Simple, Scalable and Effective Clustering via
One-Dimensional Projections

Moses Charikar
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
moses@cs.stanford.edu

Monika Henzinger
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
Klosterneuburg, Austria
monika.henzinger@ist.ac.at

Lunjia Hu
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
lunjia@stanford.edu

Maximilian Vötsch
Faculty of Computer Science
Doctoral School of Computer Science DoCS Vienna
University of Vienna
Vienna, Austria
maximilian.voetsch@univie.ac.at

Erik Waingarten
Department of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
ewaingar@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Clustering is a fundamental problem in unsupervised machine learning with many
applications in data analysis. Popular clustering algorithms such as Lloyd’s algorithm and k-means++ can take Ω(ndk) time when clustering n points in a
d-dimensional space (represented by an n × d matrix X) into k clusters. In applications with moderate to large k, the multiplicative k factor can become very
expensive. We introduce a simple randomized clustering algorithm that provably
runs in expected time O(nnz(X) + n log n) for arbitrary k. Here nnz(X) is the
total number of non-zero entries in the input dataset X, which is upper bounded by
nd and can be significantly smaller for sparse datasets. We prove that our algorithm
e 4 ) on any input dataset for the k-means objective.
achieves approximation ratio O(k
We also believe that our theoretical analysis is of independent interest, as we show
that the approximation ratio of a k-means algorithm is approximately preserved
under a class of projections and that k-means++ seeding can be implemented in
expected O(n log n) time in one dimension. Finally, we show experimentally that
our clustering algorithm gives a new tradeoff between running time and cluster
quality compared to previous state-of-the-art methods for these tasks.

1

Introduction

Clustering is an essential and powerful tool for data analysis with broad applications in computer
vision and computational biology, and it is one of the fundamental problems in unsupervised machine
learning. In large-scale applications, datasets often contain billions of high-dimensional points.
Grouping similar data points into clusters is crucial for understanding and organizing datasets.
Because of its practical importance, the problem of designing efficient and effective clustering
algorithms has attracted the attention of numerous researchers for many decades.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

