Precision-Recall Divergence Optimization for
Generative Modeling with GANs and
Normalizing Flows

Alexandre Verine
LAMSADE, CNRS,
Université Paris-Dauphine-PSL,
Paris, France
alexandre.verine@dauphine.psl.eu
Muni Sreenivas Pydi
LAMSADE, CNRS,
Université Paris-Dauphine-PSL,
Paris, France
muni.pydi@dauphine.psl.eu

Benjamin Negrevergne
LAMSADE, CNRS,
Université Paris-Dauphine-PSL,
Paris, France
benjamin.negrevergne@dauphine.psl.eu
Yann Chevaleyre
LAMSADE, CNRS,
Université Paris-Dauphine-PSL,
Paris, France
yann.chevaleyre@dauphine.psl.eu

Abstract
Achieving a balance between image quality (precision) and diversity (recall) is
a significant challenge in the domain of generative models. Current state-of-theart models primarily rely on optimizing heuristics, such as the Fréchet Inception
Distance. While recent developments have introduced principled methods for
evaluating precision and recall, they have yet to be successfully integrated into
the training of generative models. Our main contribution is a novel training
method for generative models, such as Generative Adversarial Networks and
Normalizing Flows, which explicitly optimizes a user-defined trade-off between
precision and recall. More precisely, we show that achieving a specified precisionrecall trade-off corresponds to minimizing a unique f -divergence from a family
we call the PR-divergences. Conversely, any f -divergence can be written as a
linear combination of PR-divergences and corresponds to a weighted precisionrecall trade-off. Through comprehensive evaluations, we show that our approach
improves the performance of existing state-of-the-art models like BigGAN in terms
of either precision or recall when tested on datasets such as ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Evaluation of generative models has always been a challenging task. The metric used must reflect
both the quality of the sample generated (precision) and how much the sample covers the targeted
probability distribution (recall). Inception Score (IS) or Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) have
been introduced and are now widely used by the community to select the best models. Typically,
these metrics are favored because they "correlate well with the visual fidelity of the samples" and
are "sensitive to both the addition of spurious modes as well as mode dropping" [44]. However as
pointed by Kynkäänniemi et al. [28], FID and IS group these two aspects into a single value without
a clear trade-off. Depending on the use-case, generative models might require a good precision
(high-resolution image and video generation, artistic synthesis, 3D model design) or a good recall
(data augmentation, drug discovery, anomaly detection). For that reason, a number of more principled
methods [9, 15, 28, 44, 47] have emerged to assess precision and recall (hereafter abbreviated by
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

