Fast Trainable Projection for Robust Fine-Tuning

Junjiao Tian
Georgia Institute of Technology
jtian73@gatech.edu

Yen-Cheng Liu
Georgia Institute of Technology
ycliu@gatech.edu

James Seale Smith
Georgia Institute of Technology
jamessealesmith@gatech.edu

Zsolt Kira
Georgia Institute of Technology
zkira@gatech.edu

Abstract
Robust fine-tuning aims to achieve competitive in-distribution (ID) performance
while maintaining the out-of-distribution (OOD) robustness of a pre-trained
model when transferring it to a downstream task. Recently, projected gradient
descent has been successfully used in robust fine-tuning by constraining the
deviation from the initialization of the fine-tuned model explicitly through
projection. However, algorithmically, two limitations prevent this method from
being adopted more widely, scalability and efficiency. In this paper, we propose
a new projection-based fine-tuning algorithm, Fast Trainable Projection (FTP) for
computationally efficient learning of per-layer projection constraints, resulting in
an average 35% speedup on our benchmarks compared to prior works. FTP can be
combined with existing optimizers such as AdamW, and be used in a plug-and-play
fashion. Finally, we show that FTP is a special instance of hyper-optimizers that
tune the hyper-parameters of optimizers in a learnable manner through nested
differentiation. Empirically, we show superior robustness on OOD datasets,
including domain shifts and natural corruptions, across four different vision tasks
with five different pre-trained models. Additionally, we demonstrate that FTP is
broadly applicable and beneficial to other learning scenarios such as low-label
and continual learning settings thanks to its easy adaptability. The code will be
available at https://github.com/GT-RIPL/FTP.git.

1

Introduction

With new progress being made in pre-training of foundation models every year, such as selfsupervised [1, 2, 3] or language-supervised training [4], their potential has gone far beyond merely
speeding up convergence [5]. They have demonstrated superior transferability to other tasks, reducing
the need for data and improving robustness and generalization capabilities [6, 7, 8]. The problem of
how to fine-tune (transfer) a foundation model such that we maintain its robustness and generalization
capabilities acquired during pre-training on large datasets has therefore become an essential research
topic. This problem is hard because the conventional machine learning paradigm of validating on
held-out training data does not impose any constraints on robustness and generalization w.r.t. the
foundation models. For example, fine-tuning with a slightly large learning rate can easily destroy
capabilities that reside in the foundation models [8], while performing well on the target task.
To maintain the robustness and generalization capability of the pre-trained model when fine-tuning,
recent projection-based methods explicitly constrain the distance between the fine-tuned and the
pre-trained models through projection. For example, MARS-SP [9] specifies a distance constraint
shared by all layers in a neural network. However, it is practically intractable to tune a constraint
for each layer (poor scalability). TPGM [10] proposes to automatically learn different constraints
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

