VisIT-Bench: A Benchmark for Vision-Language
Instruction Following Inspired by Real-World Use

Yonatan Bitton*1,2 Hritik Bansal*3 Jack Hessel*4 Rulin Shao5 Wanrong Zhu6
Anas Awadalla5 Josh Gardner5 Rohan Taori7 Ludwig Schimdt4,5,8

Abstract
We introduce VisIT-Bench (Visual InsTruction Benchmark), a benchmark for
evaluating instruction-following vision-language models for real-world use. Our
starting point is curating 70 “instruction families” that we envision instruction tuned
vision-language models should be able to address. Extending beyond evaluations
like VQAv2 and COCO, tasks range from basic recognition to game playing and creative generation. Following curation, our dataset comprises 592 test queries, each
with a human-authored instruction-conditioned caption. These descriptions surface
instruction-specific factors, e.g., for an instruction asking about the accessibility
of a storefront for wheelchair users, the instruction-conditioned caption describes
ramps/potential obstacles. These descriptions enable 1) collecting human-verified
reference outputs for each instance; and 2) automatic evaluation of candidate multimodal generations using a text-only LLM, aligning with human judgment. We quantify quality gaps between models and references using both human and automatic
evaluations; e.g., the top-performing instruction-following model wins against the
GPT-4 reference in just 27% of the comparison. VisIT-Bench is dynamic to participate, practitioners simply submit their model’s response on the project website;
Data, code and leaderboard is available at https://visit-bench.github.io/.
Reasoning Over
Plots

Art Knowledge

Recognition

Location
Understanding

Home Renovation

How much is the
browser usage for
Firefox and Safari?

Teach me about this
painting.

Where is this?

If you are going for a
picnic at this location,
what items should you
carry with you?

Here is a photo of my
bathroom. How can I
design it nicer?

Contextual
Figurative Speech
Knowledge of Events
Explanation

Chemical
Identification

Hazard Identification

Game Playing

Tell me what is notable Someone said that this
or important about the man is an angel. Why?
event in this photo.

Which chemical
compound does this
image represent?

If you are driving and What is the poker hand
come across this
shown in the picture?
scenario, what should Is this a good hand?
you do?

Figure 1: A sample from the 70 instruction families in VisIT-Bench representing tasks we envision
instruction-following vision-language models should be able to follow.

∗

Equal contribution. 1 Hebrew University 2 Google Research 3 UCLA 4 Allen Institute for AI 5 University
of Washington 6 UCSB 7 Stanford 8 LAION ,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

