HiNeRV: Video Compression with Hierarchical
Encoding-based Neural Representation

Ho Man Kwan†, Ge Gao†, Fan Zhang†, Andrew Gower‡, David Bull†
† Visual Information Lab, University of Bristol, UK
‡ Immersive Content & Comms Research, BT, UK
{hm.kwan, ge1.gao, fan.zhang, dave.bull}@bristol.ac.uk,
andrew.p.gower@bt.com

Abstract
Learning-based video compression is currently a popular research topic, offering
the potential to compete with conventional standard video codecs. In this context,
Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) have previously been used to represent
and compress image and video content, demonstrating relatively high decoding
speed compared to other methods. However, existing INR-based methods have
failed to deliver rate quality performance comparable with the state of the art in
video compression. This is mainly due to the simplicity of the employed network
architectures, which limit their representation capability. In this paper, we propose
HiNeRV, an INR that combines light weight layers with novel hierarchical positional encodings. We employs depth-wise convolutional, MLP and interpolation
layers to build the deep and wide network architecture with high capacity. HiNeRV
is also a unified representation encoding videos in both frames and patches at the
same time, which offers higher performance and flexibility than existing methods. We further build a video codec based on HiNeRV and a refined pipeline for
training, pruning and quantization that can better preserve HiNeRV’s performance
during lossy model compression. The proposed method has been evaluated on both
UVG and MCL-JCV datasets for video compression, demonstrating significant
improvement over all existing INRs baselines and competitive performance when
compared to learning-based codecs (72.3% overall bit rate saving over HNeRV and
43.4% over DCVC on the UVG dataset, measured in PSNR). 1

1

Introduction

Implicit neural representations (INRs) have become popular due to their ability to represent and
encode various scenes [37], images [45] and videos [45, 11]. INRs typically learn a coordinate
to value mapping (e.g. mapping a pixel or voxel index to its color and/or occupancy) to support
implicit reconstruction of the original signal. While these representations are usually instantiated
as multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), existing MLP-based network can only represent video content
with a low reconstruction quality and speed [11]. To address this limitation, recent works have
employed Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to perform a frame index to video frame mapping
[11, 29, 5, 25, 10]. These CNN-based INRs are capable of reconstructing video content with higher
quality and with a faster decoding speed, when compared to MLP-based approaches [45]. When using
INRs for encoding videos, video compression can then be achieved by performing model compression
for the individual input video. However, existing INR-based algorithms remain significantly inferior
to state-of-the-art standard-based [52, 47, 8] and learning-based codecs [26, 41, 27, 28, 35]. For
example, none of these INR-based codecs can compete with HEVC x265 [2] (veryslow preset).
1

Project page: https://hmkx.github.io/hinerv/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

