Revisiting Logistic-softmax Likelihood in Bayesian
Meta-learning for Few-shot Classification

Tianjun Ke†∗, Haoqun Cao†∗, Zenan Ling‡ , Feng Zhou†§
Center for Applied Statistics and School of Statistics, Renmin University of China
‡
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{keanson, caohaoqun2007, feng.zhou}@ruc.edu.cn, lingzenan@hust.edu.cn
†

Abstract
Meta-learning has demonstrated promising results in few-shot classification (FSC)
by learning to solve new problems using prior knowledge. Bayesian methods are
effective at characterizing uncertainty in FSC, which is crucial in high-risk fields.
In this context, the logistic-softmax likelihood is often employed as an alternative
to the softmax likelihood in multi-class Gaussian process classification due to
its conditional conjugacy property. However, the theoretical property of logisticsoftmax is not clear and previous research indicated that the inherent uncertainty
of logistic-softmax leads to suboptimal performance. To mitigate these issues,
we revisit and redesign the logistic-softmax likelihood, which enables control of
the a priori confidence level through a temperature parameter. Furthermore, we
theoretically and empirically show that softmax can be viewed as a special case
of logistic-softmax and logistic-softmax induces a larger family of data distribution than softmax. Utilizing modified logistic-softmax, we integrate the data
augmentation technique into the deep kernel based Gaussian process meta-learning
framework, and derive an analytical mean-field approximation for task-specific
updates. Our approach yields well-calibrated uncertainty estimates and achieves
comparable or superior results on standard benchmark datasets. Code is publicly
available at https://github.com/keanson/revisit-logistic-softmax.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning refers to the ability to quickly learn a new task given a set of training tasks that share
a common structure [13; 15; 30]. This concept is critical for achieving human-like performance
computationally with little data, and recent algorithms have shown success in few-shot classification
and regression problems [15; 18]. When dealing with limited data, it is essential to analyze robust
meta-learning methods that properly deal with uncertainty which is inevitable in the context [1]. Some
existing works have suggested that the Bayesian inference mechanism provides a principled way to
address this issue, moving towards robust meta-learning with uncertainty quantification [7; 27; 38].
The Bayesian framework combines a prior distribution and a likelihood function that models the data
distribution. By performing posterior inference on parameters, it provides a natural framework for
capturing inherent model uncertainty [8; 23]. Gaussian process (GP) is a Bayesian nonparametric
method that places a prior distribution on functions rather than parameters, ensuring better expressiveness [3]. The GP prior is defined by a covariance function which can be parameterized by deep neural
networks, commonly referred to as a deep kernel [35]. GP with a deep kernel has demonstrated
state-of-the-art performance in few-shot regression problems [20], where posterior inference admits a
closed-form solution due to the conjugacy between the Gaussian likelihood and the GP prior.
∗
§

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

