Online Convex Optimization with Unbounded Memory

Sarah Dean
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
sdean@cornell.edu

Raunak Kumar
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
raunak@cs.cornell.edu

Robert Kleinberg
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
rdk@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Online convex optimization (OCO) is a widely used framework in online learning.
In each round, the learner chooses a decision in a convex set and an adversary
chooses a convex loss function, and then the learner suffers the loss associated with
their current decision. However, in many applications the learner’s loss depends not
only on the current decision but on the entire history of decisions until that point.
The OCO framework and its existing generalizations do not capture this, and they
can only be applied to many settings of interest after a long series of approximation
arguments. They also leave open the question of whether the dependence on
memory is tight because there are no non-trivial lower bounds. In this work we
introduce a generalization of the OCO framework, “Online Convex Optimization
with Unbounded Memory”, that captures long-term dependence on past decisions.
We introduce the notion of p-effective memory capacity, Hp , that quantifies
p the
maximum influence of past decisions on present losses. We prove an O( Hp T )
upper bound on the policy regret and a matching (worst-case) lower bound. As
a special case, we prove the first non-trivial lower bound for OCO with finite
memory [Anava et al., 2015], which could be of independent interest, and also
improve existing upper bounds. We demonstrate the broad applicability of our
framework by using it to derive regret bounds, and to improve and simplify existing
regret bound derivations, for a variety of online learning problems including online
linear control and an online variant of performative prediction.

1

Introduction

Numerous applications are characterized by multiple rounds of sequential interactions with an
environment, e.g., prediction from expert advice [Littlestone and Warmuth, 1989, 1994], portoflio
selection [Cover, 1991], routing [Awerbuch and Kleinberg, 2008], etc. One of the most popular
frameworks for modelling such sequential decision-making problems is online convex optimization
(OCO) [Zinkevich, 2003]. The OCO framework is as follows. In each round, the learner chooses a
decision in a convex set and an adversary chooses a convex loss function, and then the learner suffers
the loss associated with their current decision. The performance of an algorithm is measured by
regret: the difference between the algorithm’s total loss and that of the best fixed decision. We refer
the reader to Shalev-Shwartz [2012], Hazan [2019], Orabona [2019] for surveys on this topic.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

