C ROSS C ODE E VAL: A Diverse and Multilingual
Benchmark for Cross-File Code Completion

Yangruibo Ding1∗ Zijian Wang2,∗ Wasi Uddin Ahmad2,∗
Hantian Ding2 Ming Tan2 Nihal Jain2 Murali Krishna Ramanathan2
Ramesh Nallapati2 Parminder Bhatia2 Dan Roth2 Bing Xiang2
1
Columbia University 2 AWS AI Labs
yrbding@cs.columbia.edu {zijwan,wuahmad}@amazon.com
https://crosscodeeval.github.io

Abstract
Code completion models have made significant progress in recent years, yet current
popular evaluation datasets, such as HumanEval and MBPP, predominantly focus
on code completion tasks within a single file. This over-simplified setting falls short
of representing the real-world software development scenario where repositories
span multiple files with numerous cross-file dependencies, and accessing and
understanding cross-file context is often required to complete the code correctly.
To fill in this gap, we propose C ROSS C ODE E VAL, a diverse and multilingual
code completion benchmark that necessitates an in-depth cross-file contextual
understanding to complete the code accurately. C ROSS C ODE E VAL is built on a
diverse set of real-world, open-sourced, permissively-licensed repositories in four
popular programming languages: Python, Java, TypeScript, and C#. To create
examples that strictly require cross-file context for accurate completion, we propose
a straightforward yet efficient static-analysis-based approach to pinpoint the use of
cross-file context within the current file.
Extensive experiments on state-of-the-art code language models like CodeGen and
StarCoder demonstrate that C ROSS C ODE E VAL is extremely challenging when the
relevant cross-file context is absent, and we see clear improvements when adding
these context into the prompt. However, despite such improvements, the pinnacle
of performance remains notably unattained even with the highest-performing
model, indicating that C ROSS C ODE E VAL is also capable of assessing model’s
capability in leveraging extensive context to make better code completion. Finally,
we benchmarked various methods in retrieving cross-file context, and show that
C ROSS C ODE E VAL can also be used to measure the capability of code retrievers.

1

Introduction

Language models for code (code LMs), such as Codex (Chen et al., 2021), CodeGen (Nijkamp
et al., 2023b,a), and StarCoder (Li et al., 2023), have demonstrated their power to enhance developer
productivity through their promising results in code completion tasks. To evaluate these models,
researchers propose multiple code completion evaluation benchmarks, (e.g., Chen et al., 2021; Lu
et al., 2021; Athiwaratkun et al., 2023; Austin et al., 2021), where the model is asked to complete
the code given the context in the current file. However, such an evaluation setting is over-simplified,
and it is not able to reflect the model’s capability in code completion accurately. Specifically, in the
realm of modern software development, repositories consist of multiple files, each interwoven with
∗

Equal Contribution. Work done while Yangruibo Ding was an intern at AWS AI Labs.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

