Spatially Resolved Gene Expression Prediction from
H&E Histology Images via Bi-modal Contrastive
Learning

Ronald Xie1,2,3,4 Kuan Pang1,2,4 Sai W. Chung1,5 Catia T. Perciani1,5
Sonya A. MacParland1,5 Bo Wang1,2,3∗ Gary D. Bader1,3,4,6∗
1

University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 University Health Network,
The Donnelly Centre, 5 Toronto General Hospital Research Institute,
6
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR)
{ronald.xie, kuan.pang, sai.chung,
catia.perciani, gary.bader}@mail.utoronto.ca,
Sonya.MacParland@uhnresearch.ca, bowang@vectorinstitute.ai
4

Abstract
Histology imaging is an important tool in medical diagnosis and research, enabling the examination of tissue structure and composition at the microscopic
level. Understanding the underlying molecular mechanisms of tissue architecture
is critical in uncovering disease mechanisms and developing effective treatments.
Gene expression profiling provides insight into the molecular processes underlying
tissue architecture, but the process can be time-consuming and expensive. We
present BLEEP (Bi-modaL Embedding for Expression Prediction), a bi-modal
embedding framework capable of generating spatially resolved gene expression
profiles of whole-slide Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained histology images.
BLEEP uses contrastive learning to construct a low-dimensional joint embedding
space from a reference dataset using paired image and expression profiles at micrometer resolution. With this approach, the gene expression of any query image
patch can be imputed using the expression profiles from the reference dataset. We
demonstrate BLEEP’s effectiveness in gene expression prediction by benchmarking
its performance on a human liver tissue dataset captured using the 10x Visium
platform, where it achieves significant improvements over existing methods. Our
results demonstrate the potential of BLEEP to provide insights into the molecular
mechanisms underlying tissue architecture, with important implications in diagnosis and research of various diseases. The proposed approach can significantly
reduce the time and cost associated with gene expression profiling, opening up new
avenues for high-throughput analysis of histology images for both research and
clinical applications.
Code available at https://github.com/bowang-lab/BLEEP

1

Introduction

Histology imaging of whole-slide Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained tissues has long been used
in academic and clinical settings for research and diagnosis. It provides useful information pertaining
to tissue architecture and composition at the microscopic level, which are critical for understanding
disease mechanisms and developing effective treatments. Gene expression profiling is a powerful
tool that offers deeper insights into the molecular processes underlying tissue architecture. However,
∗

Co-senior author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

