Sketching Algorithms for Sparse Dictionary Learning:
PTAS and Turnstile Streaming
Gregory Dexter
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
gdexter@purdue.edu

Petros Drineas
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
pdrineas@purdue.edu

David P. Woodruff
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Taisuke Yasuda
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
taisukey@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Sketching algorithms have recently proven to be a powerful approach both for
designing low-space streaming algorithms as well as fast polynomial time approximation schemes (PTAS). In this work, we develop new techniques to extend the
applicability of sketching-based approaches to the sparse dictionary learning and
the Euclidean k-means clustering problems. In particular, we initiate the study of
the challenging setting where the dictionary/clustering assignment for each of the
n input points must be output, which has surprisingly received little attention in
prior work. On the fast algorithms front, we obtain a new approach for designing
PTAS’s for the k-means clustering problem, which generalizes to the first PTAS
for the sparse dictionary learning problem. On the streaming algorithms front, we
obtain new upper bounds and lower bounds for dictionary learning and k-means
clustering. In particular, given a design matrix A 2 Rn⇥d in a turnstile stream, we
show an Õ(nr/✏2 + dk/✏) space upper bound for r-sparse dictionary learning of
size k, an Õ(n/✏2 + dk/✏) space upper bound for k-means clustering, as well as
an Õ(n) space upper bound for k-means clustering on random order row insertion
streams with a natural “bounded sensitivity” assumption. On the lower bounds
˜
side, we obtain a general ⌦(n/✏
+ dk/✏) lower bound for k-means clustering, as
2
˜
well as an ⌦(n/✏ ) lower bound for algorithms which can estimate the cost of a
single fixed set of candidate centers.

1

Introduction

A classic idea in machine learning and signal processing for efficiently handling large datasets is to
approximate them by simpler or more structured surrogate datasets. Many methods in this direction
have long been considered, including low rank approximation, which approximates a given dataset
by one that lies on a low-dimensional subspace, k-means clustering, which approximates a given
dataset by at most k distinct points, and sparse dictionary learning Olshausen and Field [1997], which
approximates a given dataset by linear combinations of elements of a small dictionary of size k with
r-sparse coefficient vectors (i.e., a vector with at most r nonzero entries). We focus on the latter two
problems in this work:
Definition 1.1 (r-sparse dictionary learning). Let {ai }ni=1 ✓ Rd be a set of n vectors in d dimensions,
and let A 2 Rn⇥d be the matrix with the ith row set to ai . Then for a matrix X 2 Rn⇥k with
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

