A Definition of Continual Reinforcement Learning

David Abel
dmabel@google.com
Google DeepMind
Doina Precup
doinap@google.com
Google DeepMind

André Barreto
andrebarreto@google.com
Google DeepMind

Benjamin Van Roy
benvanroy@google.com
Google DeepMind

Hado van Hasselt
hado@google.com
Google DeepMind

Satinder Singh
baveja@google.com
Google DeepMind

Abstract
In a standard view of the reinforcement learning problem, an agent’s goal is to
efficiently identify a policy that maximizes long-term reward. However, this
perspective is based on a restricted view of learning as finding a solution, rather
than treating learning as endless adaptation. In contrast, continual reinforcement
learning refers to the setting in which the best agents never stop learning. Despite
the importance of continual reinforcement learning, the community lacks a simple
definition of the problem that highlights its commitments and makes its primary
concepts precise and clear. To this end, this paper is dedicated to carefully defining
the continual reinforcement learning problem. We formalize the notion of agents
that “never stop learning” through a new mathematical language for analyzing and
cataloging agents. Using this new language, we define a continual learning agent as
one that can be understood as carrying out an implicit search process indefinitely,
and continual reinforcement learning as the setting in which the best agents are all
continual learning agents. We provide two motivating examples, illustrating that
traditional views of multi-task reinforcement learning and continual supervised
learning are special cases of our definition. Collectively, these definitions and
perspectives formalize many intuitive concepts at the heart of learning, and open
new research pathways surrounding continual learning agents.

1

Introduction

In The Challenge of Reinforcement Learning, Sutton states: “Part of the appeal of reinforcement
learning is that it is in a sense the whole AI problem in a microcosm” [56]. Indeed, the problem
facing an agent that learns to make better decisions from experience is at the heart of the study of
Artificial Intelligence (AI). Yet, when we study the reinforcement learning (RL) problem, it is typical
to restrict our focus in a number of ways. For instance, we often suppose that a complete description
of the state of the environment is available to the agent, or that the interaction stream is subdivided
into episodes. Beyond these standard restrictions, however, there is another significant assumption
that constrains the usual framing of RL: We tend to concentrate on agents that learn to solve problems,
rather than agents that learn forever. For example, consider an agent learning to play Go: Once the
agent has discovered how to master the game, the task is complete, and the agent’s learning can
stop. This view of learning is often embedded in the standard formulation of RL, in which an agent
interacts with a Markovian environment with the goal of efficiently identifying an optimal policy, at
which point learning can cease.
But what if this is not the best way to model the RL problem? That is, instead of viewing learning
as finding a solution, we can instead think of it as endless adaptation. This suggests study of the
continual reinforcement learning (CRL) problem [47, 48, 25, 27], as first explored in the thesis by
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

