ASPEN: Breaking Operator Barriers for Efficient
Parallel Execution of Deep Neural Networks

Jongseok Park
Seoul National University
cakeng@snu.ac.kr
Gibum Park
Seoul National University
gibumpark@snu.ac.kr

Kyungmin Bin
Seoul National University
kmbin@snu.ac.kr

Sangtae Ha
University of Colorado Boulder
sangtae.ha@colorado.edu

Kyunghan Lee
Seoul National University
kyunghanlee@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Modern Deep Neural Network (DNN) frameworks use tensor operators as the main
building blocks of DNNs. However, we observe that operator-based construction
of DNNs incurs significant drawbacks in parallelism in the form of synchronization
barriers. Synchronization barriers of operators confine the scope of parallel computation to each operator and obscure the rich parallel computation opportunities
that exist across operators. To this end, we present ASPEN, a novel parallel computation solution for DNNs that allows fine-grained dynamic execution of DNNs,
which (1) removes the operator barriers and expresses DNNs in dataflow graphs of
fine-grained tiles to expose the parallel computation opportunities across operators,
and (2) exploits these opportunities by dynamically locating and scheduling them
in runtime. This novel approach of ASPEN enables opportunistic parallelism, a
new class of parallelism for DNNs that is unavailable in the existing operator-based
approaches. ASPEN also achieves high resource utilization and memory reuse
by letting each resource asynchronously traverse depthwise in the DNN graph
to its full computing potential. We provide challenges and solutions to our approach and show that our proof-of-concept implementation of ASPEN on CPU
shows exceptional performance, outperforming state-of-the-art inference systems
of TorchScript and TVM by up to 3.2× and 4.3×, respectively.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are dataflow graphs of artificial neurons, each of which computes
a mathematical function using the outputs of other artificial neurons as inputs. However, artificial
neurons are rarely treated as individual units of computation, as their role as building blocks of neural
networks has largely been replaced by tensor operators. A tensor operator, or simply an operator,
refers to a large group of artificial neurons with the same functionality. These operators take inputs
from the outputs of other operators, and the multi-dimensional arrays of data transferred between the
operators are referred to as tensors. Modern DNN frameworks, such as TensorFlow [1], PyTorch[35],
and MXNet[5], all utilize these operators as the main building blocks of DNNs, as grouping many
identical artificial neurons into a single computation unit allows for easier construction, representation,
and execution of DNNs that are becoming increasingly complex.
However, we find that the operator-based expression of DNNs incurs significant drawbacks in
parallelism. Grouping artificial neurons into operators separates the computation of a DNN into
two hierarchical layers of inter-operator and intra-operator computations[30, 51]. Inter-operator
computations of a DNN are represented by a dataflow graph of operators, and frameworks such as
Tensorflow or PyTorch delegate the execution of each operator to vendor-provided DNN acceleration
libraries such as oneDNN [19], cuDNN [7], or ARMNN [3]. These libraries handle intra-operator
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

