Self-supervised Object-Centric Learning for Videos

1

Görkay Aydemir1 Weidi Xie3, 4 Fatma Güney1,2
Department of Computer Engineering, Koç University 2 KUIS AI Center
3
CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{gaydemir23, fguney}@ku.edu.tr weidi@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised multi-object segmentation has shown impressive results on images
by utilizing powerful semantics learned from self-supervised pretraining. An additional modality such as depth or motion is often used to facilitate the segmentation
in video sequences. However, the performance improvements observed in synthetic
sequences, which rely on the robustness of an additional cue, do not translate to
more challenging real-world scenarios. In this paper, we propose the first fully
unsupervised method for segmenting multiple objects in real-world sequences. Our
object-centric learning framework spatially binds objects to slots on each frame
and then relates these slots across frames. From these temporally-aware slots,
the training objective is to reconstruct the middle frame in a high-level semantic
feature space. We propose a masking strategy by dropping a significant portion
of tokens in the feature space for efficiency and regularization. Additionally, we
address over-clustering by merging slots based on similarity. Our method can
successfully segment multiple instances of complex and high-variety classes in
YouTube videos.1

1

Introduction

Given a video sequence of a complex scene, our goal is to train a vision system that can discover,
track, and segment objects, in a way that abstracts the visual information from millions of pixels
into semantic components, i.e., objects. This is commonly referred to as object-centric visual
representation learning in the literature. By learning such abstractions of the visual scene, the
resulting object-centric representation acts as fundamental building blocks that can be processed
independently and recombined, thus improving the model’s generalization and supporting high-level
cognitive vision tasks such as reasoning, control, etc. [13, 29].
The field of object-centric representation learning in computer vision has made significant progress
over the years, starting from synthetic images [34, 37], and has since shifted towards in-the-wild
image [20, 49] and real-world videos [65, 85, 87, 46, 60]. In general, existing approaches typically
follow an autoencoder training paradigm [52, 26], i.e., reconstructing the input signals with certain
bottlenecks, with the hope to group the regional pixels into semantically meaningful objects based
on the priors of architecture or data. In particular, for images, low-level features like color, and
semantic features from pretrained deep networks, are often used to indicate the assignment of pixels
to objects, while for videos, additional modalities/signals are normally incorporated, such as optical
flow [40], depth map [17], with segmentation masks directly available from the discontinuities.
Despite being promising, using additional signals in videos naturally incurs computation overhead
and error accumulation, for example, optical flow may struggle with static or deformable objects and
large displacements between frames, while depth may not be readily available in generic videos and
its estimation can suffer in low-light or low-contrast environments.
1

Project page: https://kuis-ai.github.io/solv

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

