D4Explainer: In-Distribution GNN Explanations via
Discrete Denoising Diffusion

Jialin Chen
Yale University
jialin.chen@yale.edu

Shirley Wu
Stanford University
shirwu@cs.stanford.edu

Abhijit Gupta
Yale University
abhijit.gupta@yale.edu

Rex Ying
Yale University
rex.ying@yale.edu

Abstract
The widespread deployment of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) sparks significant interest in their explainability, which plays a vital role in model auditing and
ensuring trustworthy graph learning. The objective of GNN explainability is to
discern the underlying graph structures that have the most significant impact on
model predictions. Ensuring that explanations generated are reliable necessitates
consideration of the in-distribution property, particularly due to the vulnerability of GNNs to out-of-distribution data. Unfortunately, prevailing explainability
methods tend to constrain the generated explanations to the structure of the original graph, thereby downplaying the significance of the in-distribution property
and resulting in explanations that lack reliability. To address these challenges,
we propose D4Explainer, a novel approach that provides in-distribution GNN
explanations for both counterfactual and model-level explanation scenarios. The
proposed D4Explainer incorporates generative graph distribution learning into the
optimization objective, which accomplishes two goals: 1) generate a collection
of diverse counterfactual graphs that conform to the in-distribution property for
a given instance, and 2) identify the most discriminative graph patterns that contribute to a specific class prediction, thus serving as model-level explanations. It is
worth mentioning that D4Explainer is the first unified framework that combines
both counterfactual and model-level explanations. Empirical evaluations conducted
on synthetic and real-world datasets provide compelling evidence of the state-ofthe-art performance achieved by D4Explainer in terms of explanation accuracy,
faithfulness, diversity, and robustness. 1

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have rapidly gained popularity recently due to their ability to model
relational data [1, 2]. However, when it comes to critical decision-making and high-stake applications,
such as healthcare, finance, and autonomous systems, the explainability of GNNs is fundamental for
humans to understand the model’s decision-making logic and build trust in the deployment of GNNs
in real-world scenarios [3, 4, 5].
Counterfactual and model-level explanations. Existing methods mainly focus on factual and
instance-level explanations [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11], while the significance of counterfactual and modellevel explanations are equally noteworthy, yet under-explored. Counterfactual explanation considers
1

The code is available at https://github.com/Graph-and-Geometric-Learning/D4Explainer

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

