The Clock and the Pizza: Two Stories in Mechanistic
Explanation of Neural Networks

Ziqian Zhong*, Ziming Liu*, Max Tegmark, Jacob Andreas
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{ziqianz, zmliu, tegmark, jda}@mit.edu

Abstract
Do neural networks, trained on well-understood algorithmic tasks, reliably rediscover known algorithms for solving those tasks? Several recent studies, on
tasks ranging from group arithmetic to in-context linear regression, have suggested
that the answer is yes. Using modular addition as a prototypical problem, we
show that algorithm discovery in neural networks is sometimes more complex.
Small changes to model hyperparameters and initializations can induce discovery
of qualitatively different algorithms from a fixed training set, and even parallel
implementations of multiple such algorithms. Some networks trained to perform
modular addition implement a familiar Clock algorithm (previously described by
Nanda et al. [1]); others implement a previously undescribed, less intuitive, but
comprehensible procedure we term the Pizza algorithm, or a variety of even more
complex procedures. Our results show that even simple learning problems can
admit a surprising diversity of solutions, motivating the development of new tools
for characterizing the behavior of neural networks across their algorithmic phase
space. 1

1

Introduction

Mechanistically understanding deep network models—reverse-engineering their learned algorithms
and representation schemes—remains a major challenge across problem domains. Several recent
studies [2, 3, 4, 5, 1] have exhibited specific examples of models apparently re-discovering interpretable (and in some cases familiar) solutions to tasks like curve detection, sequence copying and
modular arithmetic. Are these models the exception or the rule? Under what conditions do neural
network models discover familiar algorithmic solutions to algorithmic tasks?
In this paper, we focus specifically on the problem of learning modular addition, training networks
to compute sums like 8 + 6 = 2 (mod 12). Modular arithmetic can be implemented with a simple
geometric solution, familiar to anyone who has learned to read a clock: every integer is represented
as an angle, input angles are added together, and the resulting angle evaluated to obtain a modular
sum (Figure 1, left). Nanda et al. [1] show that specific neural network architectures, when trained to
perform modular addition, implement this Clock algorithm. In this work, we show that the Clock
algorithm is only one part of a more complicated picture of algorithm learning in deep networks. In
particular, networks structurally similar to the ones trained by Nanda et al. preferentially implement a
qualitatively different approach to modular arithmetic, which we term the Pizza algorithm (Figure 1,
right), and sometimes even more complex solutions. Models exhibit sharp algorithmic phase
transitions [6] between the Clock and Pizza algorithms as their width and attention strength very, and
often implement multiple, imperfect copies of the Pizza algorithm in parallel.
*
1

Equal contribution.
Code is available at https://github.com/fjzzq2002/pizza.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

