Language Model Tokenizers Introduce
Unfairness Between Languages

Aleksandar Petrov, Emanuele La Malfa, Philip H.S. Torr, Adel Bibi
University of Oxford
aleks@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent language models have shown impressive multilingual performance,
even when not explicitly trained for it. Despite this, there are concerns
about the quality of their outputs across different languages. In this paper, we show how disparity in the treatment of different languages arises
at the tokenization stage, well before a model is even invoked. The same
text translated into different languages can have drastically different tokenization lengths, with differences up to 15 times in some cases. These
disparities persist even for tokenizers that are intentionally trained for multilingual support. Character-level and byte-level models also exhibit over 4
times the difference in the encoding length for some language pairs. This
induces unfair treatment for some language communities in regard to the
cost of accessing commercial language services, the processing time and latency, as well as the amount of content that can be provided as context
to the models. Therefore, we make the case that we should train future
language models using multilingually fair subword tokenizers.

1

Introduction

Language models are increasingly important in natural language processing tasks, as they
can understand and generate human-like language. They have been deployed in applications
such as virtual assistants (Chen et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022), chatbots (Kuhail et al.,
2023; Lee et al., 2023), machine translation (Stahlberg, 2020; Ranathunga et al., 2023), and
text summarization (Kryściński et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020). As general-purpose technologies,
it is also projected that Large Language Models (LLMs) will have a significant impact on
the economy and the labour market (Teubner et al., 2023; Eloundou et al., 2023).
Such LLMs are often trained using large swaths of internet content regardless of language.
Hence, these models often end up being multilingual, even if not by design. ChatGPT
(OpenAI, 2022) is a prominent recent example (Bang et al., 2023; Jiao et al., 2023; Johnson,
2023). Given the economic benefits of LLMs and LLM-derived technology, it’s beneficial
that they support multiple languages. Equal access is crucial, and multilingual support is a
key component of this.
However, this multilingualism is currently treated as a curious emergent phenomenon rather
than a carefully designed, controlled and managed process. The performance of LLMs has
been shown to be generally lower in non-target languages, a problem especially pronounced
for low-resource languages (Virtanen et al., 2019; Ahuja et al., 2023). Providing access to the
same technology in different languages but moderation and safety tools only for some has
resulted in dire societal consequences before (Stecklow, 2018; Facebook, 2021; Leung, 2022).
Differing cost of access could also reinforce inequality in opportunities for economic mobility
and social participation (Lythreatis et al., 2022). Therefore, as LLM multilingualism emerges,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

