Unified 3D Segmenter As Prototypical Classifiers

1

Zheyun Qin1∗ , Cheng Han2∗, Qifan Wang3 , Nie Xiushan4 , Yilong Yin1† , Xiankai Lu1†
Shandong University, 2 Rochester Institute of Technology, 3 Meta AI, 4 Shandong Jianzhu University

Abstract
The task of point cloud segmentation, comprising semantic, instance, and panoptic
segmentation, has been mainly tackled by designing task-specific network architectures, which often lack the flexibility to generalize across tasks, thus resulting
in a fragmented research landscape. In this paper, we introduce P ROTO SEG, a
prototype-based model that unifies semantic, instance, and panoptic segmentation
tasks. Our approach treats these three homogeneous tasks as a classification problem with different levels of granularity. By leveraging a Transformer architecture,
we extract point embeddings to optimize prototype-class distances and dynamically
learn class prototypes to accommodate the end tasks. Our prototypical design
enjoys simplicity and transparency, powerful representational learning, and ad-hoc
explainability. Empirical results demonstrate that P ROTO SEG outperforms concurrent well-known specialized architectures on 3D point cloud benchmarks, achieving
72.3%, 76.4% and 74.2% mIoU for semantic segmentation on S3DIS, ScanNet V2
and SemanticKITTI, 66.8% mCov and 51.2% mAP for instance segmentation on
S3DIS and ScanNet V2, 62.4% PQ for panoptic segmentation on SemanticKITTI,
validating the strength of our concept and the effectiveness of our algorithm. The
code and models are available at https://github.com/zyqin19/PROTOSEG.

1

Introduction

Point cloud segmentation entails partitioning a collection of 3D data points into meaningful categories
to interpret complex 3D scenes. Three classical subdivision segmentation tasks are involved: semantic
segmentation, which assigns a class label to each point based on its class; instance segmentation,
which distinguishes between individual instances of the same class; and panoptic segmentation, which
combines semantic and instance segmentation to address amorphous or uncountable regions. These
tasks use distinct technical approaches, which have advanced each individual task but lack flexibility
to generalize to other tasks. This methodological convention leads to fragmented research efforts.
For the purpose of advancing the field of point cloud segmentation in a synergistic manner, a shift from
task-specific network architectures towards a more universal framework is imperative. It is natural
to question why the existing methods cannot achieve such unification, and we address this issue
in § 2 by examining the relationships and distinctions between current approaches. Many of these
approaches are customized for individual tasks, resulting in data representation, feature extraction,
and prediction head inconsistencies that hinder integration into a unified framework [1]. Furthermore,
task-specific architectures tend to overfit their respective tasks, reducing their generalizability when
applied to other segmentation tasks, thus hindering the practical unification of segmentation tasks.
In light of the above discussion, our research question becomes more fundamental: what epistemological framework can effectively embrace this shift? In response, we revisit the prototype paradigm
and point clouds’ natural properties (irregular and sparse), and propose that point cloud segmentation
naturally aligns with a classification problem. This foundational perspective shapes our research
direction and motivates the creation of our prototype-anchored classification method, allowing us
to unify various segmentation tasks within a single framework seamlessly. In § 3, we introduce
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

