Vulnerabilities in Video Quality Assessment Models:
The Challenge of Adversarial Attacks

Ao-Xiang Zhang

Yu Ran

Weixuan Tang∗

Yuan-Gen Wang∗

Guangzhou University, China
{zax, ranyu}@e.gzhu.edu.cn, {tweix, wangyg}@gzhu.edu.cn

Abstract
No-Reference Video Quality Assessment (NR-VQA) plays an essential role in
improving the viewing experience of end-users. Driven by deep learning, recent
NR-VQA models based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Transformers have achieved outstanding performance. To build a reliable and practical
assessment system, it is of great necessity to evaluate their robustness. However,
such issue has received little attention in the academic community. In this paper,
we make the first attempt to evaluate the robustness of NR-VQA models against
adversarial attacks, and propose a patch-based random search method for black-box
attack. Specifically, considering both the attack effect on quality score and the
visual quality of adversarial video, the attack problem is formulated as misleading
the estimated quality score under the constraint of just-noticeable difference (JND).
Built upon such formulation, a novel loss function called Score-Reversed Boundary
Loss is designed to push the adversarial video’s estimated quality score far away
from its ground-truth score towards a specific boundary, and the JND constraint is
modeled as a strict L2 and L∞ norm restriction. By this means, both white-box
and black-box attacks can be launched in an effective and imperceptible manner.
The source code is available at https://github.com/GZHU-DVL/AttackVQA.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the service of “we-media” has shown an explosive growth. It is reported that
Facebook can produce approximately 4 billion video views per day [1]. Nevertheless, the storage and
transmission of such volumes of video data pose a significant challenge to video service providers [2].
To address this challenge, video coding is employed to balance the tradeoff between coding efficiency
and video quality. Therefore, Video Quality Assessment (VQA) has become a prominent research
topic. In general, according to whether pristine video is applied as a reference, VQA can be divided
into Full-Reference VQA (FR-VQA), Reduced-Reference VQA (RR-VQA), and No-Reference VQA
(NR-VQA). Recently, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Transformers have made great
progress in NR-VQA. However, according to recent studies, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) show
vulnerability against adversarial examples [19]. To build a reliable and practical assessment system,
it is of great necessity to evaluate the robustness of the NR-VQA models against adversarial attacks.
The threat of adversarial attacks has been studied in the task of image classification. Szegedy et al.
[4] first found that an image injected with a small amount of imperceptible adversarial perturbations
can mislead DNNs with high confidence. Moosav-DezFool et al. [5] suggested that universal
perturbations can achieve attack effect on different samples. Athalye et al. [6] showed that adversarial
examples can be applied in physical world. Since then, numerous adversarial attacks on CNNs and
Transformers have been proposed [7; 8; 9; 24; 32].
* denotes corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

