Neural Modulation for Flash Memory: An
Unsupervised Learning Framework for Improved
Reliability

Jonathan Zedaka
Elisha Halperin
Evgeny Blaichman
Amit Berman
Samsung Semiconductor Israel Research and Development Center
{jonathan.z,elisha.h,evgeny.bl,amit.berman}@samsung.com

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed a significant increase in the storage density of NAND
flash memory, making it a critical component in modern electronic devices. However, with the rise in storage capacity comes an increased likelihood of errors in
data storage and retrieval. The growing number of errors poses ongoing challenges
for system designers and engineers, in terms of the characterization, modeling, and
optimization of NAND-based systems. We present a novel approach for modeling
and preventing errors by utilizing the capabilities of generative and unsupervised
machine learning methods. As part of our research, we constructed and trained a
neural modulator that translates information bits into programming operations on
each memory cell in NAND devices. Our modulator, tailored explicitly for flash
memory channels, provides a smart writing scheme that reduces programming
errors as well as compensates for data degradation over time. Specifically, the
modulator is based on an auto-encoder architecture with an additional channel
model embedded between the encoder and the decoder. A conditional generative
adversarial network (cGAN) was used to construct the channel model. Optimized
for the end-of-life work-point, the learned memory system outperforms the prior
art by up to 56% in raw bit error rate (RBER) and extends the lifetime of the flash
memory block by up to 25%.

1

Introduction

The continued scaling of flash memory technology into smaller process nodes, combined with
the increased information capacity of each flash cell (i.e, storing more bits per cell), has placed
NAND flash memory at the forefront of modern storage technology. Those advances comes at the
cost of increased vulnerability to various error mechanisms that can compromise data integrity and
system reliability. The endurance of the flash can be measured by the number of program-erase (PE)
cycles the cells can undergo, before the error-correction-code (ECC) decoder fails to reconstruct the
programmed bits.
Modern flash devices suffer from multiple sources of error, such as write-induced [1], data retention
[2, 3] and read-induced [4] errors. The impact of these different mechanisms vary between physical
locations in the chip. In addition, the probability of errors to occur on different cells is not independent:
The charge stored in a flash memory cell is affected by the state of its neighboring cells (see section
2.1.4), a phenomenon dubbed inter-cell interference (ICI).
To maintain high reliability while pushing for ever-growing storage density, manufactures devote
significant resources to comprehensive characterization and optimization of flash systems [5, 6]. Over
the years, the industry has developed numerous strategies for mitigating errors, including robust ECC
algorithms [7], smart writing schemes [8] and adaptive read methods [9, 10]. However, all above
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

