O CEAN B ENCH:
The Sea Surface Height Edition
J. Emmanuel Johnson⇤
CNRS UMR IGE
johnsonj@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr
Anastasia Gorbunova
CNRS UMR IGE

Sammy Metref
DATLAS

Quentin Febvre⇤
IMT Atlantique
quentin.febvre@imt-atlantique.fr
Maxime Ballarotta
CLS

Julien Le Sommer
CNRS UMR IGE

Ronan Fablet
IMT Atlantique

Abstract
The ocean is a crucial component of the Earth’s system. It profoundly influences
human activities and plays a critical role in climate regulation. Our understanding has significantly improved over the last decades with the advent of satellite
remote sensing data, allowing us to capture essential sea surface quantities over
the globe, e.g., sea surface height (SSH). Despite their ever-increasing abundance,
ocean satellite data presents challenges for information extraction due to their
sparsity and irregular sampling, signal complexity, and noise. Machine learning
(ML) techniques have demonstrated their capabilities in dealing with large-scale,
complex signals. Therefore we see an opportunity for these ML models to harness the full extent of the information contained in ocean satellite data. However,
data representation and relevant evaluation metrics can be the defining factors
when determining the success of applied ML. The processing steps from the raw
observation data to a ML-ready state and from model outputs to interpretable
quantities require domain expertise, which can be a significant barrier to entry for
ML researchers. In addition, imposing fixed processing steps, like committing to
specific variables, regions, and geometries, will narrow the scope of ML models
and their potential impact on real-world applications. OceanBench is a unifying
framework that provides standardized processing steps that comply with domainexpert standards. It is designed with a flexible and pedagogical abstraction: it a)
provides plug-and-play data and pre-configured pipelines for ML researchers to
benchmark their models w.r.t. ML and domain-related baselines and b) provides a
transparent and configurable framework for researchers to customize and extend the
pipeline for their tasks. In this work, we demonstrate the OceanBench framework
through a first edition dedicated to SSH interpolation challenges. We provide
datasets and ML-ready benchmarking pipelines for the long-standing problem of
interpolating observations from simulated ocean satellite data, multi-modal and
multi-sensor fusion issues, and transfer-learning to real ocean satellite observations.
The OceanBench framework is available at github.com/jejjohnson/oceanbench and
the dataset registry is available at github.com/quentinf00/oceanbench-data-registry.

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

