PICProp: Physics-Informed Confidence Propagation
for Uncertainty Quantification

Qianli Shen
National University of Singapore
Singapore
shenqianli@u.nus.edu

Wai Hoh Tang
National University of Singapore
Singapore
waihoh.tang@nus.edu.sg

Zhun Deng
Columbia University
USA
zhun.d@columbia.edu
Apostolos Psaros
Brown University
USA
a.psaros@brown.edu

Kenji Kawaguchi
National University of Singapore
Singapore
kenji@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Standard approaches for uncertainty quantification in deep learning and physicsinformed learning have persistent limitations. Indicatively, strong assumptions
regarding the data likelihood are required, the performance highly depends on the
selection of priors, and the posterior can be sampled only approximately, which
leads to poor approximations because of the associated computational cost. This
paper introduces and studies confidence interval (CI) estimation for deterministic
partial differential equations as a novel problem. That is, to propagate confidence,
in the form of CIs, from data locations to the entire domain with probabilistic guarantees. We propose a method, termed Physics-Informed Confidence Propagation
(PICProp), based on bi-level optimization to compute a valid CI without making
heavy assumptions. We provide a theorem regarding the validity of our method,
and computational experiments, where the focus is on physics-informed learning.
Code is available at https://github.com/ShenQianli/PICProp.

1

Introduction

Combining data and physics rules using deep learning for solving differential equations [25] and
learning operator mappings [20] has recently attracted increased research interest. In this context,
physics-informed machine learning is transforming the computational science field in an unprecedented manner, by solving ill-posed problems, involving noisy and multi-fidelity data as well as
missing functional terms, which could not be tackled before [16]. Nevertheless, uncertainty – mainly
due to data noise and neural network over-parametrization – must be considered for using such
models safely in critical applications [24]. Despite extensive work on uncertainty quantification
(UQ) for deep learning [1], standard UQ has persistent limitations. Indicatively, although for most
practical applications where only confidence intervals (CIs) are required, the harder problem of UQ
is often solved first using simplifying assumptions, and the CIs are subsequently computed. Further,
strong assumptions regarding the data likelihood are required, the performance highly depends on
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

