Regression with Cost-based Rejection

Xin Cheng1

Yuzhou Cao2 Haobo Wang3 Hongxin Wei4 Bo An2 Lei Feng2∗
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, China
4
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Southern University of Science and Technology, China
xincheng9215@gmail.com, yuzhou002@e.ntu.edu.sg, wanghaobo@zju.edu.cn
weihx@sustech.edu.cn, boan@ntu.edu.sg, lfengqaq@gmail.com
1

Abstract
Learning with rejection is an important framework that can refrain from making
predictions to avoid critical mispredictions by balancing between prediction and
rejection. Previous studies on cost-based rejection only focused on the classification setting, which cannot handle the continuous and infinite target space in the
regression setting. In this paper, we investigate a novel regression problem called
regression with cost-based rejection, where the model can reject to make predictions on some examples given certain rejection costs. To solve this problem,
we first formulate the expected risk for this problem and then derive the Bayes
optimal solution, which shows that the optimal model should reject to make predictions on the examples whose variance is larger than the rejection cost when
the mean squared error is used as the evaluation metric. Furthermore, we propose
to train the model by a surrogate loss function that considers rejection as binary
classification and we provide conditions for the model consistency, which implies
that the Bayes optimal solution can be recovered by our proposed surrogate loss.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, the learned model from training data is expected to make predictions on unknown test data as accurately as possible. However, it would be unreasonable for the learned model
to make predictions on all the test instances, as there may exist some difficult instances that the
learned model cannot give an accurate prediction. Incorrect predictions can cause severe consequences and even can be life-threatening, especially in risk-sensitive applications [5, 19, 36, 11],
such as healthcare management, autonomous driving, and product inspection. Therefore, the learning with rejection (LwR) framework [10, 11, 36, 27, 31, 17, 8, 6, 38] was extensively investigated,
which aims to provide a reject option to not make a prediction in order to prevent critical false predictions. In this case, the LwR model can be learned by balancing the rejection and the prediction.
So far, most of the existing studies on LwR have focused on the classification setting, i.e., classification with rejection [10, 3, 44, 45, 14, 19, 37, 17, 8, 6]. A well-known framework for classification
with rejection that has been studied extensively is called the cost-based framework, i.e., classification with cost-based rejection [11, 12, 18, 39, 16, 36, 8, 6]. In the classification with cost-based
rejection setting, there is a pre-determined rejection cost c for each instance, which must be smaller
than the classification error 1. A typical approach for classification with cost-based rejection is the
confidence-based approach [22, 3, 45, 39, 40, 8]. The main idea is to use the real-valued output
of the classifier as the confidence score and decide whether to reject the prediction based on the
∗

Corresponding author: Lei Feng.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

