Sharp Bounds for Generalized Causal Sensitivity
Analysis

Dennis Frauen, Valentyn Melnychuk & Stefan Feuerriegel
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
{frauen,melnychuk,feuerriegel}@lmu.de

Abstract
Causal inference from observational data is crucial for many disciplines such as
medicine and economics. However, sharp bounds for causal effects under relaxations of the unconfoundedness assumption (causal sensitivity analysis) are subject
to ongoing research. So far, works with sharp bounds are restricted to fairly simple settings (e.g., a single binary treatment). In this paper, we propose a unified
framework for causal sensitivity analysis under unobserved confounding in various
settings. For this, we propose a flexible generalization of the marginal sensitivity
model (MSM) and then derive sharp bounds for a large class of causal effects.
This includes (conditional) average treatment effects, effects for mediation analysis
and path analysis, and distributional effects. Furthermore, our sensitivity model
is applicable to discrete, continuous, and time-varying treatments. It allows us
to interpret the partial identification problem under unobserved confounding as
a distribution shift in the latent confounders while evaluating the causal effect of
interest. In the special case of a single binary treatment, our bounds for (conditional) average treatment effects coincide with recent optimality results for causal
sensitivity analysis. Finally, we propose a scalable algorithm to estimate our sharp
bounds from observational data.

1

Introduction

Causal effects are crucial for decision-making in many disciplines, such as marketing [71], medicine
[77], and economics [1]. For example, physicians need to know the treatment effects to personalize
medical care, and governments are interested in the causal effects of policies on infection rates during
a pandemic. In many such applications, randomized experiments are costly or infeasible, because of
which causal effects must be estimated from observational data [59].
Estimating causal effects from observational data may lead to bias due to the existence of confounders,
i.e., variables that affect both treatment and outcome [55]. A remedy is to observe all confounders and
thus to assume unconfoundedness (e.g., as in [16, 63, 64]). However, in many practical applications,
the assumption of unconfoundedness is violated. For example, electronic health records do not
capture a patient’s ethnic background, which is a known confounder in medicine [52]. In such cases,
the causal effect is not identified from observational data, and unbiased estimation is thus impossible
[27].
A popular way to perform causal inference in the presence of unobserved confounders is causal
sensitivity analysis. Causal sensitivity analysis aims to derive bounds on the causal effect of interest
under relaxations of the unconfoundedness assumption. Here, the strength of unobserved confounding
is typically controlled by some sensitivity parameter Γ, which also determines the tightness of the
bounds. In practice, one chooses Γ through domain knowledge [14, 33, 82] or data-driven heuristics
[29]. Then, one derives that the causal effect of interest lies in some informative region. For example,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

