Recursion in Recursion: Two-Level Nested Recursion
for Length Generalization with Scalability

Jishnu Ray Chowdhury
Cornelia Caragea
Computer Science
University of Illinois Chicago
jraych2@uic.edu
cornelia@uic.edu

Abstract
Binary Balanced Tree Recursive Neural Networks (BBT-RvNNs) enforce sequence
composition according to a preset balanced binary tree structure. Thus, their nonlinear recursion depth (which is the tree depth) is just log2 n (n being the sequence
length). Such logarithmic scaling makes BBT-RvNNs efficient and scalable on long
sequence tasks such as Long Range Arena (LRA). However, such computational
efficiency comes at a cost because BBT-RvNNs cannot solve simple arithmetic
tasks like ListOps. On the flip side, RvNN models (e.g., Beam Tree RvNN) that
do succeed on ListOps (and other structure-sensitive tasks like formal logical
inference) are generally several times more expensive (in time and space) than
even Recurrent Neural Networks. In this paper, we introduce a novel framework —
Recursion in Recursion (RIR) to strike a balance between the two sides - getting
some of the benefits from both worlds. In RIR, we use a form of two-level nested
recursion - where the outer recursion is a k-ary balanced tree model with another
recursive model (inner recursion) implementing its cell function. For the inner
recursion, we choose Beam Tree RvNNs. To adjust Beam Tree RvNNs within RIR
we also propose a novel strategy of beam alignment. Overall, this entails that the
total recursive depth in RIR is upper-bounded by k logk n. Our best RIR-based
model is the first model that demonstrates high (≥ 90%) length-generalization
performance on ListOps while at the same time being scalable enough to be
trainable on long sequence inputs from LRA (it can reduce the memory usage of the
original Beam Tree RvNN by hundreds of times). Moreover, in terms of accuracy
in the LRA language tasks, it performs competitively with Structured State Space
Models (SSMs) without any special initialization - outperforming Transformers by
a large margin. On the other hand, while SSMs can marginally outperform RIR on
LRA, they (SSMs) fail to length-generalize on ListOps. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/JRC1995/BeamRecursionFamily/.

1

Introduction

Non-linear Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [23, 40] have the potential to enable powerful nonlinear sequential dynamics that dynamically adapt with the input length. However, this ability that
makes them powerful also causes several problems. First, RNNs are slow because of their non-linear
sequential operations that scale linearly with the input sequence length. Second, backpropagation
through arbitrarily large non-linear recurrence depth (depending on the input length) can lead to
vanishing/exploding gradients [39, 3] - or can have stability issues overall [67]. Potentially, because
of the combination of these factors, it was found that fast convolution-based models [99, 48, 51,
16, 57, 26, 2, 47] with fixed non-linear depth could often do just as well as an RNN. Transformers
[94] are built upon this trajectory replacing bounded kernel window in convolution with an attention
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

