Learning Dense Flow Field for Highly-accurate
Cross-view Camera Localization
Zhenbo Song1∗, Xianghui Ze1∗, Jianfeng Lu1 , Yujiao Shi2†
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 2 ShanghaiTech University
{songzb, zexh, lujf}@njust.edu.cn, shiyj2@shanghaitech.edu.cn
1

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of estimating the 3-DoF camera pose for a
ground-level image with respect to a satellite image that encompasses the local
surroundings. We propose a novel end-to-end approach that leverages the learning
of dense pixel-wise flow fields in pairs of ground and satellite images to calculate
the camera pose. Our approach differs from existing methods by constructing
the feature metric at the pixel level, enabling full-image supervision for learning
distinctive geometric configurations and visual appearances across views. Specifically, our method employs two distinct convolution networks for ground and
satellite feature extraction. Then, we project the ground feature map to the bird’s
eye view (BEV) using a fixed camera height assumption to achieve preliminary
geometric alignment. To further establish the content association between the
BEV and satellite features, we introduce a residual convolution block to refine
the projected BEV feature. Optical flow estimation is performed on the refined
BEV feature map and the satellite feature map using flow decoder networks based
on RAFT. After obtaining dense flow correspondences, we apply the least square
method to filter matching inliers and regress the ground camera pose. Extensive
experiments demonstrate significant improvements compared to state-of-the-art
methods. Notably, our approach reduces the median localization error by 89%,
19%, 80%, and 35% on the KITTI, Ford multi-AV, VIGOR, and Oxford RobotCar
datasets, respectively.

1

Introduction

Cross-view camera localization, also known as ground-to-aerial/satellite image matching, has evolved
from the study of coarse localization through image retrieval[4, 12, 16, 20] to a highly accurate 3-DoF
pose estimation task[5, 13, 22, 24]. This task involves accurately determining the precise position
and orientation of a ground camera in relation to a satellite patch that encompasses the surrounding
environment.
The key challenge in cross-view camera localization is to bridge the gap between the visual observations captured by the ground camera and the corresponding top-view camera, enabling robust and
accurate regression of the camera’s pose in real-world spatial coordinates. This capability holds
immense significance across various applications, including augmented reality, autonomous navigation, virtual reality, and robotics, where precise camera localization is crucial for enabling advanced
functionalities and interactions with the environment.
This paper focuses on investigating the problem of single-frame ground image localization, which
aims to estimate the 3 DoF pose of a ground camera relative to a single satellite image. This problem
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

