BoardgameQA: A Dataset for Natural Language
Reasoning with Contradictory Information

Mehran Kazemi, Quan Yuan, Deepti Bhatia, Najoung Kim, Xin Xu,
Vaiva Imbrasaite, Deepak Ramachandran
Google Research
{mehrankazemi, yquan, bhatiad, njkim, xxujasmine,
vimbrasaite, ramachandrand}@google.com

Abstract
Automated reasoning with unstructured natural text is a key requirement for many
potential applications of NLP and for developing robust AI systems. Recently,
Language Models (LMs) have demonstrated complex reasoning capacities even
without any finetuning. However, existing evaluation for automated reasoning
assumes access to a consistent and coherent set of information over which models
reason. When reasoning in the real-world, the available information is frequently
inconsistent or contradictory, and therefore models need to be equipped with a
strategy to resolve such conflicts when they arise. One widely-applicable way
of resolving conflicts is to impose preferences over information sources (e.g.,
based on source credibility or information recency) and adopt the source with
higher preference. In this paper, we formulate the problem of reasoning with
contradictory information guided by preferences over sources as the classical
problem of defeasible reasoning, and develop a dataset called BoardgameQA
for measuring the reasoning capacity of LMs in this setting. BoardgameQA
also incorporates reasoning with implicit background knowledge, to better reflect
reasoning problems in downstream applications. We benchmark various LMs on
BoardgameQA and the results reveal a significant gap in the reasoning capacity
of state-of-the-art LMs on this problem, showing that reasoning with conflicting
information does not surface out-of-the-box in LMs. While performance can be
improved with finetuning, it nevertheless remains poor.

1

Introduction

A fundamental goal of AI since its early days has been automatically applying logical or deductive
reasoning to draw new conclusions from existing knowledge [29, 20]. Since a large amount of
knowledge is available in the form of natural language, tremendous effort has been put into developing
models that can understand and reason over natural language [23, 42, 54, 32, 12, 57] (see [35] for a
survey). Recent years have seen substantial improvements in this direction thanks to advancements in
pretrained language models (LMs) [8, 9] that can handle unstructured data more flexibly, combined
with advanced prompting techniques [52, 31], and modular reasoning approaches [23, 12].
Existing work in automated reasoning in natural language usually assumes that the provided knowledge is consistent and reliable. But in many applications, the collection of information one has
to reason with is inconsistent and contradictory. This is the case, for instance, when reasoning
is performed with information found in different online sources or social media (e.g., retrievalaugmented LMs [17, 3]). When input sources are contradictory, one can consider various strategies to resolve the contradictions. One simple and practical formulation, which we adopt in this
work, is to resolve the conflicts based on preferences over the information sources: when a con37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

