Holistic Transfer: Towards Non-Disruptive
Fine-Tuning with Partial Target Data

Cheng-Hao Tu∗1 , Hong-You Chen∗1 , Zheda Mai1 , Jike Zhong1 , Vardaan Pahuja1 ,
Tanya Berger-Wolf1 , Song Gao2 , Charles Stewart3 , Yu Su1 , Wei-Lun Chao1
1

The Ohio State University, 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison, 3 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Abstract
We propose a learning problem involving adapting a pre-trained source model to
the target domain for classifying all classes that appeared in the source data, using
target data that covers only a partial label space. This problem is practical, as it is
unrealistic for the target end-users to collect data for all classes prior to adaptation.
However, it has received limited attention in the literature. To shed light on this
issue, we construct benchmark datasets and conduct extensive experiments to
uncover the inherent challenges. We found a dilemma — on the one hand, adapting
to the new target domain is important to claim better performance; on the other
hand, we observe that preserving the classification accuracy of classes missing
in the target adaptation data is highly challenging, let alone improving them. To
tackle this, we identify two key directions: 1) disentangling domain gradients
from classification gradients, and 2) preserving class relationships. We present
several effective solutions that maintain the accuracy of the missing classes and
enhance the overall performance, establishing solid baselines for holistic transfer
of pre-trained models with partial target data.

1

Introduction

We are entering an era in which we can easily access pre-trained machine-learning models capable
of classifying many objects. In practice, when end-users deploy these models in diverse domains,
adaptation is often necessary to achieve high accuracy. To address this issue, considerable efforts have
been devoted to domain adaptation (DA), aiming to transfer domain knowledge from the source to the
target. This involves updating the model on an adaptation set collected from the target environment.
Although various DA settings have been proposed to tackle different scenarios [75, 56, 55], we argue
that previous setups rely on a strong assumption that hinders their applicability in the real world: the
adaptation set contains samples from all possible labels (e.g., classes) in the target environments.
Taking classification as an example, to adapt a pre-trained source model’s recognition ability over C
classes to a novel domain, DA necessitates access to a target dataset encompassing all C classes.
In reality, the adaptation set may only have samples of much fewer classes C ′ < C due to limited
sample size, collections bias, etc. Many pertinent examples can be found in realistic AI applications.
Considering wildlife monitoring [38] as an instance, where data collection often occurs passively,
through smart camera traps, awaiting animal appearances. Consequently, when a smart camera trap
is deployed to a new location and requires adaptation, assembling a comprehensive target dataset
containing all the animal species becomes a daunting task, especially if a specific rare species does
not appear within the data collection period due to seasonal variations or animal migrations.
∗

Equal contributions

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

