Game Solving with Online Fine-Tuning

Ti-Rong Wu,1∗ Hung Guei,1∗ Ting Han Wei,2 Chung-Chin Shih,1,3 Jui-Te Chin,3 I-Chen Wu3,4
1
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Canada
3
Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
4
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
2

tirongwu@iis.sinica.edu.tw, hguei@iis.sinica.edu.tw, tinghan@ualberta.ca
rockmanray.cs02@nycu.edu.tw, pikachin.cs10@nycu.edu.tw, icwu@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
Game solving is a similar, yet more difficult task than mastering a game. Solving
a game typically means to find the game-theoretic value (outcome given optimal
play), and optionally a full strategy to follow in order to achieve that outcome. The
AlphaZero algorithm has demonstrated super-human level play, and its powerful
policy and value predictions have also served as heuristics in game solving. However, to solve a game and obtain a full strategy, a winning response must be found
for all possible moves by the losing player. This includes very poor lines of play
from the losing side, for which the AlphaZero self-play process will not encounter.
AlphaZero-based heuristics can be highly inaccurate when evaluating these outof-distribution positions, which occur throughout the entire search. To address
this issue, this paper investigates applying online fine-tuning while searching and
proposes two methods to learn tailor-designed heuristics for game solving. Our
experiments show that using online fine-tuning can solve a series of challenging 7x7
Killall-Go problems, using only 23.54% of computation time compared to the baseline without online fine-tuning. Results suggest that the savings scale with problem
size. Our method can further be extended to any tree search algorithm for problem
solving. Our code is available at https://rlg.iis.sinica.edu.tw/papers/neurips2023online-fine-tuning-solver.

1

Introduction

Playing and solving strategic games have served as drivers and major milestones [1] in artificial
intelligence research. To master such games, the objective is often designed to optimize on the
objective of maximizing the probability of winning. In the past several decades, researchers made significant progress in game playing, reaching super-human playing levels in many domains. Successful
examples include Chinook (checkers) [2], Deep Blue (chess) [3], AlphaGo (Go) [4], and AlphaStar
(StarCraft II) [5]. Furthermore, AlphaZero [6, 7] and MuZero [8] even boast generality by mastering
a variety of games without requiring expert human knowledge. Although these learning-based agents
have progressed dramatically in playing strength, there are no guarantees that their decisions are
always correct [9, 10] in terms of game-theoretic value, which is defined as the outcome of the game
given optimal play for both players. Game solving is this pursuit of finding game-theoretic values.
Game solving is a more difficult challenge than game playing. Many seemingly simple games
have astronomically large state spaces, with no simple way of exploring this space. Here is where
∗

These authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

