L2T-DLN: Learning to Teach with
Dynamic Loss Network

Zhaoyang Hai 1,∗, Liyuan Pan 1,2,∗,† , Xiabi Liu 1,∗,† , Zhengzheng Liu1 , Mirna Yunita1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, 2 BIT Special Zone
Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing, China, 100081
{haizhaoyang, liyuan.pan, liuxiabi, liuzhengzheng, mirnayunita}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
With the concept of teaching being introduced to the machine learning community,
a teacher model start using dynamic loss functions to teach the training of a student
model. The dynamic intends to set adaptive loss functions to different phases of
student model learning. In existing works, the teacher model 1) merely determines
the loss function based on the present states of the student model, i.e., disregards
the experience of the teacher; 2) only utilizes the states of the student model, e.g.,
training iteration number and loss/accuracy from training/validation sets, while
ignoring the states of the loss function. In this paper, we first formulate the loss
adjustment as a temporal task by designing a teacher model with memory units,
and, therefore, enables the student learning to be guided by the experience of
the teacher model. Then, with a dynamic loss network, we can additionally use
the states of the loss to assist the teacher learning in enhancing the interactions
between the teacher and the student model. Extensive experiments demonstrate our
approach can enhance student learning and improve the performance of various
deep models on real-world tasks, including classification, objective detection, and
semantic segmentation scenarios.

1

Introduction

In pedagogy study, teachers refine their teaching ability based on student feedback, e.g., exam scores.
Students benefited from the enhanced ability of teachers and then achieved high scores on the exam.
Both teachers and students are developed in this interaction iteratively and constantly [27–29, 17].
The phenomenon is known as teaching-learning transaction [5], or learning to teach (L2T) in machine
learning [7].
In L2T, a teacher model uses a dynamic loss function, which acts as an exam paper, to train and
optimize the student model (as shown in Figure 1(a)). However, existing approaches adjust the loss
functions by only employing a simple feedforward network as the teacher model, and neglecting
the temporal nature of loss function adjustment. The disregarding of the experience accumulation
for teachers (e.g., the ability to analyze all previous exam scores for a student), and, therefore,
limits the potential of L2T. In addition, in previous works, the teacher model only focuses on the
state of the student model, i.e., training iteration number [37], training/validation accuracy [37, 16],
training/validation loss[2], and the output of the student model[16, 2, 23]. However, the states of loss
functions (e.g., the gradients concerning loss functions) are neglected, which dilutes the benefit of
improving the exam paper. In other words, the teacher needs to consider that the question changes of
an exam paper also influence the performance of a student.
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

