Keypoint-Augmented Self-Supervised Learning for
Medical Image Segmentation with Limited Annotation

Zhangsihao Yang∗
Arizona State University
zshyang1106@gmail.com
Kaize Ding
Northwestern University
kaize.ding@northwestern.edu

Mengwei Ren∗
New York University
mengwei.ren@nyu.edu
Guido Gerig
New York University
gerig@nyu.edu

Yalin Wang
Arizona State University
ylwang@asu.edu

Abstract
Pretraining CNN models (i.e., UNet) through self-supervision has become a powerful approach to facilitate medical image segmentation under low annotation regimes.
Recent contrastive learning methods encourage similar global representations when
the same image undergoes different transformations, or enforce invariance across
different image/patch features that are intrinsically correlated. However, CNNextracted global and local features are limited in capturing long-range spatial
dependencies that are essential in biological anatomy. To this end, we present
a keypoint-augmented fusion layer that extracts representations preserving both
short- and long-range self-attention. In particular, we augment the CNN feature
map at multiple scales by incorporating an additional input that learns long-range
spatial self-attention among localized keypoint features. Further, we introduce both
global and local self-supervised pretraining for the framework. At the global scale,
we obtain global representations from both the bottleneck of the UNet, and by
aggregating multiscale keypoint features. These global features are subsequently
regularized through image-level contrastive objectives. At the local scale, we define
a distance-based criterion to first establish correspondences among keypoints and
encourage similarity between their features. Through extensive experiments on
both MRI and CT segmentation tasks, we demonstrate the architectural advantages
of our proposed method in comparison to both CNN and Transformer-based UNets,
when all architectures are trained with randomly initialized weights. With our proposed pretraining strategy, our method further outperforms existing SSL methods
by producing more robust self-attention and achieving state-of-the-art segmentation
results. The code is available at https://github.com/zshyang/kaf.git.

1

Introduction

Large-scale and diverse source of training data has significantly empowered the generalization ability
of supervised segmentation models [52, 77, 34]. However, in biomedical image analysis, manual
delineation of images/volumes requires extensive domain knowledge and can be extremely timeconsuming and error-prone. Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) [9, 25, 18, 45, 7, 72, 51] has
emerged in medical vision to pretrain a segmentation backbone (e.g. UNet) leveraging large scale
unlabelled data, to serve as a better initialization before finetuning the model with limited annotation.
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

