Universality laws for Gaussian mixtures
in generalized linear models

Yatin Dandi, Ludovic Stephan, Florent Krzakala
Idephics, EPFL, Switzerland
Bruno Loureiro
DI, Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris, France

Lenka Zdeborova
SPOC, EPFL, Switzerland

Abstract
A recent line of work in high-dimensional statistics working under the Gaussian
mixture hypothesis has led to a number of results in the context of empirical risk
minimization, Bayesian uncertainty quantification, separation of kernel methods
and neural networks, ensembling and fluctuation of random features. We provide rigorous proofs for the applicability of these results to a general class of
datasets
(xi , yi )i=1,...,n containing independent samples from mixture distribution
P
x
c∈C ρc Pc . Specifically, we consider the hypothesis class of generalized linear
models ŷ = F (Θ⊤ x) and investigate the asymptotic joint statistics of a family of
generalized linear estimators (Θ(1) , . . . , Θ(M ) ), obtained either from (a) minimiz(m)
ing an empirical risk R̂n (Θ(m) ; X, y) or (b) sampling from the associated Gibbs
(m)
measure exp(−βnR̂n (Θ(m) ; X, y)). Our main contribution is to characterize
under which conditions the asymptotic joint statistics of this family depend (on
a weak sense) only on the means and covariances of the class conditional feature
distribution Pcx . This allows us to prove the universality of different quantities of
interest, including training and generalization errors, as well as the geometrical
properties and correlations of the estimators.
A recurrent topic in high-dimensional statistics is the investigation of the typical properties of signal
processing and machine learning methods on synthetic, i.i.d. Gaussian data, a scenario often known
under the umbrella of Gaussian design [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. A less restrictive assumption arises when
considering that many machine learning tasks deal with data partitioned into a fixed number of classes.
In these cases, the data distribution is naturally described by a mixture model, where each sample is
generated conditionally on the class. In other words: data is generated by first sampling the class
assignment and then generating the input conditioned on the class. Arguably the simplest example of
such distributions is that of a Gaussian mixture, which shall be our focus in this work.
Gaussian mixtures are a popular model in high-dimensional statistics since, besides being an universal
approximator, they often lead to mathematically tractable problems. Indeed, a recent line of work has
analyzed the asymptotic performance of a large class of machine learning problems in the proportional
high-dimensional limit under the Gaussian mixture data assumption, see e.g. [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
The goal of the present work is to show that this assumption, and the conclusions derived therein, are
far more general than previously anticipated.
A recent line of work [13, 14], initiated by the work of [15] for Kernel matrices, posits that for
generalized linear estimation on non-linear feature maps satisfying certain regularity conditions and a
“one-dimensional CLT”, the data distribution can be replaced by equivalent Gaussian data without
affecting the training and generalization errors. This was recently proven by [16] for empirical

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

