SPA: A Graph Spectral Alignment Perspective for
Domain Adaptation

Zhiqing Xiao13 , Haobo Wang23 , Ying Jin4 , Lei Feng5 , Gang Chen13 , Fei Huang6 , Junbo Zhao13∗
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Key Lab of Intelligent Computing based Big Data of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University
4
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
6
Alibaba Group
{zhiqing.xiao, wanghaobo, cg, j.zhao}@zju.edu.cn,
{sherryying003, lfengqaq, feirhuang}@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is a pivotal form in machine learning to
extend the in-domain model to the distinctive target domains where the data distributions differ. Most prior works focus on capturing the inter-domain transferability
but largely overlook rich intra-domain structures, which empirically results in even
worse discriminability. In this work, we introduce a novel graph SPectral Alignment (SPA) framework to tackle the tradeoff. The core of our method is briefly
condensed as follows: (i)-by casting the DA problem to graph primitives, SPA
composes a coarse graph alignment mechanism with a novel spectral regularizer
towards aligning the domain graphs in eigenspaces; (ii)-we further develop a finegrained message propagation module — upon a novel neighbor-aware self-training
mechanism — in order for enhanced discriminability in the target domain. On
standardized benchmarks, the extensive experiments of SPA demonstrate that its
performance has surpassed the existing cutting-edge DA methods. Coupled with
dense model analysis, we conclude that our approach indeed possesses superior efficacy, robustness, discriminability, and transferability. Code and data are available
at: https://github.com/CrownX/SPA.

1

Introduction

Domain adaptation (DA) problem is a widely studied area in computer vision field [20, 19, 73, 65, 40],
which aims to transfer knowledge from label-rich source domains to label-scare target domains where
dataset shift [32] or domain shift [72] exists. The existing unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
methods usually explore the idea of learning domain-invariant feature representations based on the
theoretical analysis [3]. These methods can be generally categorized several types, i.e., moment
matching methods [44, 51, 70], and adversarial learning methods [18, 66, 19, 52].
The most essential challenge of domain adaptation is how to find a suitable utilization of intra-domain
information and inter-domain information to properly align target samples. More specifically, it
is a trade-off between discriminating data samples of different categories within a domain to the
greatest extent possible, and learning transferable features across domains with the existence of
domain shift. To achieve this, adversarial learning methods implicitly mitigate the domain shift
by driving the feature extractor to extract indistinguishable features and fool the domain classifier.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

