Live Graph Lab: Towards Open, Dynamic and Real
Transaction Graphs with NFT

Zhen Zhang, Bingqiao Luo, Shengliang Lu, Bingsheng He
National University of Singapore
zhen@nus.edu.sg,luo.bingqiao@u.nus.edu,lusl@nus.edu.sg,hebs@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Numerous studies have been conducted to investigate the properties of large-scale
temporal graphs. Despite the ubiquity of these graphs in real-world scenarios,
it’s usually impractical for us to obtain the whole real-time graphs due to privacy
concerns and technical limitations. In this paper, we introduce the concept of Live
Graph Lab for temporal graphs, which enables open, dynamic and real transaction
graphs from blockchains. Among them, Non-fungible tokens (NFTs) have become
one of the most prominent parts of blockchain over the past several years. With
more than $40 billion market capitalization, this decentralized ecosystem produces
massive, anonymous and real transaction activities, which naturally forms a complicated transaction network. However, there is limited understanding about the
characteristics of this emerging NFT ecosystem from a temporal graph analysis
perspective. To mitigate this gap, we instantiate a live graph with NFT transaction
network and investigate its dynamics to provide new observations and insights.
Specifically, through downloading and parsing the NFT transaction activities, we
obtain a temporal graph with more than 4.5 million nodes and 124 million edges.
Then, a series of measurements are presented to understand the properties of the
NFT ecosystem. Through comparisons with social, citation, and web networks,
our analyses give intriguing findings and point out potential directions for future
exploration. Finally, we also study machine learning models in this live graph to
enrich the current datasets and provide new opportunities for the graph community.
The source codes and dataset are available at https://livegraphlab.github.io.

1

Introduction

Temporal graphs provide an accurate representation of real-world systems, including social networks,
transaction networks and the Web [5, 38, 39, 41], etc. By investigating temporal graphs, we can gain
insights into the temporal dynamics and understand how these systems evolve and function [86, 6].
Notably, a growing number of graph mining algorithms [36, 25, 85] and graph systems [69, 35, 13]
have been developed. However, with this continuously growing trend, several severe issues emerge,
which limit the further development of graph community. In the current literature, studies are usually
conducted on a set of outdated and incomplete graphs. The majority of the aforementioned graphs
are either not easily available or their graph structures are incomplete since they cannot record all the
interactions in graph. Moreover, even through all the interactions are recorded, they might not be
shareable in a public and timely evolving manner, such as social networks in companies like Meta
and Tencent. Thus, for meaningful temporal graph analysis and benchmarks, we need open graph
datasets that evolve dynamically and are easily accessible in a timely manner.
To bridge this gap, we propose the concept of Live Graph Lab, which provides live graphs according to
blockchain transactions. Specifically, we offer a set of tools for downloading, parsing, cleaning, and
analyzing blockchain transactions to empower the analyses of transaction graphs. It not only alleviates
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

