Evaluating Graph Neural Networks for Link
Prediction: Current Pitfalls and New Benchmarking

Juanhui Li1∗, Harry Shomer1∗ , Haitao Mao1 , Shenglai Zeng1
Yao Ma2 , Neil Shah3 , Jiliang Tang1 , Dawei Yin4
1
Michigan State University, 2 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
3
Snap Inc., 4 Baidu Inc.
{lijuanh1,shomerha,haitaoma,zengshe1,tangjili}@msu.edu
may13@rpi.edu, nshah@snap.com, yindawei@acm.org

Abstract
Link prediction attempts to predict whether an unseen edge exists based on only
a portion of edges of a graph. A flurry of methods have been introduced in recent years that attempt to make use of graph neural networks (GNNs) for this
task. Furthermore, new and diverse datasets have also been created to better evaluate the effectiveness of these new models. However, multiple pitfalls currently
exist that hinder our ability to properly evaluate these new methods. These pitfalls mainly include: (1) Lower than actual performance on multiple baselines,
(2) A lack of a unified data split and evaluation metric on some datasets, and (3)
An unrealistic evaluation setting that uses easy negative samples. To overcome
these challenges, we first conduct a fair comparison across prominent methods and
datasets, utilizing the same dataset and hyperparameter search settings. We then
create a more practical evaluation setting based on a Heuristic Related Sampling
Technique (HeaRT), which samples hard negative samples via multiple heuristics.
The new evaluation setting helps promote new challenges and opportunities in link
prediction by aligning the evaluation with real-world situations. Our implementation and data are available at https://github.com/Juanhui28/HeaRT.

1

Introduction

The task of link prediction is to determine the existence of an edge between two unconnected nodes
in a graph. Existing link prediction algorithms attempt to estimate the proximity of different pairs
of nodes in the graph, where node pairs with a higher proximity are more likely to interact [1].
Link prediction is applied in many different domains including social networks [2], biological networks [3], and recommender systems [4].
Graph neural networks (GNNs) [5] have gained prominence in recent years with many new frameworks being proposed for a variety of different tasks. Corresponding to the rise in popularity of
GNNs, there has been a number of studies that attempt to critically examine the effectiveness of
different GNNs on various tasks. This can be seen for the task of node classification [6], graph
classification [7], knowledge graph completion (KGC) [8–10], and others [11].
However, despite a number of new GNN-based methods being proposed [12–15] for link prediction,
there is currently no work that attempts to carefully examine recent advances in link prediction
methods. Upon examination, we find that there are several pitfalls in regard to model evaluation that
impede our ability to properly evaluate current methods. This includes:
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

