Every Parameter Matters: Ensuring the
Convergence of Federated Learning
with Dynamic Heterogeneous Models Reduction

Hanhan Zhou
The George Washington University
hanhan@gwu.edu

Tian Lan
The George Washington University
tlan@gwu.edu

Guru Venkataramani
The George Washington University
guruv@gwu.edu

Wenbo Ding
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute
ding.wenbo@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-device Federated Learning (FL) faces significant challenges where lowend clients that could potentially make unique contributions are excluded from
training large models due to their resource bottlenecks. Recent research efforts have
focused on model-heterogeneous FL, by extracting reduced-size models from the
global model and applying them to local clients accordingly. Despite the empirical
success, general theoretical guarantees of convergence on this method remain
an open question. This paper presents a unifying framework for heterogeneous
FL algorithms with online model extraction and provides a general convergence
analysis for the first time. In particular, we prove that under certain sufficient
conditions and for both IID and non-IID data, these algorithms converge to a
stationary point of standard FL for general smooth cost functions. Moreover, we
introduce the concept of minimum coverage index, together with model reduction
noise, which will determine the convergence of heterogeneous federated learning,
and therefore we advocate for a holistic approach that considers both factors to
enhance the efficiency of heterogeneous federated learning.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) is a machine learning paradigm that enables a massive number of distributed
clients to collaborate and train a centralized global model without exposing their local data [1].
Heterogeneous FL is confronted with two fundamental challenges: (1) mobile and edge devices that
are equipped with drastically different computation and communication capabilities are becoming the
dominant source for FL [2], also known as device heterogeneity; (2) state-of-the-art machine learning
model sizes have grown significantly over the years, limiting the participation of certain devices
in training. This has prompted significant recent attention to a family of FL algorithms relying on
training reduced-size heterogeneous local models (often obtained through extracting a subnet or
pruning a shared global model) for global aggregation. It includes algorithms such as HeteroFL [3]
that employ fixed heterogeneous local models, as well as algorithms like PruneFL [4] and FedRolex
[5] that adaptively select and train pruned or partial models dynamically during training. However,
the success of these algorithms has only been demonstrated empirically (e.g., [2, 4, 3]). Unlike
standard FL that has received rigorous analysis [6, 7, 8, 9], the convergence of heterogeneous FL
algorithms is still an open question.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

