On the Convergence to a Global Solution of
Shuffling-Type Gradient Algorithms

Lam M. Nguyen∗
IBM Research
Thomas J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
LamNguyen.MLTD@ibm.com

Trang H. Tran∗
School of ORIE
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
htt27@cornell.edu

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm is the method of choice in many
machine learning tasks thanks to its scalability and efficiency in dealing with
large-scale problems. In this paper, we focus on the shuffling version of SGD
which matches the mainstream practical heuristics. We show the convergence
to a global solution of shuffling SGD for a class of non-convex functions under over-parameterized settings. Our analysis employs more relaxed non-convex
assumptions than previous literature. Nevertheless, we maintain the desired computational complexity as shuffling SGD has achieved in the general convex setting.

1

Introduction

In the last decade, neural network-based models have shown great success in many machine learning
applications such as natural language processing [Collobert and Weston, 2008, Goldberg et al., 2018],
computer vision and pattern recognition [Goodfellow et al., 2014, He and Sun, 2015]. The training
task of many learning models boils down to the following finite-sum minimization problem:
)
(
n
1X
f (w; i) ,
(1)
min F (w) :=
n i=1
w∈Rd
where f (·; i) : Rd → R is smooth and possibly non-convex for i ∈ [n] := {1, · · · , n}. Solving the
empirical risk minimization (1) had been a difficult task for a long time due to the non-convexity
and the complicated learning models. Later progress with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its
variants [Robbins and Monro, 1951, Duchi et al., 2011, Kingma and Ba, 2014] have shown great
performance in training deep neural networks. These stochastic first-order methods are favorable
thanks to its scalability and efficiency in dealing with large-scale problems. At each iteration SGD
samples an index i uniformly from the set {1, . . . , n}, and uses the individual gradient ∇f (·; i) to
update the weight.
While there has been much attention on the theoretical aspect of the traditional i.i.d. (independently
identically distributed) version of SGD [Nemirovski et al., 2009, Ghadimi and Lan, 2013, Bottou
et al., 2018], practical heuristics often use without-replacement data sampling schemes. Also known
as shuffling sampling schemes, these methods generate some random or deterministic permutations
of the index set {1, 2, . . . , n} and apply gradient updates using these permutation orders. Intuitively,
a collection of such n individual updates is a pass over all the data, or an epoch. One may choose to
create a new random permutation at the beginning of each epoch (in Random Reshuffling scheme) or
use a random permutation for every epoch (in Single Shuffling scheme). Alternatively, one may use a
∗

Equally contributed. Corresponding author: Lam M. Nguyen

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

