Provable Guarantees for Neural Networks via
Gradient Feature Learning

Zhenmei Shi∗ , Junyi Wei∗ , Yingyu Liang
University of Wisconsin, Madison
zhmeishi@cs.wisc.edu,jwei53@wisc.edu,yliang@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Neural networks have achieved remarkable empirical performance, while the
current theoretical analysis is not adequate for understanding their success, e.g.,
the Neural Tangent Kernel approach fails to capture their key feature learning
ability, while recent analyses on feature learning are typically problem-specific.
This work proposes a unified analysis framework for two-layer networks trained
by gradient descent. The framework is centered around the principle of feature
learning from gradients, and its effectiveness is demonstrated by applications in
several prototypical problems such as mixtures of Gaussians and parity functions.
The framework also sheds light on interesting network learning phenomena such
as feature learning beyond kernels and the lottery ticket hypothesis.

1

Introduction

Neural network (NN) learning has achieved remarkable empirical success and has been a main
driving force for the recent progress in machine learning and artificial intelligence. On the other
hand, theoretical understandings significantly lag behind. Traditional analysis approaches are not
adequate due to the overparameterization of practical networks and the non-convex optimization in the
training via gradient descent. One line of work (e.g. [9, 31, 38, 60, 71, 123] and many others) shows
under proper conditions, heavily overparameterized networks are approximately linear models over
data-independent features, i.e., a linear function on the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK). While making
weak assumptions about the data and thus applicable to various settings, this approach requires the
network learning to be approximately using fixed data-independent features (i.e., the kernel regime,
or fixed feature methods). It thus fails to capture the feature learning ability of networks (i.e., to learn
a feature mapping for the inputs which allow accurate prediction), which is widely believed to be the
key factor to their empirical success in many applications (e.g., [54, 77, 117, 119]). To study feature
learning in networks, a recent line of work (e.g. [5, 6, 14, 33, 52, 72, 76, 116] and others) shows
examples where networks provably enjoy advantages over fixed feature methods (including NTK),
under different settings and assumptions. While providing more insights, these studies typically focus
on specific problems, and their analyses exploit the specific properties of the problems and appear to
be unrelated to each other. Is there a common principle for feature learning in networks via gradient
descent? Is there a unified analysis framework that can clarify the principle and also lead to provable
error guarantees for prototypical problem settings?
In this work, we take a step toward this goal by proposing a gradient feature learning framework
for analyzing two-layer network learning by gradient descent. (1) The framework makes essentially
no assumption about the data distribution and can be applied to various problems. Furthermore,
it is centered around features from gradients, clearly illustrating how gradient descent leads to
feature learning in networks and subsequently accurate predictions. (2) It leads to error guarantees
competitive with the optimal in a family of networks that use the features induced by gradients on the
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

