RayDF: Neural Ray-surface Distance Fields with
Multi-view Consistency
Zhuoman Liu Bo Yang∗ Yan Luximon Ajay Kumar Jinxi Li
vLAR Group, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{zhuo-man.liu, jinxi.li}@connect.polyu.hk
bo.yang@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of continuous 3D shape representations. The
majority of existing successful methods are coordinate-based implicit neural representations. However, they are inefficient to render novel views or recover explicit
surface points. A few works start to formulate 3D shapes as ray-based neural
functions, but the learned structures are inferior due to the lack of multi-view geometry consistency. To tackle these challenges, we propose a new framework called
RayDF. It consists of three major components: 1) the simple ray-surface distance
field, 2) the novel dual-ray visibility classifier, and 3) a multi-view consistency
optimization module to drive the learned ray-surface distances to be multi-view
geometry consistent. We extensively evaluate our method on three public datasets,
demonstrating remarkable performance in 3D surface point reconstruction on
both synthetic and challenging real-world 3D scenes, clearly surpassing existing
coordinate-based and ray-based baselines. Most notably, our method achieves a
1000× faster speed than coordinate-based methods to render an 800 × 800 depth
image, showing the superiority of our method for 3D shape representation. Our
code and data are available at https://github.com/vLAR-group/RayDF

1

Introduction

Learning accurate and efficient 3D shape representations is crucial for many cutting-edge applications in the fields of machine vision and robotics. Recent advances in 3D coordinate-based neural
representations including occupancy fields (OF) [46, 11], un/signed distance fields (U/SDF) [54, 14],
and radiance fields (NeRF) [47], have shown great potential to recover complex shapes from RGB/D
images and/or point clouds. Although these methods and their variants have achieved excellent
performance in a wide range of downstream tasks such as shape reconstruction [55, 58, 60], novel
view synthesis [4, 72, 51, 5], and scene understanding [85, 86, 73], obtaining 3D shapes or 2D views
from their trained networks is computationally expensive, due to the requirement of extensive network
evaluations to regress surface points.
Very recently, a number of works start to represent 3D models as ray-based neural functions. By
simply taking individual light rays as input, the methods LFN [64] and NeuLF [40] learn to directly
predict the radiance (RGB) values, while PRIF [23] and DDF [3] straightly estimate the surface hitting
points of input rays. Compared with coordinate-based representations, these ray-based methods are
clearly more efficient to infer 3D geometry and render 2D views, as every single ray only needs to
query the trained network once forward. Nevertheless, the learned 3D geometries by these methods
are still lack of fidelity, primarily because they fail to explicitly take into account geometry consistency
across multiple views, resulting in the network likely over-fitting individual training rays but unable
to generalize to unseen rays in testing.
In this paper, we aim to address this key issue of ray-based neural representations by explicitly
integrating multi-view geometry consistency into the network design. In particular, we introduce a
∗ Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

