A Bayesian Approach To Analysing Training Data
Attribution In Deep Learning

Elisa Nguyen
Tübingen AI Center
University of Tübingen

Minjoon Seo
KAIST AI

Seong Joon Oh
Tübingen AI Center
University of Tübingen

Abstract
Training data attribution (TDA) techniques find influential training data for the
model’s prediction on the test data of interest. They approximate the impact of
down- or up-weighting a particular training sample. While conceptually useful,
they are hardly applicable to deep models in practice, particularly because of their
sensitivity to different model initialisation. In this paper, we introduce a Bayesian
perspective on the TDA task, where the learned model is treated as a Bayesian
posterior and the TDA estimates as random variables. From this novel viewpoint,
we observe that the influence of an individual training sample is often overshadowed
by the noise stemming from model initialisation and SGD batch composition. Based
on this observation, we argue that TDA can only be reliably used for explaining
deep model predictions that are consistently influenced by certain training data,
independent of other noise factors. Our experiments demonstrate the rarity of
such noise-independent training-test data pairs but confirm their existence. We
recommend that future researchers and practitioners trust TDA estimates only in
such cases. Further, we find a disagreement between ground truth and estimated
TDA distributions and encourage future work to study this gap. Code is provided
at https://github.com/ElisaNguyen/bayesian-tda.

1

Introduction

Understanding how machine learning models arrive at decisions is desirable for social, legal and
ethical reasons, particularly for opaque deep learning models [1]. One approach to explanations is the
data-centric approach of training data attribution (TDA). As the name suggests, TDA finds attributing
training samples for a model decision, uncovering which part of the training data is relevant. The
attribution τ of a training sample zj on another sample z is usually defined as the change of model
loss L on z when the model is retrained without zj [2]:
τ (zj , z) := L(z; θ\j ) − L(z; θ)

(1)

where θ is a model trained on the entire dataset D and θ\j is a model trained on the same set
without zj . Since the direct computation of Equation 1 is expensive, various TDA techniques for
approximating the quantity have been proposed, such as influence functions [3] or TracIn [4]. Their
approximations are often based on some form of inner product between the parameter gradients
∇θ L(z; θ) and ∇θ L(zj ; θ).
Knowing how training samples attribute to a model decision provides an actionable understanding
of the training data distribution, especially in cases of model error. TDA methods can identify the
training samples that are most relevant to an error and therefore enable users to understand why the
error occurred (e.g. due to domain mismatch of test and training data or wrongly labelled training
data) [3]. Additionally, TDA gives them the tool to address the errors by e.g. changing the model
directly through the training data. Even in non-erroneous cases, understanding the attributing training
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

