Identification of Nonlinear Latent Hierarchical Models
Lingjing Kong1 , Biwei Huang2 , Feng Xie3 , Eric Xing1,4 , Yuejie Chi1 , and Kun Zhang1,4
1
Carnegie Mellon University
University of California San Diego
3
Beijing Technology and Business University
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
2

Abstract
Identifying latent variables and causal structures from observational data is essential to many real-world applications involving biological data, medical data, and
unstructured data such as images and languages. However, this task can be highly
challenging, especially when observed variables are generated by causally related
latent variables and the relationships are nonlinear. In this work, we investigate
the identification problem for nonlinear latent hierarchical causal models in which
observed variables are generated by a set of causally related latent variables, and
some latent variables may not have observed children. We show that the identifiability of causal structures and latent variables (up to invertible transformations)
can be achieved under mild assumptions: on causal structures, we allow for multiple paths between any pair of variables in the graph, which relaxes latent tree
assumptions in prior work; on structural functions, we permit general nonlinearity
and multi-dimensional continuous variables, alleviating existing work’s parametric
assumptions. Specifically, we first develop an identification criterion in the form
of novel identifiability guarantees for an elementary latent variable model. Leveraging this criterion, we show that both causal structures and latent variables of
the hierarchical model can be identified asymptotically by explicitly constructing
an estimation procedure. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to
establish identifiability guarantees for both causal structures and latent variables in
nonlinear latent hierarchical models.

1

Introduction

Classical causal structure learning algorithms often assume no latent confounders. However, it
is usually impossible to enumerate and measure all task-related variables in real-world scenarios.
Neglecting latent confounders may lead to spurious correlations among observed variables. Hence,
much effort has been devoted to handling the confounding problem. For instance, Fast Casual
Inference and its variants [Spirtes et al., 2000, Pearl, 2000, Colombo et al., 2012, Akbari et al., 2021]
leverage conditional independence constraints to locate possible latent confounders and estimate
causal structures among observed variables, assuming no causal relationships among latent variables.
This line of approaches ends up with an equivalence class, which usually consists of many directed
acyclic graphs (DAGs).
Later, several approaches have been proposed to tackle direct causal relations among latent variables
with observational data. These approaches are built upon principles such as rank constraints [Silva
et al., 2006a, Kummerfeld and Ramsey, 2016, Huang et al., 2022], matrix decomposition [Chandrasekaran et al., 2011, 2012, Anandkumar et al., 2013], high-order moments [Shimizu et al., 2009,
Cai et al., 2019, Xie et al., 2020, Adams et al., 2021, Chen et al., 2022], copula models [Cui et al.,
2018], and mixture oracles [Kivva et al., 2021]. Pearl [1988], Zhang [2004], Choi et al. [2011], Drton
et al. [2017], Zhou et al. [2020], Huang et al. [2020] extend such approaches to handle tree structures
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

