On the Interplay between Social Welfare and
Tractability of Equilibria

Ioannis Anagnostides
Carnegie Mellon University
ianagnos@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Carnegie Mellon University
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Computational tractability and social welfare (aka. efficiency) of equilibria are two
fundamental but in general orthogonal considerations in algorithmic game theory.
Nevertheless, we show that when (approximate) full efficiency can be guaranteed
via a smoothness argument à la Roughgarden, Nash equilibria are approachable
under a family of no-regret learning algorithms, thereby enabling fast and decentralized computation. We leverage this connection to obtain new convergence results in
large games—wherein the number of players n ≫ 1—under the well-documented
property of full efficiency via smoothness in the limit. Surprisingly, our framework
unifies equilibrium computation in disparate classes of problems including games
with vanishing strategic sensitivity and two-player zero-sum games, illuminating
en route an immediate but overlooked equivalence between smoothness and a
well-studied condition in the optimization literature known as the Minty property.
Finally, we establish that a family of no-regret dynamics attains a welfare bound
that improves over the smoothness framework while at the same time guaranteeing
convergence to the set of coarse correlated equilibria. We show this by employing
the clairvoyant mirror descent algortihm recently introduced by Piliouras et al.

1

Introduction

The Nash equilibrium (NE) [76] formalizes the notion of a stable outcome in a multiagent strategic
interaction, and has arguably served as the most influential solution concept in the development
of game theory. Indeed, algorithms designed to approximate Nash equilibria in two-player zerosum games have recently resolved major challenges in AI [7, 10, 81]. Its prescriptive power,
however, has been severely undermined in multi-player general-sum games by intrinsic computational
barriers [30, 20, 94, 35, 28, 44], limitations which also manifest in the inability of natural learning
algorithms to converge [73, 105, 60, 70]. Another well-established but orthogonal critique is the
equilibrium selection problem [52]: a general-sum game may have multiple Nash equilibria with
widely different welfare. As a result, a modern research agenda in computational game theory has been
to identify and characterize natural classes of games that circumvent those fundamental limitations.
In this paper, we uncover a new natural class of games for which the aforementioned caveats of
Nash equilibria can be effectively addressed. In particular, our investigation originates from a natural
question: when are efficient—in terms of social welfare—Nash equilibria easy to compute? The
answer to this question is, at first glance, unsatisfactory: even if Nash equilibria are fully efficient,
computational hardness still persists given that constant-sum multi-player games are hard. Indeed,
efficiency and computational tractability are, in general, two orthogonal considerations. We show,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

