Discovering Intrinsic Spatial-Temporal Logic Rules to
Explain Human Actions

Chengzhi Cao1,2∗, Chao Yang1 , Ruimao Zhang1 , Shuang Li1†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
2
University of Science and Technology of China
chengzhicao@mail.ustc.edu.cn, 222043011@link.cuhk.edu.cn,
zhangruimao@cuhk.edu.cn, lishuang@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a logic-informed knowledge-driven modeling framework for human
movements by analyzing their trajectories. Our approach is inspired by the fact that
human actions are usually driven by their intentions or desires, and are influenced
by environmental factors such as the spatial relationships with surrounding objects.
In this paper, we introduce a set of spatial-temporal logic rules as knowledge
to explain human actions. These rules will be automatically discovered from
observational data. To learn the model parameters and the rule content, we design
an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm, which treats the rule content as
latent variables. The EM algorithm alternates between the E-step and M-step:
in the E-step, the posterior distribution over the latent rule content is evaluated;
in the M-step, the rule generator and model parameters are jointly optimized by
maximizing the current expected log-likelihood. Our model may have a wide
range of applications in areas such as sports analytics, robotics, and autonomous
cars, where understanding human movements are essential. We demonstrate the
model’s superior interpretability and prediction performance on pedestrian and
NBA basketball player datasets, both achieving promising results.

1

Introduction

For a human, although the exhibited movements can be complex, the logic behind the actions is
usually simple, clear, and can be generalized [17]. The logic rules present a compact and high-level
knowledge representation, defining what actions tend to be executed under what conditions. It
emphasizes reasoning, and encourages structuring the world in terms of objects, properties, and
relations [22]. There has been a great interest and business value in unveiling the human logic from
the observational movements and actions [18]. We provide two motivating examples below.
In sports analytics, understanding each player’s behavior preferences or tendencies under various
scenarios will provide coaches with valuable information [1]. Usually, coaches need to watch the
game or training videos for hundreds of hours before they can summarize the discoveries into
compact principles. Could we design an algorithm to synthesize these principles from the raw
action data automatically? One can imagine, such a tool will significantly reduce the workload of
coaches, providing more granular insight into each player’s capabilities and strategies, and aiding in
personalized training and match strategy design [15].
In self-driving car, it’s essential to enable the self-driving cars to “read human’s mind" like humans.
This requires the self-driving cars to automatically understand human intentions and reasoning when
∗

Work done as a graduate research assistant at The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
†
Corresponding author.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

