Online Control for Meta-optimization
Xinyi Chen
Princeton University
Google DeepMind
xinyic@princeton.edu

Elad Hazan
Princeton University
Google DeepMind
ehazan@princeton.edu

Abstract
Choosing the optimal hyperparameters, including the learning rate and momentum,
for specific optimization instances is a significant yet nonconvex challenge. This
makes conventional iterative techniques such as hypergradient descent insufficient
in obtaining global optimality guarantees in general.
We consider the more general task of meta-optimization – online learning of the best
optimization algorithm given problem instances. For this task, a novel approach
based on control theory is introduced. We show how meta-optimization can be
formulated as an optimal control problem, departing from existing literature that
use stability-based methods to study optimization. Our approach leverages convex
relaxation techniques in the recently-proposed nonstochastic control framework to
overcome the challenge of nonconvexity, and obtains regret guarantees vs. the best
offline solution. This guarantees that in meta-optimization, we can learn a method
that attains convergence comparable to that of the best optimization method in
hindsight from a class of methods.

1

Introduction

The performance of optimization methods, in particular for the application of training deep neural
networks, crucially depends on their hyperparameters. Bengio [2012] notes that the learning rate
is the “single most important parameter" for efficient training. However, this parameter is also
notoriously hard to tune without intensive hyperparameter search. An even more difficult problem
is adapting all aspects of an optimization algorithm, including momentum, preconditioner, weight
decay, and more, to potentially changing tasks. This is the motivating problem of our paper.
The problem of learning the best optimizer, even for the special case of hyperparameter tuning of the
learning rate, is difficult because optimizing these hyperparameters is nonconvex. We tackle this
challenging problem by a novel framework that is based on several components:
• We formalize the problem of “finding the best algorithm" as the task of meta-optimization.
In this task, the player is given a sequence of optimization problems. Her goal is to solve
them as fast as the best algorithm in hindsight from a family of possible methods. This
setting generalizes hyperparameter tuning to encompass several attributes, including the
preconditioning matrix and momentum.
• We propose a new metric for meta optimization called meta-regret, which measures the
total cost compared to the cost of the best algorithm in hindsight in meta-optimization. We
give an efficient method for minimizing the meta-regret that attains sublinear guarantee,
which is tight. The implication of this efficient method with optimal meta-regret bound is
that we can compete with the best hyperparameters in hindsight (although not necessarily
find them).
• We give a novel control formulation for meta-optimization based on the recently proposed
framework of online nonstochastic control. This control formulation differs in several
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

