Sample Complexity of Forecast Aggregation

Tao Lin
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
tlin@g.harvard.edu

Yiling Chen
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
yiling@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider a Bayesian forecast aggregation model where n experts, after observing private signals about an unknown binary event, report their posterior beliefs
about the event to a principal, who then aggregates the reports into a single prediction for the event. The signals of the experts and the outcome of the event follow
a joint distribution that is unknown to the principal, but the principal has access
to i.i.d. “samples” from the distribution, where each sample is a tuple of the experts’ reports (not signals) and the realization of the event. Using these samples,
the principal aims to find an ε-approximately optimal aggregator, where optimality is measured in terms of the expected squared distance between the aggregated
prediction and the realization of the event. We show that the sample complexity
of this problem is at least Ω̃(mn−2 /ε) for arbitrary discrete distributions, where
m is the size of each expert’s signal space. This sample complexity grows exponentially in the number of experts n. But, if the experts’ signals are independent
conditioned on the realization of the event, then the sample complexity is significantly reduced, to Õ(1/ε2 ), which does not depend on n. Our results can be
generalized to non-binary events. The proof of our results uses a reduction from
the distribution learning problem and reveals the fact that forecast aggregation is
almost as difficult as distribution learning.

1

Introduction

Suppose you want to know whether it will rain tomorrow. A Google search on “weather” returns
40% probability of raining. The weather forecasting app on your phone shows 85%. And one of
your friends, who is an expert in meteorology, predicts 65%. How do you aggregate these different
predictions into a single, accurate prediction? This problem is called forecast aggregation or forecast
combination [7, 16, 45]. It has innumerable applications in fields ranging from economics, statistics,
operations research, to machine learning, decision theory, and of course, climate science.
A straightforward solution to forecast aggregation is to take the (unweighted) average of all experts’
forecasts. Simple as it is, unweighted average performs surprisingly well in practice, as observed
by many forecast aggregation works from 1960s to 2020s (e.g., [7, 38, 35, 30, 16, 45, 34]). Naturally, when past data of expert forecasts and event outcomes (e.g., historical weather forecasts and
outcomes) are available, one may hope to leverage on such data to learn more accurate aggregators.
While adjusting the weights of experts in averaging according to their individual historical accuracy
has led to improved accuracy for the aggregated prediction [49], interestingly, more sophisticated
data-driven methods [23, 35, 49] were often outperformed by the unweighted average. The dominance of simple aggregators over more sophisticated data-driven methods is observed so often in
empirical applications that it is termed “the forecast combination puzzle” [44, p.428].
There are many potential explanations for the forecast combination puzzle [43, 23, 15]. In some
scenarios, the past events are different from the future events in fundamental ways (e.g., geopolitical
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

