Information Maximizing Curriculum:
A Curriculum-Based Approach for Imitating Diverse Skills

Denis Blessing ∗i† Onur Celik†§ Xiaogang Jia†‡ Moritz Reuss‡
Maximilian Xiling Li‡ Rudolf Lioutikov‡ Gerhard Neumann†§
†
Autonomous Learning Robots, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
‡
Intuitive Robots Lab, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
§
FZI Research Center for Information Technology

Abstract
Imitation learning uses data for training policies to solve complex tasks. However,
when the training data is collected from human demonstrators, it often leads
to multimodal distributions because of the variability in human actions. Most
imitation learning methods rely on a maximum likelihood (ML) objective to learn
a parameterized policy, but this can result in suboptimal or unsafe behavior due
to the mode-averaging property of the ML objective. In this work, we propose
Information Maximizing Curriculum, a curriculum-based approach that assigns
a weight to each data point and encourages the model to specialize in the data it
can represent, effectively mitigating the mode-averaging problem by allowing the
model to ignore data from modes it cannot represent. To cover all modes and thus,
enable diverse behavior, we extend our approach to a mixture of experts (MoE)
policy, where each mixture component selects its own subset of the training data
for learning. A novel, maximum entropy-based objective is proposed to achieve
full coverage of the dataset, thereby enabling the policy to encompass all modes
within the data distribution. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on
complex simulated control tasks using diverse human demonstrations, achieving
superior performance compared to state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Equipping agents with well-performing policies has long been a prominent focus in machine learning research. Imitation learning (IL) [1] offers a promising technique to mimic human behavior
by leveraging expert data, without the need for intricate controller design, additional environment
interactions, or complex reward shaping to encode the target behavior. The latter are substantial
advantages over reinforcement learning techniques [2, 3] that rely on reward feedback. However,
a significant challenge in IL lies in handling the multimodal nature of data obtained from human
demonstrators, which can stem from differences in preferences, expertise, or problem-solving strategies. Conventionally, maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is employed to train a policy on expert
data. It is well-known that MLE corresponds to the moment projection [4], causing the policy to
average over modes in the data distribution that it cannot represent. Such mode averaging can lead
to unexpected and potentially dangerous behavior . We address this critical issue by introducing
Information Maximizing Curriculum (IMC), a novel curriculum-based approach.
In IMC, we view imitation learning as a conditional density estimation problem and present a
mathematically sound weighted optimization scheme. Data samples are assigned curriculum weights,
which are updated using an information projection. The information projection minimizes the reverse
∗

Correspondence to denis.blessing@kit.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

