Aligning Language Models with Human Preferences
via a Bayesian Approach

Jiashuo WANG1 , Haozhao WANG2 , Shichao SUN1 , Wenjie LI1∗
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{csjwang,csssun,cswjli}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
hz_wang@hust.edu.cn
1

Abstract
In the quest to advance human-centric natural language generation (NLG) systems,
ensuring alignment between NLG models and human preferences is crucial. For
this alignment, current popular methods leverage a reinforcement learning (RL) approach with a reward model trained on feedback from humans. However, inherent
disagreements due to the subjective nature of human preferences pose a significant
challenge for training the reward model, resulting in a deterioration of the NLG
performance. To tackle this issue, previous approaches typically rely on majority
voting or averaging to consolidate multiple inconsistent preferences into a merged
one. Although straightforward to understand and execute, such methods suffer from
an inability to capture the nuanced degrees of disaggregation among humans and
may only represent a specialized subset of individuals, thereby lacking the ability
to quantitatively disclose the universality of human preferences. To address this
challenge, this paper proposes a novel approach, which employs a Bayesian framework to account for the distribution of disagreements among human preferences as
training a preference model, and names it as d-PM. Besides, considering the RL
strategy’s inefficient and complex training process over the training efficiency, we
further propose utilizing the contrastive learning strategy to train the NLG model
with the preference scores derived from the d-PM model. Extensive experiments
on two human-centric NLG tasks, i.e., emotional support conversation and integrity
“Rule-of-Thumb” generation, show that our method consistently exceeds previous
SOTA models in both automatic and human evaluations.

1

Introduction

Human-centric natural language processing (NLP) aims to develop NLP systems that are finely
attuned to human preferences [14, 12, 30]. Consequently, learning from human feedback is wellsuited for training models in human-centric NLG tasks [18, 28]. Currently, reinforcement learning
(RL) with a reward model is the most popular method to align models with human preferences
[26, 11, 41]. Its effectiveness depends heavily on how well human preferences are learned by the
reward model [6, 4]. However, modeling human preferences can be challenging.
Due to the high subjectivity of personal standards and human values, it can be difficult to reach a consensus on preferences among individuals, significantly increasing the learning difficulty. As depicted
in Figure 1, persons may have varied preferred responses with inconsistent emotions and values given
the same context. To tackle this challenge, existing methods mostly adopt aggregation techniques
such as majority voting or averaging [11, 6, 4]. However, aggregated preferences potentially cater
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

