Stable Nonconvex-Nonconcave Training
via Linear Interpolation

Thomas Pethick
EPFL (LIONS)
thomas.pethick@epfl.ch

Wanyun Xie
EPFL (LIONS)
wanyun.xie@epfl.ch

Volkan Cevher
EPFL (LIONS)
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
This paper presents a theoretical analysis of linear interpolation as a principled
method for stabilizing (large-scale) neural network training. We argue that instabilities in the optimization process are often caused by the nonmonotonicity of
the loss landscape and show how linear interpolation can help by leveraging the
theory of nonexpansive operators. We construct a new optimization scheme called
relaxed approximate proximal point (RAPP), which is the first 1-SCLI method
to achieve last iterate convergence rates for ρ-comonotone problems while only
1
requiring ρ > − 2L
. The construction extends to constrained and regularized
settings. By replacing the inner optimizer in RAPP we rediscover the family of
Lookahead algorithms for which we establish convergence in cohypomonotone
problems even when the base optimizer is taken to be gradient descent ascent.
The range of cohypomonotone problems in which Lookahead converges is further
expanded by exploiting that Lookahead inherits the properties of the base optimizer.
We corroborate the results with experiments on generative adversarial networks
which demonstrates the benefits of the linear interpolation present in both RAPP
and Lookahead.

1

Introduction

Stability is a major concern when training large scale models. In particular, generative adversarial
networks (GANs) are known to be notoriously difficult to train. To stabilize training, the Lookahead
algorithm of Zhang et al. (2019) was recently proposed for GANs Chavdarova et al. (2020) which
linearly interpolates with a slow moving iterate. The mechanism has enjoyed superior empirical
performance in both minimization and minimax problems, but it largely remains a heuristic with little
theoretical motivation.
One major obstacle for providing a theoretical treatment, is in capturing the (fuzzy) notion of stability.
Loosely speaking, a training dynamics is referred to as unstable in practice when the iterates either
cycle indefinitely or (eventually) diverge—as has been observed for the Adam optimizer (see e.g.
Gidel et al. (2018, Fig. 12) and Chavdarova et al. (2020, Fig. 6) respectively). Conversely, a stable
dynamics has some bias towards stationary points. The notion of stability so far (e.g. in Chavdarova
et al. (2020, Thm. 2-3)) is based on the spectral radius and thus inherently local.
In this work, we are interested in establishing global convergence properties, in which case some
structural assumptions are needed. One (nonmonotone) structure that lends itself well to the study of
stability is that of cohypomonotonicity studied in Combettes & Pennanen (2004); Diakonikolas et al.
(2021), since even the extragradient method has been shown to cycle and diverge in this problem
class (see Pethick et al. (2022, Fig. 1) and Pethick et al. (2023, Fig. 2) respectively). We provide a
geometric intuition behind these difficulties in Figure 1. Biasing the optimization schemes towards
stationary points becomes a central concern and we demonstrate in Figure 2 that Lookahead can
indeed converge for such nonmonotone problems.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

