Stein Π-Importance Sampling
Congye Wang1 , Wilson Ye Chen2 , Heishiro Kanagawa1 , Chris. J. Oates1
1
Newcastle University, UK
2
University of Sydney, Australia

Abstract
Stein discrepancies have emerged as a powerful tool for retrospective improvement
of Markov chain Monte Carlo output. However, the question of how to design
Markov chains that are well-suited to such post-processing has yet to be addressed.
This paper studies Stein importance sampling, in which weights are assigned to the
states visited by a Π-invariant Markov chain to obtain a consistent approximation
of P , the intended target. Surprisingly, the optimal choice of Π is not identical to
the target P ; we therefore propose an explicit construction for Π based on a novel
variational argument. Explicit conditions for convergence of Stein Π-Importance
Sampling are established. For ≈ 70% of tasks in the PosteriorDB benchmark, a
significant improvement over the analogous post-processing of P -invariant Markov
chains is reported.

1

Introduction

Stein discrepancies are a class of statistical divergences that can be computed without access to
a normalisation constant. Originally conceived as a tool to measure the performance of sampling
methods (Gorham and Mackey, 2015), these discrepancies have since found wide-ranging statistical
applications (see the review of Anastasiou et al., 2023). Our focus here is the use of Stein discrepancies
for retrospective improvement of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), and here two main techniques
have been proposed: (i) Stein importance sampling (Liu and Lee, 2017; Hodgkinson et al., 2020),
and (ii) Stein thinning (Riabiz et al., 2022). In Stein importance sampling (also called black box
importance sampling), the samples are assigned weights such that a Stein discrepancy between
the weighted empirical measure and the target P is minimised. Stein thinning constructs a sparse
approximation to this optimally weighted measure at a lower computational and storage cost. Together,
these techniques provide a powerful set of post-processing tools for MCMC, with subsequent authors
proposing a range of generalisations and extensions (Teymur et al., 2021; Chopin and Ducrocq, 2021;
Hawkins et al., 2022; Fisher and Oates, 2023; Bénard et al., 2023).
The consistency of these algorithms has been established in the setting of approximate, Π-invariant
MCMC, motivated by challenging inference problems where only approximate sampling can be
performed. In these settings, Π is implicitly an approximation to P that is as accurate as possible
subject to computational budget. However, the critical question of how to design Markov chains that
are well-suited to such post-processing has yet to be addressed. This paper provides a solution, in
the form of a specific construction for Π derived from a novel variational argument. Surprisingly,
we are able to demonstrate a substantial improvement using the proposed Π, compared to the case
where Π and P are equal. The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 presents an abstract formulation
of the task and existing results for optimally-weighted empirical measures are reviewed. Section 3
derives our proposed choice of Π and establishes that Stein post-processing of samples from a
Π-invariant Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm (MALA) provides a consistent approximation
of P . The approach is stress-tested using the recently released PosteriorDB suite of benchmark
tasks in Section 4, before concluding with a discussion in Section 5.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

