V ISO G ENDER: A dataset for benchmarking gender
bias in image-text pronoun resolution

Siobhan Mackenzie Hall
Grace Sodunke

Fernanda Gonçalves Abrantes
Aleksandar Shtedritski

Hanwen Zhu

Hannah Rose Kirk

Oxford Artificial Intelligence Society, University of Oxford

Abstract
We introduce V ISO G ENDER, a novel dataset for benchmarking gender bias in
vision-language models. We focus on occupation-related biases within a hegemonic system of binary gender, inspired by Winograd and Winogender schemas,
where each image is associated with a caption containing a pronoun relationship of subjects and objects in the scene. V ISO G ENDER is balanced by gender
representation in professional roles, supporting bias evaluation in two ways: i)
resolution bias, where we evaluate the difference between pronoun resolution accuracies for image subjects with gender presentations perceived as masculine versus
feminine by human annotators and ii) retrieval bias, where we compare ratios
of professionals perceived to have masculine and feminine gender presentations
retrieved for a gender-neutral search query. We benchmark several state-of-the-art
vision-language models and find that they demonstrate bias in resolving binary
gender in complex scenes. While the direction and magnitude of gender bias depends on the task and the model being evaluated, captioning models are generally
less biased than Vision-Language Encoders. Dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/oxai/visogender.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) are advancing rapidly and reaching ever-wider audience across
numerous applications, such as classification and captioning, as well as text-to-image retrieval and
generation. However, these models are pre-trained from uncurated image-text pairs scraped from
the internet [1, 2] and so, their outputs can perpetuate or amplify social biases [3, 4, 5, 6]. How the
VLM is used determines the mechanisms of how biases transfer from pre-training to downstream
representational and/or allocational harms [7]. For example, a VLM used for image retrieval may
skew towards returning more images of male doctors, thus reinforcing stereotypical associations
between gender and career success; or a VLM used for captioning may more frequently misgender
women or non-binary image subjects, aligning with a capability (un)fairness [8].
Despite the growing body of work on evaluating and mitigating the bias of VLMs [9, 10, 11, 12, 13],
there is a dearth of specifically-designed benchmark datasets to evaluate the presence of social biases
across downstream tasks (such as captioning or image retrieval): most prior work has measured biases
using pre-existing image datasets such as FairFace [14] or COCO [15, 16], despite their limited realworld transferability and spurious correlations [12, 17]. In this paper, we introduce the V ISO G ENDER
benchmark for evaluating bias in VLMs. The design of V ISO G ENDER is inspired by two prior bodies
of works. Firstly, we apply stress-testing of vision-linguistic reasoning capabilities of VLMs as in
the Winoground benchmark [18] but introduce the dimension of social biases. Secondly, we adopt
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

