MKOR: Momentum-Enabled Kronecker-Factor-Based
Optimizer Using Rank-1 Updates

Mohammad Mozaffari
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
mmozaffari@cs.toronto.edu

Sikan Li
Texas Advanced Computing Server
sli@tacc.utexas.edu

Zhao Zhang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Rutgers University
zhao.zhang@rutgers.edu

Maryam Mehri Dehnavi
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
mmehride@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
This work proposes a Momentum-Enabled Kronecker-Factor-Based Optimizer
Using Rank-1 Updates, called MKOR, that improves the training time and convergence properties of deep neural networks (DNNs). Second-order techniques,
while enjoying higher convergence rates vs first-order counterparts, have cubic
complexity with respect to either the model size and/or the training batch size.
Therefore, they exhibit poor scalability and performance in transformer models,
e.g. large language models (LLMs), because the batch sizes in these models
scale by the attention mechanism sequence length, leading to large model size
and batch sizes. MKOR’s complexity is quadratic with respect to the model size,
alleviating the computation bottlenecks in second-order methods. Because of their
high computation complexity, state-of-the-art implementations of second-order
methods can only afford to update the second order information infrequently, and
thus do not fully exploit the promise of better convergence from these updates.
By reducing the communication complexity of the second-order updates, as well
as achieving a linear communication complexity, MKOR increases the frequency
of second-order updates. We also propose a hybrid version of MKOR (called
MKOR-H) that mid-training falls backs to a first order optimizer if the second order
updates no longer accelerate convergence. Our experiments show that MKOR
outperforms state-of-the-art first-order methods, e.g. the LAMB optimizer, and
best implementations of second-order methods, i.e. KAISA/KFAC, up to 2.57×
and 1.85× respectively on BERT-Large-Uncased on 64 GPUs.

1

Introduction

Second-order optimization methods have recently gained popularity in the training process of deep
neural networks (DNNs) due to their higher convergence rate in comparison to their first-order
counterparts. One of the well-known second-order methods, Newton’s method, uses the inverse of
the Hessian of the objective function as a preconditioner to the gradients, capturing more information
on the curvature of the loss function. However, since the size of the Hessian scales with the model
size, computing and storing the exact Hessian and its inverse is the main bottleneck in these methods,
giving rise to different approximation methods.
One of the most common approximations of Newton’s method is Natural Gradient Descent (NGD) [1],
where the Hessian is substituted with the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) [4] to reduce the cost
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

