Diffusion-Based Probabilistic Uncertainty Estimation
for Active Domain Adaptation

Zhekai Du, Jingjing Li∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
zhekaid@std.uestc.edu.cn, lijin117@yeah.net

Abstract
Active Domain Adaptation (ADA) has emerged as an attractive technique for
assisting domain adaptation by actively annotating a small subset of target samples.
Most ADA methods focus on measuring the target representativeness beyond
traditional active learning criteria to handle the domain shift problem, while leaving
the uncertainty estimation to be performed by an uncalibrated deterministic model.
In this work, we introduce a probabilistic framework that captures both datalevel and prediction-level uncertainties beyond a point estimate. Specifically, we
use variational inference to approximate the joint posterior distribution of latent
representation and model prediction. The variational objective of labeled data can
be formulated by a variational autoencoder and a latent diffusion classifier, and
the objective of unlabeled data can be implemented in a knowledge distillation
framework. We utilize adversarial learning to ensure an invariant latent space. The
resulting diffusion classifier enables efficient sampling of all possible predictions
for each individual to recover the predictive distribution. We then leverage a t-testbased criterion upon the sampling and select informative unlabeled target samples
based on the p-value, which encodes both prediction variability and cross-category
ambiguity. Experiments on both ADA and Source-Free ADA settings show that
our method provides more calibrated predictions than previous ADA methods and
achieves favorable performance on three domain adaptation datasets.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms heavily depend on large amounts of labeled data. However, in many
real-world scenarios, the distribution of data can change over time or across different domains, which
challenges the training of models to perform consistently in all situations. Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) [1, 2, 3] addresses this problem by transferring knowledge learned from a labeled
source domain to an unlabeled target domain. Despite impressive achievements, UDA struggles
to bridge the performance gap with fully supervised methods due to the lack of target-supervised
information. Recognizing this limitation, a promising alternative is Active Domain Adaptation (ADA)
[4, 5, 6], which actively annotates a small subset of target data to greatly benefit the UDA model.
In ADA, the primary concern revolves around designing a criterion for selecting the most informative
target samples that can have the maximum impact on performance once annotated. Existing ADA
methods have been mainly enlightened by traditional Active Learning (AL) methods [7, 8, 9, 10]
and rely on criteria that consider both predictive uncertainty and representativeness of the entire
distribution. While they have shown empirical success, they usually handle the distribution shift
by further measuring the representativeness of the target domain through various criteria (e.g., the
output of a domain discriminator [11], free energy score [5], weighted clustering [4]). However, these
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

