Active Representation Learning for General Task
Space with Applications in Robotics

Yifang Chen1 , Yingbing Huang2 , Simon S. Du1∗ , Kevin Jamieson1∗ , Guanya Shi3∗
1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington, Seattle,WA
{yifangc, ssdu, jamieson, guanyas}@cs.washington.edu
2

3

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL
{yh21}@illinois.edu

Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
{{guanyas }@andrew.cmu.edu
∗
Equal advising

Abstract
Representation learning based on multi-task pretraining has become a powerful
approach in many domains. In particular, task-aware representation learning aims
to learn an optimal representation for a specific target task by sampling data from
a set of source tasks, while task-agnostic representation learning seeks to learn a
universal representation for a class of tasks. In this paper, we propose a general and
versatile algorithmic and theoretic framework for active representation learning,
where the learner optimally chooses which source tasks to sample from. This
framework, along with a tractable meta algorithm, allows most arbitrary target
and source task spaces (from discrete to continuous), covers both task-aware
and task-agnostic settings, and is compatible with deep representation learning
practices. We provide several instantiations under this framework, from bilinear
and feature-based nonlinear to general nonlinear cases. In the bilinear case, by
leveraging the non-uniform spectrum of the task representation and the calibrated
source-target relevance, we prove that the sample complexity to achieve ε-excess
risk on target scales with (k ∗ )2 ∥v ∗ ∥22 ε−2 where k ∗ is the effective dimension
of the target and ∥v ∗ ∥22 ∈ (0, 1] represents the connection between source and
target space. Compared to the passive one, this can save up to d1W of sample
complexity, where dW is the task space dimension. Finally, we demonstrate
different instantiations of our meta algorithm in synthetic datasets and robotics
problems, from pendulum simulations to real-world drone flight datasets. On
average, our algorithms outperform baselines by 20% − 70%. 1

1

Introduction

Recently, few-shot machine learning has enjoyed significant attention and has become increasingly
critical due to its ability to derive meaningful insights for target tasks that have minimal data, a
scenario commonly encountered in real-world applications. This issue is especially prevalent in
robotics where data collection and training data is prohibitive to collect or even non-reproducible
(e.g., drone flying with complex aerodynamics [1] or legged robots on challenging terrains [2]). One
1

Code in https://github.com/cloudwaysX/ALMultiTask_Robotics

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

