Block Coordinate Plug-and-Play Methods
for Blind Inverse Problems
Weijie Gan
Washington University in St. Louis
weijie.gan@wustl.edu

Shirin Shoushtari
Washington University in St. Louis
s.shirin@wustl.edu

Yuyang Hu
Washington University in St. Louis
h.yuyang@wustl.edu

Jiaming Liu
Washington University in St. Louis
jiaming.liu@wustl.edu

Hongyu An
Washington University in St. Louis
hongyuan@wustl.edu

Ulugbek S. Kamilov
Washington University in St. Louis
kamilov@wustl.edu

Abstract
Plug-and-play (PnP) prior is a well-known class of methods for solving imaging
inverse problems by computing fixed-points of operators combining physical measurement models and learned image denoisers. While PnP methods have been
extensively used for image recovery with known measurement operators, there
is little work on PnP for solving blind inverse problems. We address this gap by
presenting a new block-coordinate PnP (BC-PnP) method that efficiently solves
this joint estimation problem by introducing learned denoisers as priors on both the
unknown image and the unknown measurement operator. We present a new convergence theory for BC-PnP compatible with blind inverse problems by considering
nonconvex data-fidelity terms and expansive denoisers. Our theory analyzes the
convergence of BC-PnP to a stationary point of an implicit function associated with
an approximate minimum mean-squared error (MMSE) denoiser. We numerically
validate our method on two blind inverse problems: automatic coil sensitivity
estimation in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and blind image deblurring. Our
results show that BC-PnP provides an efficient and principled framework for using
denoisers as PnP priors for jointly estimating measurement operators and images.

1

Introduction

Many problems in computational imaging, biomedical imaging, and computer vision can be formulated as inverse problems involving the recovery of high-quality images from low-quality observations.
Imaging inverse problems are generally ill-posed, which means that multiple plausible clean images
could lead to the same observation. It is thus common to introduce prior models on the desired
images. While the literature on prior modeling of images is vast, current methods are often based on
deep learning (DL), where a deep model is trained to map observations to images [1–3].
Plug-and-play (PnP) priors [4, 5] is one of the most widely-used DL frameworks for solving imaging
inverse problems. PnP methods circumvent the need to explicitly describe the full probability density
of images by specifying image priors using image denoisers. The integration of state-of-the-art
deep denoisers with physical measurement models within PnP has been shown to be effective in
a number of inverse problems, including image super-resolution, phase retrieval, microscopy, and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

