How a student becomes a teacher: learning and
forgetting through Spectral methods
Lorenzo Giambagli1,2 , Lorenzo Buffoni1 , Lorenzo Chicchi1 , Duccio Fanelli1
1
Department of Physics, University of Florence
Department of Mathematics, University of Namur
{lorenzo.giambagli, lorenzo.buffoni, lorenzo.chicchi,
duccio.fanelli}@unifi.it
2

Abstract
In theoretical Machine Learning, the teacher-student paradigm is often employed
as an effective metaphor for real-life tuition. A student network is trained on
data generated by a fixed teacher network until it matches the instructor’s ability
to cope with the assigned task. The above scheme proves particularly relevant
when the student network is overparameterized (namely, when larger layer sizes
are employed) as compared to the underlying teacher network. Under these operating conditions, it is tempting to speculate that the student ability to handle
the given task could be eventually stored in a sub-portion of the whole network.
This latter should be to some extent reminiscent of the frozen teacher structure,
according to suitable metrics, while being approximately invariant across different
architectures of the student candidate network. Unfortunately, state-of-the-art
conventional learning techniques could not help in identifying the existence of
such an invariant subnetwork, due to the inherent degree of non-convexity that
characterizes the examined problem. In this work, we take a decisive leap forward by proposing a radically different optimization scheme which builds on a
spectral representation of the linear transfer of information between layers. The
gradient is hence calculated with respect to both eigenvalues and eigenvectors with
negligible increase in terms of computational and complexity load, as compared
to standard training algorithms. Working in this framework, we could isolate
a stable student substructure, that mirrors the true complexity of the teacher in
terms of computing neurons, path distribution and topological attributes. When
pruning unimportant nodes of the trained student, as follows a ranking that reflects the optimized eigenvalues, no degradation in the recorded performance is
seen above a threshold that corresponds to the effective teacher size. The observed behavior can be pictured as a genuine second-order phase transition that
bears universality traits. Code available at: https://github.com/Jamba15/
Spectral-regularization-teacher-student/tree/master.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) technologies nowadays play a pivotal role in systematizing complex data by
elucidating how different elements relate to each other. To this end, ML models learn from data by
identifying distinctive features, which form their basis for decision-making. This task is accomplished
by solving an optimisation problem that seeks to minimise a suitably defined loss function which
compares expected and actual output. When operating with deep learning architectures with a
feedforward structure, data supplied as input are processed via a repeated sequence of linear and
non-linear transformations. The linear transformation, indeed, maps the signal from any given layer
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

