Learning Energy-based Model via Dual-MCMC
Teaching

Jiali Cui, Tian Han
Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology
{jcui7,than6}@stevens.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the fundamental learning problem of the energy-based model
(EBM). Learning the EBM can be achieved using the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), which typically involves the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
sampling, such as the Langevin dynamics. However, the noise-initialized Langevin
dynamics can be challenging in practice and hard to mix. This motivates the exploration of joint training with the generator model where the generator model serves
as a complementary model to bypass MCMC sampling. However, such a method
can be less accurate than the MCMC and result in biased EBM learning. While
the generator can also serve as an initializer model for better MCMC sampling,
its learning can be biased since it only matches the EBM and has no access to
empirical training examples. Such biased generator learning may limit the potential
of learning the EBM. To address this issue, we present a joint learning framework
that interweaves the maximum likelihood learning algorithm for both the EBM and
the complementary generator model. In particular, the generator model is learned
by MLE to match both the EBM and the empirical data distribution, making it
a more informative initializer for MCMC sampling of EBM. Learning generator
with observed examples typically requires inference of the generator posterior. To
ensure accurate and efficient inference, we adopt the MCMC posterior sampling
and introduce a complementary inference model to initialize such latent MCMC
sampling. We show that three separate models can be seamlessly integrated into
our joint framework through two (dual-) MCMC teaching, enabling effective and
efficient EBM learning.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models have made significant progress in learning complex data distributions
[35, 18, 37, 34, 19, 22, 5] and have found successful applications in a wide range of real-world
scenarios [26, 6, 11, 15]. Among these, the energy-based model (EBM) [5, 6, 29, 8, 39, 2, 3] has
gained particular interest as a flexible and expressive generative model with an energy function
parameterized by a neural network. Learning the EBM can be accomplished via the maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE), which involves the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling
in high-dimensional data space. However, such MCMC sampling has shown to be challenging
[30, 7, 33, 13], as it may take a long time to mix between different local modes with a non-informative
noise initialization [43, 15].
To address this challenge, recent advances have explored employing complementary models to
substitute for MCMC sampling [15, 16, 12, 17, 24]. One notable example is the generator model.
The generator model incorporates a top-down generation network that is capable of mapping lowdimensional latent space to high-dimensional data space and admits efficient sample generation. The
generator is learned to match the EBM so that MCMC sampling can be replaced by generator ancestral
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

