The Contextual Lasso:
Sparse Linear Models via Deep Neural Networks

Ryan Thompson∗
University of New South Wales
CSIRO’s Data61

Amir Dezfouli†
BIMLOGIQ

Robert Kohn
University of New South Wales

Abstract
Sparse linear models are one of several core tools for interpretable machine learning,
a field of emerging importance as predictive models permeate decision-making in
many domains. Unfortunately, sparse linear models are far less flexible as functions
of their input features than black-box models like deep neural networks. With
this capability gap in mind, we study a not-uncommon situation where the input
features dichotomize into two groups: explanatory features, which are candidates
for inclusion as variables in an interpretable model, and contextual features, which
select from the candidate variables and determine their effects. This dichotomy
leads us to the contextual lasso, a new statistical estimator that fits a sparse linear
model to the explanatory features such that the sparsity pattern and coefficients
vary as a function of the contextual features. The fitting process learns this function
nonparametrically via a deep neural network. To attain sparse coefficients, we
train the network with a novel lasso regularizer in the form of a projection layer
that maps the network’s output onto the space of ℓ1 -constrained linear models. An
extensive suite of experiments on real and synthetic data suggests that the learned
models, which remain highly transparent, can be sparser than the regular lasso
without sacrificing the predictive power of a standard deep neural network.

1

Introduction

Sparse linear models—linear predictive functions in a small subset of features—have a long history
in statistics, dating back at least to the 1960s (Garside, 1965). Nowadays, against the backdrop of
elaborate, black-box models such as deep neural networks, the appeal of sparse linear models is
largely their transparency and intelligibility. These qualities are sought in decision-making settings
(e.g., consumer finance and criminal justice) and constitute the foundation of interpretable machine
learning, a topic that has recently received significant attention (Murdoch et al., 2019; Molnar et al.,
2020; Rudin et al., 2022; Marcinkevičs and Vogt, 2023). Interpretability, however, comes at a price
when the underlying phenomenon cannot be predicted accurately without a more expressive model
capable of well-approximating complex functions, such as a neural network. Unfortunately, one must
forgo direct interpretation of expressive models and instead resort to post hoc explanations (Ribeiro
et al., 2016; Lundberg and Lee, 2017), which have their own flaws (Laugel et al., 2019; Rudin, 2019).
Motivated by a desire for interpretability and expressivity, this paper focuses on a setting where
sparse linear models and neural networks can collaborate together. The setting is characterized by
a not-uncommon situation where the input features dichotomize into two groups, which we call
explanatory features and contextual features. Explanatory features are features whose effects are
of primary interest. They should be modeled via a low-complexity function such as a sparse linear
model for interpretability. Meanwhile, contextual features describe the broader predictive context,
∗
†

Corresponding author. Email: ryan.thompson1@unsw.edu.au
Part of this work was carried out while the author was at CSIRO’s Data61.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

