On the Constrained Time-Series Generation Problem
Andrea Coletta
J.P. Morgan AI Research
London, UK

Sriram Gopalakrishan
J.P. Morgan AI Research
New York, USA

Daniel Borrajo
J.P. Morgan AI Research
Madrid, ESP

Svitlana Vyetrenko
J.P. Morgan AI Research
New York, USA

Abstract
Synthetic time series are often used in practical applications to augment the historical time series dataset, amplify the occurrence of rare events and also create
counterfactual scenarios. Distributional-similarity (which we refer to as realism) as
well as the satisfaction of certain numerical constraints are common requirements
for counterfactual time series generation. For instance, the US Federal Reserve
publishes synthetic market stress scenarios given by the constrained time series
for financial institutions to assess their performance in hypothetical recessions.
Existing approaches for generating constrained time series usually penalize training
loss to enforce constraints, and reject non-conforming samples. However, these
approaches would require re-training if we change constraints, and rejection sampling can be computationally expensive, or impractical for complex constraints. In
this paper, we propose a novel set of methods to tackle the constrained time series
generation problem and provide efficient sampling while ensuring the realism of
generated time series. In particular, we frame the problem using a constrained
optimization framework and then we propose a set of generative methods including
“GuidedDiffTime”, a guided diffusion model. We empirically evaluate our work on
several datasets for financial and energy data, where incorporating constraints is
critical. We show that our approaches outperform existing work both qualitatively
and quantitatively, and that “GuidedDiffTime” does not require re-training for new
constraints, resulting in a significant carbon footprint reduction, up to 92% w.r.t.
existing deep learning methods.

1

Introduction

In recent years, synthetic time series (TS) have gained popularity in various applications such as data
augmentation, forecasting, and imputation of missing values [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Additionally, synthetic TS
are extremely useful to generate unseen and counterfactual scenarios, where we can test hypotheses
and algorithms before employing them in real settings [6]. For example, in financial markets, it can
be very useful to test trading strategies on unseen hypothetical markets scenarios, as poorly tested
algorithms can lead to large losses for investors, as well as to overall market instability [7, 8]. In
order to be useful, such hypothetical market stress scenarios need to be realistic - i.e., the synthetic
market TS need to have statistical properties similar to the historical ones. They also need to satisfy
certain constraints supplied by experts on how hypothetical market shock scenarios can potentially
unfold. For instance, in order to ensure financial market stability, the US Federal Reserve annually
assesses the market conditions and publishes a set of constrained market stress scenarios that financial
institutions must subject their portfolios to, in order to estimate and adjust for their losses in case of
market downturns [9].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

