Replicable Clustering∗

Hossein Esfandiari
Google Research
esfandiari@google.com

Amin Karbasi
Yale University, Google Research
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Grigoris Velegkas
Yale University
grigoris.velegkas@yale.edu

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Felix Zhou
Yale University
felix.zhou@yale.edu

Abstract
We design replicable algorithms in the context of statistical clustering under the
recently introduced notion of replicability from Impagliazzo et al. [2022]. According to this definition, a clustering algorithm is replicable if, with high probability,
its output induces the exact same partition of the sample space after two executions on different inputs drawn from the same distribution, when its internal
randomness is shared across the executions. We propose such algorithms for the
statistical k-medians, statistical k-means, and statistical k-centers problems by
utilizing approximation routines for their combinatorial counterparts in a black-box
manner. In particular, we demonstrate a replicable O(1)-approximation algorithm for statistical Euclidean k-medians (k-means) with Õ(poly(k, d)k log log k )
sample complexity. We also describe an O(1)-approximation algorithm with
an additional O(1)-additive error for statistical Euclidean k-centers, albeit with
Õ(poly(k) exp(d)) sample complexity. In addition, we provide experiments on
synthetic distributions in 2D using the k-means++ implementation from sklearn as
a black-box that validate our theoretical results2 .

1

Introduction

The unprecedented increase in the amount of data that is available to researchers across many
different scientific areas has led to the study and development of automated data analysis methods.
One fundamental category of such methods is unsupervised learning which aims to identify some
inherent structure in unlabeled data. Perhaps the most well-studied way to do that is by grouping
together data that share similar characteristics. As a result, clustering algorithms have become one
of the central objects of study in unsupervised learning. Despite a very long line of work studying
such algorithms, e.g. Jain and Dubes [1988], Hart et al. [2000], Anderberg [2014], there is not an
agreed-upon definition that quantifies the quality of a clustering solution. Kleinberg [2002] showed
that there is an inherent reason why this is the case: it is impossible to design a clustering function
that satisfies three natural properties, namely scale-invariance, richness of solutions, and consistency.
This means that the algorithm designer needs to balance several conflicting desiderata. As a result,
the radically different approaches that scientists use depending on their application domain can be
sensitive to several factors such as their random initialization, the measure of similarity of the data,
the presence of noise in the measurements, and the existence of outliers in the dataset. All these
issues give rise to algorithms whose results are not replicable, i.e., when we execute them on two
different samples of the same population, they output solutions that vary significantly. This begs the
∗
2

Authors are listed alphabetically.
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/replicable_clustering_experiments-E380

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

