Primal-Attention: Self-attention through Asymmetric
Kernel SVD in Primal Representation

Yingyi Chen ∗
ESAT-STADIUS
KU Leuven, Belgium
yingyi.chen@esat.kuleuven.be

Qinghua Tao ∗
ESAT-STADIUS
KU Leuven, Belgium
qinghua.tao@esat.kuleuven.be

Francesco Tonin
ESAT-STADIUS
KU Leuven, Belgium
francesco.tonin@esat.kuleuven.be

Johan A.K. Suykens
ESAT-STADIUS
KU Leuven, Belgium
johan.suykens@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Recently, a new line of works has emerged to understand and improve self-attention
in Transformers by treating it as a kernel machine. However, existing works apply
the methods for symmetric kernels to the asymmetric self-attention, resulting in a
nontrivial gap between the analytical understanding and numerical implementation.
In this paper, we provide a new perspective to represent and optimize self-attention
through asymmetric Kernel Singular Value Decomposition (KSVD), which is
also motivated by the low-rank property of self-attention normally observed in
deep layers. Through asymmetric KSVD, i) a primal-dual representation of selfattention is formulated, where the optimization objective is cast to maximize the
projection variances in the attention outputs; ii) a novel attention mechanism, i.e.,
Primal-Attention, is proposed via the primal representation of KSVD, avoiding
explicit computation of the kernel matrix in the dual; iii) with KKT conditions, we
prove that the stationary solution to the KSVD optimization in Primal-Attention
yields a zero-value objective. In this manner, KSVD optimization can be implemented by simply minimizing a regularization loss, so that low-rank property is
promoted without extra decomposition. Numerical experiments show state-of-theart performance of our Primal-Attention with improved efficiency. Moreover, we
demonstrate that the deployed KSVD optimization regularizes Primal-Attention
with a sharper singular value decay than that of the canonical self-attention, further
verifying the great potential of our method. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first work that provides a primal-dual representation for the asymmetric kernel
in self-attention and successfully applies it to modelling and optimization2 .

1

Introduction

Transformers [1] have become ubiquitous nowadays with state-of-the-art results in various tasks, such
as natural language processing [2, 3, 4], computer vision [5, 6, 7, 8], reinforcement learning [9, 10, 11],
etc. In the remarkable success of Transformers, the self-attention blocks play a key role, where the
complicated dependencies between the individuals in data sequences can be depicted by using the
established queries, keys, and values. Despite the prevailing advantages, theoretical understandings
towards Transformers seem yet lagged behind its unprecedented empirical performance.
∗
2

Equal contribution.
Our implementation is available at https://github.com/yingyichen-cyy/PrimalAttention

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

