Homotopy-based training of NeuralODEs for accurate
dynamics discovery

Joon-Hyuk Ko†
Department of Physics & Astronomy
Seoul National University
Seoul, 08826, South Korea
jhko725@snu.ac.kr

Hankyul Koh†
Department of Physics & Astronomy
Seoul National University
Seoul, 08826, South Korea
physics113@snu.ac.kr

Nojun Park
Department of Physics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MA, 02142, United States
bnj11526@mit.edu

Wonho Jhe
Department of Physics & Astronomy
Seoul National University
Seoul, 08826, South Korea
whjhe@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (NeuralODEs) present an attractive way
to extract dynamical laws from time series data, as they bridge neural networks
with the differential equation-based modeling paradigm of the physical sciences.
However, these models often display long training times and suboptimal results,
especially for longer duration data. While a common strategy in the literature
imposes strong constraints to the NeuralODE architecture to inherently promote
stable model dynamics, such methods are ill-suited for dynamics discovery as
the unknown governing equation is not guaranteed to satisfy the assumed constraints. In this paper, we develop a new training method for NeuralODEs, based
on synchronization and homotopy optimization, that does not require changes to
the model architecture. We show that synchronizing the model dynamics and the
training data tames the originally irregular loss landscape, which homotopy optimization can then leverage to enhance training. Through benchmark experiments,
we demonstrate our method achieves competitive or better training loss while
often requiring less than half the number of training epochs compared to other
model-agnostic techniques. Furthermore, models trained with our method display
better extrapolation capabilities, highlighting the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Predicting the evolution of a time varying system and discovering mathematical models that govern
it is paramount to both deeper scientific understanding and potential engineering applications. The
centuries-old paradigm to tackle this problem was to either ingeniously deduce empirical rules
from experimental data, or mathematically derive physical laws from first principles. However, the
complexities of systems of interest have grown so much that these traditional approaches are now
often insufficient. This has led to a growing interest in using machine learning methods to infer
dynamical laws from data.
One line of research stems from the dynamical systems literature, where the problem of interest was
to determine the unknown coefficients of a given differential equation from data. While the task seems
rather simple, it was found that naive optimization cannot properly recover the desired coefficients
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

