Pruning vs Quantization: Which is Better?

Andrey Kuzmin, Markus Nagel, Mart van Baalen, Arash Behboodi, Tijmen Blankevoort
Qualcomm AI Research∗
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{akuzmin, markusn, mart, behboodi, tijmen}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Neural network pruning and quantization techniques are almost as old as neural
networks themselves. However, to date only ad-hoc comparisons between the two
have been published. In this paper, we set out to answer the question on which
is better: neural network quantization or pruning? By answering this question,
we hope to inform design decisions made on neural network hardware going
forward. We provide an extensive comparison between the two techniques for
compressing deep neural networks. First, we give an analytical comparison of
expected quantization and pruning error for general data distributions. Then, we
provide lower bounds for the per-layer pruning and quantization error in trained
networks, and compare these to empirical error after optimization. Finally, we
provide an extensive experimental comparison for training 9 large-scale models on
4 tasks. Our results show that in most cases quantization outperforms pruning. Only
in some scenarios with very high compression ratio, pruning might be beneficial
from an accuracy standpoint. 1

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep learning led to exceeding human-level performance in many tasks, including
computer vision, machine translation, voice recognition, and language understanding. Real-world
applications of DNNs rely heavily on their efficiency. Both mobile and cloud platforms greatly benefit
from reduced latency and energy efficiency achieved by some form of model compression. In this
work, we consider two mainstream techniques used in practice; pruning and quantization.
Pruning methods remove individual weights [70, 25], or sometimes groups of weights [28, 47]. This
procedure can reduce the memory footprint. Furthermore, not having to perform the computations
with weights that are zeroed out can make network inference more efficient. On the other hand,
quantization reduces the bit-width used for both the weights and the computation used in networks,
leading to both predictable memory savings and reductions in the necessary compute. In both
scenarios, the hardware used for making use of these optimization schemes needs to take them into
account.
Depending on the availability of training data and computing budget, most methods for pruning and
quantization fall into one of two families. The first family includes fine-tuning approaches, namely
quantization-aware training (QAT) and fine-tuning with pruning in the loop. The second family
includes post-training approaches such as post-training quantization (PTQ). Previously, pruning
techniques primarily relied on fine-tuning; however, some post-training pruning methods appeared
recently as fine-tuning is not desirable for large language models [18].
Despite the importance of model efficiency and the plethora of approaches for pruning and quantization, the two fields are mostly disjoint. The literature presents little insight into which of the two
∗
1

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

Code is available at https://github.com/Qualcomm-AI-research/pruning-vs-quantization

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

