Learning a 1-layer conditional generative model in
total variation
Ajil Jalal

Justin Kang
UC Berkeley
{ajiljalal, justin_kang}@berkeley.edu
Kannan Ramchandran
UC Berkeley
kannanr@eecs.berkeley.edu

Ananya Uppal
UT Austin
ananya.uppal09@gmail.com
Eric Price
UT Austin
ecprice@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
A conditional generative model is a method for sampling from a conditional
distribution p(y | x). For example, one may want to sample an image of a cat given
the label “cat”. A feed-forward conditional generative model is a function g(x, z)
that takes the input x and a random seed z, and outputs a sample y from p(y | x).
Ideally the distribution of outputs (x, g(x, z)) would be close in total variation to
the ideal distribution (x, y).
Generalization bounds for other learning models require assumptions on the distribution of x, even in simple settings like linear regression with Gaussian noise. We
show these assumptions are unnecessary in our model, for both linear regression
and single-layer ReLU networks. Given samples (x, y), we show how to learn a
1-layer ReLU conditional generative model in total variation. As our result has no
assumption on the distribution of inputs x, if we are given access to the internal
activations of a deep generative model, we can compose our 1-layer guarantee to
progressively learn the deep model using a near-linear number of samples.

1

Introduction

Generative models are in the midst of an explosion in accessibility, as models like DALL-E [31] or
Stable Diffusion [32] capture the attention of millions. In many cases, these generative models can be
succinctly represented by a fundamental mathematical object—the conditional distribution p(y | x).
In the example of text-to-image generative models, x can represent a text prompt or its Word2Vec
embedding [26], and the model can be seen as sampling an image y from its conditional distribution
p(y | x). With large numbers of people accessing these models, a massive amount of sample pairs
(yi , xi ), are becoming available online. A natural question to ask is: How many samples (yi , xi ) does
it take to learn the conditional generative model p(y | x)?
Recent empirical studies such as Stanford Alpaca [34], which attempt to learn GPT-3.5 from limited
samples, indicate that the number of samples needed may be within a practical range. In this paper,
we attempt to address this problem from a fundamental perspective grounded in a concept from
classical theoretical statistics: the Maximum Likelihood Estimator (MLE). Specifically, we focus on
feed-forward generative models from a relatively simple family and ask: with no assumptions on x,
how many samples are required to efficiently learn the conditional generative model p(y | x)?
Linear Regression. Consider ordinary linear regression with Gaussian noise: you observe independent samples (xi , yi ) ∈ Rk × R of the form
y = x · w∗ + η
for η ∼ N (0, 1).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

