Projection-Free Methods for Solving
Nonconvex-Concave Saddle Point Problems
Morteza Boroun∗ , Erfan Yazdandoost Hamedani∗ , Afrooz Jalilzadeh∗
∗
Department of Systems & Industrial Engineering
The University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
morteza@arizona.edu, erfany@arizona.edu, afrooz@arizona.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate a class of constrained saddle point (SP) problems where
the objective function is nonconvex-concave and smooth. This class of problems
has wide applicability in machine learning, including robust multi-class classification and dictionary learning. Several projection-based primal-dual methods have
been developed to tackle this problem; however, the availability of methods with
projection-free oracles remains limited. To address this gap, we propose efficient
single-loop projection-free methods reliant on first-order information. In particular,
using regularization and nested approximation techniques, we propose a primaldual conditional gradient method that solely employs linear minimization oracles to
handle constraints. Assuming that the constraint set in the maximization is strongly
convex, our method achieves an ϵ-stationary solution within O(ϵ−6 ) iterations.
When the projection onto the constraint set of maximization is easy to compute, we
propose a one-sided projection-free method that achieves an ϵ-stationary solution
within O(ϵ−4 ) iterations. Moreover, we present improved iteration complexities
of our methods under a strong concavity assumption. To the best of our knowledge, our proposed algorithms are among the first projection-free methods with
convergence guarantees for solving nonconvex-concave SP problems.

1

Introduction

Let (X , ∥·∥X ) and (Y, ∥·∥Y ) be finite-dimensional, real normed spaces with the corresponding dual
spaces denoted by (X ∗ , ∥·∥X ∗ ) and (Y ∗ , ∥·∥Y ∗ ), respectively. In this paper, we study a saddle point
(SP) problem of the following form:
min max L(x, y),

x∈X y∈Y

(1)

where L : X ×Y → R is possibly nonconvex in x for any y ∈ Y and concave in y for any x ∈ X with
certain differentiability properties (see Assumption 2.6); moreover, X ⊆ X and Y ⊆ Y are convex
and compact sets. Such a problem has a broad range of applications including robust optimization
[4], reinforcement learning [11], and adversarial learning [17], to name just a few.
There has been vast research conducted on developing algorithms for solving SP problems [37, 41, 8,
42, 18]. Despite the extensive studies conducted on the development of algorithms to solve problem
(1) a common drawback of these methods is their reliance on costly operations involving the projection
onto constraint sets. In the optimization literature, the shortcomings associated with projection-based
techniques prompted the emergence and advancement of projection-free approaches. Namely, Frank
Wolfe-based algorithms [14] are first-order methods designed for minimizing smooth constrained
optimization problems where instead of projection onto a constraint set only a linear minimization
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

