Path following algorithms for ℓ2-regularized
M-estimation with approximation guarantee

Yunzhang Zhu
Department of Statistics
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43015
zhu.219@osu.edu

Renxiong Liu∗
Statistics and Data Science team
Nokia Bell Labs
Murray Hill, NJ 07974
renxiong.liu@nokia-bell-labs.com

Abstract
Many modern machine learning algorithms are formulated as regularized Mestimation problems, in which a regularization (tuning) parameter controls a tradeoff between model fit to the training data and model complexity. To select the “best”
tuning parameter value that achieves a good trade-off, an approximated solution
path needs to be computed. In practice, this is often done through selecting a grid
of tuning parameter values and solving the regularized problem at the selected grid
points. However, given any desired level of accuracy, it is often not clear how to
choose the grid points and also how accurately one should solve the regularized
problems at the selected gird points, both of which can greatly impact the overall
amount of computation. In the context of ℓ2 -regularized M-estimation problem,
we propose a novel grid point selection scheme and an adaptive stopping criterion
for any given optimization algorithm that produces an approximated solution path
with approximation error guarantee. Theoretically, we prove that the proposed
solution path can approximate the exact solution path to arbitrary level of accuracy,
while saving the overall computation as much as possible. Numerical results also
corroborate our theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning algorithms are often formulated as regularized M-minimization problems,
θ(λ) = arg min Ln (θ) + λp(θ) ,
θ

(1)

where Ln (θ) denotes an empirical loss function, p(θ) denotes a regularization function, and λ is a
tuning parameter that controls the trade-off between model fit and model complexity. Varying the
tuning parameter leads to a collection of models, among which one of them may be chosen as the
final model. This requires solving a collection of related optimization problems, whose solutions are
often referred to as the solution path (We refer readers to Figure S4 and S5 in the supplementary
material for some examples of solution paths).
Very often the exact solution path θ(λ) can not be computed, and path-following algorithms are
usually used to obtain a sequence of solutions at some selected grid points to produce an approximated
solution path. Existing path-following algorithms [see, e.g., Hastie et al., 2004, 2007] typically
choose a set of equally-spaced grid points (often on a log-scale), and choose certain algorithm to solve
the minimization problem at the selected grid points. Warm-start strategy is often used to leverage
the fact that the minimizers at two consecutive grid points may be close. However, there is a paucity
of literature on how to choose these grid points and how accurately one should solve the optimization
∗

Work done when Renxiong Liu is a PhD student at the Ohio State University.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

