Normalizing flow neural networks by JKO scheme

Chen Xu
School of Industrial and
Systems Engineering
Georgia Tech

Xiuyuan Cheng
Department of Mathematics
Duke University

Yao Xie
School of Industrial and
Systems Engineering
Georgia Tech

Abstract
Normalizing flow is a class of deep generative models for efficient sampling and
likelihood estimation, which achieves attractive performance, particularly in high
dimensions. The flow is often implemented using a sequence of invertible residual
blocks. Existing works adopt special network architectures and regularization of
flow trajectories. In this paper, we develop a neural ODE flow network called JKOiFlow, inspired by the Jordan-Kinderleherer-Otto (JKO) scheme, which unfolds
the discrete-time dynamic of the Wasserstein gradient flow. The proposed method
stacks residual blocks one after another, allowing efficient block-wise training of
the residual blocks, avoiding sampling SDE trajectories and score matching or
variational learning, thus reducing the memory load and difficulty in end-to-end
training. We also develop adaptive time reparameterization of the flow network
with a progressive refinement of the induced trajectory in probability space to
improve the model accuracy further. Experiments with synthetic and real data show
that the proposed JKO-iFlow network achieves competitive performance compared
with existing flow and diffusion models at a significantly reduced computational
and memory cost.

1

Introduction

Generative models have wide applications in statistics and
machine learning to infer data-generating distributions and
to sample from the model distributions learned from the
data. In addition to widely used deep generative models such as variational auto-encoders (VAE) Kingma and
Welling [2014, 2019] and generative adversarial networks
(GAN) Goodfellow et al. [2014], Gulrajani et al. [2017],
normalizing flow models Kobyzev et al. [2020] have been
popular and with a great potential. The flow model learns
the data distribution via an invertible mapping F between
the data density pX in Rd and the target standard multivariate Gaussian density pZ , Z ∼ N (0, Id ). While flow
models, once trained, can be utilized for efficient data sam(a) JKO-iFlow
(b) usual CNF
pling and explicit likelihood evaluation, training of such
models is often difficult in practice. To alleviate such diffi- Figure 1: Comparison of JKO-iFlow (proposed) and standard CNF models. In contrast to most existing CNF modculties, many prior works [Dinh et al., 2015, 2017, Kingma els, JKO-iFlow learns the unique deterministic transport
and Dhariwal, 2018, Behrmann et al., 2019, Ruthotto et al., equation corresponding to the diffusion process by directly
2020, Onken et al., 2021], among others, have explored performing block-wise training of a neural ODE model.
designs of training objectives, network architectures, and computational techniques.
Among various flow models, continuous normalizing flow (CNF) transports the data density to a target
distribution through continuous dynamics, primarily neural ODE [Chen et al., 2018] models. CNF
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

