Budgeting Counterfactual for Offline RL

1

Yao Liu1 , Pratik Chaudhari1,2 , Rasool Fakoor1
Amazon Web Services, 2 University of Pennsylvania
{yaoliuai,prtic,fakoor}@amazon.com

Abstract
The main challenge of offline reinforcement learning, where data is limited, arises
from a sequence of counterfactual reasoning dilemmas within the realm of potential actions: What if we were to choose a different course of action? These
circumstances frequently give rise to extrapolation errors, which tend to accumulate exponentially with the problem horizon. Hence, it becomes crucial to
acknowledge that not all decision steps are equally important to the final outcome,
and to budget the number of counterfactual decisions a policy make in order to
control the extrapolation. Contrary to existing approaches that use regularization
on either the policy or value function, we propose an approach to explicitly bound
the amount of out-of-distribution actions during training. Specifically, our method
utilizes dynamic programming to decide where to extrapolate and where not to,
with an upper bound on the decisions different from behavior policy. It balances
between the potential for improvement from taking out-of-distribution actions and
the risk of making errors due to extrapolation. Theoretically, we justify our method
by the constrained optimality of the fixed point solution to our Q updating rules.
Empirically, we show that the overall performance of our method is better than the
state-of-the-art offline RL methods on tasks in the widely-used D4RL benchmarks.

1

Introduction

One of the primary hurdles in reinforcement learning (RL), or online RL, is its reliance on interacting
with an environment in order to learn [47]. This can be a significant barrier to applying RL to realworld problems, where it may not be feasible or safe to interact with the environment directly [48]. In
contrast, batch or offline RL [6, 27, 30] provides a more suitable framework for effectively learning
policies by leveraging previously collected data to learn a policy. Notably, offline RL relies on a fixed
but limited dataset comprising previously collected data from an unknown policy(s) and lacks the
ability to continue interacting with the environment to gather additional samples.
These limitations in offline RL give rise to various challenges, with one notable issue being the
occurrence of extrapolation problems resulting from the scarcity of training data [8, 12]. In order
to overcome this challenge, previous approaches to offline RL primarily focus on constraining the
gap between the behavioral policy and the learned policy [4, 11, 12, 25, 40, 51], or limiting the
disparity between the state-action values of logged actions in the data and extrapolated actions [8, 22,
26, 50, 53]. Alternatively, other approaches utilize a learned model that avoids making predictions
outside the distribution of the dataset [21, 35, 55]. All these offline RL methods involve a sequence of
counterfactual reasoning problems within the realm of potential actions, explicitly or implicitly. The
question of ”what if” we were to choose a different course of action than the behavior policy often
arises, leading to extrapolation errors. Hence the difficulty of the problem increases as we plan for a
longer horizon and involves more counterfactual decisions. For offline RL algorithms, it is difficult to
find a balance between the potential for improvement from taking out-of-distribution actions and the
risk of making errors due to extrapolation.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

