D IFF -F OLEY: Synchronized Video-to-Audio Synthesis
with Latent Diffusion Models
Simian Luo1,2 Chuanhao Yan1 Chenxu Hu1 Hang Zhao1,2∗
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
{luosm22, yanch21, hu-cx21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The Video-to-Audio (V2A) model has recently gained attention for its practical
application in generating audio directly from silent videos, particularly in video/film
production. However, previous methods in V2A have limited generation quality in
terms of temporal synchronization and audio-visual relevance. We present D IFF F OLEY, a synchronized Video-to-Audio synthesis method with a latent diffusion
model (LDM) that generates high-quality audio with improved synchronization
and audio-visual relevance. We adopt contrastive audio-visual pretraining (CAVP)
to learn more temporally and semantically aligned features, then train an LDM
with CAVP-aligned visual features on spectrogram latent space. The CAVP-aligned
features enable LDM to capture the subtler audio-visual correlation via a crossattention module. We further significantly improve sample quality with ‘double
guidance’. D IFF -F OLEY achieves state-of-the-art V2A performance on current
large scale V2A dataset. Furthermore, we demonstrate D IFF -F OLEY practical
applicability and adaptability via customized downstream finetuning. Project Page:
https://diff-foley.github.io/

Traditional Foley

Foley Artists
Generated Audio

Silent
Videos / Movies

Video Production
Neural Foley

AI Generated Audio

Figure 1: Traditional Foley v.s Neural Foley: Traditional Foley, a time-consuming and labor-intensive process
involving skilled artists manipulating objects to create hours of physical sounds for sound recording [31]. In
contrast, Neural Foley presents an appealing alternative utilizing neural networks to synthesize high-quality
synchronized audio, accelerating video production and alleviating human workload.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in diffusion models [42; 45; 16] have accelerated the development of AI-generated
contents, e.g. Text-to-Image (T2I) generation [37; 39; 38], Text-to-Audio (T2A) generation [48; 27],
and Text-to-Video (T2V) generation [15]. This paper focuses on Video-to-Audio (V2A) generation,
which has practical applications in video/film production. During live shooting, due to the presence of
excessive background noise and challenges in the audio collection in complex scenarios, the majority
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

