Practical Differentially Private
Hyperparameter Tuning with Subsampling

Antti Koskela
Nokia Bell Labs
antti.h.koskela@nokia-bell-labs.com

Tejas Kulkarni
Nokia Bell Labs
tejas.kulkarni@nokia-bell-labs.com

Abstract
Tuning the hyperparameters of differentially private (DP) machine learning (ML)
algorithms often requires use of sensitive data and this may leak private information
via hyperparameter values. Recently, Papernot and Steinke (2022) proposed a
certain class of DP hyperparameter tuning algorithms, where the number of random
search samples is randomized. Commonly, these algorithms still considerably
increase the DP privacy parameter ε over non-tuned DP ML model training and can
be computationally heavy as evaluating each hyperparameter candidate requires
a new training run. We focus on lowering both the DP bounds and the compute
cost of these methods by using only a random subset of the sensitive data for the
hyperparameter tuning and by extrapolating the optimal values to a larger dataset.
We provide a Rényi differential privacy analysis for the proposed method and
experimentally show that it consistently leads to better privacy-utility trade-off than
the baseline method by Papernot and Steinke.

1

Introduction

Our aim is two-fold: to decrease the computational cost as well as the privacy cost of hyperparameter
tuning of DP ML models. The reasons for this are clear. As the dataset sizes grow and models get
more complex, blackbox optimization of hyperparameters becomes more expensive since evaluation
of a single set of hyperparameters often requires retraining a new model. On the other hand, tuning
the hyperparameters often depends on the use of sensitive data, so it requires privacy protection
as well, as illustrated by the example by Papernot and Steinke (2022). Intuitively, the leakage
from hyperparameters is much smaller than from the model parameters, however, providing tuning
algorithms with low additional DP cost has turned out challenging. Current best algorithms (Papernot
and Steinke, 2022) still come with a considerable DP cost overhead.
Although our methods and results are applicable to general DP mechanisms, we focus in particular
on tuning of the DP stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) (Song et al., 2013; Bassily et al., 2014;
Abadi et al., 2016) which has become the most widely used method to train ML models with DP
guarantees. Compared to plain SGD, DP brings additional hyperparameters to tune: the noise level σ
and the clipping constant C. Additionally, also the subsampling ratio γ affects the DP guarantees, as
well as length of the training. Tuning all the hyperparameters of DP-SGD commonly requires use of
sensitive data.
We use the results by Papernot and Steinke (2022) as building blocks of our methods. Their work
was based on the analysis of Liu and Talwar (2019) who provided the first results for DP blackbox optimization of hyperparameters, where, if the base training algorithm is (ε, 0)-DP, then the
tuned model is approximately (3ε, 0)-DP. Papernot and Steinke (2022) provided a Rényi differential
privacy (RDP) analysis for a class of black-box tuning algorithms, where the number of runs in the
hyperparameter tuning is randomized. As the privacy bounds are in terms of RDP and assume only
RDP bounds about the candidate model training algorithms, they are particularly suitable to tuning
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

