Real-Time Motion Prediction via Heterogeneous
Polyline Transformer with Relative Pose Encoding

Zhejun Zhang
Computer Vision Lab
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
zhejun.zhang@vision.ee.ethz.ch
Christos Sakaridis
Computer Vision Lab
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
csakarid@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Alexander Liniger
Computer Vision Lab
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
alex.liniger@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Fisher Yu
Computer Vision Lab
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
i@yf.io

Luc Van Gool
CVL, ETH Zurich, CH
PSI, KU Leuven, BE
INSAIT, Un. Sofia, BU
vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
The real-world deployment of an autonomous driving system requires its components to run on-board and in real-time, including the motion prediction module that
predicts the future trajectories of surrounding traffic participants. Existing agentcentric methods have demonstrated outstanding performance on public benchmarks.
However, they suffer from high computational overhead and poor scalability as
the number of agents to be predicted increases. To address this problem, we introduce the K-nearest neighbor attention with relative pose encoding (K NARPE),
a novel attention mechanism allowing the pairwise-relative representation to be
used by Transformers. Then, based on K NARPE we present the Heterogeneous
Polyline Transformer with Relative pose encoding (HPTR), a hierarchical framework enabling asynchronous token update during the online inference. By sharing
contexts among agents and reusing the unchanged contexts, our approach is as
efficient as scene-centric methods, while performing on par with state-of-the-art
agent-centric methods. Experiments on Waymo and Argoverse-2 datasets show
that HPTR achieves superior performance among end-to-end methods that do not
apply expensive post-processing or model ensembling. The code is available at
https://github.com/zhejz/HPTR.

1

Introduction

Motion prediction is an important component of modular autonomous driving stack [63]. As the
downstream module of perception [22, 42, 48] and the upstream module of planning [3, 9, 39], the
task of motion prediction [16, 60] is to predict the multi-modal future trajectories of other agents next
to the self-driving vehicle (SDV) based on the heterogeneous observations, including for example
high-definition (HD) maps, traffic lights and other vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists. This is an
essential task because without accurate and real-time prediction results [30], the planning module
cannot safely and comfortably navigate the SDV through highly interactive driving environments.
To achieve top performance on public motion prediction leaderboards [1, 58], state-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods [36, 47, 52, 55] leverage agent-centric vectorized representations and Transformer-based
network architectures. However, the good performance of these approaches comes at a cost of high
computational overhead as illustrated in Figure 1. The most well-known problem of agent-centric
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

