Metropolis Sampling for Constrained Diffusion Models

Nic Fishman
University of Oxford

Leo Klarner
University of Oxford

Michael Hutchinson
University of Oxford

Emile Mathieu
University of Cambridge
Valentin De Bortoli
ENS Ulm

{njwfish,leojklarner}@gmail.com

Abstract
Denoising diffusion models have recently emerged as the predominant paradigm for
generative modelling on image domains. In addition, their extension to Riemannian
manifolds has facilitated a range of applications across the natural sciences. While
many of these problems stand to benefit from the ability to specify arbitrary, domaininformed constraints, this setting is not covered by the existing (Riemannian)
diffusion model methodology. Recent work has attempted to address this issue
by constructing novel noising processes based on the reflected Brownian motion
and logarithmic barrier methods. However, the associated samplers are either
computationally burdensome or only apply to convex subsets of Euclidean space. In
this paper, we introduce an alternative, simple noising scheme based on Metropolis
sampling that affords substantial gains in computational efficiency and empirical
performance compared to the earlier samplers. Of independent interest, we prove
that this new process corresponds to a valid discretisation of the reflected Brownian
motion. We demonstrate the scalability and flexibility of our approach on a range
of problem settings with convex and non-convex constraints, including applications
from geospatial modelling, robotics and protein design.

1

Introduction

In recent years, denoising diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song et al., 2019; Song et al.,
2021; Ho et al., 2020) have emerged as a powerful paradigm for generative modelling, achieving
state-of-the-art performance across a range of domains. They work by progressively adding noise to
data following a Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE)—the forward noising process—until it is
close to the invariant distribution of the SDE. The generative model is then given by an approximation
of the associated time-reversed denoising process, which is also an SDE whose drift depends on the
gradient of the logarithmic densities of the forward process, referred to as the Stein score. Building on
the success of diffusion models for image generation tasks, De Bortoli et al. (2022) and Huang et al.
(2022) have recently extended this framework to a wide range of Riemannian manifolds, enabling
the specification of inherent structural properties of the modelled domain. This has broadened the
applicability of diffusion models to problems in the natural and engineering sciences, including the
conformational modelling of small molecules (Jing et al., 2022; Corso et al., 2022), proteins (Trippe
et al., 2022; Watson et al., 2022; Yim et al., 2023) and robotic platforms (Urain et al., 2022).
However, in many data-scarce or safety-critical settings, researchers may want to restrict the modelled
domain even further by specifying problem-informed constraints to make maximal use of limited
experimental data or prevent unwanted behaviour (Morris, 2002; Han et al., 2006; Thiele et al.,
2013; Lukens et al., 2020). As illustrated in Figure 1, such domain-informed constraints can be
naturally represented as a Riemannian manifold with boundary. Training diffusion models on such
constrained manifolds is thus an important problem that requires principled noising processes—and
corresponding discretisations—that stay within the constrained set.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

