C LIP -OGD: An Experimental Design for Adaptive
Neyman Allocation in Sequential Experiments

Jessica Dai
UC Berkeley
jessicadai@berkeley.edu

Paula Gradu
UC Berkeley
pgradu@berkeley.edu

Christopher Harshaw˚
MIT
charshaw@mit.edu

Abstract
From clinical development of cancer therapies to investigations into partisan bias,
adaptive sequential designs have become increasingly popular method for causal
inference, as they offer the possibility of improved precision over their non-adaptive
counterparts. However, even in simple settings (e.g. two treatments) the extent to
which adaptive designs can improve precision is not sufficiently well understood.
In this work, we study the problem of Adaptive Neyman Allocation in a designbased potential outcomes framework, where the experimenter seeks to construct
an adaptive design which is nearly as efficient as the optimal (but infeasible) nonadaptive Neyman design, which has access to all potential outcomes. Motivated by
connections to online optimization, we propose Neyman Ratio and Neyman Regret
as two (equivalent) performance measures of adaptive designs
? for this problem. We
present C LIP -OGD, an adaptive design which achieves r
Op T q expected Neyman
regret and thereby recovers the optimal Neyman variance in large samples. Finally,
we construct a conservative variance estimator which facilitates the development
of asymptotically valid confidence intervals. To complement our theoretical results,
we conduct simulations using data from a microeconomic experiment.

1

Introduction

From medicine and public health to economics and public policy, randomized control trials are used
in a variety of disciplines to investigate causal effects. Typically, treatment is assigned in a nonadaptive manner, where assignments are determined before any outcomes are observed. A sequential
experimental approach, which adaptively assigns treatment based on previously observed outcomes,
offers the possibility of more precise or high powered estimates of relevant causal effects. Adaptive
experiments are run to develop clinical therapies for breast cancer [Barker et al., 2009], evaluate
incentives to reduce partisan bias [Offer-Westort et al., 2021], and evaluate customer acquisition via
online advertising [Schwartz et al., 2017], to name a few.
In this paper, we study the problem of Adaptive Neyman Allocation, which we informally define as
follows. An optimal non-adaptive experimental design which minimizes variance of an estimator will
depend on the unknown potential outcomes, rendering it infeasible to run. However, by adaptively
choosing treatment assignments in a sequential manner based on observed outcomes, we can hope
to guarantee that the variance of the estimator under the adaptive design converges to the optimal
non-adaptive variance. The problem of Adaptive Neyman Allocation is to construct such an adaptive
design which guarantees the variance converges to the (infeasible) optimal non-adaptive design.
˚

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

