No-Regret Online Reinforcement Learning with
Adversarial Losses and Transitions
Tiancheng Jin ∗
University of Southern California
tiancheng.jin@usc.edu

Junyan Liu ∗
University of California, San Diego
jul037@ucsd.edu

Chloé Rouyer
University of Copenhagen
chloe@di.ku.dk

William Chang
University of California, Los Angeles
chang314@g.ucla.edu

Chen-Yu Wei
MIT Institute for Data, Systems, and Society
chenyuw@mit.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Abstract
Existing online
√ learning algorithms for adversarial Markov Decision Processes
achieve O( T ) regret after T rounds of interactions even if the loss functions are
chosen arbitrarily by an adversary, with the caveat that the transition function has
to be fixed. This is because it has been shown that adversarial transition functions
make no-regret learning impossible. Despite such impossibility results, in this
work, we develop algorithms that can handle both adversarial losses and adversarial
transitions, with regret increasing smoothly in the degree of maliciousness
√ of the
e T + C P)
adversary. More concretely, we first propose an algorithm that enjoys O(
regret where C P measures how adversarial the transition functions are and can be
at most O(T ). While this algorithm itself requires knowledge of C P , we further
develop a black-box reduction approach that removes this requirement. Moreover,
we also show that further refinements of the algorithm not only maintains the same
regret bound, but also simultaneously adapts to easier environments (where losses
are generated in a certain
√ stochastically constrained manner as in Jin et al. [2021])
e + U C L +C P ) regret, where U is some standard gap-dependent
and achieves O(U
coefficient and C L is the amount of corruption on losses.

1

Introduction

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are widely-used models for reinforcement learning. They are
typically studied under a fixed transition function and a fixed loss function, which fails to capture
scenarios where the environment is time-evolving or susceptible to adversarial corruption. This
motivates many recent studies to overcome these challenges. In particular, one line of research,
originated from Even-Dar et al. [2009] and later improved or generalized by e.g. Neu et al. [2010a,b],
Zimin and Neu [2013], Rosenberg and Mansour [2019a], Jin et al. [2020], takes inspiration from
the online learning literature and considers interacting with a sequence of T MDPs, each with an
adversarially chosen
loss function. Despite facing such a challenging environment, the learner can
√
still ensure O( T ) regret (ignoring other dependence; same below) as shown by these√works, that is,
the learner’s average performance is close to that of the best fixed policy up to O(1/ T ).
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

