Waymax: An Accelerated, Data-Driven Simulator for
Large-Scale Autonomous Driving Research

Cole Gulino ∗ †

Justin Fu ∗ †

Wenjie Luo ∗ †

George Tucker ∗ ‡

Eli Bronstein †

Yiren Lu † Jean Harb † Xinlei Pan † Yan Wang † Xiangyu Chen † John D Co-Reyes ‡
Rishabh Agarwal ‡
Zoey Yang †

Rebecca Roelofs ‡
Brandyn White †

Yao Lu ‡

Aleksandra Faust ‡

Dragomir Anguelov †
* Equal Contribution

Nico Montali †

Paul Mougin †

Rowan McAllister †

Benjamin Sapp †
†

Waymo Research

‡

Google DeepMind

Abstract
Simulation is an essential tool to develop and benchmark autonomous vehicle
planning software in a safe and cost-effective manner. However, realistic simulation requires accurate modeling of nuanced and complex multi-agent interactive
behaviors. To address these challenges, we introduce Waymax, a new data-driven
simulator for autonomous driving in multi-agent scenes, designed for large-scale
simulation and testing. Waymax uses publicly-released, real-world driving data
(e.g., the Waymo Open Motion Dataset [15]) to initialize or play back a diverse set
of multi-agent simulated scenarios. It runs entirely on hardware accelerators such
as TPUs/GPUs and supports in-graph simulation for training, making it suitable
for modern large-scale, distributed machine learning workflows. To support online
training and evaluation, Waymax includes several learned and hard-coded behavior models that allow for realistic interaction within simulation. To supplement
Waymax, we benchmark a suite of popular imitation and reinforcement learning
algorithms with ablation studies on different design decisions, where we highlight
the effectiveness of routes as guidance for planning agents and the ability of RL to
overfit against simulated agents.

1

Introduction

Due to the cost and risk of deploying autonomous vehicles (AVs) in the real world, simulation is
a crucial tool in the research and development of autonomous driving software. The two primary
challenges of a simulator are speed and realism: we wish for a simulator to be fast in order to
cost-effectively train/evaluate on many hours of synthetic driving experience, and we wish for a
simulator to be diverse and realistic in terms vehicle behavior in order to minimize the sim-to-real
gap [50, 37], such that performance in the simulator correlates with real-world performance.
Existing work in simulation for autonomous driving has made significant progress in recent years.
Simulators such as CARLA [14], Sim4CV [33] and SUMMIT [9] focus on photo-realistic rendering
of driving scenarios, enabling users to train and evaluate driving solutions. However, a major
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

