On Class Distributions Induced by Nearest Neighbor
Graphs for Node Classification of Tabular Data

Federico Errica
NEC Laboratories Europe
Heidelberg, Germany

Abstract
Researchers have used nearest neighbor graphs to transform classical machine
learning problems on tabular data into node classification tasks to solve with
graph representation learning methods. Such artificial structures often reflect the
homophily assumption, believed to be a key factor in the performances of deep
graph networks. In light of recent results demystifying these beliefs, we introduce
a theoretical framework to understand the benefits of Nearest Neighbor (NN)
graphs when a graph structure is missing. We formally analyze the Cross-Class
Neighborhood Similarity (CCNS), used to empirically evaluate the usefulness of
structures, in the context of nearest neighbor graphs. Moreover, we study the class
separability induced by deep graph networks on a k-NN graph. Motivated by
the theory, our quantitative experiments demonstrate that, under full supervision,
employing a k-NN graph offers no benefits compared to a structure-agnostic
baseline. Qualitative analyses suggest that our framework is good at estimating
the CCNS and hint at k-NN graphs never being useful for such classification
tasks under full supervision, thus advocating for the study of alternative graph
construction techniques in combination with deep graph networks.

1

Introduction

The pursuit of understanding real-world phenomena has often led researchers to model the system
of interest as a set of interdependent constituents, which influence each other in complex ways.
In disciplines such as chemistry, physics, and network science, graphs are a convenient and wellstudied mathematical object to represent such interacting entities and their attributes. In machine
learning, the term “graph representation learning” refers to methods that can automatically leverage
graph-structured data to solve tasks such as entity (or node), link, and whole-graph predictions
[12, 32, 78, 73, 4].
Most of these methods assume that the relational information, that is the connections between
entities, naturally emerges from the domain of the problem and is thus known. There is also broad
consensus that connected entities typically share characteristics, behavioral patterns, or affiliation,
something known as the homophily assumption [45]. This is possibly why, when the structure is not
available, researchers have tried to artificially build Nearest Neighbor (NN) graphs from tabular data,
by connecting entities based on some attribute similarity criterion, with applications in healthcare
[44, 65], fake news and spam detection [39, 7], biology [77, 42], and document classification [56] to
name a few. From an information-theoretic perspective, the creation of such graphs does not add new
information as it depends on the available data; that said, what makes their use plausible is that the
graph construction is a form of feature engineering that often encodes the homophily assumption.
Combined with the inductive bias of Deep Graph Networks (DGNs) [59, 46], this strategy aims at
improving the generalization performances on tabular data compared to structure-agnostic baselines,
for example, a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

