Debiased and Denoised Entity Recognition from
Distant Supervision

Haobo Wang1∗ , Yiwen Dong1∗, Ruixuan Xiao1 , Fei Huang2 , Gang Chen1 , Junbo Zhao1†
1
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{wanghaobo, dyw424, xiaoruixuan, cg, j.zhao}@zju.edu.cn, feirhuang@gmail.com

Abstract
While distant supervision has been extensively explored and exploited in NLP tasks
like named entity recognition, a major obstacle stems from the inevitable noisy
distant labels tagged unsupervisedly. A few past works approach this problem
by adopting a self-training framework with a sample-selection mechanism. In
this work, we innovatively identify two types of biases that were omitted by
prior work, and these biases lead to inferior performance of the distant-supervised
NER setup. First, we characterize the noise concealed in the distant labels as
highly structural rather than fully randomized. Second, the self-training framework
would ubiquitously introduce an inherent bias that causes erroneous behavior in
both sample selection and eventually prediction. To cope with these problems,
we propose a novel self-training framework, dubbed DesERT. This framework
augments the conventional NER predicative pathway to a dual form that effectively
adapts the sample-selection process to conform to its innate distributional-bias
structure. The other crucial component of DesERT composes a debiased module
aiming to enhance the token representations, hence the quality of the pseudo-labels.
Extensive experiments are conducted to validate the DesERT. The results show that
our framework establishes a new state-of-art performance, it achieves a +2.22%
average F1 score improvement on five standardized benchmarking datasets. Lastly,
DesERT demonstrates its effectiveness under a new DSNER benchmark where
additional distant supervision comes from the ChatGPT model.

1

Introduction

As an iconic and pivotal task, named entity recognition (NER) [1] has gained wide attention from the
natural language processing community. While there have been several successes towards solving
this task [2, 3, 4, 5], most of these solutions demand decent datasets for training that enjoys both
good quality and large quantity. When it comes to specialized industrial deployment, this leads us to
expensive data annotation and curation costs which may hinder the development of NER.
Distant supervision [6, 7, 8] is a promising direction to alleviate this problem. Indeed, there have
been a number of attempts to combine the additional labels obtained from distant supervision with
the original unlabeled data, and then establish a selection-based self-training framework [9] to handle
noise among distant labels. The core of these methods is to sample reliable clean tokens and cope
with potentially noisy tokens involved by the imperfect pseudo-label prediction.
On one hand, we characterize that the label distribution for distant supervision is rather skewed.
Notably, as shown in Figure 1 (a), we found that true non-entity tokens are far more than the remaining
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

