Quantification of Uncertainty with Adversarial Models

Kajetan Schweighofer∗ Lukas Aichberger∗ Mykyta Ielanskyi∗
Günter Klambauer Sepp Hochreiter
ELLIS Unit Linz and LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning,
Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
∗
Joint first authors

Abstract
Quantifying uncertainty is important for actionable predictions in real-world applications. A crucial part of predictive uncertainty quantification is the estimation
of epistemic uncertainty, which is defined as an integral of the product between a
divergence function and the posterior. Current methods such as Deep Ensembles
or MC dropout underperform at estimating the epistemic uncertainty, since they
primarily consider the posterior when sampling models. We suggest Quantification
of Uncertainty with Adversarial Models (QUAM) to better estimate the epistemic
uncertainty. QUAM identifies regions where the whole product under the integral
is large, not just the posterior. Consequently, QUAM has lower approximation error
of the epistemic uncertainty compared to previous methods. Models for which
the product is large correspond to adversarial models (not adversarial examples!).
Adversarial models have both a high posterior as well as a high divergence between
their predictions and that of a reference model. Our experiments show that QUAM
excels in capturing epistemic uncertainty for deep learning models and outperforms
previous methods on challenging tasks in the vision domain.

1

Introduction

Actionable predictions typically require risk assessment based on predictive uncertainty quantification
[Apostolakis, 1991]. This is of utmost importance in high stake applications, such as medical
diagnosis or drug discovery, where human lives or extensive investments are at risk. In such settings,
even a single prediction has far-reaching real-world impact, thus necessitating the most precise
quantification of the associated uncertainties. Furthermore, foundation models or specialized models
that are obtained externally are becoming increasingly prevalent, also in high stake applications. It
is crucial to assess the robustness and reliability of those unknown models before applying them.
Therefore, the predictive uncertainty of given, pre-selected models at specific test points should be
quantified, which we address in this work.
We consider predictive uncertainty quantification (see Fig. 1) for deep neural networks [Gal, 2016,
Hüllermeier and Waegeman, 2021]. According to Vesely and Rasmuson [1984], Apostolakis [1991],
Helton [1993], McKone [1994], Helton [1997], predictive uncertainty can be categorized into two
types. First, aleatoric (Type A, variability, stochastic, true, irreducible) uncertainty refers to the
variability when drawing samples or when repeating the same experiment. Second, epistemic (Type
B, lack of knowledge, subjective, reducible) uncertainty refers to the lack of knowledge about the true
model. Epistemic uncertainty can result from imprecision in parameter estimates, incompleteness
in modeling, or indefiniteness in the applicability of the model. While aleatoric uncertainty cannot
be reduced, epistemic uncertainty can be reduced by more data, better models, or more knowledge
about the problem. We follow Helton [1997] and consider epistemic uncertainty as the imprecision
or variability of parameters that determine the predictive distribution. Vesely and Rasmuson [1984]
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

