Why Does Sharpness-Aware Minimization Generalize
Better Than SGD?
Zixiang Chen∗ Junkai Zhang∗ Yiwen Kou Xiangning Chen Cho-Jui Hsieh Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
{chenzx19,zhang,evankou,xiangning,chohsieh,qgu}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
The challenge of overfitting, in which the model memorizes the training data
and fails to generalize to test data, has become increasingly significant in the
training of large neural networks. To tackle this challenge, Sharpness-Aware
Minimization (SAM) has emerged as a promising training method, which can
improve the generalization of neural networks even in the presence of label noise.
However, a deep understanding of how SAM works, especially in the setting of
nonlinear neural networks and classification tasks, remains largely missing. This
paper fills this gap by demonstrating why SAM generalizes better than Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) for a certain data model and two-layer convolutional
ReLU networks. The loss landscape of our studied problem is nonsmooth, thus
current explanations for the success of SAM based on the Hessian information
are insufficient. Our result explains the benefits of SAM, particularly its ability
to prevent noise learning in the early stages, thereby facilitating more effective
learning of features. Experiments on both synthetic and real data corroborate our
theory.

1

Introduction

The remarkable performance of deep neural networks has sparked considerable interest in creating
ever-larger deep learning models, while the training process continues to be a critical bottleneck
affecting overall model performance. The training of large models is unstable and difficult due to the
sharpness, non-convexity, and non-smoothness of its loss landscape. In addition, as the number of
model parameters is much larger than the training sample size, the model has the ability to memorize
even randomly labeled data (Zhang et al., 2021), which leads to overfitting. Therefore, although
traditional gradient-based methods like gradient descent (GD) and stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
can achieve generalizable models under certain conditions, these methods may suffer from unstable
training and harmful overfitting in general.
To overcome the above challenge, Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) (Foret et al., 2020), an
innovative training paradigm, has exhibited significant improvement in model generalization and has
become widely adopted in many applications. In contrast to traditional gradient-based methods that
primarily focus on finding a point in the parameter space with a minimal gradient norm, SAM also
pursues a solution with reduced sharpness, characterized by how rapidly the loss function changes
locally. Despite the empirical success of SAM across numerous tasks (Bahri et al., 2021; Behdin
et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022a), the theoretical understanding of this method remains
limited.
Foret et al. (2020) provided a PAC-Bayes bound on the generalization error of SAM to show that it will
generalize well, while the bound only holds for the infeasible average-direction perturbation instead of
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

