Meta-learning families of plasticity rules in recurrent
spiking networks using simulation-based inference

Basile Confavreux*
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
basile.confavreux@gmail.com

Poornima Ramesh*
University of Tübingen, Germany
poornimaramesh1995@gmail.com

Pedro J. Gonçalves
University of Tübingen, Germany
VIB-Neuroelectronics Research Flanders (NERF), Belgium
imec, Belgium
Jakob H. Macke †
University of Tübingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems, Germany

Tim P. Vogels †
Institute of Science
and Technology Austria

Abstract
There is substantial experimental evidence that learning- and memory-related
behaviours rely on local synaptic changes, but the search for distinct plasticity rules
has been driven by human intuition, with limited success for multiple, co-active
plasticity rules in biological networks. More recently, automated meta-learning
approaches have been used in simplified settings, such as rate networks and small
feed-forward spiking networks. Here, we develop a simulation-based inference
(SBI) method for sequentially filtering plasticity rules through an increasingly fine
mesh of constraints that can be modified on-the-fly. This method, filter SBI, allows
us to infer entire families of complex and co-active plasticity rules in spiking
networks. We first consider flexibly parameterized doublet (Hebbian) rules, and
find that the set of inferred rules contains solutions that extend and refine—and also
reject—predictions from mean-field theory. Next, we expand the search space of
plasticity rules by modelling them as multi-layer perceptrons that combine several
plasticity-relevant factors, such as weight, voltage, triplets and co-dependency. Out
of the millions of possible rules, we identify thousands of unique rule combinations
that satisfy biological constraints like plausible activity and weight dynamics.
They can be used as a starting point for further investigations into specific network
computations, and already suggest refinements and predictions for classical
experimental approaches on plasticity. This flexible approach for principled
exploration of complex plasticity rules in large recurrent spiking networks presents
the most advanced search tool to date for enabling robust predictions and deep
insights into the plasticity mechanisms underlying brain function.

1

Introduction and related work

Synaptic plasticity has received continuous attention over the past decades [1–5]. Nevertheless,
how functions such as learning and memory emerge from local synaptic changes is still poorly
understood. Given the experimental inaccessibility of synapses in vivo, many studies have relied
*, †: equal contributions
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023)

