Cal-DETR: Calibrated Detection Transformer
Muhammad Akhtar Munir1,2 , Salman Khan1,3 , Muhammad Haris Khan1 ,
Mohsen Ali2 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,4
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, 2 Information Technology University,
3
Australian National University, 4 Linköping University

akhtar.munir@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Albeit revealing impressive predictive performance for several computer vision
tasks, deep neural networks (DNNs) are prone to making overconfident predictions.
This limits the adoption and wider utilization of DNNs in many safety-critical
applications. There have been recent efforts toward calibrating DNNs, however,
almost all of them focus on the classification task. Surprisingly, very little attention
has been devoted to calibrating modern DNN-based object detectors, especially
detection transformers, which have recently demonstrated promising detection performance and are influential in many decision-making systems. In this work, we address the problem by proposing a mechanism for calibrated detection transformers
(Cal-DETR), particularly for Deformable-DETR, UP-DETR and DINO. We pursue
the train-time calibration route and make the following contributions. First, we
propose a simple yet effective approach for quantifying uncertainty in transformerbased object detectors. Second, we develop an uncertainty-guided logit modulation
mechanism that leverages the uncertainty to modulate the class logits. Third, we
develop a logit mixing approach that acts as a regularizer with detection-specific
losses and is also complementary to the uncertainty-guided logit modulation technique to further improve the calibration performance. Lastly, we conduct extensive
experiments across three in-domain and four out-domain scenarios. Results corroborate the effectiveness of Cal-DETR against the competing train-time methods in
calibrating both in-domain and out-domain detections while maintaining or even
improving the detection performance. Our codebase and pre-trained models can be
accessed at https://github.com/akhtarvision/cal-detr.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have enabled notable advancements in computer vision, encompassing
tasks such as classification [29, 6, 44, 11], object detection [2, 53, 5, 38, 43, 51], and semantic
segmentation [47, 42, 3]. Due to their high predictive performance, DNNs are increasingly adopted
in many real-world applications. However, it has been shown that DNNs often make highly confident
predictions even when they are incorrect [10]. This misalignment between the predictive confidence
and the actual likelihood of correctness undermines trust in DNNs and can lead to irreversible harm
in safety-critical applications, such as medical diagnosis [7, 41], autonomous driving [9], and legal
decision-making [49].
Among others, an important factor behind the overconfident predictions of DNNs is the training
with zero-entropy target vectors, which do not encompass uncertainty information [12]. An early
class of methods aimed at reducing the model’s miscalibration proposes various post-hoc techniques
[10, 15, 16, 37, 21]. Typically, a single temperature scaling parameter is used to re-scale the logits of
a trained model which is learned using a held-out validation set. Despite being effective and simple,
they are architecture-dependent and require a held-out set which is unavailable in many real-world
scenarios [28]. Recently, we have seen an emergence of train-time calibration methods. They are
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

