Variational Annealing on Graphs for Combinatorial
Optimization

Sebastian Sanokowski1,2

Wilhelm Berghammer2

Sepp Hochreiter1,2

Sebastian Lehner1,2
1

2

ELLIS Unit Linz and LIT AI Lab
Institute for Machine Learning, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
sanokowski@ml.jku.at

Abstract
Several recent unsupervised learning methods use probabilistic approaches to solve
combinatorial optimization (CO) problems based on the assumption of statistically
independent solution variables. We demonstrate that this assumption imposes
performance limitations in particular on difficult problem instances. Our results
corroborate that an autoregressive approach which captures statistical dependencies among solution variables yields superior performance on many popular CO
problems. We introduce subgraph tokenization in which the configuration of a
set of solution variables is represented by a single token. This tokenization technique alleviates the drawback of the long sequential sampling procedure which is
inherent to autoregressive methods without sacrificing expressivity. Importantly,
we theoretically motivate an annealed entropy regularization and show empirically
that it is essential for efficient and stable learning. 1

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization (CO) problems are of central interest to a wide range of fields, including
operations research, physics, and computational complexity [Papadimitriou and Steiglitz, 1998].
Since CO problems are typically NP-hard one would not expect that one can find the solutions
to all arbitrarily large CO problem instances in polynomial time. However, these restrictions are
concerned with worst case scenarios over entire problem families. For instance finding the Minimum
Independent Set of any graph. Consequently, it is not surprising that a large body of work is focused
on the design of solution strategies that yield a particularly good performance on a restricted subset
of all possible instances. There is growing interest in exploring deep learning approaches to this
restricted CO setting [Bello et al., 2017]. These methods aim to learn how to efficiently generate high
quality solutions for CO problems and rely primarily on learned algorithmic components rather than
on problem-specific, hand-crafted ones [Bengio et al., 2021]. Importantly, practicable methods should
not rely on supervised training with solutions from other solvers since this limits the achievable
performance of the learned model to that of the solver used to generate the training data [Yehuda
et al., 2020]. As a result the development of unsupervised methods [Karalias and Loukas, 2020,
Wang et al., 2022, Qiu et al., 2022, Karalias et al., 2022, Min et al., 2022, Wang and Li, 2023] and of
Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods [Bello et al., 2017, Khalil et al., 2017, Kool et al., 2019, Ahn
et al., 2020, Böther et al., 2022, Mazyavkina et al., 2021] for CO is an active field of research. In this
work we are interested in training models that generate solutions at inference in contrast to approaches
1

Our code is available at: https://github.com/ml-jku/VAG-CO.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

