Score-based Data Assimilation
François Rozet
University of Liège
francois.rozet@uliege.be

Gilles Louppe
University of Liège
g.louppe@uliege.be

Abstract
Data assimilation, in its most comprehensive form, addresses the Bayesian inverse
problem of identifying plausible state trajectories that explain noisy or incomplete
observations of stochastic dynamical systems. Various approaches have been
proposed to solve this problem, including particle-based and variational methods.
However, most algorithms depend on the transition dynamics for inference, which
becomes intractable for long time horizons or for high-dimensional systems with
complex dynamics, such as oceans or atmospheres. In this work, we introduce
score-based data assimilation for trajectory inference. We learn a score-based
generative model of state trajectories based on the key insight that the score of
an arbitrarily long trajectory can be decomposed into a series of scores over short
segments. After training, inference is carried out using the score model, in a nonautoregressive manner by generating all states simultaneously. Quite distinctively,
we decouple the observation model from the training procedure and use it only at
inference to guide the generative process, which enables a wide range of zero-shot
observation scenarios. We present theoretical and empirical evidence supporting
the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Data assimilation (DA) [1–9] is at the core of many scientific domains concerned with the study of
complex dynamical systems such as atmospheres, oceans or climates. The purpose of DA is to infer
the state of a system evolving over time based on various sources of imperfect information, including
sparse, intermittent, and noisy observations.
Formally, let x1:L = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xL ) ∈ RL×D denote a trajectory of states in a discrete-time
stochastic dynamical system and p(xi+1 | xi ) be the transition dynamics from state xi to state xi+1 .
An observation y ∈ RM of the state trajectory x1:L follows an observation process p(y | x1:L ),
generally formulated as y = A(x1:L ) + η, where the measurement function A : RL×D 7→ RM is
often non-linear and the observational error η ∈ RM is a stochastic additive term that accounts for
instrumental noise and systematic uncertainties. In this framework, the goal of DA is to solve the
inverse problem of inferring plausible trajectories x1:L given an observation y, that is, to estimate the
trajectory posterior
L−1
Y
p(y | x1:L )
p(x1:L | y) =
p(x1 )
p(xi+1 | xi )
(1)
p(y)
i=1
where the initial state prior p(x1 ) is commonly referred to as background [5–9]. In geosciences,
the amount of data available is generally insufficient to recover the full state of the system from the
observation alone [8]. For this reason, the physical model underlying the transition dynamics is of
paramount importance to fill in spatial and temporal gaps in the observation.

State-of-the-art approaches to data assimilation are based on variational assimilation [1, 2, 5–7].
Many of these approaches formulate the task as a maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) estimation problem
and solve it by maximizing the log-posterior density log p(x1:L | y) via gradient ascent. Although this
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

