On quantum backpropagation, information reuse, and
cheating measurement collapse

Amira Abbas
Google Quantum AI, Venice, California 90291, USA
University of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa
QuSoft, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 123, 1098 XG Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Robbie King
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Caltech, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
Hsin-Yuan Huang
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Caltech, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
Institute for Quantum Information and Matter, Caltech, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
William J. Huggins
Google Quantum AI, Venice, California 90291, USA
Ramis Movassagh
Google Quantum AI, Venice, California 90291, USA
Dar Gilboa
Google Quantum AI, Venice, California 90291, USA
Jarrod R. McClean
Google Quantum AI, Venice, California 90291, USA
jmcclean@google.com

Abstract
The success of modern deep learning hinges on the ability to train neural networks
at scale. Through clever reuse of intermediate information, backpropagation
facilitates training through gradient computation at a total cost roughly proportional
to running the function, rather than incurring an additional factor proportional to
the number of parameters – which can now be in the trillions. Naively, one
expects that quantum measurement collapse entirely rules out the reuse of quantum
information as in backpropagation. But recent developments in shadow tomography,
which assumes access to multiple copies of a quantum state, have challenged that
notion. Here, we investigate whether parameterized quantum models can train as
efficiently as classical neural networks. We show that achieving backpropagation
scaling is impossible without access to multiple copies of a state. With this added
ability, we introduce an algorithm with foundations in shadow tomography that
matches backpropagation scaling in quantum resources while reducing classical
auxiliary computational costs to open problems in shadow tomography. These
results highlight the nuance of reusing quantum information for practical purposes
and clarify the unique difficulties in training large quantum models, which could
alter the course of quantum machine learning.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

