Inverse Preference Learning:
Preference-based RL without a Reward Function
Joey Hejna
Stanford University
jhejna@cs.stanford.edu

Dorsa Sadigh
Stanford University
dorsa@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Reward functions are difficult to design and often hard to align with human intent.
Preference-based Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms address these problems
by learning reward functions from human feedback. However, the majority of
preference-based RL methods naïvely combine supervised reward models with
off-the-shelf RL algorithms. Contemporary approaches have sought to improve
performance and query complexity by using larger and more complex reward
architectures such as transformers. Instead of using highly complex architectures,
we develop a new and parameter-efficient algorithm, Inverse Preference Learning
(IPL), specifically designed for learning from offline preference data. Our key
insight is that for a fixed policy, the 𝑄-function encodes all information about
the reward function, effectively making them interchangeable. Using this insight,
we completely eliminate the need for a learned reward function. Our resulting
algorithm is simpler and more parameter-efficient. Across a suite of continuous
control and robotics benchmarks, IPL attains competitive performance compared
to more complex approaches that leverage transformer-based and non-Markovian
reward functions while having fewer algorithmic hyperparameters and learned
network parameters. Our code is publicly released1 .

1 Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has shown marked success in fixed and narrow domains such as
simulated control [20] and game-playing [37]. When deploying RL in more complex settings, like in
robotics or interaction with humans, one often runs into a critical bottleneck: the reward function.
Obtaining reward labels in the real world can be complex, requiring difficult instrumentation [48, 57]
and painstaking tuning [56] to achieve reasonable levels of sample efficiency. Moreover, despite
extensive engineering, reward functions can still be exploited by algorithms in ways that do not align
with human values and intents [21], which can be detrimental in safety-critical applications [5].
Instead of hand-designing reward functions, contemporary works have attempted to learn them
through expert demonstrations [1], natural language [34], or human feedback [47, 3, 53]. Recently,
reward functions learned through pairwise comparison queries—where a user is asked which of two
demonstrated behaviors they prefer—have been shown to be effective in both control [13, 47, 32]
and natural language domains [51]. This is often referred to as Reinforcement Learning with Human
Feedback (RLHF). Reward functions learned via RLHF can directly capture human intent, while
avoiding alternative and more expensive forms of human feedback such as expert demonstrations.
Preference-based RL algorithms for RLHF often interleave reward-learning from comparisons with
off-the-shelf RL algorithms.
While preference-based RL methods discover reward functions that are aligned with human preferences, they are not without flaws. Learned reward functions must have adequate coverage of
1 https://github.com/jhejna/inverse-preference-learning

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

