AdaVAE: Bayesian Structural Adaptation for
Variational Autoencoders
Paribesh Regmi
Rui Li∗
Rochester Institute of Technology
{pr8537, rxlics}@rit.edu

Abstract
The neural network structures of generative models and their corresponding infenrence models paired in variational autoencoders (VAEs) play a critical role in the
models’ generative performance. However, powerful VAE network structures are
hand-crafted and fixed prior to training, resulting in a one-size-fits-all approach
that requires heavy computation to tune for given data. Moreover, existing VAE
regularization methods largely overlook the importance of network structures and
fail to prevent overfitting in deep VAE models with cascades of hidden layers. To
address these issues, we propose a Bayesian inference framework that automatically adapts VAE network structures to data and prevent overfitting as they grow
deeper. We model the number of hidden layers with a beta process to infer the
most plausible encoding/decoding network depths warranted by data and perform
layer-wise dropout regularization with a conjugate Bernoulli process. We develop
a scalable estimator that performs joint inference on both VAE network structures
and latent variables. Our experiments show that the inference framework effectively
prevents overfitting in both shallow and deep VAE models, yielding state-of-the-art
performance. We demonstrate that our framework is compatible with different
types of VAE backbone networks and can be applied to various VAE variants,
further improving their performance.

1

Introduction

The inference models and the generative models paired in variational autoencoders (VAEs) are commonly constructed with neural networks, i.e., encoding networks and decoding networks, respectively
[1, 2, 3]. Extensive research efforts show that well-designed encoding/decoding network structures
for VAE models can constantly achieve state-of-the-art generative performance compared to other
generative models [4, 5, 6]. However, powerful VAE network structures are hand-crafted and fixed
prior to training. The issue with fixed network structures is that shallow ones limit VAE models’
expressiveness, whereas overly deep networks are slow to use and prone to overfitting. Traditional
model selection by training different VAE network structures for given data is difficult since finding
optimal hyperparameters for each candidate structure is a daunting task, and training large VAE
structures requires significant computation. On the other hand, network structure adaptation methods
for discriminative model settings [7, 8, 9] cannot be straightforwardly applied to address the unique
challenge posed by VAE estimation along with the latent variables.
Although the network structures play a critical role in the performance of VAE models, they are largely
overlooked by current VAE regularization methods. This renders their failure to prevent overfitting
when the network structures grow deeper. Amortized inference regularization (AIR) proposes two
approaches: injecting random noise to the VAE objective for inference or directly restricting the
inference models to a set of smooth functions [10, 11]. Another approach in VAE regularization
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

