Certifiably Robust Graph Contrastive Learning

Minhua Lin, Teng Xiao, Enyan Dai, Xiang Zhang, Suhang Wang
The Pennsylvania State University
{mfl5681,tengxiao,emd5759,xzhang,szw494}@psu.edu

Abstract
Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) has emerged as a popular unsupervised graph
representation learning method. However, it has been shown that GCL is vulnerable
to adversarial attacks on both the graph structure and node attributes. Although
empirical approaches have been proposed to enhance the robustness of GCL, the
certifiable robustness of GCL is still remain unexplored. In this paper, we develop
the first certifiably robust framework in GCL. Specifically, we first propose a unified criteria to evaluate and certify the robustness of GCL. We then introduce a
novel technique, RES (Randomized Edgedrop Smoothing), to ensure certifiable
robustness for any GCL model, and this certified robustness can be provably preserved in downstream tasks. Furthermore, an effective training method is proposed
for robust GCL. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed method in providing effective certifiable robustness
and enhancing the robustness of any GCL model. The source code of RES is
available at https://github.com/ventr1c/RES-GCL.

1

Introduction

Graph structured data are ubiquitous in real-world applications such as social networks [1], finance
systems [2], and molecular graphs [3]. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a popular
approach to learn graph representations by adopting a message passing scheme [4, 5, 6], which
updates a node’s representation by aggregating information from its neighbors. Recently, graph
contrastive learning has gained popularity as an unsupervised approach to learn node or graph
representations [7, 8, 9]. The graph contrastive learning creates augmented views and minimizes
the distances among positive pairs while maximizing the distances among negative pairs in the
embedding space.
Despite the great success of GNNs, some existing works [10, 11, 12, 13] have shown that GNNs
are vulnerable to adversarial attacks where the attackers can deliberately manipulate the graph
structures and/or node features to degrade the model’s performance. The representations learned
by Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) are also susceptible to such attacks, which can lead to poor
performance in downstream tasks with a small amount of perturbations [14, 15, 16]. To defend
against graph adversarial attacks, several empirical-based works have been conducted in robust
GNNs for classification tasks [17, 18] and representation learning with contrastive learning [14, 15].
Nevertheless, with the advancement of new defense strategies, new attacks may be developed to
invalidate the defense methods [19, 20, 21, 22], leading to an endless arms race. Therefore, it
is important to develop a certifiably robust GNNs under contrastive learning, which can provide
certificates to nodes/graphs that are robust to potential perturbations in considered space. There are
several efforts in certifiable robustness of GNNs under supervised learning, which requires labels for
the certifiable robustness analysis [23, 24, 25, 26]. For instance, [23] firstly analyze the certifiable
robustness against the perturbation on node features. Some following works [24, 25, 26] further study
the certified robustness of GNN under graph topology attacks. However, the certifiable robustness of
GCL, which is in unsupervised setting, is still rarely explored.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

