Slimmed Asymmetrical Contrastive Learning and
Cross Distillation for Lightweight Model Training

Jian Meng∗, Li Yang†, Kyungmin Lee‡, Jinwoo Shin‡, Deliang Fan§, and Jae-sun Seo∗
∗
†
Cornell Tech, USA
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA
‡
KAIST, South Korea John Hopkins University, USA
{kyungmnlee, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr‡ lyang50@uncc.edu†
dfan10@jhu.edu§ {jm2787, js3528}@cornell.edu∗

Abstract
Contrastive learning (CL) has been widely investigated with various learning mechanisms and achieves strong capability in learning representations of data in a
self-supervised manner using unlabeled data. A common fashion of contrastive
learning on this line is employing large-sized encoders to achieve comparable
performance as the supervised learning counterpart. Despite the success of the
labelless training, current contrastive learning algorithms failed to achieve good
performance with lightweight (compact) models, e.g., MobileNet, while the requirements of the heavy encoders impede the energy-efficient computation, especially for resource-constrained AI applications. Motivated by this, we propose a
new self-supervised CL scheme, named SACL-XD, consisting of two technical
components, Slimmed Asymmetrical Contrastive Learning (SACL) and CrossDistillation (XD), which collectively enable efficient CL with compact models.
While relevant prior works employed a strong pre-trained model as the teacher
of unsupervised knowledge distillation to a lightweight encoder, our proposed
method trains CL models from scratch and outperforms them even without such
an expensive requirement. Compared to the SoTA lightweight CL training (distillation) algorithms, SACL-XD achieves 1.79% ImageNet-1K accuracy improvement on MobileNet-V3 with 64× training FLOPs reduction. Code is available at
https://github.com/mengjian0502/SACL-XD.

1

Introduction

To overcome the labeling bottleneck for supervised training of deep neural networks (DNNs), selfsupervised learning has been widely investigated to learn representations without intensive labeling.
In particular, contrastive learning (CL) has demonstrated its capability of representation learning in
various machine learning domains, e.g., image [7, 34], video [31], language [2], speech [11], and
medical imaging [30]. The success of CL is built upon different data augmentations from the original
(training) samples, and the representation is learned by maximizing the latent common knowledge
between contrastive embeddings [8, 7, 35], which are separately encoded from the augmented
images by DNN models [25]. Despite the various contrastive learning techniques, learning the latent
knowledge and representations requires wide and deep encoders. In particular, current SoTA CL
algorithms [3, 18] have to employ a large-sized encoder (e.g., ResNet-50) to achieve comparable
performance as the supervised learning counterpart.
On the other hand, training the lightweight models [23, 22, 29] from scratch is largely under-explored
in CL. Almost none of the prior works have reported the CL performance with directly-trained
lightweight models. In fact, the prior success of the lightweight models in supervised learning
cannot be smoothly transferred to CL. where the performance gap between the lightweight models
and large-sized models is largely amplified under recent CL methods [7, 19], For example, with
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

