A Novel Framework for Policy Mirror Descent with
General Parameterization and Linear Convergence

Carlo Alfano
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Rui Yuan
Stellantis, France∗

Patrick Rebeschini
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

rui.yuan@stellantis.com

carlo.alfano@stats.ox.ac.uk

patrick.rebeschini@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Modern policy optimization methods in reinforcement learning, such as TRPO
and PPO, owe their success to the use of parameterized policies. However, while
theoretical guarantees have been established for this class of algorithms, especially
in the tabular setting, the use of general parameterization schemes remains mostly
unjustified. In this work, we introduce a framework for policy optimization
based on mirror descent that naturally accommodates general parameterizations.
The policy class induced by our scheme recovers known classes, e.g., softmax,
and generates new ones depending on the choice of mirror map. Using our
framework, we obtain the first result that guarantees linear convergence for a
policy-gradient-based method involving general parameterization. To demonstrate
the ability of our framework to accommodate general parameterization schemes,
we provide its sample complexity when using shallow neural networks, show
that it represents an improvement upon the previous best results, and empirically
validate the effectiveness of our theoretical claims on classic control tasks.

1

Introduction

Policy optimization is one of the most widely-used classes of algorithms for reinforcement learning
(RL). Among policy optimization techniques, policy gradient (PG) methods [e.g., 92, 87, 49, 6]
are gradient-based algorithms that optimize the policy over a parameterized policy class and have
emerged as a popular class of algorithms for RL [e.g., 42, 75, 12, 69, 78, 80, 54].
The design of gradient-based policy updates has been key to achieving empirical success in many
settings, such as games [9] and autonomous driving [81]. In particular, a class of PG algorithms
that has proven successful in practice consists of building updates that include a hard constraint (e.g.,
a trust region constraint) or a penalty term ensuring that the updated policy does not move too far
from the previous one. Two examples of algorithms belonging to this category are trust region policy
optimization (TRPO) [78], which imposes a Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence [53] constraint on
its updates, and policy mirror descent (PMD) [e.g. 88, 54, 93, 51, 89], which applies mirror descent
(MD) [70] to RL. Shani et al. [82] propose a variant of TRPO that is actually a special case of PMD,
thus linking TRPO and PMD.
From a theoretical perspective, motivated by the empirical success of PMD, there is now a concerted
effort to develop convergence theories for PMD methods. For instance, it has been established
that PMD converges linearly to the global optimum in the tabular setting by using a geometrically
increasing step-size [54, 93], by adding entropy regularization [17], and more generally by adding
convex regularization [100]. Linear convergence of PMD has also been established for the negative
∗

The work was done when the author was affiliated with Télécom Paris.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

