GAIA: Delving into Gradient-based Attribution
Abnormality for Out-of-distribution Detection

Jinggang Chen†∗, Junjie Li†∗ , Xiaoyang Qu‡§, Jianzong Wang‡§, Jiguang Wan†, Jing Xiao‡
†
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
‡
Ping An Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd.
{chen.jinggang98, 2216217669ljj, quxiaoy}@gmail.com, jzwang@188.com,
jgwan@hust.edu.cn, xiaojing661@pingan.com.cn

Abstract
Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) examples is crucial to guarantee the reliability
and safety of deep neural networks in real-world settings. In this paper, we offer
an innovative perspective on quantifying the disparities between in-distribution
(ID) and OOD data—analyzing the uncertainty that arises when models attempt
to explain their predictive decisions. This perspective is motivated by our observation that gradient-based attribution methods encounter challenges in assigning
feature importance to OOD data, thereby yielding divergent explanation patterns.
Consequently, we investigate how attribution gradients lead to uncertain explanation outcomes and introduce two forms of abnormalities for OOD detection:
the zero-deflation abnormality and the channel-wise average abnormality. We
then propose GAIA, a simple and effective approach that incorporates Gradient
Abnormality Inspection and Aggregation. The effectiveness of GAIA is validated
on both commonly utilized (CIFAR) and large-scale (ImageNet-1K) benchmarks.
Specifically, GAIA reduces the average FPR95 by 23.10% on CIFAR10 and by
45.41% on CIFAR100 compared to advanced post-hoc methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have been extensively applied across various domains, demonstrating remarkable performance. However, when they are deployed in real-world scenarios, particularly in contexts
that require high levels of security [1–3], an urgent challenge arises. Namely, these models must
be able to ensure the reliability of their outcomes, even in the face of out-of-distribution (OOD)
inputs from the open world that differ from in-distribution (ID) training data and thus surpass their
cognitive capabilities. That underscores the importance of OOD detection, which involves estimating
uncertainty from the model to identify the "unknown" samples, serving as an alert mechanism before
making predictive decisions.
Recently, a rich line of literature has emerged to address the challenge of OOD detection [4–13].
Indeed, the majority of previous approaches focus on defining more suitable measures of OOD
uncertainty by using model outputs [4, 5, 7–9] or feature representations [11, 13–15]. Despite the
above mainstream approaches, estimating uncertainty from gradients is readily implemented with a
fixed model and has received increasing research attention lately. Prior gradient-based OOD detection
methods [10, 16, 17] have primarily emphasized utilizing parameter gradients as the measurement,
while giving limited attention to the in-depth exploration of gradients related to the inputs (i.e.,
attribution gradients [18]).
* Equal Contribution.
§

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

