A Heat Diffusion Perspective on Geodesic Preserving
Dimensionality Reduction

Guillaume Huguet1∗ Alexander Tong1∗ Edward De Brouwer2∗
Yanlei Zhang1 Guy Wolf1 Ian Adelstein2† Smita Krishnaswamy2†
1
Université de Montréal; Mila - Quebec AI Institute 2 Yale University

Abstract
Diffusion-based manifold learning methods have proven useful in representation
learning and dimensionality reduction of modern high dimensional, high throughput, noisy datasets. Such datasets are especially present in fields like biology and
physics. While it is thought that these methods preserve underlying manifold structure of data by learning a proxy for geodesic distances, no specific theoretical links
have been established. Here, we establish such a link via results in Riemannian
geometry explicitly connecting heat diffusion to manifold distances. In this process,
we also formulate a more general heat kernel based manifold embedding method
that we call heat geodesic embeddings. This novel perspective makes clearer the
choices available in manifold learning and denoising. Results show that our method
outperforms existing state-of-the-art in preserving ground truth manifold distances,
and preserving cluster structure in toy datasets. We also showcase our method on
single cell RNA-sequencing datasets with both continuum and cluster structure,
where our method enables interpolation of withheld timepoints of data. Finally, we
show that parameters of our more general method can be configured to give results
similar to PHATE (a state-of-the-art diffusion based manifold learning method) as
well as SNE (an attraction/repulsion neighborhood based method that forms the
basis of t-SNE).

1

Introduction

The advent of high throughput and high dimensional data in various fields of science have made
dimensionality reduction and visualization techniques an indispensable part of exploratory analysis.
Diffusion-based manifold learning methods, based on the data diffusion operator, first defined in
[5], have proven especially useful due to their ability to handle noise and density variations while
preserving structure. As a result, diffusion-based dimensionality reduction methods, such as PHATE
[22], T-PHATE [3], and diffusion maps [5], have emerged as methods for analyzing high throughput
noisy data in various situations. While these methods are surmised to learn manifold geodesic
distances, no specific theoretical links have been established. Here, we establish such a link by using
Varadhan’s formula [34] and a parabolic Harnack inequality [17, 25], which relate manifold distances
to heat diffusion directly. This lens gives new insight into existing dimensionality reduction methods,
including when they preserve geodesics, and suggests a new method for dimensionality reduction to
explicitly preserve geodesics, which we call heat geodesic embeddings3 . Furthermore, based on our
understanding of other methods [22, 5], we introduce theoretically justified parameter choices that
∗

Equal contribution
Co-senior authors
3
https://github.com/KrishnaswamyLab/HeatGeo

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

