To Repeat or Not To Repeat:
Insights from Scaling LLM under Token-Crisis

Fuzhao Xue1

Yao Fu2
1

Wangchunshu Zhou3 Zangwei Zheng1
National University of Singapore
2
University of Edinburgh
3
ETH Zurich

Yang You1†

Abstract
Recent research has highlighted the importance of dataset size in scaling language
models. However, large language models (LLMs) are notoriously token-hungry
during pre-training, and high-quality text data on the web is likely to be approaching
its scaling limit for LLMs. To further enhance LLMs, a straightforward approach is
to repeat the pre-training data for additional epochs. In this study, we empirically investigate three key aspects under this approach. First, we explore the consequences
of repeating pre-training data, revealing that the model is susceptible to overfitting,
leading to multi-epoch degradation. Second, we examine the key factors contributing to multi-epoch degradation, finding that significant factors include dataset size,
model parameters, and training objectives, while less influential factors consist of
dataset quality and model FLOPs. Finally, we explore whether widely used regularization can alleviate multi-epoch degradation. Most regularization techniques
do not yield significant improvements, except for dropout, which demonstrates
remarkable effectiveness but requires careful tuning when scaling up the model
size. Additionally, we discover that leveraging mixture-of-experts (MoE) enables
cost-effective and efficient hyper-parameter tuning for computationally intensive
dense LLMs with comparable trainable parameters, potentially impacting efficient
LLM development on a broader scale.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance on various NLP
tasks [14, 21], and have even become a part of our daily lives through applications such as ChatGPT
and Bard. This success has been largely attributed to scaling up transformer-based language models,
as evidenced by recent work [10, 20, 28]. In the early stages of transformer scaling, researchers
observed that larger models could achieve comparable performance with smaller models using fewer
training steps and less pre-training data [10], leading to early views that model size might be one of
the most critical factors in achieving better performance.
Dataset size is more important than we thought in LLM scaling. Recent work [8] found that
the pre-training dataset size plays a more significant role than previously thought and proposed
compute-optimal scaling (i.e., Chinchilla scaling law), where model size and training dataset size
should be scaled equally for optimal performance given a fixed computation budget. For instance, an
under-trained larger model like Gopher-280B [20] can be outperformed by a well-trained smaller
model like Chinchilla-70B if not enough data is used in larger model training. The intuition here is
that the decreased model size can be compensated by the increased size of data. The effectiveness
of the Chinchilla scaling law is further validated by the recent success of LLaMA-65B [31] and
PaLM-2 [1].
†

Correspondence to youy@comp.nus.edu.sg

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

