Polyhedron Attention Module: Learning
Adaptive-order Interactions

Tan Zhu
University of Connecticut
tan.zhu@uconn.edu

Fei Dou
University of Georgia
fei.dou@uga.edu

Jin Lu
University of Georgia
jin.lu@uga.edu

Xinyu Wang
University of Connecticut
xinyu.wang@uconn.edu

Jinbo Bi
University of Connecticut
jinbo.bi@uconn.edu

Abstract
Learning feature interactions can be the key for multivariate predictive modeling.
ReLU-activated neural networks create piecewise linear prediction models. Other
nonlinear activation functions lead to models with only high-order feature interactions, thus lacking of interpretability. Recent methods incorporate candidate
polynomial terms of fixed orders into deep learning, which is subject to the issue of
combinatorial explosion, or learn the orders that are difficult to adapt to different
regions of the feature space. We propose a Polyhedron Attention Module (PAM)
to create piecewise polynomial models where the input space is split into polyhedrons which define the different pieces and on each piece the hyperplanes that
define the polyhedron boundary multiply to form the interactive terms, resulting
in interactions of adaptive order to each piece. PAM is interpretable to identify
important interactions in predicting a target. Theoretic analysis shows that PAM
has stronger expression capability than ReLU-activated networks. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superior classification performance of PAM on
massive datasets of the click-through rate prediction and PAM can learn meaningful
interaction effects in a medical problem.

1

Introduction

Learning feature interactions provides insights into how predictors (features in x) interact to vary
a dependent variable y, and could significantly improve prediction performance in a wide range of
research areas, such as recommendation systems [1, 2, 3, 4], genetic analysis [5, 6] and neuroscience
[7, 8], and help explain the decision-making of a complex model.
Interactions among features can significantly improve the model’s expression capability. For a simple
example, by incorporating the two-way interaction effect between gender (0/1: female and male) and
age into the linear regression model height ∼ w1 · gender + w2 · age + w3 · gender × age + w0
(where w0 , w1 , w2 , w3 are trainable parameters), the effects of female’s age on the heights will be
different from that of male (w2 v.s. w2 + w3 ). A predictive model f (x) has a k-way interaction effect
if it satisfies [9]:
Definition 1 (k-way interaction effect) Let x be the input of a function f (x) : Rp → R, and xi be
the ith feature of x. Let I ⊆ {1, 2, ..., p} be a set of feature indices and k (k > 2) be the cardinality
of I. If
|I|
2
Ex [ ∂xi ∂∂xif (x)
(1)
...∂xi ] > 0,
1

2

k

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

