Assumption violations in causal discovery and the
robustness of score matching

Francesco Montagna
MaLGa, Università di Genova

Atalanti A. Mastakouri
AWS

Elias Eulig
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
Lorenzo Rosasco
MaLGa, Università di Genova
MIT, CBMM
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia

Nicoletta Noceti
MaLGa, Università di Genova

Dominik Janzing
AWS

Bryon Aragam
University of Chicago

Francesco Locatello
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)

Abstract
When domain knowledge is limited and experimentation is restricted by ethical,
financial, or time constraints, practitioners turn to observational causal discovery
methods to recover the causal structure, exploiting the statistical properties of their
data. Because causal discovery without further assumptions is an ill-posed problem,
each algorithm comes with its own set of usually untestable assumptions, some
of which are hard to meet in real datasets. Motivated by these considerations, this
paper extensively benchmarks the empirical performance of recent causal discovery
methods on observational iid data generated under different background conditions,
allowing for violations of the critical assumptions required by each selected approach. Our experimental findings show that score matching-based methods demonstrate surprising performance in the false positive and false negative rate of the
inferred graph in these challenging scenarios, and we provide theoretical insights
into their performance. This work is also the first effort to benchmark the stability of
causal discovery algorithms with respect to the values of their hyperparameters. Finally, we hope this paper will set a new standard for the evaluation of causal discovery methods and can serve as an accessible entry point for practitioners interested
in the field, highlighting the empirical implications of different algorithm choices.

1

Introduction

The ability to infer causal relationships from observational data, instead of simple statistical associations, is crucial to answer interventional and counterfactual queries without direct manipulation
of a system [1, 2, 3, 4]. The challenge of drawing causal conclusions from pure observations lies
in the modeling assumptions on the data, which are often impossible to verify. Methods based on
conditional independence testing (e.g. PC, FCI and their variations [4, 5, 6]) require faithfulness of
the distribution [1, 2, 4, 7] to the causal graph, which formalizes the intuition that causal relations
manifest themselves in the form of statistical dependencies among the variables. The assumption
of causal sufficiency (i.e. the absence of unobserved confounders [8]) is a common requirement for
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

