Survival Permanental Processes for
Survival Analysis with Time-Varying Covariates

Hideaki Kim
NTT Human Informatics Laboratories
NTT Corporation
hideaki.kin@ntt.com

Abstract
Survival or time-to-event data with time-varying covariates are common in practice, and exploring the non-stationarity in covariates is essential to accurately analyzing the nonlinear dependence of time-to-event outcomes on covariates. Traditional survival analysis methods such as Cox proportional hazards model have
been extended to address the time-varying covariates through a counting process
formulation, although sophisticated machine learning methods that can accommodate time-varying covariates have been limited. In this paper, we propose a
non-parametric Bayesian survival model to analyze the nonlinear dependence of
time-to-event outcomes on time-varying covariates. We focus on a computationally feasible Cox process called permanental process, which assumes the square
root of hazard function to be generated from a Gaussian process, and tailor it for
survival data with time-varying covariates. We verify that the proposed model
holds with the representer theorem, a beneﬁcial property for functional analysis,
which offers us a fast Bayesian estimation algorithm that scales linearly with the
number of observed events without relying on Markov Chain Monte Carlo computation. We evaluate our algorithm on synthetic and real-world data, and show
that it achieves comparable predictive accuracy while being tens to hundreds of
times faster than state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Survival or time-to-event data analysis has been widely applied for analyzing the dependence of
survival time, the time until an event occurs, on covariates. They have a wide ranging list of applications in reliability engineering [27], ﬁnance [14], marketing [20], and especially, clinical research
[4, 5, 28].
An essential part of the survival data analysis is to estimate a hazard function, that is, the instantaneous probability of events occurring at any particular time, as a regression function of covariates.
Given a hazard function, we can evaluate the impact of covariates on survival times, and assess the
degree of risk of experiencing an event in the future, through the survival function, i.e., the probability of no events occurring during a speciﬁed interval. The literature contains a vast number of
studies that have proposed survival models to estimate hazard functions, most of which assume that
covariates are time-invariant (e.g., gender and age at the time of diagnosis in clinical research): they
range from the classical Cox proportional hazards model [5] to modern machine learning models
based on generalized boosting machines [38] , random forests [17], Gaussian processes [11, 25],
and deep neural networks [10, 22, 49]. However, time-varying covariates are common in survival
data, and the rapid advances in data collection allow us to access long-term and high temporal resolution covariate data. This is encouraging researchers to explore the non-stationarity in covariates
for the accurate estimation/prediction of time-to-event outcomes. An important application of sur37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

