Front-door Adjustment Beyond Markov Equivalence
with Limited Graph Knowledge

Abhin Shah
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
abhin@mit.edu

Karthikeyan Shanmugam
Google Research
karthikeyanvs@google.com

Murat Kocaoglu
Purdue University
mkocaoglu@purdue.edu

Abstract
Causal effect estimation from data typically requires assumptions about the
cause-effect relations either explicitly in the form of a causal graph structure
within the Pearlian framework, or implicitly in terms of (conditional) independence
statements between counterfactual variables within the potential outcomes
framework. When the treatment variable and the outcome variable are confounded,
front-door adjustment is an important special case where, given the graph, causal
effect of the treatment on the target can be estimated using post-treatment variables.
However, the exact formula for front-door adjustment depends on the structure
of the graph, which is difficult to learn in practice. In this work, we provide
testable conditional independence statements to compute the causal effect using
front-door-like adjustment without knowing the graph under limited structural side
information. We show that our method is applicable in scenarios where knowing
the Markov equivalence class is not sufficient for causal effect estimation. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on a class of random graphs as well as
real causal fairness benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Causal effect estimation is at the center of numerous scientific, societal, and medical questions [Nabi
et al., 2019, Castro et al., 2020]. The do(·) operator of Pearl represents the effect of an experiment
on a causal system. For example, the probability distribution of a target variable y after setting a
treatment t to t is represented by P(y |do(t = t)) and is known as an interventional distribution.
Learning this distribution for any realization t = t1 is what causal effect estimation entails. This
distribution is different from the conditional distribution P(y |t = t) as there may be unobserved
confounders between treatment and outcome that cannot be controlled for.
A causal graph, often depicted as a directed acyclic graph, captures the cause-and-effect relationships
between variables and explains the causal system under consideration. A semi-Markovian causal
model represents a causal model that includes unobserved variables influencing multiple observed
variables [Verma and Pearl, 1990, Acharya et al., 2018]. In a semi-Markovian graph, directed edges
between observed variables represent causal relationships, while bi-directed edges between observed
variables represent unobserved common confounding (see Figure 1). Given any semi-Markovian
1

Depending on the context, causal effect estimation sometimes refers to the estimating the difference of
assigning t = 1 vs. t = 0 on the target variable y , e.g., E[y |do(t = 1)] − E[y |do(t = 0)]. This quantity is
computable if we can identify P(y |do(t = t)) for t = {0, 1}.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

