Synthetic-to-Real Pose Estimation
with Geometric Reconstruction
Qiuxia Lin1
Kerui Gu1
Linlin Yang2,3
Angela Yao1
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
2
State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication, CUC
3
School of Information and Communication Engineering, CUC
{qiuxia, keruigu, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Pose estimation is remarkably successful under supervised learning, but obtaining
annotations, especially for new deployments, is costly and time-consuming. This
work tackles adapting models trained on synthetic data to real-world target domains with only unlabelled data. A common approach is model ﬁne-tuning with
pseudo-labels from the target domain; yet many pseudo-labelling strategies cannot
provide sufﬁcient high-quality pose labels. This work proposes a reconstructionbased strategy as a complement to pseudo-labelling for synthetic-to-real domain
adaptation. We generate the driving image by geometrically transforming a base
image according to the predicted keypoints and enforce a reconstruction loss to
reﬁne the predictions. It provides a novel solution to effectively correct conﬁdent
yet inaccurate keypoint locations through image reconstruction in domain adaptation. Our approach outperforms the previous state-of-the-arts by 8% for PCK
on four large-scale hand and human real-world datasets. In particular, we excel
on endpoints such as ﬁngertips and head, with 7.2% and 29.9% improvements in
PCK.

1

Introduction

Training deep models for human pose estimation, be it of the full body [30, 29, 2] or hands [37, 42],
requires large-scale labelled datasets. Synthetic data [43, 31] has become more favoured due to the
ease of generation and the challenges of accurately annotating real-world data. Despite advancements in realistic rendering [23, 5], models trained on synthetic data do not generalize well to realworld settings. The gap arises due to variations in pose, appearance, lighting, and other low-level
differences between the two data domains. This paper aims to close this gap and targets learning
from labelled synthetic and unlabelled real-world data for application to real-world settings.
Domain adaptation studies the transfer of models from synthetic to real data. Recent works on
domain adaptive pose estimation [17, 36, 15] learn from target pseudo-labels. However, the gains
from pseudo-labelling can be limited. There is an inherent contradiction – only labels which are sufﬁciently accurate beneﬁt the learning, and it is important to ensure label quality through selection [15]
and or correction schemes [36, 18]. Yet the ability to obtain high-quality pseudo-labels implies that
the model is sufﬁciently capable of estimating the poses of said samples. The cross-domain setting
makes it difﬁcult to obtain high-quality labels. The challenge is compounded by additional gaps like
different subjects’ anatomical sizings, different annotation standards across datasets, etc.
Instead of estimating labels for the given target data, what if we try to reconstruct the data itself?
This latter strategy is often used in self-supervised pose estimation, where learning is guided by
reconstruction losses [33, 11, 34]. The challenge lies in linking the reconstruction scheme back to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

