A Theory of Link Prediction via
Relational Weisfeiler-Leman on Knowledge Graphs

Xingyue Huang
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK.
xingyue.huang@cs.ox.ac.uk

Miguel Romero
Department of Computer Science
Universidad Católica de Chile
& CENIA Chile
mgromero@uc.cl

İsmail İlkan Ceylan
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK.
ismail.ceylan@cs.ox.ac.uk

Pablo Barceló
Inst. for Math. and Comp. Eng.
Universidad Católica de Chile
& IMFD Chile & CENIA Chile
pbarcelo@uc.cl

Abstract
Graph neural networks are prominent models for representation learning over
graph-structured data. While the capabilities and limitations of these models are
well-understood for simple graphs, our understanding remains incomplete in the
context of knowledge graphs. Our goal is to provide a systematic understanding
of the landscape of graph neural networks for knowledge graphs pertaining to
the prominent task of link prediction. Our analysis entails a unifying perspective on seemingly unrelated models and unlocks a series of other models. The
expressive power of various models is characterized via a corresponding relational
Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm. This analysis is extended to provide a precise logical
characterization of the class of functions captured by a class of graph neural networks. The theoretical findings presented in this paper explain the benefits of some
widely employed practical design choices, which are validated empirically.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) [27, 12] are prominent models for representation learning over graphstructured data, where the idea is to iteratively compute vector representations of nodes of an input
graph through a series of invariant (resp., equivariant) transformations. While the landscape of GNNs
is overwhelmingly rich, the vast majority of such models are instances of message passing neural
networks [11] which are well-studied, leading to a theoretical understanding of their capabilities
and limitations [34, 21]. In turn, our understanding is rather limited for GNN models dedicated to
learning over knowledge graphs, which are applied in a wide range of domains.
To make our context precise, we first consider an extension of message passing neural networks with
relation-specific message functions, which we call relational message passing neural networks. Two
prominent examples of this framework are RGCN [28] and CompGCN [32], and their expressive
power has recently been characterized through a dedicated relational Weisfeiler-Leman test [4].
While offering principled means for learning over knowledge graphs, the standard relational message
passing framework is tailored for computing unary node representations and therefore models of this
class are better suited for node-level tasks (e.g., node/entity classification). Actually, it is well-known
that even a good node-level representation might not necessarily induce a good edge representation,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

