The Crucial Role of Normalization in
Sharpness-Aware Minimization

Yan Dai ∗
IIIS, Tsinghua University
yan-dai20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Kwangjun Ahn ∗
EECS, MIT
kjahn@mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
TU Munich / MIT
suvrit@mit.edu

Abstract
Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) is a recently proposed gradient-based optimizer (Foret et al., ICLR 2021) that greatly improves the prediction performance of
deep neural networks. Consequently, there has been a surge of interest in explaining
its empirical success. We focus, in particular, on understanding the role played by
normalization, a key component of the SAM updates. We theoretically and empirically study the effect of normalization in SAM for both convex and non-convex
functions, revealing two key roles played by normalization: i) it helps in stabilizing
the algorithm; and ii) it enables the algorithm to drift along a continuum (manifold)
of minima – a property identified by recent theoretical works that is the key to better
performance. We further argue that these two properties of normalization make
SAM robust against the choice of hyper-parameters, supporting the practicality of
SAM. Our conclusions are backed by various experiments.

1

Introduction

We study the recently proposed gradient-based optimization algorithm Sharpness-Aware Minimization
(SAM) (Foret et al., 2021) that has shown impressive performance in training deep neural networks to
generalize well (Foret et al., 2021; Bahri et al., 2022; Mi et al., 2022; Zhong et al., 2022). SAM updates
involve an ostensibly small but key modification to Gradient Descent (GD). Specifically, for a loss
function L and each iteration t ≥ 0, instead of updating the parameter wt as wt+1 = wt − η∇L(wt )
(where η is called the learning rate), SAM performs the following update:1


∇L(wt )
wt+1 = wt − η∇L wt + ρ
,
(1)
∥∇L(wt )∥
where ρ is an additional hyper-parameter that we call the perturbation radius. Foret et al. (2021)
motivate SAM as an algorithm minimizing the robust loss max∥ϵ∥≤ρ L(w + ϵ), which is roughly the
loss at w (i.e., L(w)) plus the “sharpness” of the loss landscape around w, hence its name.
The empirical success of SAM has driven a recent surge of interest in characterizing its dynamics and
theoretical properties (Bartlett et al., 2022; Wen et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2023d). However, a major
component of SAM remains unexplained in prior work: the role and impact of the normalization
1
factor ∥∇L(w
used by SAM. In fact, quite a few recent works drop the normalization factor for
t )∥
simplicity when analyzing SAM (Andriushchenko and Flammarion, 2022; Behdin and Mazumder,
2023; Agarwala and Dauphin, 2023; Kim et al., 2023; Compagnoni et al., 2023). Instead of the SAM
update (1), these works consider the following update that we call Un-normalized SAM (USAM):
wt+1 = wt − η∇L(wt + ρ∇L(wt )) .
(2)
∗

The first two authors contribute equally. Work done while Yan Dai was visiting MIT.
In principle, the normalization in Equation 1 may make SAM ill-defined. However, Wen et al. (2023,
Appendix B) showed that except for countably many learning rates, SAM (with any ρ) is always well-defined for
almost all initialization. Hence, throughout the paper, we assume that the SAM iterates are always well-defined.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

