Finite-Time Analysis of Whittle Index based
Q-Learning for Restless Multi-Armed Bandits with
Neural Network Function Approximation

Guojun Xiong, Jian Li
Stony Brook University
{guojun.xiong,jian.li.3}@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Whittle index policy is a heuristic to the intractable restless multi-armed bandits
(RMAB) problem. Although it is provably asymptotically optimal, finding Whittle
indices remains difficult. In this paper, we present Neural-Q-Whittle, a Whittle
index based Q-learning algorithm for RMAB with neural network function approximation, which is an example of nonlinear two-timescale stochastic approximation
with Q-function values updated on a faster timescale and Whittle indices on a slower
timescale. Despite the empirical success of deep Q-learning, the non-asymptotic
convergence rate of Neural-Q-Whittle, which couples neural networks with
two-timescale Q-learning largely remains unclear. This paper provides a finite-time
analysis of Neural-Q-Whittle, where data are generated from a Markov chain,
and Q-function is approximated by a ReLU neural network. Our analysis leverages
a Lyapunov drift approach to capture the evolution of two coupled parameters,
and the nonlinearity in value function approximation further requires us to characterize the approximation error. Combing these provide Neural-Q-Whittle with
O(1/k 2/3 ) convergence rate, where k is the number of iterations.

1

Introduction

We consider the restless multi-armed bandits (RMAB) problem [56], where the decision maker
(DM) repeatedly activates K out of N arms at each decision epoch. Each arm is described by a
Markov decision process (MDP) [45], and evolves stochastically according to two different transition
kernels, depending on whether the arm is activated or not. Rewards are generated with each transition.
Although RMAB has been widely used to study constrained sequential decision making problems
[5, 38, 12, 64, 29, 36, 35, 25], it is notoriously intractable due to the explosion of state space [44]. A
celebrated heuristic is the Whittle index policy [56], which computes the Whittle index for each arm
given its current state as the cost to pull the arm. Whittle index policy then activates the K highest
indexed arms at each decision epoch, and is provably asymptotically optimal [54].
However, the computation of Whittle index requires full knowledge of the underlying MDP associated
with each arm, which is often unavailable in practice. To this end, many recent efforts have focused
on learning Whittle indices for making decisions in an online manner. First, model-free reinforcement
learning (RL) solutions have been proposed [10, 23, 53, 8, 28, 57, 59, 61, 58, 3], among which
[3] developed a Whittle index based Q-learning algorithm, which we call Q-Whittle for ease of
exposition, and provided the first-ever rigorous asymptotic analysis. However, Q-Whittle suffers
from slow convergence since it only updates the Whittle index of a specific state when that state
is visited. In addition, Q-Whittle needs to store the Q-function values for all state-action pairs,
which limits its applicability only to problems with small state space. Second, deep RL methods
have been leveraged to predict Whittle indices via training neural networks [40, 41]. Though
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

