Tanh Works Better With Asymmetry

Dongjin Kim1,3 Woojeong Kim2 Suhyun Kim3∗
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
2
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
3
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
{npclinic3, kwj962004, dr.suhyun.kim}@gmail.com

Abstract
Batch Normalization is commonly located in front of activation functions, as proposed by the original paper. Swapping the order, i.e., using Batch Normalization
after activation functions, has also been attempted, but its performance is generally
not much different from the conventional order when ReLU or a similar activation
function is used. However, in the case of bounded activation functions like Tanh,
we discovered that the swapped order achieves considerably better performance
than the conventional order on various benchmarks and architectures. This paper
reports this remarkable phenomenon and closely examines what contributes to this
performance improvement. By looking at the output distributions of individual
activation functions, not the whole layers, we found that many of them are asymmetrically saturated. The experiments designed to induce a different degree of
asymmetric saturation support the hypothesis that asymmetric saturation helps
improve performance. In addition, Batch Normalization after bounded activation
functions relocates the asymmetrically saturated output of activation functions
near zero, enabling the swapped model to have high sparsity, further improving
performance. Extensive experiments with Tanh, LeCun Tanh, and Softsign show
that the swapped models achieve improved performance with a high degree of
asymmetric saturation. Finally, based on this investigation, we test a Tanh function
shifted to be asymmetric. This shifted Tanh function that is manipulated to have
consistent asymmetry shows even higher accuracy than the original Tanh used in
the swapped order, confirming the asymmetry’s importance. The code is available
at https://github.com/hipros/tanh_works_better_with_asymmetry.

1

Introduction

Batch Normalization (BN) is a widely used technique in deep learning. It was proposed to address
the internal covariate shift problem by maintaining a stable output distribution among layers. As the
characteristics of the output distribution of the weighted summation operation tend to be symmetric,
non-sparse, and Gaussian [10], Ioffe & Szegedy [11] placed the BN between the weight and activation
function. Thus, the “weight-BN-activation” order, which we call “Convention” in this paper, has
been widely used to construct a block in many architectures [18, 8]. “Swap” models, swapping the
order of BN and the activation function in a block, have also been attempted, but no significant and
consistent difference between the two orders has been observed in the case of ReLU or similarly
shaped activation functions. For instance, Hasani & Khotanlou [6] evaluated the effect of the position
of BN in terms of training speed and concluded that there is no clear winner and the result depends
on the datasets and architecture types.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

