A Unified Detection Framework for Inference-Stage
Backdoor Defenses
Ganghua Wang
School of Statistics
University of Minnesota
wang9019@umn.edu

Xun Xian
Department of ECE
University of Minnesota
xian0044@umn.edu
Jayanth Srinivasa
Cisco Research
jasriniv@cisco.com

Ashish Kundu
Cisco Research
ashkundu@cisco.com

Mingyi Hong
Department of ECE
University of Minnesota
mhong@umn.edu

Xuan Bi
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
xbi@umn.edu
Jie Ding
School of Statistics
University of Minnesota
dingj@umn.edu

Abstract
Backdoor attacks involve inserting poisoned samples during training, resulting in
a model containing a hidden backdoor that can trigger specific behaviors without
impacting performance on normal samples. These attacks are challenging to detect,
as the backdoored model appears normal until activated by the backdoor trigger,
rendering them particularly stealthy. In this study, we devise a unified inferencestage detection framework to defend against backdoor attacks. We first rigorously
formulate the inference-stage backdoor detection problem, encompassing various
existing methods, and discuss several challenges and limitations. We then propose
a framework with provable guarantees on the false positive rate or the probability
of misclassifying a clean sample. Further, we derive the most powerful detection
rule to maximize the detection power, namely the rate of accurately identifying
a backdoor sample, given a false positive rate under classical learning scenarios.
Based on the theoretically optimal detection rule, we suggest a practical and
effective approach for real-world applications based on the latent representations
of backdoored deep nets. We extensively evaluate our method on 14 different
backdoor attacks using Computer Vision (CV) and Natural Language Processing
(NLP) benchmark datasets. The experimental findings align with our theoretical
results. We significantly surpass the state-of-the-art methods, e.g., up to 300%
improvement on the detection power as evaluated by AUCROC, over the state-ofthe-art defense against advanced adaptive backdoor attacks.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made remarkable advancements in various domains, thanks to
their exceptional learning capabilities [1, 2]. However, these same learning capabilities that make
DNNs so powerful have unfortunately rendered them vulnerable to a growing critical threat known
as the backdoor attack [3–19]. In a typical backdoor attack, the attacker manipulates a small part
of the training dataset by inserting specific triggers, such as pixel patches in images [3] or random
word combinations in texts [16]. These manipulated samples are labeled with a specific target
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

