Learning Interpretable Low-dimensional
Representation via Physical Symmetry

Xuanjie Liu1,2

Daniel Chin1,2

Yichen Huang1

Gus Xia1,2

1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
2
New York University Shanghai
{Xuanjie.Liu, Nanfeng.Qin, Yichen.Huang, Gus.Xia}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
We have recently seen great progress in learning interpretable music representations,
ranging from basic factors, such as pitch and timbre, to high-level concepts, such
as chord and texture. However, most methods rely heavily on music domain
knowledge. It remains an open question what general computational principles
give rise to interpretable representations, especially low-dim factors that agree with
human perception. In this study, we take inspiration from modern physics and use
physical symmetry as a self-consistency constraint for the latent space of time-series
data. Specifically, it requires the prior model that characterises the dynamics of the
latent states to be equivariant with respect to certain group transformations. We
show that physical symmetry leads the model to learn a linear pitch factor from
unlabelled monophonic music audio in a self-supervised fashion. In addition, the
same methodology can be applied to computer vision, learning a 3D Cartesian
space from videos of a simple moving object without labels. Furthermore, physical
symmetry naturally leads to counterfactual representation augmentation, a new
technique which improves sample efficiency.

1

Introduction

Interpretable representation-learning models have achieved great progress for various types of timeseries data. Taking the music domain as an example, tailored models [Ji et al., 2020] have been
developed to learn pitch, timbre, melody contour, chord progression, texture, etc. from music audio.
These human-interpretable representations have greatly improved the performance of generative
algorithms in various music creation tasks, including inpainting [Wei et al., 2022], harmonization [Yi
et al., 2022], (re-)arrangement, and performance rendering [Jeong et al., 2019].
However, most representation learning models still rely heavily on domain-specific knowledge. For
example, to use pitch scales or instrument labels for learning pitch and timbre representations [Luo
et al., 2020, 2019; Engel et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2021; Esling et al., 2018] and to use chords and
rhythm labels for learning higher-level representations [Akama, 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Wang et
al., 2020; Wei and Xia, 2021]. Such an approach is presumably very different from human learning;
even without formal music training, we see that many people can learn pitch, a fundamental music
concept, simply from the experience of listening to music. Hence, it remains an open question how to
learn interpretable pitch factor using inductive biases that are more general. In other words, what
general computational principle gives rise to the concept of pitch.
We see a similar issue in other domains. For instance, various computer-vision models [McCarthy
and Ahmed, 2020; Trevithick and Yang, 2021; Mescheder et al., 2019; Riegler et al., 2017] can learn
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

