A LGO: Synthesizing Algorithmic Programs
with LLM-Generated Oracle Verifiers
Kexun Zhang1 Danqing Wang1 Jingtao Xia1 William Yang Wang1 Lei Li2
1
University of California Santa Barbara 2 Carnegie Mellon University
{kexun,danqingwang,jingtaoxia,william}@ucsb.edu leili@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) excel at implementing code from functionality
descriptions but struggle with algorithmic problems that require not only implementation but also identification of the suitable algorithm. Moreover, LLM-generated
programs lack guaranteed correctness and require human verification. To address
these challenges, we propose A LGO, a framework that synthesizes Algorithmic
programs with LLM-Generated Oracles to guide the generation and verify their
correctness. A LGO first generates a reference oracle by prompting an LLM to
exhaustively enumerate all the combinations of relevant variables. This oracle is
then utilized to guide an arbitrary search strategy in exploring the algorithm space
and to verify the synthesized algorithms. Our study shows that the LLM-generated
oracles are correct for 88% of the cases. With the oracles as verifiers, A LGO can
be integrated with any existing code generation model in a model-agnostic manner
to enhance its performance. Experiments show that when equipped with A LGO,
we achieve an 8× better one-submission pass rate over the Codex model and a
2.6× better one-submission pass rate over CodeT, the current state-of-the-art model
on CodeContests. We can also get 1.3× better pass rate over the ChatGPT Code
Interpreter on unseen problems. The problem set we used for testing, the prompts
we used, the verifier and solution programs, and the test cases generated by A LGO
are available at https://github.com/zkx06111/ALGO.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant prowess in generating code from
natural language descriptions. Models such as Codex [5] and CodeGen [23] can easily achieve over
30% pass@1 accuracy on HumanEval, a docstring-to-code dataset. However, these models struggle
when faced with algorithmic problems akin to those encountered in CodeContests [17]. Even with
reasonable sample limits, achieving a 10% accuracy rate remains a considerable challenge [4]. More
recently, the GPT-4 model, despite being provided with problem descriptions and solution hints,
managed a pass@1 accuracy of only 10.6% [3] on LeetCode Hard problems.
The verifiability of LLM-based code generation presents another significant challenge. Without
verifiability, code generation systems can hardly earn trust for production use. Users of GitHub
Copilot [21], an AI assistant for programmers, reportedly spend over 20% of their time verifying
the suggested code snippets. Existing approaches toward verification and reranking LLM-generated
programs either rely on neural models to predict confidence scores [22, 32] or require LLM-generated
test cases to execute the programs [4, 15]. However, neural verifiers do not provide interpretable
feedbacks and LLM-generated test cases are often incorrect.
Traditional code synthesis techniques rely on oracles for the verification of the synthesized code.
These oracles are typically derived from formal specifications [20, 25, 28, 29]. They can also
be employed in program synthesis under the widely-used framework of oracle-guided inductive
synthesis (OGIS) [14]. Despite their widespread application in code verification and synthesis, the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

