To Stay or Not to Stay in the Pre-train Basin:
Insights on Ensembling in Transfer Learning

Ildus Sadrtdinov1∗, Dmitrii Pozdeev1,2∗, Dmitry Vetrov3 , Ekaterina Lobacheva4
1
HSE University 2 Technical University of Munich (TUM)
3
Constructor University, Bremen 4 Independent researcher
isadrtdinov@hse.ru, dmitrii.pozdeev@tum.de
dvetrov@constructor.university, lobacheva.tjulja@gmail.com

Abstract
Transfer learning and ensembling are two popular techniques for improving the
performance and robustness of neural networks. Due to the high cost of pre-training,
ensembles of models fine-tuned from a single pre-trained checkpoint are often used
in practice. Such models end up in the same basin of the loss landscape, which
we call the pre-train basin, and thus have limited diversity. In this work, we show
that ensembles trained from a single pre-trained checkpoint may be improved by
better exploring the pre-train basin, however, leaving the basin results in losing
the benefits of transfer learning and in degradation of the ensemble quality. Based
on the analysis of existing exploration methods, we propose a more effective
modification of the Snapshot Ensembles (SSE) for transfer learning setup, StarSSE,
which results in stronger ensembles and uniform model soups.

1

Introduction

Ensembling neural networks by averaging their predictions is one of the standard ways to improve model quality. This technique is known to improve not only the task-specific quality metric,
e. g., accuracy, but also the model calibration (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017) and robustness to
noise (Gustafsson et al., 2020), domain shift (Ovadia et al., 2019), and adversarial attacks (Strauss
et al., 2017). In practice, the importance of the solution robustness often goes hand in hand with the
scarcity of data and computational resources for training. A popular way to obtain a high-quality
solution for a task with limited data using less computation is transfer learning, which initializes the
training process on the target task with the model checkpoint pre-trained on a large source task.
In this paper, we investigate the effectiveness of neural network ensembling methods in transfer
learning setup since combining the two techniques is a non-trivial problem. The diversity of networks
is crucial for obtaining substantial quality gain with ensembling. Therefore, in classic deep ensembles
(DE by Lakshminarayanan et al. (2017)), networks are trained independently from different random
initializations. However, in the transfer learning setup, networks are not trained from scratch but
are fine-tuned from pre-trained checkpoints. Fine-tuning networks from different independently pretrained checkpoints results in a diverse set of models and a high-quality final ensemble but requires a
huge amount of computation due to the large cost of the pre-training process. Fine-tuning networks
from the same pre-trained checkpoint is much more resource-effective; however, the resulting set of
networks are usually located in the same basin of the loss landscape (Neyshabur et al., 2020), are
less diverse, and their ensemble has lower quality (Mustafa et al., 2020). So, the main question of
our paper is the following: can we improve the quality of the ensemble of networks obtained by
fine-tuning from the same pre-trained checkpoint by better exploring the loss landscape of the target
task?
∗

First two authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

