Generative Modeling through the Semi-dual
Formulation of Unbalanced Optimal Transport

Jaemoo Choi∗
Seoul National University
toony42@snu.ac.kr

Jaewoong Choi ∗
Korea Institute for Advanced Study
chwj1475@kias.re.kr

Myungjoo Kang
Seoul National University
mkang@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Optimal Transport (OT) problem investigates a transport map that bridges two
distributions while minimizing a given cost function. In this regard, OT between
tractable prior distribution and data has been utilized for generative modeling
tasks. However, OT-based methods are susceptible to outliers and face optimization
challenges during training. In this paper, we propose a novel generative model based
on the semi-dual formulation of Unbalanced Optimal Transport (UOT). Unlike OT,
UOT relaxes the hard constraint on distribution matching. This approach provides
better robustness against outliers, stability during training, and faster convergence.
We validate these properties empirically through experiments. Moreover, we study
the theoretical upper-bound of divergence between distributions in UOT. Our
model outperforms existing OT-based generative models, achieving FID scores
of 2.97 on CIFAR-10 and 6.36 on CelebA-HQ-256. The code is available at
https://github.com/Jae-Moo/UOTM.

1

Introduction

Optimal Transport theory [57, 77] explores the cost-optimal transport to transform one probability
distribution into another. Since WGAN [6], OT theory has attracted significant attention in the
field of generative modeling as a framework for addressing important challenges in this field. In
particular, WGAN introduced the Wasserstein distance, an OT-based probability distance, as a loss
function for optimizing generative models. WGAN measures the Wasserstein distance between the
data distribution and the generated distribution, and minimizes this distance during training. The
introduction of OT-based distance has improved the diversity [6, 27], convergence [63], and stability
[36, 52] of generative models, such as WGAN [6] and its variants [27, 45, 56]. However, several
works showed that minimizing the Wasserstein distance still faces computational challenges, and the
models tend to diverge without a strong regularization term, such as gradient penalty [51, 63].
Recently, there has been a surge of research on directly modeling the optimal transport map between
the input prior distribution and the real data distribution [2, 3, 49, 61, 82]. In other words, the optimal
transport serves as the generative model itself. These approaches showed promising results that
are comparable to WGAN models. However, the classical optimal transport-based approaches are
known to be highly sensitive to outlier-like samples [8]. The existence of a few outliers can have
a significant impact on the overall OT-based distance and the corresponding transport map. This
sensitivity can be problematic when dealing with large-scale real-world datasets where outliers and
noises are inevitable.
To overcome these challenges, we suggest a new generative algorithm utilizing the semi-dual formulation of the Unbalanced Optimal Transport (UOT) problem [12, 44]. In this regard, we refer to our
model as the UOT-based generative model (UOTM). The UOT framework relaxes the hard constraints
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Myungjoo Kang <mkang@snu.ac.kr>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

