SmooSeg: Smoothness Prior for Unsupervised
Semantic Segmentation

Mengcheng Lan1∗ Xinjiang Wang3 Yiping Ke2 Jiaxing Xu2
Litong Feng3 Wayne Zhang3
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
SCSE, Nanyang Technological University
3
SenseTime Research
{lanm0002, jiaxing003}@e.ntu.edu.sg
ypke@ntu.edu.sg
{wangxinjiang, fenglitong, wayne.zhang}@sensetime.com
https://github.com/mc-lan/SmooSeg

Abstract
Unsupervised semantic segmentation is a challenging task that segments images
into semantic groups without manual annotation. Prior works have primarily focused on leveraging prior knowledge of semantic consistency or priori concepts
from self-supervised learning methods, which often overlook the coherence property of image segments. In this paper, we demonstrate that the smoothness prior,
asserting that close features in a metric space share the same semantics, can significantly simplify segmentation by casting unsupervised semantic segmentation as an
energy minimization problem. Under this paradigm, we propose a novel approach
called SmooSeg that harnesses self-supervised learning methods to model the
closeness relationships among observations as smoothness signals. To effectively
discover coherent semantic segments, we introduce a novel smoothness loss that
promotes piecewise smoothness within segments while preserving discontinuities
across different segments. Additionally, to further enhance segmentation quality,
we design an asymmetric teacher-student style predictor that generates smoothly
updated pseudo labels, facilitating an optimal fit between observations and labeling
outputs. Thanks to the rich supervision cues of the smoothness prior, our SmooSeg
significantly outperforms STEGO in terms of pixel accuracy on three datasets:
COCOStuff (+14.9%), Cityscapes (+13.0%), and Potsdam-3 (+5.7%).

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a crucial task in computer vision that allows for a better understanding
of the visual content and has numerous applications, including autonomous driving [1] and remote
sensing imagery [2]. Despite advancements in the field, most traditional semantic segmentation
models heavily rely on vast amounts of annotated data, which can be both arduous and costly to
acquire. Consequently, unsupervised semantic segmentation [3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 8] has emerged as a
promising alternative. Prior knowledge is fundamental to the success of unsupervised semantic
segmentation models. One key prior knowledge is the principle of semantic consistency, which
stipulates that an object’s semantic label should remain consistent despite photometric or geometric
transformations. Recent advances [3; 9; 4; 10] use contrastive learning to achieve consistent features
or class assignments. Another essential prior knowledge is the priori concepts implicitly provided
by self-supervised learning techniques, e.g., DINO [11] and precedent arts [12; 8; 6] whose learned
features can be employed to partition each image into different segments. Despite their effectiveness,
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

