Training Neural Networks is NP-Hard
in Fixed Dimension
Vincent Froese
Algorithmics and Computational Complexity
Faculty IV, TU Berlin
Berlin, Germany
vincent.froese@tu-berlin.de
Christoph Hertrich∗
Department of Mathematics
London School of Economics and Political Science
London, UK
c.hertrich@lse.ac.uk

Abstract
We study the parameterized complexity of training two-layer neural networks with
respect to the dimension of the input data and the number of hidden neurons, considering ReLU and linear threshold activation functions. Albeit the computational
complexity of these problems has been studied numerous times in recent years, several questions are still open. We answer questions by Arora et al. [2018, ICLR] and
Khalife and Basu [2022, IPCO] showing that both problems are NP-hard for two
dimensions, which excludes any polynomial-time algorithm for constant dimension.
We also answer a question by Froese et al. [2022, JAIR] proving W[1]-hardness for
four ReLUs (or two linear threshold neurons) with zero training error. Finally, in
the ReLU case, we show ﬁxed-parameter tractability for the combined parameter
number of dimensions and number of ReLUs if the network is assumed to compute
a convex map. Our results settle the complexity status regarding these parameters
almost completely.

1

Introduction

Neural networks with rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) activations are arguably one of the most fundamental
models in modern machine learning [Arora et al., 2018, Glorot et al., 2011, LeCun et al., 2015]. To
use them as predictors on unseen data, one usually ﬁrst ﬁxes an architecture (the graph of the neural
network) and then optimizes the weights and biases such that the network performs well on some
known training data, with the hope that it will then also generalize well to unseen test data. While the
ultimate goal in applications is generalization, empirical risk minimization (that is, optimizing the
training error) is an important step in this pipeline and understanding its computational complexity is
crucial to advance the theoretical foundations of deep learning.
In this paper, we aim to understand how the choice of different meta-parameters, like the input
dimension and the width of the neural network, inﬂuences the computational complexity of the
training problem. To this end, we focus on two-layer neural networks, which can be seen as the
standard building block also for deeper architectures.
∗
Moved to Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium, and Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Germany, after
submission of this article.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

