Implicit Bias of (Stochastic) Gradient Descent for
Rank-1 Linear Neural Network
Bochen Lyu
DataCanvas Lab, DataCanvas
Beijing, China
bochen.lv@gmail.com

Zhanxing Zhu
Changping National Lab & Peking University
Beijing, China
zhanxing.zhu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Studying the implicit bias of gradient descent (GD) and stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) is critical to unveil the underlying mechanism of deep learning. Unfortunately, even for standard linear networks in regression setting, a comprehensive
characterization of the implicit bias is still an open problem. This paper proposes to investigate a new proxy model of standard linear network, rank-1 linear
network, where each weight matrix is parameterized as a rank-1 form. For overparameterized regression problem, we precisely analyze the implicit bias of GD
and SGD—by identifying a “potential” function such that GD converges to its minimizer constrained by zero training error (i.e., interpolation solution), and further
characterizing the role of the noise introduced by SGD in perturbing the form of
this potential. Our results explicitly connect the depth of the network and the initialization with the implicit bias of GD and SGD. Furthermore, we emphasize a new
implicit bias of SGD jointly induced by stochasticity and over-parameterization,
which can reduce the dependence of the SGD’s solution on the initialization. Our
findings regarding the implicit bias are different from that of a recently popular
model, the diagonal linear network. We highlight that the induced bias of our rank-1
model is more consistent with standard linear network while the diagonal one is
not. This suggests that the proposed rank-1 linear network might be a plausible
proxy for standard linear net.

1

Introduction

Gradient Descent (GD) and its stochastic variant, Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), are probably
the most important optimization techniques in deep learning. To unveil the underlying mechanism of
modern neural networks, it is highly fundamental to understand the thrilling and mysterious properties
of GD and SGD. Some recent works [24, 18, 3, 22] have made significant efforts in this direction by
exploring their implicit bias: among all global minimum, i.e., interpolation solutions, what particular
ones will GD and SGD prefer without adding an explicit regularization? This question highlights
the crucial roles of these algorithms in the generalization performance of the trained models.
Among the vast number of architectures in deep learning, the first object to investigate is the deep
linear network, i.e., without any nonlinear activations,
F (x; W ) = WL · · · W1 x

(1)

where Wk ’s are weight matrices and x is the input data. The linear network can be obviously treated as
an over-parameterized model of standard linear model, θT = WL · · · W1 . However, the introduction
of the over-parameterization brings significant non-convexity, and thus complicates dynamics during
learning. Until now, the direct analysis of implicit bias of GD and, particularly, SGD for standard
deep linear networks with any depth and initialization on regression problems is still an open problem.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

