Causal Component Analysis

Liang Wendong 1,2

Armin Kekić 1

Michel Besserve 1
2

Julius von Kügelgen 1,3

Luigi Gresele∗1

Simon Buchholz 1

Bernhard Schölkopf∗1

1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
ENS Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France 3 University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
{wendong.liang,armin.kekic,jvk,simon.buchholz}@tue.mpg.de
{besserve,luigi.gresele,bs}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) aims to recover independent latent variables from observed mixtures thereof. Causal Representation Learning (CRL) aims
instead to infer causally related (thus often statistically dependent) latent variables,
together with the unknown graph encoding their causal relationships. We introduce
an intermediate problem termed Causal Component Analysis (CauCA). CauCA can
be viewed as a generalization of ICA, modelling the causal dependence among the
latent components, and as a special case of CRL. In contrast to CRL, it presupposes
knowledge of the causal graph, focusing solely on learning the unmixing function
and the causal mechanisms. Any impossibility results regarding the recovery of
the ground truth in CauCA also apply for CRL, while possibility results may serve
as a stepping stone for extensions to CRL. We characterize CauCA identifiability
from multiple datasets generated through different types of interventions on the
latent causal variables. As a corollary, this interventional perspective also leads
to new identifiability results for nonlinear ICA—a special case of CauCA with an
empty graph—requiring strictly fewer datasets than previous results. We introduce
a likelihood-based approach using normalizing flows to estimate both the unmixing
function and the causal mechanisms, and demonstrate its effectiveness through
extensive synthetic experiments in the CauCA and ICA setting.

1

Introduction

Independent Component Analysis (ICA) [7] is a principled approach to representation learning, which
aims to recover independent latent variables, or sources, from observed mixtures thereof. Whether
this is possible depends on the identifiability of the model [32, 57]: this characterizes assumptions
under which a learned representation provably recovers (or disentangles) the latent variables, up to
some well-specified ambiguities [22, 58]. A key result shows that, when nonlinear mixtures of the
latent components are observed, the model is non-identifiable based on independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) samples from the generative process [8, 19]. Consequently, a learned model may
explain the data equally well as the ground truth, even if the corresponding representation is strongly
entangled, rendering the recovery of the original latent variables fundamentally impossible.
Identifiability can be recovered under deviations from the i.i.d. assumption, e.g., in the form of
temporal autocorrelation [14, 18] or spatial dependence [15] among the latent components; auxiliary
variables which render the sources conditionally independent [17, 21, 25, 26]; or additional, noisy
views [11]. An alternative path is to restrict the class of mixing functions [4, 13, 63].
∗

Shared last author.

Code available at https://github.com/akekic/causal-component-analysis.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

