Beyond Average Return in Markov Decision Processes

Alexandre Marthe
UMPA
ENS de Lyon
Lyon, France
alexandre.marthe@ens-lyon.fr

Aurelien Garivier
UMPA UMR 5669 and LIP UMR 5668
Univ. Lyon, ENS de Lyon
46 allée d’Italie F-69364 Lyon cedex 07, France
aurelien.garivier@ens-lyon.fr

Claire Vernade
University of Tuebingen
Tuebingen, Germany
claire.vernade@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
What are the functionals of the reward that can be computed and optimized exactly
in Markov Decision Processes? In the finite-horizon, undiscounted setting, Dynamic Programming (DP) can only handle these operations efficiently for certain
classes of statistics. We summarize the characterization of these classes for policy
evaluation, and give a new answer for the planning problem. Interestingly, we prove
that only generalized means can be optimized exactly, even in the more general
framework of Distributional Reinforcement Learning (DistRL). DistRL permits,
however, to evaluate other functionals approximately. We provide error bounds
on the resulting estimators, and discuss the potential of this approach as well as
its limitations. These results contribute to advancing the theory of Markov Decision Processes by examining overall characteristics of the return, and particularly
risk-conscious strategies.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has emerged as a flourishing field of study, delivering significant practical applications ranging from robot control and game solving to drug discovery or hardware design
[Lazic et al., 2018, Popova et al., 2018, Volk et al., 2023, Mirhoseini et al., 2020]. The cornerstone of
RL is the "return" value, a sum of successive rewards. Conventionally, the focus is on computing
and optimizing its expected value on Markov Decision Process (MDP). The remarkable efficiency
of MDPs comes from their ability to be solved through dynamic programming with the Bellman
equations [Sutton and Barto, 2018, Szepesvári, 2010]. RL theory has seen considerable expansion,
with a renewed interest for the consideration of more rich descriptions of a policy’s behavior than
the sole average return. At the other end of the spectrum, the so-called Distributional Reinforcement
Learning (DistRL) approach aims at studying and optimizing the entire return distribution, leading
to impressive practical results [Bellemare et al., 2017, Hessel et al., 2018, Wurman et al., 2022,
Fawzi et al., 2022]. Between the expectation and the entire distribution, the efficient handling of
other statistical functionals of the reward appears also particularly relevant for risk-sensitive contexts
[Bernhard et al., 2019, Mowbray et al., 2022].
Despite recent progress, the full understanding of the abilities and limitations of DistRL to compute
other functionals remains incomplete, with the underlying theory yet to be fully understood. Historically, the theory of RL has been established for discounted MDPs, see e.g. [Sutton and Barto,
2018, Watkins and Dayan, 1992, Szepesvári, 2010, Bellemare et al., 2023] for modern reference
textbooks. Recently more attention was drawn to the undiscounted, finite-horizon setting [Auer, 2002,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

