Learning Rate Free Sampling
in Constrained Domains
Louis Sharrock
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Lancaster University, UK
l.sharrock@lancaster.ac.uk

Lester Mackey
Microsoft Research New England
Cambridge, MA
lmackey@microsoft.com

Christopher Nemeth
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Lancaster University, UK
c.nemeth@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce a suite of new particle-based algorithms for sampling in constrained
domains which are entirely learning rate free. Our approach leverages coin betting
ideas from convex optimisation, and the viewpoint of constrained sampling as a
mirrored optimisation problem on the space of probability measures. Based on this
viewpoint, we also introduce a unifying framework for several existing constrained
sampling algorithms, including mirrored Langevin dynamics and mirrored Stein
variational gradient descent. We demonstrate the performance of our algorithms on
a range of numerical examples, including sampling from targets on the simplex,
sampling with fairness constraints, and constrained sampling problems in postselection inference. Our results indicate that our algorithms achieve competitive
performance with existing constrained sampling methods, without the need to tune
any hyperparameters.

1

Introduction

The problem of sampling from unnormalised probability distributions is of central importance to
computational statistics and machine learning. Standard approaches to this problem include Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [11, 76] and variational inference (VI) [41, 96]. More recently, there has
been growing interest in particle-based variational inference (ParVI) methods, which deterministically
evolve a collection of particles towards the target distribution and combine favourable aspects of
both MCMC and VI. Perhaps the most well-known of these methods is Stein variational gradient
descent (SVGD) [63], which iteratively updates particles according to a form of gradient descent
on the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. This approach has since given rise to several extensions
[16, 27, 97, 105] and found success in a wide range of applications [27, 66, 74].
While such methods have enjoyed great success in sampling from unconstrained distributions, they
typically break down when applied to constrained targets [see, e.g., 60, 82]. This is required for
targets that are not integrable over the entire Euclidean space (e.g., the uniform distribution), when
the target density is undefined outside a particular domain (e.g., the Dirichlet distribution), or when
the target must satisfy certain additional constraints (e.g., fairness constraints in Bayesian inference
[65]). Notable examples include latent Dirichlet allocation [9], ordinal data models [45], regularised
regression [15], survival analysis [49], and post-selection inference [54, 88]. In recent years, there has
been increased interest in this topic, with several new methodological and theoretical developments
[1, 19, 43, 44, 60, 61, 82, 86, 103, 104].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

