Object-Centric Learning for Real-World Videos by
Predicting Temporal Feature Similarities

Andrii Zadaianchuk1,2∗
Maximilian Seitzer1∗
Georg Martius1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
andrii.zadaianchuk@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Unsupervised video-based object-centric learning is a promising avenue to learn
structured representations from large, unlabeled video collections, but previous
approaches have only managed to scale to real-world datasets in restricted domains.
Recently, it was shown that the reconstruction of pre-trained self-supervised features leads to object-centric representations on unconstrained real-world image
datasets. Building on this approach, we propose a novel way to use such pretrained features in the form of a temporal feature similarity loss. This loss encodes
semantic and temporal correlations between image patches and is a natural way
to introduce a motion bias for object discovery. We demonstrate that this loss
leads to state-of-the-art performance on the challenging synthetic MOVi datasets.
When used in combination with the feature reconstruction loss, our model is the
first object-centric video model that scales to unconstrained video datasets such as
YouTube-VIS. https://martius-lab.github.io/videosaur/

1

Introduction

Autonomous systems should have the ability to understand the natural world in terms of independent
entities. Towards this goal, unsupervised object-centric learning methods [1–3] learn to structure
scenes into object representations solely from raw perceptual data. By leveraging large-scale datasets,
these methods have the potential to obtain a robust object-based understanding of the natural world.
Of particular interest in recent years have been video-based methods [4–7], not least because the
temporal information in video presents a useful bias for object discovery [8]. However, these
approaches are so far restricted to data of limited complexity, successfully discovering objects from
natural videos only on closed-world datasets in restricted domains.
In this paper, we present the method Video Slot Attention Using temporal feature similaRity,
VideoSAUR, that scales video object-centric learning to unconstrained real-world datasets covering diverse domains. To achieve this, we build upon recent advances in image-based object-centric
learning. In particular, Seitzer et al. [9] showed that reconstructing pre-trained features obtained from
self-supervised methods like DINO [10] or MAE [11] leads to state-of-the-art object discovery on
complex real-world images. We demonstrate that combining this feature reconstruction objective
with a video object-centric model [5] also leads to promising results on real-world YouTube videos.
We then identify a weakness in the training objective of current unsupervised video object-centric
architectures [4, 7]: the prevalent reconstruction loss does not exploit the temporal correlations
existing in video data for object grouping. To address this issue, we propose a novel self-supervised
loss based on feature similarities that explicitly incorporates temporal information (see Fig. 1). The
loss works by predicting distributions over similarities between features of the current and future
∗

equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

