Don’t be so Monotone: Relaxing Stochastic
Line Search in Over-Parameterized Models
Leonardo Galli, Holger Rauhut
RWTH Aachen University
Aachen
{galli, rauhut}@mathc.rwth-aachen.de

Mark Schmidt
University of British Columbia
Canada CIFAR AI Chair (Amii)
schmidtm@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Recent works have shown that line search methods can speed up Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and Adam in modern over-parameterized settings. However,
existing line searches may take steps that are smaller than necessary since they
require a monotone decrease of the (mini-)batch objective function. We explore
nonmonotone line search methods to relax this condition and possibly accept larger
step sizes. Despite the lack of a monotonic decrease, we prove the same fast rates
of convergence as in the monotone case. Our experiments show that nonmonotone methods improve the speed of convergence and generalization properties
of SGD/Adam even beyond the previous monotone line searches. We propose
a POlyak NOnmonotone Stochastic (PoNoS) method, obtained by combining a
nonmonotone line search with a Polyak initial step size. Furthermore, we develop
a new resetting technique that in the majority of the iterations reduces the amount
of backtracks to zero while still maintaining a large initial step size. To the best of
our knowledge, a first runtime comparison shows that the epoch-wise advantage of
line-search-based methods gets reflected in the overall computational time.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) [Robbins and Monro, 1951] is the workhorse for the whole Deep
Learning (DL) activity today. Even though its simplicity and low memory requirements seem crucial
for dealing with these huge models, the success of SGD is strongly connected to the choice of the
learning rate. In the field of deterministic optimization [Nocedal and Wright, 2006], this problem is
addressed [Armijo, 1966] by employing a line search technique to select the step size. Following this
approach, a recent branch of research has started to re-introduce the use of line search techniques
for training DL models [Mahsereci and Hennig, 2017, Paquette and Scheinberg, 2018, Bollapragada
et al., 2018, Truong and Nguyen, 2018, Vaswani et al., 2019]. These methods have been shown to
speed up SGD [Vaswani et al., 2019] and Adam [Duchi et al., 2011, Vaswani et al., 2020] in the
over-parameterized regime. However, the existing stochastic line searches may take step sizes that are
smaller than necessary since they require a monotone decrease in the (mini-)batch objective function.
In particular, the highly non-linear non-convex landscapes of DL training losses suggest that it may
be too restrictive to impose such a condition [Grippo et al., 1986]. In addition, the stochastic nature of
SGD discourages imposing a monotone requirement on a function that is not directly the one we are
minimizing [Ferris and Lucidi, 1994] (mini- vs full-batch function). Furthermore, the recent research
on the edge of stability phenomenon [Cohen et al., 2021, Nacson et al., 2022] shows that the best
performance for training DL models with Gradient Descent (GD) is obtained when large step sizes
yield a nonmonotone decrease of the loss function. In this paper, we propose the use of nonmonotone
line search methods [Grippo et al., 1986, Zhang and Hager, 2004] to possibly accept increases in the
objective function and thus larger step sizes.
In parallel with line search techniques, many other methods [Baydin et al., 2017, Luo et al., 2019,
Mutschler and Zell, 2020, Truong and Nguyen, 2021] have been recently developed to automatically
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

