Joint Prompt Optimization of Stacked LLMs
using Variational Inference

Alessandro Sordoniab∗ Xingdi Yuana Marc-Alexandre Côtéa Matheus Pereiraa
Adam Trischlera Ziang Xiaoa Arian Hosseinib Friederike Niedtnera Nicolas Le Rouxab
Microsoft Research Montréala

MILAb

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) can be seen as atomic units of computation mapping sequences to a distribution over sequences. Thus, they can be seen as stochastic
language layers in a language network, where the learnable parameters are the
natural language prompts at each layer. By stacking two such layers and feeding the
output of one layer to the next, we obtain a Deep Language Network (DLN). We
first show how to effectively perform prompt optimization for a 1-Layer language
network (DLN-1). Then, we present an extension that applies to 2-layer DLNs
(DLN-2), where two prompts must be learned. The key idea is to consider the
output of the first layer as a latent variable, which requires inference, and prompts
to be learned as the parameters of the generative distribution. We first test the
effectiveness of DLN-1 in multiple reasoning and natural language understanding
tasks. Then, we show that DLN-2 can reach higher performance than a single layer,
showing promise that we might reach comparable performance to GPT-4, even
when each LLM in the network is smaller and less powerful. The DLN code is
open source.1

1

Introduction

The size of large language models (LLMs) has grown significantly over the last few years, mainly
because of emerging capabilities [5, 31], but at considerable technical and societal costs [49, 2, 4].
Recent efforts have focused either on learning smaller models matching the abilities of larger ones on
some tasks using distillation [43, 36, 29, 13], or offloading part of the computation to other dedicated
components [28, 22, 25, 18]. In the latter case, this is done through carefully crafted instructions to
retrieve the necessary information from these additional modules [48, 41, 6, 54, 24].
Instruction-tuned LLMs map an input sequence to a distribution over output sequences conditioned
on an instruction, or prompt. In this paper, we view such LLMs as stochastic language layers, whose
learnable parameters are the prompts. Multiple layers can be stacked to form a Deep Language
Network (DLN) whose learnable parameters are the prompts associated to each layer. Specifically,
each layer uses a template to organize both its prompt and the inputs coming from the layer below
into a single sequence before producing the output (see Figure 1). This layering induces a learnable
decomposition of the task into a series of smaller sub-tasks, each of which might be more easily
solvable by an LLM. This view shares similarities to recent works that chain LLM calls [41, 6, 54].
In this work, we move towards integrating learnable components in the pipeline: each prompt can be
learned to maximize the final objective.
∗
1

Corresponding author: alsordon@microsoft.com
Code: https://github.com/microsoft/deep-language-networks.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

