The noise level in linear regression
with dependent data

Ingvar Ziemann
University of Pennsylvania
George J. Pappas
University of Pennsylvania

Stephen Tu
Google Research
Nikolai Matni
University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
We derive upper bounds for random design linear regression with dependent (βmixing) data absent any realizability assumptions. In contrast to the strictly realizable martingale noise regime, no sharp instance-optimal non-asymptotics are
available in the literature. Up to constant factors, our analysis correctly recovers
the variance term predicted by the Central Limit Theorem—the noise level of the
problem—and thus exhibits graceful degradation as we introduce misspecification. Past a burn-in, our result is sharp in the moderate deviations regime, and in
particular does not inflate the leading order term by mixing time factors.

1

Introduction

Ordinary least squares (OLS) regression from a finite sample is one of the most ubiquitous and
widely used technique in machine learning. When faced with independent data, there are now sharp
tools available to analyze its success optimally under relatively general assumptions. Indeed, a
non-asymptotic theory matching the classical asymptotically optimal understanding from statistics
[van der Vaart, 2000] has been developed over the last decade [Hsu et al., 2012, Oliveira, 2016,
Mourtada, 2022]. However, once we relax the independence assumption and move toward data that
exhibits correlations, the situation is much less well-understood—even for a problem as seemingly
simple as linear regression. While sharp asymptotics are available through various limit theorems,
there are no general results matching these in the finite sample regime.
In this paper, we study the instance-specific performance of ordinary least squares in a setting with
dependent data—and in contrast to much contemporary work on the theme—without imposing
realizability.1 If in addition to a realizability assumption the noise forms a martingale difference
sequence, it is now well-known that martingale methods can be used to demonstrate that dependent
linear regression is no harder than its independent counterpart [Simchowitz et al., 2018]. Furthermore,
as long as one maintains such an assumption on the noise, a similar observation even holds true for
generalized linear and bilinear models [Kowshik et al., 2021, Sattar et al., 2022], and regression with
square loss more generally [Ziemann and Tu, 2022].
However, barring any such strong realizability assumption, martingale methods are no longer directly
available, and neither are there any sharp non-asymptotics in the learning theory literature. Absent
martingale techniques, a natural approach is to use the blocking technique [Bernstein, 1927, Yu,
1994] to port concentration inequalities valid for independent data to the dependent setting. However,
since blocking effectively reduces the sample size by a factor of the degree of dependence of the data,
a judicious application is necessary in order to recover the correct noise level of the problem—the
level predicted by the Central Limit Theorem (CLT).
1

A distribution PX,Y is (linearly) realizable if the regression function x 7→ E[Y | X = x] is linear.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

