Behavior Alignment via
Reward Function Optimization

Dhawal Gupta∗
University of Massachusetts

Yash Chandak∗ †
Stanford University

Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts

Scott M. Jordan†
University of Alberta

Bruno Castro da Silva
University of Massachusetts

Abstract
Designing reward functions for efficiently guiding reinforcement learning (RL)
agents toward specific behaviors is a complex task. This is challenging since it
requires the identification of reward structures that are not sparse and that avoid inadvertently inducing undesirable behaviors. Naively modifying the reward structure
to offer denser and more frequent feedback can lead to unintended outcomes and
promote behaviors that are not aligned with the designer’s intended goal. Although
potential-based reward shaping is often suggested as a remedy, we systematically
investigate settings where deploying it often significantly impairs performance.
To address these issues, we introduce a new framework that uses a bi-level objective to learn behavior alignment reward functions. These functions integrate
auxiliary rewards reflecting a designer’s heuristics and domain knowledge with
the environment’s primary rewards. Our approach automatically determines the
most effective way to blend these types of feedback, thereby enhancing robustness
against heuristic reward misspecification. Remarkably, it can also adapt an agent’s
policy optimization process to mitigate suboptimalities resulting from limitations
and biases inherent in the underlying RL algorithms. We evaluate our method’s
efficacy on a diverse set of tasks, from small-scale experiments to high-dimensional
control challenges. We investigate heuristic auxiliary rewards of varying quality—
some of which are beneficial and others detrimental to the learning process. Our
results show that our framework offers a robust and principled way to integrate
designer-specified heuristics. It not only addresses key shortcomings of existing
approaches but also consistently leads to high-performing solutions, even when
given misaligned or poorly-specified auxiliary reward functions.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we investigate the challenge of enabling reinforcement learning (RL) practitioners, who
may not be experts in the field, to incorporate domain knowledge through heuristic auxiliary reward
functions. Our goal is to ensure that such auxiliary rewards not only induce behaviors that align with
the designer’s intentions but also allow for faster learning. RL practitioners typically model a given
control problem by first designing simple reward functions that directly quantify whether (or how
well) an agent completed a task. These could be, for instance, functions assigning a reward of +1 iff
the agent reaches a specified goal state, and zero otherwise. However, optimizing a policy based on
such a sparse reward function often proves challenging.
∗
Both authors contributed equally to this work. † Work done while at the University of Massachusetts.
Corresponding author: Dhawal Gupta (dgupta@cs.umass.edu).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

