Offline RL with Discrete Proxy Representations for
Generalizability in POMDPs

Pengjie Gu 1,† , Xinyu Cai 1,† , Dong Xing2 , Xinrun Wang 1,‡ , Mengchen Zhao 3,‡ , Bo An1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei3
{pengjie.gu, xinyu.cai, xinrun.wang, boan}@ntu.edu.sg,
dongxing@zju.edu.cn, zhaomengchen@huawei.com

Abstract
Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) has demonstrated promising results in various
applications by learning policies from previously collected datasets, reducing the
need for online exploration and interactions. However, real-world scenarios usually
involve partial observability, which brings crucial challenges of the deployment
of offline RL methods: i) the policy trained on data with full observability is not
robust against the masked observations during execution, and ii) the information
of which parts of observations are masked is usually unknown during training. In
order to address these challenges, we present Offline RL with DiscrEte pRoxy
representations (ORDER), a probabilistic framework which leverages novel state
representations to improve the robustness against diverse masked observabilities.
Specifically, we propose a discrete representation of the states and use a proxy
representation to recover the states from masked partial observable trajectories.
The training of ORDER can be compactly described as the following three steps. i)
Learning the discrete state representations on data with full observations, ii) Training the decision module based on the discrete representations, and iii) Training the
proxy discrete representations on the data with various partial observations, aligning with the discrete representations. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate
ORDER, showcasing its effectiveness in offline RL for diverse partially observable
scenarios and highlighting the significance of discrete proxy representations in
generalization performance. ORDER is a flexible framework to employ any offline
RL algorithms and we hope that ORDER can pave the way for the deployment of
RL policy against various partial observabilities in the real world.

1

Introduction

The past decade witnesses the remarkable success of Reinforcement Learning (RL) in various domains,
such as Atari games [38], Go [43], and even nuclear fusion [10]. Offline RL, a particularly promising
approach, focuses on learning effective policies from previously collected datasets, reducing the need
for online exploration and interactions [34]. However, the various partial observabilities in the real
world pose challenges when deploying the learned policy in practice. Examples include autonomous
cars facing blocked or perturbed observations [11], drones navigating through cluttered environments
with occlusions [51], and robotic manipulators handling objects with varying degrees of visibility [5].
As a result, agents trained on offline datasets must adapt their learned policies to cope with dynamic,
uncertain, and partially observable environments, ensuring generalizability in real-world applications.
1
2

† Equal contribution.
‡ Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

