Imbalanced Mixed Linear Regression

Pini Zilber
Boaz Nadler
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel
{pini.zilber, boaz.nadler}@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
We consider the problem of mixed linear regression (MLR), where each observed
sample belongs to one of K unknown linear models. In practical applications, the
mixture of the K models may be imbalanced with a significantly different number
of samples from each model. Unfortunately, most MLR methods do not perform
well in such settings. Motivated by this practical challenge, in this work we propose
Mix-IRLS, a novel, simple and fast algorithm for MLR with excellent performance
on both balanced and imbalanced mixtures. In contrast to popular approaches
that recover the K models simultaneously, Mix-IRLS does it sequentially using
tools from robust regression. Empirically, beyond imbalanced mixtures, Mix-IRLS
succeeds in a broad range of additional settings where other methods fail, including
small sample sizes, presence of outliers, and an unknown number of models K.
Furthermore, Mix-IRLS outperforms competing methods on several real-world
datasets, in some cases by a large margin. We complement our empirical results
by deriving a recovery guarantee for Mix-IRLS, which highlights its advantage on
imbalanced mixtures.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider a simple generalization of the linear regression problem, known as mixed
linear regression (MLR) [5, Chapter 14]. In MLR, each sample belongs to one of K unknown linear
models, but it is not known to which one. MLR can thus be viewed as a combination of regression
and clustering. Despite its simplicity, the presence of multiple linear components makes MLR highly
expressive and thus a useful data representation model in various applications, including trajectory
clustering [20], health care analysis [16], market segmentation [49], face recognition [7], population
clustering [29], drug sensitivity prediction [37] and relating genes to disease phenotypes [8, 47].
Several methods were developed to solve MLR, including expectation maximization [15, 5], alternating minimization [52, 53] and gradient descent [56]. These methods share three common features:
they all (i) require as input the number of components K; (ii) estimate the K models simultaneously;
and (iii) tend to perform better on balanced mixtures, where the number of samples from each of
the K models are approximately equal. As illustrated in Section 4, given data from an imbalanced
mixture, these methods may fail. In addition, most of the theoretical guarantees in the literature
assume a balanced mixture. Since imbalanced mixtures are ubiquitous in applications, it is of practical
interest to develop MLR methods that are able to handle such settings, as well as corresponding
recovery guarantees.
In this paper, we present Mix-IRLS, a novel and conceptually different iterative algorithm for MLR,
able to handle both balanced and imbalanced mixtures. Mix-IRLS is computationally efficient, simple
to implement, and scalable to high-dimensional settings. In addition, Mix-IRLS successfully recovers
the underlying components with relatively few samples, is robust to noise and outliers, and does
not require as input the number of components K. In Sections 4 and 5 we illustrate the competitive
advantage of Mix-IRLS over several other methods, on both synthetic and real data.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

