Decompose a Task into Generalizable Subtasks in
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Zikang Tian1,2,3 , Ruizhi Chen4 , Xing Hu1,5 , Ling Li2,4 , Rui Zhang1 , Fan Wu2,3,4 ,
Shaohui Peng4 , Jiaming Guo1 , Zidong Du1,5 , Qi Guo1 , Yunji Chen1,2∗
1
SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Cambricon Technologies, Beijing, China
4
Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing, China
5
Shanghai Innovation Center for Processor Technologies, SHIC, Shanghai, China
{tianzikang21s, cyj}@ict.ac.cn,

Abstract
In recent years, Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) techniques have
made significant strides in achieving high asymptotic performance in single task.
However, there has been limited exploration of model transferability across tasks.
Training a model from scratch for each task can be time-consuming and expensive,
especially for large-scale Multi-Agent Systems. Therefore, it is crucial to develop
methods for generalizing the model across tasks. Considering that there exist
task-independent subtasks across MARL tasks, a model that can decompose such
subtasks from the source task could generalize to target tasks. However, ensuring
true task-independence of subtasks poses a challenge. In this paper, we propose
to decompose a task into a series of generalizable subtasks (DT2GS), a novel
framework that addresses this challenge by utilizing a scalable subtask encoder
and an adaptive subtask semantic module. We show that these components endow
subtasks with two properties critical for task-independence: avoiding overfitting
to the source task and maintaining consistent yet scalable semantics across tasks.
Empirical results demonstrate that DT2GS possesses sound zero-shot generalization
capability across tasks, exhibits sufficient transferability, and outperforms existing
methods in both multi-task and single-task problems.

1

Introduction

In the last few years, many works in MARL field prospers, including value-based algorithms
[26, 25, 20, 27, 30, 39, 10, 17], and policy-based algorithms [6, 36, 35, 11, 24, 7]. However,
these works mainly focused on the model’s asymptotic performance in a single task, neglecting
its transferability across tasks. Training an optimal model on a single task requires millions of
interactions with the environment [21, 16], particularly when dealing with large-scale Multi-Agent
Systems, whereas transferring the model across tasks can reduce training cost by dozens of times
[2, 5]. As the number of tasks increases, the reduction in training costs due to model transfer will
become even more significant.
Knowledge reuse is a common approach for model generalization across tasks in the MARL field [4].
Recent knowledge reuse methods for online MARL can be roughly classified into two categories:
network-design-based methods and task-embedding-based methods. Network-design-based methods
[33, 9, 1] implicitly reuse knowledge extracted from the source task to the target task by constructing
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

