Deep Equilibrium Based Neural Operators for
Steady-State PDEs

Tanya Marwah1∗ Ashwini Pokle 1∗ J. Zico Kolter 1,2 Zachary C. Lipton 1
Jianfeng Lu 3 Andrej Risteski 1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Bosch Center for AI 3 Duke University
{tmarwah,apokle,zicokolter,zlipton,aristesk}@andrew.cmu.edu
jianfeng@math.duke.edu

Abstract
Data-driven machine learning approaches are being increasingly used to solve partial differential equations (PDEs). They have shown particularly striking successes
when training an operator, which takes as input a PDE in some family, and outputs
its solution. However, the architectural design space, especially given structural
knowledge of the PDE family of interest, is still poorly understood. We seek to
remedy this gap by studying the benefits of weight-tied neural network architectures for steady-state PDEs. To achieve this, we first demonstrate that the solution
of most steady-state PDEs can be expressed as a fixed point of a non-linear operator. Motivated by this observation, we propose FNO-DEQ, a deep equilibrium
variant of the FNO architecture that directly solves for the solution of a steady-state
PDE as the infinite-depth fixed point of an implicit operator layer using a blackbox root solver and differentiates analytically through this fixed point resulting
in O(1) training memory. Our experiments indicate that FNO-DEQ-based architectures outperform FNO-based baselines with 4× the number of parameters in
predicting the solution to steady-state PDEs such as Darcy Flow and steady-state
incompressible Navier-Stokes. Finally, we show FNO-DEQ is more robust when
trained with datasets with more noisy observations than the FNO-based baselines,
demonstrating the benefits of using appropriate inductive biases in architectural
design for different neural network based PDE solvers. Further, we show a universal approximation result that demonstrates that FNO-DEQ can approximate the
solution to any steady-state PDE that can be written as a fixed point equation.

1

Introduction

Partial differential equations (PDEs) are used to model a wide range of processes in science and
engineering. They define a relationship of (unknown) function and its partial derivatives. Most
PDEs do not admit a closed form solution, and are solved using a variety of classical numerical
methods such as finite element [LeVeque, 2007], finite volume [Moukalled et al., 2016], and spectral
methods [Kopriva, 2009, Boyd, 2001]. These methods are often very computationally expensive,
both as the ambient dimension grows, and as the desired accuracy increases.
This has motivated a rapidly growing area of research in data-driven approaches to PDE solving. One
promising approach involves learning neural solution operators [Chen and Chen, 1995, Lu et al.,
2019, Bhattacharya et al., 2021, Li et al., 2020b], which take in the coefficients of a PDE in some
family and output its solution—and are trained by examples of coefficient-solution pairs.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to tmarwah@andrew.cmu.edu and apokle@andrew.cmu.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

