Explore to Generalize in Zero-Shot RL

Ev Zisselman∗, Itai Lavie, Daniel Soudry, Aviv Tamar
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

Abstract
We study zero-shot generalization in reinforcement learning—optimizing a policy
on a set of training tasks to perform well on a similar but unseen test task. To
mitigate overfitting, previous work explored different notions of invariance to the
task. However, on problems such as the ProcGen Maze, an adequate solution that
is invariant to the task visualization does not exist, and therefore invariance-based
approaches fail. Our insight is that learning a policy that effectively explores the
domain is harder to memorize than a policy that maximizes reward for a specific
task, and therefore we expect such learned behavior to generalize well; we indeed
demonstrate this empirically on several domains that are difficult for invariancebased approaches. Our Explore to Generalize algorithm (ExpGen) builds on this
insight: we train an additional ensemble of agents that optimize reward. At test
time, either the ensemble agrees on an action, and we generalize well, or we take
exploratory actions, which generalize well and drive us to a novel part of the state
space, where the ensemble may potentially agree again. We show that our approach
is the state-of-the-art on tasks of the ProcGen challenge that have thus far eluded
effective generalization, yielding a success rate of 83% on the Maze task and 74%
on Heist with 200 training levels. ExpGen can also be combined with an invariance
based approach to gain the best of both worlds, setting new state-of-the-art results
on ProcGen. Code available at https://github.com/EvZissel/expgen.

1

Introduction

Recent developments in reinforcement learning (RL) led to algorithms that surpass human experts in a
broad range of tasks [Mnih et al., 2015, Vinyals et al., 2019, Schrittwieser et al., 2020, Wurman et al.,
2022]. In most cases, the RL agent is tested on the same task it was trained on, and is not guaranteed
to perform well on unseen tasks. In zero-shot generalization for RL (ZSG-RL), however, the goal is to
train an agent on training domains to act optimally in a new, previously unseen test environment [Kirk
et al., 2021]. A standard evaluation suite for ZSG-RL is the ProcGen benchmark [Cobbe et al., 2020],
containing 16 games, each with levels that are procedurally generated to vary in visual properties
(e.g., color of agents in BigFish, Fig. 1a, or background image in Jumper, Fig. 1c) and dynamics (e.g.,
wall positions in Maze, Fig. 1d, and key positions in Heist, Fig. 1e).
Previous studies focused on identifying various invariance properties in the tasks, and designing
corresponding invariant policies, through an assortment of regularization and augmentation techniques [Igl et al., 2019, Cobbe et al., 2019, Wang et al., 2020, Lee et al., 2019a, Raileanu et al., 2021,
Raileanu and Fergus, 2021, Cobbe et al., 2021, Sonar et al., 2021, Bertran et al., 2020, Li et al., 2021].
For example, a policy that is invariant to the color of agents is likely to generalize well in BigFish.
More intricate invariances include the order of observations in a trajectory [Raileanu and Fergus,
2021], and the length of a trajectory, as reflected in the value function [Raileanu and Fergus, 2021].
∗

Correspondence E-mail: ev_zis@campus.technion.ac.il

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

