3D Indoor Instance Segmentation in an Open-World

Mohamed El Amine Boudjoghra1 , Salwa K. Al Khatib1 , Jean Lahoud1 ,
Hisham Cholakkal1 , Rao Muhammad Anwer1,2 , Salman Khan1,3 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,4
1
Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI),
2
Aalto University, 3 Australian National University, 4 Linköping University
{mohamed.boudjoghra, salwa.khatib, jean.lahoud,
hisham.cholakkal, rao.anwer, salman.khan, fahad.khan}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Existing 3D instance segmentation methods typically assume that all semantic
classes to be segmented would be available during training and only seen categories are segmented at inference. We argue that such a closed-world assumption
is restrictive and explore for the first time 3D indoor instance segmentation in
an open-world setting, where the model is allowed to distinguish a set of known
classes as well as identify an unknown object as unknown and then later incrementally learning the semantic category of the unknown when the corresponding
category labels are available. To this end, we introduce an open-world 3D indoor
instance segmentation method, where an auto-labeling scheme is employed to
produce pseudo-labels during training and induce separation to separate known
and unknown category labels. We further improve the pseudo-labels quality at
inference by adjusting the unknown class probability based on the objectness
score distribution. We also introduce carefully curated open-world splits leveraging realistic scenarios based on inherent object distribution, region-based indoor
scene exploration and randomness aspect of open-world classes. Extensive experiments reveal the efficacy of the proposed contributions leading to promising
open-world 3D instance segmentation performance. Code and splits are available
at: https://github.com/aminebdj/3D-OWIS.

1

Introduction

3D semantic instance segmentation aims at identifying objects in a given 3D scene, represented by a
point cloud or mesh, by providing object instance-level categorization and semantic labels. The ability
to segment objects in the 3D domain has numerous vision applications, including robotics, augmented
reality, and autonomous driving. Following the developments in the sensors that acquire depth
information, a variety of datasets has been presented in the literature which provides instance-level
annotations. In view of the availability of large-scale 3D datasets and the advances in deep learning
methods, various 3D instance segmentation methods have been proposed in recent years.
The dependence of 3D instance segmentation methods on available datasets has a major drawback:
a fixed set of object labels (vocabulary) is learned. However, object classes in the real world are
plentiful, and many unseen/unknown classes can be present at inference. Current methods that
learn on a fixed set not only discard the unknown classes but also supervise them to be labeled
as background. This prevents intelligent recognition systems from identifying unknown or novel
objects that are not part of the background. Given the importance of identifying unknown objects,
recent works have explored open-world learning setting for 2D object detection [18, 11, 28, 33]. In
the open-world setting, a model is expected to identify unknown objects, and once new classes are
labeled, the new set is desired to be incrementally learned without retraining [18]. While previous
methods have been mostly suggested for open-world 2D object detection, it is yet to be explored
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

