Improving Language Plasticity via
Pretraining with Active Forgetting

Yihong Chenàá Kelly Marchisioä Roberta Raileanuá David Ifeoluwa Adelanià
Pontus Stenetorpà Sebastian Riedelà Mikel Artetxeê
à
UCL Centre for Artificial Intelligence
á
ä
Meta AI ê Reka AI
Cohere AI
{yihong.chen, d.adelani, p.stenetorp, s.riedel}@cs.ucl.ac.uk
mikel@reka.ai kelly@cohere.com raileanu@meta.com

Abstract
Pretrained language models (PLMs) are today the primary model for natural
language processing. Despite their impressive downstream performance, it can be
difficult to apply PLMs to new languages, a barrier to making their capabilities
universally accessible. While prior work has shown it possible to address this
issue by learning a new embedding layer for the new language, doing so is both
data and compute inefficient. We propose to use an active forgetting mechanism
during pretraining, as a simple way of creating PLMs that can quickly adapt to
new languages. Concretely, by resetting the embedding layer every K updates
during pretraining, we encourage the PLM to improve its ability of learning new
embeddings within limited number of updates, similar to a meta-learning effect.
Experiments with RoBERTa show that models pretrained with our forgetting
mechanism not only demonstrate faster convergence during language adaptation,
but also outperform standard ones in a low-data regime, particularly for languages
that are distant from English. Code will be available at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/language-model-plasticity.

1

Introduction

Pretrained language models (PLMs) have been swiftly reshaping the landscape of natural language
processing (NLP) by improving upon standardized benchmarks across the board [Radford and
Narasimhan, 2018, Devlin et al., 2019, Liu et al., 2019, Brown et al., 2020]. At their core, they
acquire knowledge by ingesting large datasets and store this knowledge in their parameters during
pretraining. Using finetuning or prompting [Brown et al., 2020], such knowledge can then be applied
to downstream applications, such as semantic analysis, question answering, and others.
Despite their success, PLMs still have a number of shortcomings [Weidinger et al., 2021, 2022]. In
particular, it requires massive data and computation to pretrain them [Gururangan et al., 2020, Kaplan
et al., 2020, Hernandez et al., 2021, Hu et al., 2021, Touvron et al., 2023]. Naively retraining a new
PLM to accommodate every lingual space shift 1 would be prohibitively expensive. This makes it a
highly relevant research target to create PLMs that can be efficiently adapted to new lingual spaces.
While forgetting in the context of both human and machine learning is often perceived as something negative (for instance catastrophic forgetting [McCloskey and Cohen, 1989, Ratcliff, 1990,
Kirkpatrick et al., 2017]), recent works have shown that for artificial neural networks forgetting
1

We use the term lingual space shift to describe changes in language usage between pretraining and the target
downstream application, caused by factors such as language change, time evolution, or domain switch. A model
with high language plasticity would quickly adapt to these shifts.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

