OBELICS: An Open Web-Scale Filtered
Dataset of Interleaved Image-Text Documents
Hugo Laurençonú,1,2
Lucile Saulnierú,1
Léo Tronchonú,1
Stas Bekmanú,1 Amanpreet Singhú,1 Anton Lozhkov1
Thomas Wang1 Siddharth Karamcheti1,3 Alexander M. Rush†,1
Douwe Kiela†,1,3 Matthieu Cord†,2 Victor Sanhú,†,1
ú
Equal contributions, † Senior contributions
hugo@huggingface.co
1
Hugging Face 2 Sorbonne Université 3 Stanford University

Abstract
Large multimodal models trained on natural documents, which interleave
images and text, outperform models trained on image-text pairs on various
multimodal benchmarks. However, the datasets used to train these models
have not been released, and the collection process has not been fully specified.
We introduce the OBELICS dataset, an open web-scale filtered dataset of interleaved image-text documents comprising 141 million web pages extracted
from Common Crawl, 353 million associated images, and 115 billion text
tokens. We describe the dataset creation process, present comprehensive
filtering rules, and provide an analysis of the dataset’s content. To show
the viability of OBELICS, we train vision and language models of 9 and 80
billion parameters named IDEFICS, and obtain competitive performance
on different multimodal benchmarks. We release our dataset, models and
code.1 .

1

Introduction

Recent systems demonstrate the effectiveness of training large multimodal models such as
Flamingo on naturally occurring multimodal documents (Alayrac et al., 2022; Aghajanyan
et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023). A multimodal document is a succession of text paragraphs
interleaved by images, such as web pages that contain images. Models trained on these web
documents outperform vision and language models trained solely on image-text pairs on
various benchmarks (Alayrac et al., 2022). They can also generate long and coherent text
about a set of multiple images.
While these results are compelling, they have not been replicable. The datasets used in
these works are not publicly available, and relatively little information is known about their
creation process and composition. This state motivates the creation of large-scale collections
of high-quality multimodal web documents to support the creation of the next generation of
models.
We take inspiration from existing large open image-text datasets such as LAION (Schuhmann
et al., 2022) and COYO (Byeon et al., 2022), comprised of hundreds of millions of image-text
1

OBELICS: https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceM4/OBELICS
OBELICS reproduction code: https://github.com/huggingface/OBELICS
IDEFICS models: https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceM4/idefics-80b

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and
Benchmarks.

