State Regularized Policy Optimization
on Data with Dynamics Shift

Zhenghai Xue1

Qingpeng Cai2 Shuchang Liu2 Dong Zheng2
Peng Jiang2 Kun Gai3 Bo An1
1
Nanyang Technology University, Singapore
2
Kuaishou Technology 3 Unaffliated
zhenghai001@e.ntu.edu.sg boan@ntu.edu.sg gai.kun@qq.com
{caiqingpeng,liushuchang,zhengdong,jiangpeng}@kuaishou.com

Abstract
In many real-world scenarios, Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms are trained
on data with dynamics shift, i.e., with different underlying environment dynamics.
A majority of current methods address such issue by training context encoders to
identify environment parameters. Data with dynamics shift are separated according
to their environment parameters to train the corresponding policy. However, these
methods can be sample inefficient as data are used ad hoc, and policies trained for
one dynamics cannot benefit from data collected in all other environments with
different dynamics. In this paper, we find that in many environments with similar
structures and different dynamics, optimal policies have similar stationary state
distributions. We exploit such property and learn the stationary state distribution
from data with dynamics shift for efficient data reuse. Such distribution is used
to regularize the policy trained in a new environment, leading to the SRPO (State
Regularized Policy Optimization) algorithm. To conduct theoretical analyses,
the intuition of similar environment structures is characterized by the notion of
homomorphous MDPs. We then demonstrate a lower-bound performance guarantee
on policies regularized by the stationary state distribution. In practice, SRPO can be
an add-on module to context-based algorithms in both online and offline RL settings.
Experimental results show that SRPO can make several context-based algorithms
far more data efficient and significantly improve their overall performance.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved great success in solving challenging sequential decisionmaking problems [1, 2]. Unfortunately, existing RL methods usually assume that agents are trained
and evaluated in exactly the same environment, which is often not the case in real-world applications
where environment dynamics can vary a lot. For example, the recommendation engine of social
apps may need to deal with time-varying and heterogeneous user preferences [3, 4]. A robot arm
may operate in different scenarios with different joint frictions and medium densities [5]. In these
cases, the agent has to work with the trajectory data from different environment dynamics, i.e., data
with dynamics shift, which will bias the learning process and lead to poor performance. In fact,
some empirical studies [6, 5] demonstrate that general RL algorithms [7, 8] can easily be misled by
different environment dynamics and fail to train a good policy.
In recent years, considerable research efforts have been devoted to addressing the dynamics shift and
learning generalizable policies for environments with changing dynamics. One common practice is
to train a context encoder [9, 10, 11] to associate the environment dynamics with a latent variable.
The policy is then trained with the latent variable as an additional input [12]. One issue with this
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

