Mitigating Source Bias for Fairer Weak Supervision

Changho Shin, Sonia Cromp, Dyah Adila, Frederic Sala
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{cshin23, cromp, adila, fsala}@wisc.edu

Abstract
Weak supervision enables efficient development of training sets by reducing the
need for ground truth labels. However, the techniques that make weak supervision
attractive—such as integrating any source of signal to estimate unknown labels—
also entail the danger that the produced pseudolabels are highly biased. Surprisingly,
given everyday use and the potential for increased bias, weak supervision has not
been studied from the point of view of fairness. We begin such a study, starting with
the observation that even when a fair model can be built from a dataset with access
to ground-truth labels, the corresponding dataset labeled via weak supervision can
be arbitrarily unfair. To address this, we propose and empirically validate a model
for source unfairness in weak supervision, then introduce a simple counterfactual
fairness-based technique that can mitigate these biases. Theoretically, we show
that it is possible for our approach to simultaneously improve both accuracy and
fairness—in contrast to standard fairness approaches that suffer from tradeoffs.
Empirically, we show that our technique improves accuracy on weak supervision
baselines by as much as 32% while reducing demographic parity gap by 82.5%.
A simple extension of our method aimed at maximizing performance produces
state-of-the-art performance in five out of ten datasets in the WRENCH benchmark.

1

Introduction

Weak supervision (WS) is a powerful set of techniques aimed at overcoming the labeled data bottleneck
[RSW+ 16, FCS+ 20, SLV+ 22]. Instead of manually annotating points, users assemble noisy label
estimates obtained from multiple sources, model them by learning source accuracies, and combine
them into a high-quality pseudolabel to be used for downstream training. All of this is done without
any ground truth labels. Simple, flexible, yet powerful, weak supervision is now a standard component
in machine learning workflows in industry, academia, and beyond [BRL+ 19]. Most excitingly, WS
has been used to build models deployed to billions of devices.
Real-life deployment of models, however, raises crucial questions of fairness and bias. Such questions
are tackled in the burgeoning field of fair machine learning [DHP+ 12, HPS16]. However, weak
supervision has not been studied from this point of view. This is not a minor oversight. The
properties that make weak supervision effective (i.e., omnivorously ingesting any source of signal
for labels) are precisely those that make it likely to suffer from harmful biases. This motivates the need
to understand and mitigate the potentially disparate outcomes that result from using weak supervision.
The starting point for this work is a simple result. Even when perfectly fair classifiers are possible when
trained on ground-truth labels, weak supervision-based techniques can nevertheless produce arbitrarily
unfair outcomes. Because of this, simply applying existing techniques for producing fair outcomes
to the datasets produced via WS is insufficient—delivering highly suboptimal datasets. Instead, a
new approach, specific to weak supervision, must be developed. We introduce a simple technique for
improving the fairness properties of weak supervision-based models. Intuitively, a major cause of bias
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

