Recovering from Out-of-sample States via Inverse
Dynamics in Offline Reinforcement Learning

1

Ke Jiang1,2 , Jia-yu Yao3 , Xiaoyang Tan1,2∗
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
ke_jiang@nuaa.edu.cn, jiayu_yao@pku.edu.cn, x.tan@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
We deal with the state distributional shift problem commonly encountered in offline
reinforcement learning during test, where the agent tends to take unreliable actions
at out-of-sample (unseen) states. Our idea is to encourage the agent to follow
the so called state recovery principle when taking actions, i.e., besides long-term
return, the immediate consequences of the current action should also be taken
into account and those capable of recovering the state distribution of the behavior
policy are preferred. For this purpose, an inverse dynamics model is learned and
employed to guide the state recovery behavior of the new policy. Theoretically,
we show that the proposed method helps aligning the transited state distribution of
the new policy with the offline dataset at out-of-sample states, without the need
of explicitly predicting the transited state distribution, which is usually difficult in
high-dimensional and complicated environments. The effectiveness and feasibility
of the proposed method is demonstrated with the state-of-the-art performance on
the general offline RL benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning has made significant advances in recent years, but it has to collect experience
actively to gain understanding of the underlying environments. However, such online interaction is
not always practical, due to either the potential high cost of data collection procedure or its possible
dangerous consequences in applications as autonomous driving or healthcare. To address these issues,
offline reinforcement learning aims to learn a policy from offline datasets without doing any actual
interaction with the environments [19, 13, 1].
However, directly deploying online RL algorithms, such as Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient [18],
to learn the new policy from the offline dataset without proper constraints would highly likely suffer
from action distributional shift due to the change in the actions generated by the new policy. This
would result in the so called extrapolation error [8], i.e., the TD target could be wrongly estimated
when querying those out-of-distribution (OOD) actions generated by the new policy. To address these
issues, methods like Conservative Q-Learning (CQL) [16], TD3+BC [7] and Implicit Q-Learning
(IQL) [14], treat the OOD actions as conterfactual queries and try to avoid performing such queries
completely during learning, hence suppressing the Q-function extrapolation error. However, such
pessimism for out-of-sample data could be too restricted and sample inefficient, as not all out-ofsample(unseen) states are not generalizable [20].
To effectively generalize to out-of-sample or even OOD states, it is necessary to constrain the behavior
of agent at those states, otherwise the policy extrapolation error that occurs at test stage may drive the
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

