SE(3) Diffusion Model-based Point Cloud Registration
for Robust 6D Object Pose Estimation

Haobo Jiang1 , Mathieu Salzmann2,3∗ , Zheng Dang2 , Jin Xie1∗ , and Jian Yang1∗
1
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
3
ClearSpace, Switzerland
{jiang.hao.bo, csjxie, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn
{zheng.dang, mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce an SE(3) diffusion model-based point cloud registration
framework for 6D object pose estimation in real-world scenarios. Our approach
formulates the 3D registration task as a denoising diffusion process, which progressively refines the pose of the source point cloud to obtain a precise alignment
with the model point cloud. Training our framework involves two operations: An
SE(3) diffusion process and an SE(3) reverse process. The SE(3) diffusion process
gradually perturbs the optimal rigid transformation of a pair of point clouds by
continuously injecting noise (perturbation transformation). By contrast, the SE(3)
reverse process focuses on learning a denoising network that refines the noisy transformation step-by-step, bringing it closer to the optimal transformation for accurate
pose estimation. Unlike standard diffusion models used in linear Euclidean spaces,
our diffusion model operates on the SE(3) manifold. This requires exploiting
the linear Lie algebra se(3) associated with SE(3) to constrain the transformation
transitions during the diffusion and reverse processes. Additionally, to effectively
train our denoising network, we derive a registration-specific variational lower
bound as the optimization objective for model learning. Furthermore, we show
that our denoising network can be constructed with a surrogate registration model,
making our approach applicable to different deep registration networks. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our diffusion registration framework presents outstanding pose estimation performance on the real-world TUD-L, LINEMOD, and
Occluded-LINEMOD datasets. The code is available at https://github.com/JiangHB/DiffusionReg.

1

Introduction

Accurately estimating the 6D pose of an object, comprising both its spatial position and orientation, is
a critical task in the field of computer vision, and has been extensively applied in various domains such
as robotics grasping [10, 52, 68], augmented reality [32, 33], and autonomous navigation [7, 16, 58].
While substantial efforts have been dedicated to developing methods for 6D pose estimation based on
RGB or RGB-D data [26, 42, 41, 52, 38, 63, 49], the advancements of 3D sensors (such as Kinect and
LiDAR) and 3D registration techniques has promoted the emergence of point cloud registration-based
pose estimation as a promising direction.
∗

Corresponding authors.
Haobo Jiang, Jin Xie, and Jian Yang are with PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for
High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding
for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
China.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

