Nominality Score Conditioned Time Series Anomaly
Detection by Point/Sequential Reconstruction

Chih-Yu Lai∗
Department of EECS, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
chihyul@mit.edu

Fan-Keng Sun
Department of EECS, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
fankeng@mit.edu

Jeffrey H. Lang
Department of EECS, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
lang@mit.edu

Zhengqi Gao
Department of EECS, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
zhengqi@mit.edu

Duane S. Boning
Department of EECS, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
boning@mtl.mit.edu

Abstract
Time series anomaly detection is challenging due to the complexity and variety of
patterns that can occur. One major difficulty arises from modeling time-dependent
relationships to find contextual anomalies while maintaining detection accuracy for
point anomalies. In this paper, we propose a framework for unsupervised time series
anomaly detection that utilizes point-based and sequence-based reconstruction
models. The point-based model attempts to quantify point anomalies, and the
sequence-based model attempts to quantify both point and contextual anomalies.
Under the formulation that the observed time point is a two-stage deviated value
from a nominal time point, we introduce a nominality score calculated from the
ratio of a combined value of the reconstruction errors. We derive an induced
anomaly score by further integrating the nominality score and anomaly score, then
theoretically prove the superiority of the induced anomaly score over the original
anomaly score under certain conditions. Extensive studies conducted on several
public datasets show that the proposed framework outperforms most state-of-the-art
baselines for time series anomaly detection.

1

Introduction

Time series anomaly detection involves identifying unusual patterns or events in a sequence of
data collected over time [1]. This technique is crucial in fields such as finance [2], healthcare
[3], manufacturing [4], transportation [5], and more [6]. A comprehensive evaluation of different
techniques can be found in [7]. Time series anomaly detection using unsupervised learning approaches
is favored by recent studies due to the fact that they don’t require labeled data and have better detection
of unseen anomalies [8], which is also the approach used in this work. Most unsupervised time
series anomaly detection methods involve calculating an anomaly score at each time point and then
comparing this score to some threshold. For calculating this score, we can categorize different
methods into three main groups: Reconstruction-based methods involve reconstructing the original
time series data and comparing the reconstructed data with the actual data [9, 10, 11]. Predictionbased methods involve predicting the next value in the time series and comparing it with the actual
value [12, 13, 14]. Dissimilarity-based methods measure the distance between the value obtained
from the model and the distribution or cluster of the aggregated data [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. There
can also be hybrid techniques where multiple methods are applied.
∗

Code available at https://github.com/andrewlai61616/NPSR

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

