Asymptotically Optimal Quantile Pure Exploration
for Infinite-Armed Bandits
Xiao-Yue Gong
Carnegie Mellon University
exiaoyue@andrew.cmu.edu

Mark Sellke
Harvard University
msellke@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We study pure exploration with infinitely many bandit arms generated i.i.d. from
an unknown distribution. Our goal is to efficiently select a single high quality
arm whose average reward is, with probability 1 − δ, within ε of being with the
top η-fraction of arms. For fixed confidence,
we give an algorithm with expected

log(1/η)
sample complexity O log(1/δ)
which
matches a known lower bound up
ηε2
to the log(1/η) factor. In particular the δ-dependence is optimal and closes a
quadratic gap. For fixed budget, we show the asymptotically optimal sample com2
plexity as δ → 0 is log(1/δ) log log(1/δ) /c. The value of c depends explicitly
on the problem parameters (including the unknown arm distribution) through a
certain Fisher information distance. Even the strictly super-linear dependence on
log(1/δ) was not known and resolves a question of [GM20].

1

Introduction

In many learning problems, one faces the classical exploration versus exploitation tradeoff. A central
example is the (stochastic) multi-armed bandit [LR85, BF85], where an agent is presented with a set
of arms each of which when played gives a stochastic reward from an unknown and arm-dependent
distribution. The performance of a bandit algorithm is most commonly determined by its regret,
i.e. the difference between its average reward and the expected reward from the best arm. Multiarmed bandits and extensions have been applied in many settings including medical trials [BE95],
online advertising [LCLS10], cognitive radio [AMTS11], and information retrieval [LPB17]. Optimal algorithms for the multi-armed bandit, including UCB, Thompson sampling, EXP3, and various
forms of mirror descent, all make a principled tradeoff between exploration and exploitation.
In this work we focus on pure exploration bandit problems, a setting motivated by situations where
the learning procedure consists of an initial exploration phase followed by a choice of policy to
deploy. This is the case in hyperparameter optimization [GM20, LJD+ 17] as well as reinforcement
learning from simulated environments. As there is no longer a competing need to exploit, optimal
algorithms for pure exploration differ from the more common regret setting.
Pure exploration problems were introduced in [EDMM02, MT04, EDMM06] in the probablyapproximately-correct (PAC) model. Here given K arms, one adaptively obtains samples until
choosing one of the arms to output – the goal is to ensure that with probability 1 − δ, this arm
has average reward within ε of the best arm, with minimum possible sample complexity depending
on ε and δ. The early works above focused on the fixed confidence setting in which one aims to
minimize the expected sample complexity. Many subsequent works have also considered the fixed
budget problem where the sample complexity is uniformly bounded.
While sharp results are known for pure exploration and other bandit problems with K arms, for
many applications such as advertising there are far too many arms to explore. This motivated the
study of infinite-armed bandit problems in e.g. [BCZ+ 97, WAM08]; the pure exploration version
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

