Oracle Complexity of Single-Loop Switching
Subgradient Methods for Non-Smooth Weakly Convex
Functional Constrained Optimization

Yankun Huang
Department of Business Analytics
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
yankun-huang@uiowa.edu

Qihang Lin
Department of Business Analytics
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
qihang-lin@uiowa.edu

Abstract
We consider a non-convex constrained optimization problem, where the objective
function is weakly convex and the constraint function is either convex or weakly
convex. To solve this problem, we consider the classical switching subgradient
method, which is an intuitive and easily implementable first-order method whose
oracle complexity was only known for convex problems. This paper provides
the first analysis on the oracle complexity of the switching subgradient method
for finding a nearly stationary point of non-convex problems. Our results are
derived separately for convex and weakly convex constraints. Compared to existing
approaches, especially the double-loop methods, the switching gradient method
can be applied to non-smooth problems and achieves the same complexity using
only a single loop, which saves the effort on tuning the number of inner iterations.

1

Introduction

Continuous optimization with nonlinear constraints arises from many applications of machine learning
and statistics. Examples include Neyman-Pearson classification [62] and learning with fairness
constraints [77]. In this paper, we consider the following general nonlinear constrained optimization
f ∗ ≡ min f (x) s.t.
x∈X

g(x) ≤ 0,

(1)

where X ⊂ Rd is a closed convex set that allows a computationally easy projection operator, f
is weakly-convex, g is either convex or weakly convex, and functions f and g are not necessarily
smooth. When g(x) ≡ maxi=1,...,m gi (x), (1) is equivalent to an optimization problem with multiple
nonlinear constraints gi (x) ≤ 0 for i = 1, . . . , m.
A weakly convex function can be non-convex, so computing an optimal solution of (1) is challenging
in general even without constraints. For this reason, theoretical analysis for gradient-based algorithms
for non-convex problems mostly focuses on an algorithm’s (oracle) complexity for finding an ϵstationary solution for (1). When a problem is non-smooth, finding an ϵ-stationary solution is
generally difficult even if the problem is convex [47]. Hence, in this paper, we consider finding a
nearly ϵ-stationary solution for (1), whose definition will be stated later in Definition 3.2.
In the past decade, there have been many studies on non-convex constrained optimization. However,
most of the existing algorithms and their theoretical complexity analysis are developed by assuming
f and gi ’s are all smooth or can be written as the sum of a smooth and a simple non-smooth functions.
A non-exhaustive list of the works under such an assumption includes [34, 80, 81, 55, 44, 45, 43, 52,
63, 53, 50, 12, 22, 9, 21, 40, 51]. Their results cannot be applied to (1) due to non-smoothness in the
problem.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

