M2SODAI: Multi-Modal Maritime Object Detection
Dataset With RGB and Hyperspectral Image Sensors

Jonggyu Jang
POSTECH
jgjang@postech.ac.kr
Dongmin Seo
Semyung University
dseo@semyung.ac.kr

Sangwoo Oh
KRISO
swoh@kriso.re.kr

Youjin Kim
Samsung Electronics
youjin8022@gmail.com

Youngchol Choi
KRISO
ycchoi@kriso.re.kr

Hyun Jong Yang∗
POSTECH
hyunyang@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Object detection in aerial images is a growing area of research, with maritime object
detection being a particularly important task for reliable surveillance, monitoring,
and active rescuing. Notwithstanding astonishing advances in computer vision
technologies, detecting ships and floating matters in these images is challenging
due to factors such as object distance. What makes it worse is pervasive sea
surface effects such as sunlight reflection, wind, and waves. Hyperspectral image
(HSI) sensors, providing more than 100 channels in wavelengths of visible and
near-infrared, can extract intrinsic information about materials from a few pixels
of HSIs. The advent of HSI sensors motivates us to leverage HSIs to circumvent
false positives due to the sea surface effects. Unfortunately, there are few public
HSI datasets due to the high cost and labor involved in collecting them, hindering
object detection research based on HSIs. We have collected and annotated a new
dataset called “Multi-Modal Ship and flOating matter Detection in Aerial
Images (M2 SODAI)”, which includes synchronized image pairs of RGB and
HSI data, along with bounding box labels for 5,764 instances per category. We
also propose a new multi-modal extension of the feature pyramid network called
DoubleFPN. Extensive experiments on our benchmark demonstrate that the fusion
of RGB and HSI data can enhance mAP, especially in the presence of the sea
surface effects. The source code and dataset are available on the project page:
https://sites.google.com/view/m2sodai.

1

Introduction

With the growing maritime traffic intensity, detecting and localizing ships and floating matters
have become core functionalities for reliable monitoring, surveillance, and active rescuing [3, 7].
Conventionally, there have been sea surface maritime surveillance systems based on buoys and
ships [56]. These systems are cost-efficient; however, their sensing range is relatively narrow. By
virtue of their wide sensing range, aerial surveillance systems have received considerable research
interest, the absolute majority of which leverage optical cameras. Although optical cameras can
obtain high-resolution RGB images, the competence of optical sensors is degraded under dire but
commonplace environmental conditions such as solar reflection or waves, i.e., sea surface effects.
Hyperspectral image (HSI) sensors, which acquire imagery in hundreds of contiguous spectral bands,
are emerging as a substitute or supplement of RGB sensors [42, 32]. Abundant spatio-spectral
∗

corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

