Training Transitive and Commutative Multimodal
Transformers with LoReTTa
Manuel Tran1,3,4

Yashin Dicente Cid2

Amal Lahiani1

Tingying Peng4,∗

Fabian J. Theis3,4

Eldad Klaiman1,∗

1
3

Roche Diagnostics GmbH, 2 Roche Diagnostics S.L.
Technical University of Munich, 4 Helmholtz Munich

Abstract
Training multimodal foundation models is challenging due to the limited availability
of multimodal datasets. While many public datasets pair images with text, few
combine images with audio or text with audio. Even rarer are datasets that align
all three modalities at once. Critical domains such as healthcare, infrastructure,
or transportation are particularly affected by missing modalities. This makes it
difficult to integrate all modalities into a large pre-trained neural network that can
be used out-of-the-box or fine-tuned for different downstream tasks. We introduce
LoReTTa (Linking mOdalities with a tRansitive and commutativE pre-Training
sTrAtegy) to address this understudied problem. Our self-supervised framework
unifies causal modeling and masked modeling with the rules of commutativity and
transitivity. This allows us to transition within and between modalities. As a result,
our pre-trained models are better at exploring the true underlying joint probability
distribution. Given a dataset containing only the disjoint combinations (A, B) and
(B, C), LoReTTa can model the relation A ↔ C with A ↔ B ↔ C. In particular,
we show that a transformer pre-trained with LoReTTa can handle any mixture of
modalities at inference time, including the never-seen pair (A, C) and the triplet
(A, B, C). We extensively evaluate our approach on a synthetic, medical, and
reinforcement learning dataset. Across different domains, our universal multimodal
transformer consistently outperforms strong baselines such as GPT, BERT, and
CLIP on tasks involving the missing modality tuple.

1

Introduction

Integrating multiple modalities, such as images, text, or speech, promises to provide a more comprehensive and holistic understanding of otherwise intractable problems. By leveraging the unique and
complementary strengths of each data type, this approach results in a more synergistic representation
of the underlying phenomena – enabling deep learning systems to excel and adapt to real-world
scenarios. Thus, there has been impressive progress in the field of multimodal learning in recent
years. While most research focuses on multimodal datasets where all data points have all modalities,
there has also been work on missing modalities [44, 45]. However, all these models and methods rely
heavily on at least a subset of samples where all modality combinations are still present (Figure 1).
In practice, it is not easy to obtain such datasets when we consider more than two modalities, e.g.
three modalities. In the worst case, we might end up with a dataset containing only modalities A
and B, and another disjoint dataset containing modalities B and C. Thus, the combination A and C
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

