ScenarioNet: Open-Source Platform for Large-Scale
Traffic Scenario Simulation and Modeling

Quanyi Li‡∗ , Zhenghao Peng§∗ , Lan Feng†∗ ,
Zhizheng Liu† , Chenda Duan§ , Wenjie Mo§ , Bolei Zhou§
‡
University of Edinburgh, † ETH Zurich, § University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract
Large-scale driving datasets such as Waymo Open Dataset and nuScenes substantially accelerate autonomous driving research, especially for perception tasks such
as 3D detection and trajectory forecasting. Since the driving logs in these datasets
contain HD maps and detailed object annotations that accurately reflect the realworld complexity of traffic behaviors, we can harvest a massive number of complex
traffic scenarios and recreate their digital twins in simulation. Compared to the handcrafted scenarios often used in existing simulators, data-driven scenarios collected
from the real world can facilitate many research opportunities in machine learning
and autonomous driving. In this work, we present ScenarioNet, an open-source
platform for large-scale traffic scenario modeling and simulation. ScenarioNet
defines a unified scenario description format and collects a large-scale repository of
real-world traffic scenarios from the heterogeneous data in various driving datasets
including Waymo, nuScenes, Lyft L5, Argoverse, and nuPlan datasets. These
scenarios can be further replayed and interacted with in multiple views from BirdEye-View layout to realistic 3D rendering in MetaDrive simulator. This provides a
benchmark for evaluating the safety of autonomous driving stacks in simulation
before their real-world deployment. We further demonstrate the strengths of ScenarioNet on large-scale scenario generation, imitation learning, and reinforcement
learning in both single-agent and multi-agent settings. Code, demo videos, and
website are available at https://metadriverse.github.io/scenarionet.

1

Introduction

Autonomous Driving (AD) is revolutionizing mobility with benefits like reliable transportation,
travel comfort, and fuel efficiency. As a safety-critical application, it is important to evaluate the
AD stack thoroughly and ensure its reliability and safety before the real-world deployment [58].
Unlike the standardized evaluation of the perception module of AD stack on large-scale real-world
annotated data [45], the planning and control modules are often evaluated in simulators with synthetic
hand-crafted scenarios [21, 51, 27, 56]. These testing scenarios, often overly simplified, cannot
reflect the complexity of real-world conditions like map structures and diverse traffic participant
behaviors [7]. Moreover, it is time-consuming and requires domain knowledge to craft such testing
scenarios, especially those with many traffic participants [22]. Thus, it remains challenging to scale
up the evaluation and the training of the AD’s decision-making in a wide range of situations.
Collecting traffic scenarios from real-world driving data can address the data accessibility issue.
By replaying the real-world traffic scenarios in simulation, we can further benchmark the decisionmaking of the AD system and improve the generalizability of the data-driven planning and control
components. However, several critical issues need to be addressed when building a large-scale
∗

Quanyi Li, Zhenghao Peng and Lan Feng contribute equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

