Task Arithmetic in the Tangent Space:
Improved Editing of Pre-Trained Models

Guillermo Ortiz-Jimenez∗
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
guillermo.ortizjimenez@epfl.ch

Alessandro Favero∗
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
alessandro.favero@epfl.ch

Pascal Frossard
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
pascal.frossard@epfl.ch

Abstract
Task arithmetic has recently emerged as a cost-effective and scalable approach to
edit pre-trained models directly in weight space: By adding the fine-tuned weights
of different tasks, the model’s performance can be improved on these tasks, while
negating them leads to task forgetting. Yet, our understanding of the effectiveness
of task arithmetic and its underlying principles remains limited. We present a comprehensive study of task arithmetic in vision-language models and show that weight
disentanglement is the crucial factor that makes it effective. This property arises during pre-training and manifests when distinct directions in weight space govern separate, localized regions in function space associated with the tasks. Notably, we show
that fine-tuning models in their tangent space by linearizing them amplifies weight
disentanglement. This leads to substantial performance improvements across multiple task arithmetic benchmarks and diverse models. Building on these findings, we
provide theoretical and empirical analyses of the neural tangent kernel (NTK) of
these models and establish a compelling link between task arithmetic and the spatial
localization of the NTK eigenfunctions. Overall, our work uncovers novel insights
into the fundamental mechanisms of task arithmetic and offers a more reliable and
effective approach to edit pre-trained models through the NTK linearization.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained models play a pivotal role in contemporary machine learning systems. However, to
enhance performance on downstream tasks [38, 39, 92], align them with human preferences [31, 50,
64, 74], and increase robustness [63, 76, 87], they often necessitate further editing. Traditional model
editing methods rely on costly joint fine-tuning across multiple tasks [92] and human-feedback [64],
which constrain scalability and democratization. Furthermore, enhancing downstream task performance typically degrades the model’s pre-training performance or zero-shot accuracy [28, 58, 87].
Recent research has introduced cost-effective and scalable model editing techniques that try to
preserve the pre-trained model behavior by acting on the model weights through task arithmetic or
weight interpolation techniques [3, 23, 27, 38–40, 46, 57, 71, 72, 79, 86, 87, 89], thus circumventing
expensive joint fine-tuning over multiple tasks. These methods hinge on the observation that arithmetic operations between fine-tuned weights often produce analogous functional behaviors [39]. For
example, summing the relative weight components of a model between pre-training and fine-tuning
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

