Improved Convergence in High Probability of
Clipped Gradient Methods with Heavy Tailed Noise

Ta Duy Nguyen
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
taduy@bu.edu

Thien Hang Nguyen
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
nguyen.thien@northeastern.edu

Alina Ene
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
aene@bu.edu

Huy Le Nguyen
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu

Abstract
In this work, we study the convergence in high probability of clipped gradient
methods when the noise distribution has heavy tails, i.e., with bounded pth
moments, for some 1 < p ≤ 2. Prior works in this setting follow the same
recipe of using concentration inequalities and an inductive argument with union
bound to bound the iterates across all iterations. This method results in an
increase in the failure probability by a factor of T , where T is the number of
iterations. We instead propose a new analysis approach based on bounding the
moment generating function of a well chosen supermartingale sequence. We
improve the dependency on T in the convergence guarantee for a wide range
of algorithms with clipped gradients, including stochastic (accelerated) mirror
descent for convex objectives and stochastic gradient descent for nonconvex
objectives. Our high probability bounds achieve the optimal convergence rates and
match the best currently known in-expectation bounds. Our approach naturally
allows the algorithms to use time-varying step sizes and clipping parameters when
the time horizon is unknown, which appears difficult or even impossible using
existing techniques from prior works. Furthermore, we show that in the case of
clipped stochastic mirror descent, several problem constants, including the initial
distance to the optimum, are not required when setting step sizes and clipping
parameters.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimization is a well-studied area with many applications ranging from machine
learning, to operation research, numerical linear algebra and beyond. In contrast to deterministic
algorithms, stochastic algorithms might fail, and a pertinent question is how often does failure
happen and how to increase the success rate. These questions are especially important in critical
applications where failure is not tolerable, or when a single run is costly in time and resources.
Fortunately, the standard stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm has been shown to converge
with high probability under a light-tailed noise distribution such as sub-Gaussian distributions
[23, 12, 27, 14, 11, 10, 18], which gives strong guarantee on the success of single runs. However,
recent observations in popular deep learning applications, such as training attention models [33]
and convolutional networks [30], reveal a more challenging optimization landscape: the gradient
noises follow heavy-tailed distributions, where the variance may be infinite [29, 33, 9], whereas
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

