Prediction and Control in Continual Reinforcement
Learning

Nishanth Anand ∗
School of Computer Science
McGill University and Mila
nishanth.anand@mail.mcgill.ca

Doina Precup
School of Computer Science
McGill University, Mila, and Deepmind
dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Temporal difference (TD) learning is often used to update the estimate of the value
function which is used by RL agents to extract useful policies. In this paper, we
focus on value function estimation in continual reinforcement learning. We propose
to decompose the value function into two components which update at different
timescales: a permanent value function, which holds general knowledge that
persists over time, and a transient value function, which allows quick adaptation to
new situations. We establish theoretical results showing that our approach is well
suited for continual learning and draw connections to the complementary learning
systems (CLS) theory from neuroscience. Empirically, this approach improves
performance significantly on both prediction and control problems.

1

Motivation

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable successes in complex tasks, e.g Go
[40, 41] but in a narrow setting, where the task is well-defined and stable over time. In contrast,
humans continually learn throughout their life and adapt to changes in the environment and in their
goals. This ability to continually learn and adapt will be crucial for general AI agents who interact
with people in order to help them accomplish tasks. One possible explanation for this ability in the
natural world is the existence of complementary learning systems (CLS): one which slowly acquires
structured knowledge and the second which rapidly learns specifics adapting to the current situation
[26]. In contrast, in RL, learning is typically focused on how to optimize return, and the main
estimated quantity is one value function (which then drives learning a policy). As a result, when
changes occur in the environment, RL systems are faced with the stability-plasticity dilemma [9]:
whether to forget past predictions in order to learn new estimates or to preserve old estimates, which
may be useful again later, and compromise the accuracy on a new task.
The stability-plasticity dilemma in RL is agnostic to the type of function approximation used to
estimate predictions, and it is not simply a side effect of the function approximator having small
capacity. In fact, the problem exists even when the RL agent uses a table to represent the value
function. To see this, consider policy evaluation on a sequence of tasks whose true value function
is different due to different rewards and transition probabilities. A convergent temporal-difference
(TD) algorithm [43] aggregates information from all value functions in the task distribution implicitly,
thereby losing precision in the estimate of the value function for the current situation. A tracking TD
learning algorithm [46] learns predictions for the current task, overwriting estimates of past tasks and
re-learning from scratch for each new task, which can require a lot of data. Using a separate function
approximator for each task, which is a common approach [23], requires detecting the identity of the
current task to update accordingly, which can be challenging and limits the number of tasks that can
be considered.
∗

corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

