Object-centric Learning with Cyclic Walks
between Parts and Whole
Ziyu Wang1,2,3 Mike Zheng Shou1,† Mengmi Zhang2,3,†
1
Show Lab, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Deep NeuroCognition Lab, CFAR and I2R, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
†Corresponding authors; address correspondence to mengmi@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
Learning object-centric representations from complex natural environments enables both humans and machines with reasoning abilities from low-level perceptual
features. To capture compositional entities of the scene, we proposed cyclic walks
between perceptual features extracted from vision transformers and object entities.
First, a slot-attention module interfaces with these perceptual features and produces
a finite set of slot representations. These slots can bind to any object entities in the
scene via inter-slot competitions for attention. Next, we establish entity-feature
correspondence with cyclic walks along high transition probability based on the
pairwise similarity between perceptual features (aka “parts") and slot-binded object
representations (aka “whole"). The whole is greater than its parts and the parts
constitute the whole. The part-whole interactions form cycle consistencies, as
supervisory signals, to train the slot-attention module. Our rigorous experiments
on seven image datasets in three unsupervised tasks demonstrate that the networks
trained with our cyclic walks can disentangle foregrounds and backgrounds, discover objects, and segment semantic objects in complex scenes. In contrast to
object-centric models attached with a decoder for the pixel-level or feature-level
reconstructions, our cyclic walks provide strong learning signals, avoiding computation overheads and enhancing memory efficiency. Our source code and data are
available at: link.

1

Introduction

Object-centric representation learning refers to the ability to decompose the complex natural scene into
multiple object entities and establish the relationships among these objects [29, 24, 14, 38, 39, 37, 22].
It is important in multiple applications, such as visual perception, scene understanding, reasoning,
and human-object interaction [45, 2]. However, learning to extract object-centric representations
from complex natural scenes in an unsupervised manner remains a challenge in machine vision.
Recent works attempt to overcome this challenge by relying on image or feature reconstructions
from object-centric representations as supervision signals [29, 38, 22, 37] (Figure 1). However,
these reconstructions have several caveats. First, these methods often require an additional decoder
network, resulting in computation overheads and memory inefficiency. Moreover, these methods
focus excessively on reconstructing unnecessary details at the pixel or feature levels and sometimes
fail to capture object-centric representations from a holistic view.
To mitigate issues from reconstructions, some studies [47, 19] introduce mutual information maximization between predicted object-centric representations and feature maps. Building upon this idea,
contrastive learning has become a powerful tool in unsupervised object-centric learning. The recent
works [21, 5] propose to learn the spatial-temporal correspondences between a sequence of video
frames with contrastive random walks. The objective is to maximize the likelihood of returning to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

