Flow: Per-instance Personalized Federated Learning

Kunjal Panchal
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
kpanchal@umass.edu
Nisarg Parikh
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
parikh.nis@northeastern.edu

Sunav Choudhary
Adobe Research
Bangalore, India
schoudha@adobe.com

Lijun Zhang, Hui Guan
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
{lijunzhang, huiguan}@umass.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) suffers from data heterogeneity, where the diverse data
distributions across clients make it challenging to train a single global model effectively. Existing personalization approaches aim to address the data heterogeneity
issue by creating a personalized model for each client from the global model that
fits their local data distribution. However, these personalized models may achieve
lower accuracy than the global model in some clients, resulting in limited performance improvement compared to that without personalization. To overcome this
limitation, we propose a per-instance personalization FL algorithm Flow. Flow
creates dynamic personalized models that are adaptive not only to each client’s data
distributions but also to each client’s data instances. The personalized model allows
each instance to dynamically determine whether it prefers the local parameters
or its global counterpart to make correct predictions, thereby improving clients’
accuracy. We provide theoretical analysis on the convergence of Flow and empirically demonstrate the superiority of Flow in improving clients’ accuracy compared
to state-of-the-art personalization approaches on both vision and language-based
tasks. The source code is available on GitHub 1 .

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning paradigm that enables edge devices, known
as “clients”, which collaboratively train a machine learning model called a “global model” [1].
However, because the server, which is the FL training orchestrator, does not have access to or
knowledge of client data distributions, it poses a challenge of statistical heterogeneity [2, 3]. This
heterogeneity hinders the server’s ability to train an ML model on a large quantity and variety of
data and also impacts the client’s ability to benefit from a generalizable model without sharing
any information about its data. To address this challenge, personalization has been studied [4, 5]
to improve prediction performance. Recent literature consistently demonstrates that personalized
models achieve higher prediction performance than the global model aggregated over clients [5–10].
These approaches typically create a personalized model specific to each client’s data distribution, and
thus we refer to them as “per-client personalization”.
1

https://github.com/Astuary/Flow

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

