SyncDiffusion: Coherent Montage via Synchronized
Joint Diffusions

Yuseung Lee

Kunho Kim

Hyunjin Kim
KAIST

Minhyuk Sung

{phillip0701,kaist984,rlaguswls98,mhsung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The remarkable capabilities of pretrained image diffusion models have been utilized not only for generating fixed-size images but also for creating panoramas.
However, naive stitching of multiple images often results in visible seams. Recent
techniques have attempted to address this issue by performing joint diffusions in
multiple windows and averaging latent features in overlapping regions. However,
these approaches, which focus on seamless montage generation, often yield incoherent outputs by blending different scenes within a single image. To overcome
this limitation, we propose S YNC D IFFUSION, a plug-and-play module that synchronizes multiple diffusions through gradient descent from a perceptual similarity
loss. Specifically, we compute the gradient of the perceptual loss using the predicted denoised images at each denoising step, providing meaningful guidance
for achieving coherent montages. Our experimental results demonstrate that our
method produces significantly more coherent outputs for text-guided panorama
generation compared to previous methods (66.35% vs. 33.65% in our user study)
while still maintaining fidelity (as assessed by GIQA) and compatibility with the
input prompt (as measured by CLIP score). We further demonstrate the versatility
of our method across three plug-and-play applications: layout-guided image generation, conditional image generation and 360-degree panorama generation. Our
project page is at https://syncdiffusion.github.io.

Figure 1: Comparison of panoramas generated with prompt “A photo of a rock concert” by Blended
Latent Diffusion [1] (top), MultiDiffusion [3] (middle), and our S YNC D IFFUSION (bottom). Blended
Latent Diffusion, when applied on image extrapolation, often generates visible seams and repetitive
patterns. MultiDiffusion creates seamless panoramas but fails to achieve global coherence across the
image. In contrast, our S YNC D IFFUSION synchronizes windows across the panorama by increasing
the perceptual similarity of the denoised output predictions. This results in significantly more coherent
panorama outputs.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

