Adversarial Robustness in Graph Neural Networks:
A Hamiltonian Approach

Kai Zhao∗

Nanyang Technological University

Qiyu Kang∗ †
Nanyang Technological University

Rui She
Nanyang Technological University

Yang Song∗
C3 AI, Singapore

Sijie Wang
Nanyang Technological University

Wee Peng Tay
Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial perturbations, including those that affect both node features and graph topology. This paper investigates GNNs derived from diverse neural flows, concentrating on their connection to various stability notions such as BIBO stability, Lyapunov stability,
structural stability, and conservative stability. We argue that Lyapunov stability,
despite its common use, does not necessarily ensure adversarial robustness. Inspired by physics principles, we advocate for the use of conservative Hamiltonian neural flows to construct GNNs that are robust to adversarial attacks. The
adversarial robustness of different neural flow GNNs is empirically compared
on several benchmark datasets under a variety of adversarial attacks. Extensive
numerical experiments demonstrate that GNNs leveraging conservative Hamiltonian flows with Lyapunov stability substantially improve robustness against
adversarial perturbations. The implementation code of experiments is available at
https://github.com/zknus/NeurIPS-2023-HANG-Robustness.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) [1–8] have achieved great success in inference tasks involving graphstructured data, including applications from social media networks, molecular chemistry, and mobility
networks. However, GNNs are known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks [9]. To fool a trained
GNN, adversaries can either add new nodes to the graph during the inference phase or remove/add
edges from/to the graph. The former is called an injection attack [10–13], and the latter is called a
modification attack [14–16]. In some works [9, 17], node feature perturbations are also considered to
enable stronger modification attacks.
Neural ordinary differential equation (ODE) networks [18] have recently gained popularity due to their
inherent robustness [19–24]. Neural ODEs can be considered as a continuous analog of ResNet [25].
Many neural ODE networks have since been proposed, including but not limited to [19, 20, 26–28].
Using neural ODEs, we can constrain the input and output of a neural network to follow certain
physics laws. Injecting physics constraints to black-box neural networks improves neural networks’
explainability. More recently, neural ODEs have also been successfully applied to GNNs by modeling
∗
†

First three authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence to: Qiyu Kang <kang0080@e.ntu.edu.sg>

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

