Bounded rationality in
structured density estimation
Tianyuan Teng∗
Center for Life Sciences,
Peking University
tengtianyuan@pku.edu.cn

Li Kevin Wenliang∗,
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit,
University College London
kevinli@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Hang Zhang 
School of Psychological and Cognitive
Sciences, Peking University
hang.zhang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning to accurately represent environmental uncertainty is crucial for
adaptive and optimal behaviors in various cognitive tasks. However, it
remains unclear how the human brain, constrained by finite cognitive resources, internalise the highly structured environmental uncertainty. In this
study, we explore how these learned distributions deviate from the ground
truth, resulting in observable inconsistency in a novel structured density
estimation task. During each trial, human participants were asked to learn
and report the latent probability distribution functions underlying sequentially presented independent observations. As the number of observations
increased, the reported predictive density became closer to the ground truth.
Nevertheless, we observed an intriguing inconsistency in human structure
estimation, specifically a large error in the number of reported clusters.
Such inconsistency is invariant to the scale of the distribution and persists
across stimulus modalities. We modeled uncertainty learning as approximate Bayesian inference in a nonparametric mixture prior of distributions.
Human reports were best explained under resource rationality embodied in
a decaying tendency towards model expansion. Our study offers insights
into human cognitive processes under uncertainty and lays the groundwork
for further exploration of resource-rational representations in the brain under more complex tasks.

1

Introduction

We study the remarkable ability of humans to learn probabilistic distributions based on
experiences in new environments, a skill essential for good performance in a wide range of
downstream perceptual [1–4] and cognitive [5–10] tasks. This ability manifests in everyday
experiences, such as when a person learns to communicate with others of varying accents
∗

Equal contributions.  Co-corresponding authors. T.T. is now at Max Planck Institute for
Biological Cybernetics, Germany. L.K.W. is now at Google DeepMind. H.Z. is also aﬀiliated with
Beijing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental Health, PKU-IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain
Research, and PKU-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences at Peking University, and Chinese Institute
for Brain Research, Beijing.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

