Synthetic Experience Replay

Cong Lu∗, Philip J. Ball∗ , Yee Whye Teh, Jack Parker-Holder
University of Oxford

Abstract
A key theme in the past decade has been that when large neural networks and
large datasets combine they can produce remarkable results. In deep reinforcement
learning (RL), this paradigm is commonly made possible through experience
replay, whereby a dataset of past experiences is used to train a policy or value
function. However, unlike in supervised or self-supervised learning, an RL agent
has to collect its own data, which is often limited. Thus, it is challenging to reap
the benefits of deep learning, and even small neural networks can overfit at the
start of training. In this work, we leverage the tremendous recent progress in
generative modeling and propose Synthetic Experience Replay (S YNTH ER), a
diffusion-based approach to flexibly upsample an agent’s collected experience.
We show that S YNTH ER is an effective method for training RL agents across
offline and online settings, in both proprioceptive and pixel-based environments. In
offline settings, we observe drastic improvements when upsampling small offline
datasets and see that additional synthetic data also allows us to effectively train
larger networks. Furthermore, S YNTH ER enables online agents to train with a
much higher update-to-data ratio than before, leading to a significant increase in
sample efficiency, without any algorithmic changes. We believe that synthetic
training data could open the door to realizing the full potential of deep learning for
replay-based RL algorithms from limited data. Finally, we open-source our code at
https://github.com/conglu1997/SynthER.

Data Augmentation Methods
SynthER
Additive Noise
Dynamics Noise
Multiplicative Noise
None

Data-Efficient Online RL
SAC (SynthER)
REDQ
SAC

0

20

40

60

Normalized Return

80

(a) IQL [41] on a reduced 15% subset of
walker2d medium-replay [21].

0

20

40

60

Normalized Return

80

100

(b) SAC [24] on 6 DeepMind Control Suite [71]
and OpenAI Gym [10] environments.

Figure 1: Upsampling data using S YNTH ER greatly outperforms explicit data augmentation schemes for small
offline datasets and data-efficient algorithms in online RL without any algorithmic changes. Moreover, synthetic
data from S YNTH ER may readily be added to any algorithm utilizing experience replay. Full results in Section 4.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, the combination of large datasets [14, 63] and ever deeper neural networks
[15, 25, 43, 73] has led to a series of more generally capable models [11, 56, 58]. In reinforcement
learning (RL, Sutton and Barto [67]), agents typically learn online from their own experience. Thus,
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to cong.lu@stats.ox.ac.uk and ball@robots.ox.ac.uk.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

