Perceptual Kalman Filters: Online State Estimation
under a Perfect Perceptual-Quality Constraint

Dror Freirich
Technion - Israel
Institute of Technology
drorfrc@gmail.com

Tomer Michaeli
Technion - Israel
Institute of Technology
tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il

Ron Meir
Technion - Israel
Institute of Technology
rmeir@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Many practical settings call for the reconstruction of temporal signals from corrupted or missing data. Classic examples include decoding, tracking, signal enhancement and denoising. Since the reconstructed signals are ultimately viewed
by humans, it is desirable to achieve reconstructions that are pleasing to human
perception. Mathematically, perfect perceptual-quality is achieved when the distribution of restored signals is the same as that of natural signals, a requirement
which has been heavily researched in static estimation settings (i.e. when a whole
signal is processed at once). Here, we study the problem of optimal causal filtering
under a perfect perceptual-quality constraint, which is a task of fundamentally
different nature. Specifically, we analyze a Gaussian Markov signal observed
through a linear noisy transformation. In the absence of perceptual constraints,
the Kalman filter is known to be optimal in the MSE sense for this setting. Here,
we show that adding the perfect perceptual quality constraint (i.e. the requirement
of temporal consistency), introduces a fundamental dilemma whereby the filter
may have to “knowingly” ignore new information revealed by the observations in
order to conform to its past decisions. This often comes at the cost of a significant
increase in the MSE (beyond that encountered in static settings). Our analysis
goes beyond the classic innovation process of the Kalman filter, and introduces the
novel concept of an unutilized information process. Using this tool, we present a
recursive formula for perceptual filters, and demonstrate the qualitative effects of
perfect perceptual-quality estimation on a video reconstruction problem.

1

Introduction

In many settings, it is desired to reconstruct a temporal signal from corrupted or missing data. Examples include decoding of transmitted communications, tracking targets based on noisy measurements,
enhancing audio signals, and denoising videos. Traditionally, restoration quality has been assessed by
distortion measures such as MSE. As a result, numerous methods targeted the minimization of such
measures, including the seminal work of Kalman [11]. However, in applications involving human
perception, one may favor reconstructions that cannot be told apart from valid signals. Mathematically, such perfect perceptual quality can be achieved only if the distribution of restored signals is the
same as that of “natural” signals.
Interestingly, it has been shown that good perceptual quality generally comes at the price of poor
distortion and vice versa. This phenomenon, known as the perception-distortion tradeoff, was first
studied in [3], and was later fully characterized in [8] for the particular setting where distortion is
measured by MSE and perception is measured by the Wasserstein-2 distance between the distribution
of estimated signals and the distribution of real signals. However, to date, all existing works addressed
the static (non-temporal) setting, in which the entire corrupted signal is available for processing all at
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

