Conservative Offline Policy Adaptation in Multi-Agent
Games
Chengjie Wu1 , Pingzhong Tang12 , Jun Yang3 , Yujing Hu4 ,
Tangjie Lv4 , Changjie Fan4 , Chongjie Zhang5
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
Turingsense
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
4
Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase
5
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis
wucj19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{kenshin,yangjun603}@tsinghua.edu.cn
{huyujing,hzlvtangjie,fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com
chongjie@wustl.edu

Abstract
Prior research on policy adaptation in multi-agent games has often relied on online
interaction with the target agent in training, which can be expensive and impractical
in real-world scenarios. Inspired by recent progress in offline reinforcement learning, this paper studies offline policy adaptation, which aims to utilize the target
agent’s behavior data to exploit its weakness or enable effective cooperation. We
investigate its distinct challenges of distributional shift and risk-free deviation, and
propose a novel learning objective, conservative offline adaptation, that optimizes
the worst-case performance against any dataset consistent proxy models. We propose an efficient algorithm called Constrained Self-Play (CSP) that incorporates
dataset information into regularized policy learning. We prove that CSP learns
a near-optimal risk-free offline adaptation policy upon convergence. Empirical
results demonstrate that CSP outperforms non-conservative baselines in various
environments, including Maze, predator-prey, MuJoCo, and Google Football.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown promise in learning collaborative or adversarial policies in
multi-agent games, including cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning [49, 6, 34, 5, 14, 40],
and learning in adversarial environments such as Texas hold’em and MOBA games [3, 45, 46, 50].
Research also recognizes the importance of adapting policy to different players in multi-agent games
[10, 26, 51]. For instance, in zero-sum games, although an approximate Nash equilibrium strategy
optimizes worst-case performance, it can be overly conservative when competing with opponents of
limited rationality and loses opportunities to exploit [27, 17, 24]. This problem is known as opponent
exploitation [17, 23, 41, 1, 28]. In cooperative games, the agent may be required to cooperate with
other competent players that have diverse behaviors [15, 11], instead of just a specific group of
teammates. The problem is investigated in recent literature such as ad-hoc cooperation [11] and
zero-shot coordination [15, 26, 51, 47]. In this paper, policy adaptation refers to the general ability
to learn to collaborate with or exploit other participants (called target agents) in multi-agent games.
This paper focuses on a specific problem of offline policy adaptation. In this setting, interaction with
the target agent is not available in training. Instead, we leverage the target agent’s behavior dataset
and maintain access to the game environment during training. The problem definition is illustrated
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

