SARAMIS: Simulation Assets for Robotic Assisted and
Minimally Invasive Surgery

Nina Montaña-Brown∗,1,2 Shaheer U. Saeed1,2 Ahmed Abdulaal1 Thomas Dowrick2
Yakup Kilic3 Sophie Wilkinson3 Jack Gao3 Meghavi Mashar3
Alkisti Stavropoulou1 Emma L. Thomson1 Zachary MC Baum1,2 Chloe He1,2
Simone Foti1,2 Brian Davidson3 Yipeng Hu1,2 Matthew J Clarkson1,2
2

1
Centre for Medical Image Computing, UCL, London, United Kingdom
Welcome/EPSRC Centre for Interventional And Surgical Sciences, London, United Kingdom
3
University College London Hospitals
∗
n.montanabrown@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Minimally-invasive surgery (MIS) and robot-assisted minimally invasive (RAMIS)
surgery offer well-documented benefits to patients such as reduced post-operative
pain and shorter hospital stays. However, the automation of MIS and RAMIS
through the use of AI has been slow due to difficulties in data acquisition and
curation, partially caused by the ethical considerations of training, testing and
deploying AI models in medical environments. We introduce SARAMIS, the first
large-scale dataset of anatomically derived 3D rendering assets of the human abdominal anatomy. Using previously existing, open-source CT datasets of the human
anatomy, we derive novel 3D meshes, tetrahedral volumes, textures and diffuse
maps for over 104 different anatomical targets in the human body, representing
the largest, open-source dataset of 3D rendering assets for synthetic simulation
of vision tasks in MIS+RAMIS, increasing the availability of openly available
3D meshes in the literature by three orders of magnitude. We supplement our
dataset with a series of GPU-enabled rendering environments, which can be used to
generate datasets for realistic MIS/RAMIS tasks. Finally, we present an example of
the use of SARAMIS assets for an autonomous navigation task in colonoscopy from
CT abdomen-pelvis scans for the first time in the literature. SARAMIS is publically
made available at https://github.com/NMontanaBrown/saramis/, with assets released under a CC-BY-NC-SA license.

1

Introduction

Laparoscopy and endoscopy are techniques in surgical and medical practice which involve inserting
video cameras into a patient in order to diagnose and treat a number of conditions, and have made it
possible to perform minimally invasive surgery (MIS). These techniques obviate the need for large
incisions at the operative site, replacing them with small incisions into which cameras and tools are
inserted to perform the intervention. The benefits of MIS have been well documented [8, 49, 71],
and can be summarised as follows: 1) Reduced post-operative pain, 2) Shortened hospital stays
[71, 47], 3) Improved rates of patient recovery [12], and 4) Lowered costs to hospital systems in a
number of interventions [8, 66, 47, 22]. Additionally, recent advances in robotics have enabled the
pairing of robotic elements with laparoscopic equipment, which provides further benefits such as
an improved ergonomic environment for surgeons [76] and the possibility of teleoperation [11]. In
tandem, (partially) autonomous robotic surgery has emerged as an increasingly important research
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

