Scaling Open-Vocabulary Object Detection

Matthias Minderer

Alexey Gritsenko

Neil Houlsby

Google DeepMind
{mjlm, agritsenko, neilhoulsby}@google.com

Abstract
Open-vocabulary object detection has benefited greatly from pretrained visionlanguage models, but is still limited by the amount of available detection training
data. While detection training data can be expanded by using Web image-text
pairs as weak supervision, this has not been done at scales comparable to imagelevel pretraining. Here, we scale up detection data with self-training, which
uses an existing detector to generate pseudo-box annotations on image-text pairs.
Major challenges in scaling self-training are the choice of label space, pseudoannotation filtering, and training efficiency. We present the OWLv2 model and
OWL-ST self-training recipe, which address these challenges. OWLv2 surpasses
the performance of previous state-of-the-art open-vocabulary detectors already
at comparable training scales (≈10M examples). However, with OWL-ST, we
can scale to over 1B examples, yielding further large improvement: With a ViTL/14 architecture, OWL-ST improves AP on LVIS rare classes, for which the
model has seen no human box annotations, from 31.2% to 44.6% (43% relative
improvement). OWL-ST unlocks Web-scale training for open-world localization,
similar to what has been seen for image classification and language modelling.
Code and checkpoints are available on GitHub.1

1

Introduction

Object detection is a core computer vision task with many real-world applications. Consequently,
there is great interest in improving detection models, especially in the open-vocabulary domain. For
image-level tasks, large improvements have been achieved through contrastive pretraining of visionlanguage models, which is massively scalable because it can use naturally abundant weak supervision
in the form of image-text pairs from the Web [30, 12, 29]. Since no such natural supervision data
exists for localization tasks, open-vocabulary detection models typically build on pretrained imagelevel encoders [9, 19, 26, 46, 22, 1, 39, 47]. However, due to the scarcity of detection data and the
fragility of pretrained representations, detection-training stages of these models have typically had to
be relatively brief, which limits final detection performance and scaling potential.
The scarcity of detection data can be addressed with self-training. In self-training, an existing
detector is used to predict bounding boxes on unlabeled images to generate data for training better
detectors [31, 48, 35]. By combining open-vocabulary detectors with Web image-text data, such
pseudo-labeling can produce practically unlimited amounts of open-vocabulary detection training
data that leverages the image-associated text for semantic supervision. While several works have
applied various forms of self-training to open-vocabulary object detection [46, 1, 47, 39, 38], they
have done so at relatively small scales, comparable to the size of human-annotated detection datasets
and much smaller than the datasets used for image-level training.
1

https://github.com/google-research/scenic/tree/main/scenic/projects/owl_vit

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

