TexQ: Zero-shot Network Quantization with Texture
Feature Distribution Calibration
Xinrui Chen, Yizhi Wang, Renao Yan∗, Yiqin Liu, Tian Guan∗ , Yonghong He
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
{cxr22, yz-wang22, yra21, liuyiqin20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{guantian, heyh}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Quantization is an effective way to compress neural networks. By reducing the
bit width of the parameters, the processing efﬁciency of neural network models at
edge devices can be notably improved. Most conventional quantization methods
utilize real datasets to optimize quantization parameters and ﬁne-tune. Due to
the inevitable privacy and security issues of real samples, the existing real-datadriven methods are no longer applicable. Thus, a natural method is to introduce
synthetic samples for zero-shot quantization (ZSQ). However, the conventional
synthetic samples fail to retain the detailed texture feature distributions, which
severely limits the knowledge transfer and performance of the quantized model.
In this paper, a novel ZSQ method, TexQ is proposed to address this issue. We
ﬁrst synthesize a calibration image and extract its calibration center for each class
with a texture feature energy distribution calibration method. Then, the calibration
centers are used to guide the generator to synthesize samples. Finally, the mixup
knowledge distillation module is introduced to diversify the synthetic samples for
ﬁne-tuning. Extensive experiments on CIFAR10/100 and ImageNet show that
TexQ is observed to perform state-of-the-art in low bit width quantization. For
example, when ResNet-18 is quantized to 3-bit, TexQ achieves a 12.18% top-1
accuracy increase on ImageNet compared to state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Limited by the computing capability of edge devices such as mobile phones, deep neural network
models inevitably require compression for terminal scenarios [1, 2]. Compared to popular compressing methods such as pruning and distillation, quantization is easier to achieve lightweight and
hardware compatibility [3, 4, 5, 6]. By compressing ﬂoating-point parameters to low-bit ﬁxed-point
integer, quantization reduces the resource footprint and improves computing efﬁciency. For example, when moving the parameters tensor (weights and activation) from 32 to 4 bits, the memory
consumption is reduced by a factor of 8, while the computational overhead of matrix multiplication
goes down by a factor of 64 at a squared rate. Most research on quantization focuses on quantizationaware training (QAT) [7, 8, 9, 10] and post-training quantization (PTQ) [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. QAT
introduces fake quantization nodes when training and achieves performance close to full precision.
However, it relies on the full training set and lacks a uniform speciﬁcation, making it unfriendly
to deploy. Thus, PTQ has gained attention, which only requires a small part of the training set to
statistically optimize the quantization parameters [17, 18, 19, 20].
Due to privacy and security constraints, access to certain real data might be prohibited [21], such
as patient medical images, conﬁdential business information, etc. Therefore, zero-shot quantization
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

