Uniform Convergence with Square-Root
Lipschitz Loss

Lijia Zhou
University of Chicago
zlj@uchicago.edu

Zhen Dai
University of Chicago
zhen9@uchicago.edu

Frederic Koehler
Stanford University
fkoehler@stanford.edu

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
nati@ttic.edu
Collaboration on the Theoretical Foundations of Deep Learning (deepfoundations.ai)

Abstract
We establish generic uniform convergence guarantees for Gaussian data in terms
of the Rademacher complexity of the hypothesis class and the Lipschitz constant
of the square root of the scalar loss function. We show how these guarantees
substantially generalize previous results based on smoothness (Lipschitz constant
of the derivative), and allow us to handle the broader class of square-root-Lipschitz
losses, which includes also non-smooth loss functions appropriate for studying
phase retrieval and ReLU regression, as well as rederive and better understand
“optimistic rate” and interpolation learning guarantees.

1

Introduction

The phenomenon of "interpolation learning", where a learning algorithm perfectly interpolates noisy
training labels while still generalizing well to unseen data, has attracted significant interest in recent
years. As Shamir (2022) pointed out, one of the difficulties in understanding interpolation learning
is that we need to determine which loss function we should use to analyze the test error. In linear
regression, interpolating the square loss is equivalent to interpolating many other losses (such as
the absolute loss) on the training set. Similarly, in the context of linear classification, many works
(Soudry et al. 2018; Ji and Telgarsky 2019; Muthukumar et al. 2021) have shown that optimizing
the logistic, exponential, or even square loss would all lead to the maximum margin solution, which
interpolates the hinge loss. Even though there are many possible loss functions to choose from to
analyze the population error, consistency is often possible with respect to only one loss function
because different loss functions generally have different population error minimizers.
In linear regression, it has been shown that minimal norm interpolant can be consistent with respect to
the square loss (Bartlett et al. 2020; Muthukumar et al. 2020; Negrea et al. 2020; Koehler et al. 2021),
while the appropriate loss for benign overfitting in linear classification is the squared hinge loss
(Shamir 2022; Zhou et al. 2022). In this line of work, uniform convergence has emerged as a general
and useful technique to understand interpolation learning (Koehler et al. 2021; Zhou et al. 2022).
Though the Lipschitz contraction technique has been very useful to establish uniform convergence in
classical learning theory, the appropriate loss functions to study interpolation learning (such as the
square loss and the squared hinge loss) are usually not Lipschitz. In fact, many papers (Nagarajan and
Kolter 2019; Zhou et al. 2020; Negrea et al. 2020) have shown that the traditional notion of uniform
convergence implied by Lipschitz contraction fails in the setting of interpolation learning. Instead, we
need to find other properties of the loss function to establish a different type of uniform convergence.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

