Learning Curves for
Deep Structured Gaussian Feature Models

Jacob A. Zavatone-Veth1,2 and Cengiz Pehlevan3,2,4
1
Department of Physics, 2 Center for Brain Science,
3
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
4
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence,
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
jzavatoneveth@g.harvard.edu, cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
In recent years, significant attention in deep learning theory has been devoted
to analyzing when models that interpolate their training data can still generalize
well to unseen examples. Many insights have been gained from studying models
with multiple layers of Gaussian random features, for which one can compute
precise generalization asymptotics. However, few works have considered the
effect of weight anisotropy; most assume that the random features are generated
using independent and identically distributed Gaussian weights, and allow only for
structure in the input data. Here, we use the replica trick from statistical physics to
derive learning curves for models with many layers of structured Gaussian features.
We show that allowing correlations between the rows of the first layer of features
can aid generalization, while structure in later layers is generally detrimental. Our
results shed light on how weight structure affects generalization in a simple class
of solvable models.

1

Introduction

Characterizing how data structure and model architecture affect generalization performance is among
the foremost goals of deep learning theory [1, 2]. A fruitful line of inquiry has focused on the
properties of a class of simplified models that are asymptotically solvable: neural networks in which
only the readout layer is trained and other weights are random, which are known as random feature
models (RFMs) [3–21]. Though RFMs cannot capture the effects of representation learning on
generalization in richly-trained neural networks [13, 22, 23], they have substantially advanced our
understanding of how data structure and model architecture interact to give rise to a wide array of
generalization phenomena observed in deep learning [1–5, 7–19, 24, 25].
Of particular interest is the question of when models overfit benignly, that is, when they generalize well
despite having been trained to perfectly interpolate their training data. Here, much intuition has been
gained by studying minimum-norm kernel interpolation—that is, the ridgeless limit of kernel ridge
regression—with RFM kernels, for which precise generalization asymptotics can be computed using
tools from random matrix theory. These asymptotics lead to a precise picture of how the spectrum of
the random feature kernel and the structure of the task interact to determine generalization. These
analyses are facilitated by universality results, often termed Gaussian equivalence theorems, that state
that the generalization error of a nonlinear RFM is asymptotically equal to that of a linear Gaussian
model with an effective noise term resulting from nonlinearity [3, 7, 10, 25, 26]. In the past few years,
Gaussian equivalence theorems for ever more general classes of RFMs have been established: within
this year Schröder et al. [20] and Bosch et al. [21] have established Gaussian equivalence theorems
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

