Learning to Search Feasible and Infeasible Regions of
Routing Problems with Flexible Neural k-Opt

Yining Ma
National University of Singapore
yiningma@u.nus.edu

Zhiguang Cao∗
Singapore Management University
zgcao@smu.edu.sg

Yeow Meng Chee
National University of Singapore
ymchee@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we present Neural k-Opt (NeuOpt), a novel learning-to-search (L2S)
solver for routing problems. It learns to perform flexible k-opt exchanges based
on a tailored action factorization method and a customized recurrent dual-stream
decoder. As a pioneering work to circumvent the pure feasibility masking scheme
and enable the autonomous exploration of both feasible and infeasible regions, we
then propose the Guided Infeasible Region Exploration (GIRE) scheme, which supplements the NeuOpt policy network with feasibility-related features and leverages
reward shaping to steer reinforcement learning more effectively. Additionally, we
equip NeuOpt with Dynamic Data Augmentation (D2A) for more diverse searches
during inference. Extensive experiments on the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP)
and Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP) demonstrate that our NeuOpt
not only significantly outstrips existing (masking-based) L2S solvers, but also showcases superiority over the learning-to-construct (L2C) and learning-to-predict (L2P)
solvers. Notably, we offer fresh perspectives on how neural solvers can handle VRP
constraints. Our code is available: https://github.com/yining043/NeuOpt.

1

Introduction

Vehicle Routing Problems (VRPs), prevalent in various real-world applications, present NP-hard
combinatorial challenges that necessitate efficient search algorithms [1, 2]. In recent years, significant
progress has been made in developing deep (reinforcement) learning-based solvers (e.g., [3–11]),
which automates the tedious algorithm design with minimal human intervention in a data-driven
fashion. Impressively, these neural solvers developed over the past five years have closed the gap to
or even surpassed some traditional hand-crafted solvers that have evolved for several decades [5, 12].
In general, neural methods for VRPs can be categorized into learning-to-construct (L2C), learning-tosearch (L2S), and learning-to-predict (L2P) solvers, each offering unique advantages while suffering
respective drawbacks. L2C solvers (e.g., [4, 13]) are recognised for their fast solution construction but
may struggle to escape local optima. L2P solvers excel at predicting crucial information (e.g., edge
heatmaps [14, 15]), thereby simplifying the search especially for large-scale instances, but may lack
the generality to efficiently handle VRP constraints beyond the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP).
L2S solvers (e.g., [8, 9]) are designed to learn exploration in the search space directly; however, their
search efficiency is still limited and lags behind the state-of-the-art L2C and L2P solvers. In this
paper, we delve into the limitations of existing L2S solvers, and aim to unleash their full potential.
∗

Zhiguang Cao is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

