Reward Finetuning for Faster and More Accurate
Unsupervised Object Discovery

Katie Z Luo∗,1,† Zhenzhen Liu∗,1 Xiangyu Chen∗,1 Yurong You1 Sagie Benaim2 Cheng Perng Phoo1
Mark Campbell1 Wen Sun1 Bharath Hariharan1 Kilian Q. Weinberger1
1
2
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Abstract
Recent advances in machine learning have shown that Reinforcement Learning
from Human Feedback (RLHF) can improve machine learning models and align
them with human preferences. Although very successful for Large Language Models (LLMs), these advancements have not had a comparable impact in research for
autonomous vehicles—where alignment with human expectations can be imperative. In this paper, we propose to adapt similar RL-based methods to unsupervised
object discovery, i.e. learning to detect objects from LiDAR points without any
training labels. Instead of labels, we use simple heuristics to mimic human feedback.
More explicitly, we combine multiple heuristics into a simple reward function that
positively correlates its score with bounding box accuracy, i.e., boxes containing
objects are scored higher than those without. We start from the detector’s own predictions to explore the space and reinforce boxes with high rewards through gradient
updates. Empirically, we demonstrate that our approach is not only more accurate,
but also orders of magnitudes faster to train compared to prior works on object
discovery. Code is available at https://github.com/katieluo88/DRIFT.

1

Introduction

Self-driving cars need to accurately detect the moving objects around them in order to move safely.
Most modern 3D object detectors rely on supervised training from 3D bounding box labels. However,
these 3D bounding box labels are hard to acquire from human annotation. Furthermore, this supervised
approach relies on a pre-decided vocabulary of classes, which can cause problems when the car
encounters novel objects that were never annotated.
Our prior work, MODEST [55], introduced the first method to train 3D detectors without labeled data.
In that work, we point out that instead of specifying millions of labels, one can succinctly describe
heuristics for what a good detector output should look like. For example, one can specify that detector
boxes should mostly enclose transient foreground points rather than background ones; they should
roughly be of an appropriate size; their sides should be aligned with the LiDAR points; their bottom
should touch the ground, etc. Although such heuristics are great for scoring a set of boxes proposed
by a detector, training a detector on them is hard for two reasons: First, these heuristics are often
non-linear, non-differentiable functions of the detector parameters (for example, a slight shift of
the box can cause all foreground points to fall off.) Second, existing object detection pipelines use
carefully designed training objectives that heavily rely on labeled boxes, that are difficult to modify
(for example, PointRCNN [40] infers point labels from box labels and uses these for training). For
these reasons, MODEST had to utilize an admittedly slow self-training pipeline to incrementally
incorporate common-sense heuristics.
∗
†

Denotes equal contribution.
Correspondences could be directed to kzl6@cornell.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

