ImageNet-Hard: The Hardest Images Remaining from
a Study of the Power of Zoom and Spatial Biases in
Image Classification

Mohammad Reza Taesiri
University of Alberta
mtaesiri@gmail.com
Sarra Habchi
Ubisoft
sarra.habchi@ubisoft.com

Giang Nguyen
Auburn University
nguyengiangbkhn@gmail.com
Cor-Paul Bezemer
University of Alberta
bezemer@ualberta.ca

Anh Nguyen
Auburn University
anh.ng8@gmail.com

Abstract
Image classifiers are information-discarding machines, by design. Yet, how these
models discard information remains mysterious. We hypothesize that one way
for image classifiers to reach high accuracy is to zoom to the most discriminative
region in the image and then extract features from there to predict image labels,
discarding the rest of the image. Studying six popular networks ranging from
AlexNet to CLIP, we find that proper framing of the input image can lead to the
correct classification of 98.91% of ImageNet images. Furthermore, we uncover
positional biases in various datasets, especially a strong center bias in two popular
datasets: ImageNet-A and ObjectNet. Finally, leveraging our insights into the
potential of zooming, we propose a test-time augmentation (TTA) technique that
improves classification accuracy by forcing models to explicitly perform zoom-in
operations before making predictions. Our method is more interpretable, accurate,
and faster than MEMO, a state-of-the-art (SOTA) TTA method. We introduce
ImageNet-Hard, a new benchmark that challenges SOTA classifiers including large
vision-language models even when optimal zooming is allowed.

1

Introduction

Since the release of AlexNet in 2012 [38], deep neural networks have set many ImageNet (IN) [59]
accuracy records [38, 23]. While many papers reported improved learning algorithms or architectures,
little is known about how the inner workings of image classifiers actually evolve. The success is
often attributed to a network’s ability to detect more objects [9] and a variety of facets of each object
(i.e., invariance to style, pose, and form changes) [50, 21]. By aggregating the information from all
the visual cues in a scene, a classifier somehow chooses a better label for the image. For example,
Figs. 13–14 in [58] show that a model detects both dogs and cats in the same image and only discards
the dog features right before the classification layer to arrive at a tiger cat prediction.
When processing an image, a network may implicitly zoom in or out (defined in Sec. 3) to the most
discriminative image region ignoring the rest of the image (Fig. 1a), and then extract that localized
region’s features to predict image labels. We hypothesize that the improved image classification may
largely be due to the networks accurately zooming to the discriminative areas (e.g., junco and magpie
birds in Fig. 1a) rather than more accurately describing them (i.e. generating better features of these
two birds). In this work, we present supporting evidence for our zooming hypothesis.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

