SPAE: Semantic Pyramid AutoEncoder
for Multimodal Generation with Frozen LLMs
Lijun Yu‡†∗ Yong Cheng†
Yanping Huang†

Zhiruo Wang‡

David A. Ross†

Kevin Murphy†
†

Vivek Kumar†

Irfan Essa†

Wolfgang Macherey†

Yonatan Bisk‡

Alexander G. Hauptmann‡

Ming-Hsuan Yang†

Lu Jiang†‡

Google, ‡ Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
In this work, we introduce Semantic Pyramid AutoEncoder (SPAE) for enabling
frozen LLMs to perform both understanding and generation tasks involving nonlinguistic modalities such as images or videos. SPAE converts between raw pixels
and interpretable lexical tokens (or words) extracted from the LLM’s vocabulary.
The resulting tokens capture both the semantic meaning and the fine-grained
details needed for visual reconstruction, effectively translating the visual content
into a language comprehensible to the LLM, and empowering it to perform a
wide array of multimodal tasks. Our approach is validated through in-context
learning experiments with frozen PaLM 2 and GPT 3.5 on a diverse set of image
understanding and generation tasks. Our method marks the first successful attempt
to enable a frozen LLM to generate image content while surpassing state-of-the-art
performance in image understanding tasks, under the same setting, by over 25%.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) empowered by Transformers [38] have achieved remarkable progress
in addressing a broad spectrum of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks [4, 8, 28, 2]. With the
continuous increases in model size and training data, LLMs are gradually becoming more versatile
and agnostic to specific tasks, unlocking new capabilities in solving complex AI tasks [42], like
question answering, code generation, reasoning, mathematics problem-solving, and understanding
humor, among various other applications [2, 28].
LLMs capture rich conceptual knowledge about the world in their lexical embeddings. This raises a
question: if provided with the appropriate visual representations as input, are frozen LLMs capable of
solving tasks in visual modalities? Very recently, there have been notable advancements in extending
the capabilities of frozen LLMs to tackle image understanding and retrieval tasks [21, 27]. However,
generating a different modality using a frozen LLM that has not been explicitly trained on that
modality has proven to be challenging and has had little success.
To facilitate LLMs for such cross-modal tasks, we propose to learn a vector quantizer to map an
image, or some other non-linguistic (“foreign”) modality, to the token space of a frozen LLM. This
effectively translates the image into a language that the LLM can comprehend, enabling us to leverage
the generative abilities of the LLM to perform image understanding and generation tasks without
having to train on image-text pairs. Specifically, our new approach is that, given an image prompt,
convert it to a token space with our learned encoder, use the LLM to generate suitable lexical tokens,
and convert back to pixel space with our learned decoder.
∗

Work partially done during a research internship at Google Research.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

