Cascading Contextual Assortment Bandits
Hyun-jun Choi
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
nschj1@snu.ac.kr

Rajan Udwani
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, USA
rudwani@berkeley.edu

Min-hwan Oh
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
minoh@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a new combinatorial bandit model, the cascading contextual assortment
bandit. This model serves as a generalization of both existing cascading bandits
and assortment bandits, broadening their applicability in practice. For this model,
we propose our first UCB bandit algorithm, UCB-CCA.
We prove that this algorithm
p
achieves a T -step regret upper-bound of Õ( 1 d T ), sharper than existing bounds
for cascading contextual bandits by eliminating dependence on cascade length K.
To improve the dependence on problem-dependent constant , we introduce our
second algorithm, UCB-CCA+, which leverages
a new Bernstein-type concentrap
tion result. This algorithm achieves Õ(d T ) without dependence on  in the
leading term. We substantiate our theoretical claims with numerical experiments,
demonstrating the practical efficacy of our proposed methods.

1

Introduction

Sequential interactions between users and a recommender agent are often modeled as the multi-armed
bandit problem or one of its variants [15]. In practice, a user typically encounters multiple items per
round of interaction rather than a solitary item. Two popular models that capture this aspect are the
cascading bandit [13; 14; 18] and the assortment bandit [4; 5; 7; 22], also often known as multinomial
logistic bandits.
In the cascading bandit problem [13; 14; 18; 29; 25; 28], the agent selects a cascade of K items from
a total of N items each round. These selected items are sequentially presented one at a time to a user.
If the user clicks on a presented item, the cascading round ends. If not, the agent proceeds to reveal
the next item from the cascade. This process continues until either the user clicks on an item or
all K items in the cascade have been presented without a click. Once a round ends, a next round
commences with a newly selected list of K items.
In the assortment bandit problem [4; 5; 7; 8; 9; 7; 22; 23], the agent presents an assortment of M
items all at once, then receives user choice feedback on the assortment. A user may opt for one of
the M items presented or choose none at all, concluding the round in either case. Both cascading
and assortment bandit problems are significant combinatorial variations of the multi-armed bandit
problem and have been extensively examined both theoretically and in practice.
However, a more commonly encountered scheme in real-world applications is a generalization of
these two settings, where a cascade of assortments is sequentially revealed in each round. This
approach is evident in video streaming services, where assortments of recommended contents are
revealed as users scroll through webpages or mobile applications. Similar experiences can also
be found in various online retail services and search engines. To address this, we propose a new
interactive model, which we term cascading assortment bandits. In the cascading assortment bandits,
the agent chooses a cascade of assortments that consists of K assortments with each assortment
containing M items. The agent reveals one assortment at a time in the cascade. The cascade concludes
if the user clicks on one of the items contained in a given assortment. If not, the agent proceeds
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

