A Dataset for Analyzing Streaming Media
Performance over HTTP/3 Browsers
Sapna Chaudhary
IIIT Delhi
sapnac@iiitd.ac.in

Naval Kumar Shukla
IIIT Delhi
naval19065@iiitd.ac.in

Sandip Chakraborty
IIT Kharagpur
sandipc@cse.iitkgp.ac.in

Mukulika Maity
IIIT Delhi
mukulika@iiitd.ac.in

Abstract
HTTP/3 is a new application layer protocol supported by most browsers. It uses
QUIC as an underlying transport protocol. QUIC provides multiple benefits,
like faster connection establishment, reduced latency, and improved connection
migration. Hence, popular browsers like Chrome/Chromium, Microsoft Edge,
Apple Safari, and Mozilla Firefox have started supporting it. This paper presents
an HTTP/3-supported browser dataset collection tool named H3B. It collects
the application and network-level logs during YouTube streaming. We consider
YouTube one of the most popular video streaming applications supporting QUIC.
Using this tool, we collected a dataset of over 5936 YouTube sessions covering
5464 hours of streaming over 5 different geographical locations and 5 different
bandwidth patterns. We believe our tool and as well as the dataset 1 could be
used in multiple applications such as a better configuration of application/transport
protocols based on the network conditions, intelligent integration of network and
application, predicting YouTube’s QoE, etc. We analyze the dataset and observe
that during an HTTP/3 streaming, not all requests are served by HTTP/3. Instead,
whenever the network condition is unfavorable, the browser chooses to fallback,
and the application requests are transmitted using HTTP/2 over the old-standing
transport protocol TCP. We observe that such switching of protocols impacts the
performance of video streaming applications.

1

Introduction

HTTP/3 is the latest variant of the popular Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), which has recently
been widely adopted by major Internet giants such as Google, Facebook, Cloudflare, Akamai, Apple,
and many others. Unlike its predecessors, HTTP/3 uses QUIC [20, 14] as the underlying transport
protocol. QUIC is expected to provide reduced latency and better application QoE (Quality of
Experience) compared to TCP, the widely used transport protocol for the Internet, for the past three
decades. The QUIC developers [23] and several other works [21, 37, 11, 39, 44] have shown the
superiority of QUIC compared to TCP in terms of supporting better QoE with less stall for video
streaming.
In this paper, we present a large-scale dataset containing network-application information for 5464 of
YouTube streaming sessions over popular browsers supporting both HTTP/3 and the legacy HTTP/2.
Notably, YouTube is one of the most popular streaming media services on the Internet today. To
1

https://github.com/NKShukla/H3B (Access:December 19, 2023)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

