Spuriosity Rankings:
Sorting Data to Measure and Mitigate Biases

Mazda Moayeri1
1

Wenxiao Wang1

Sahil Singla2,1∗

University of Maryland

{mmoayeri, wwx, sfeizi} @umd.edu,

2

Soheil Feizi1

Google

sasingla@google.com

Figure 1: Spuriosity rankings sort images based on the presence of spurious cues. The rankings reveal
hidden spurious features that models rely on, like rippling water, human hands, and flame in the dark
(right; top to bottom), and uncover minority subpopulations where spurious cues are absent (left).

Abstract
We present a simple but effective method to measure and mitigate model biases
caused by reliance on spurious cues. Instead of requiring costly changes to one’s
data or model training, our method better utilizes the data one already has by
sorting them. Specifically, we rank images within their classes based on spuriosity
(the degree to which common spurious cues are present), proxied via deep neural
features of an interpretable network. With spuriosity rankings, it is easy to identify
minority subpopulations (i.e. low spuriosity images) and assess model bias as the
gap in accuracy between high and low spuriosity images. One can even efficiently
remove a model’s bias at little cost to accuracy by finetuning its classification
head on low spuriosity images, resulting in fairer treatment of samples regardless
of spuriosity. We demonstrate our method on ImageNet, annotating 5000 classfeature dependencies (630 of which we find to be spurious) and generating a dataset
of 325k soft segmentations for these features along the way. Having computed
spuriosity rankings via the identified spurious neural features, we assess biases
for 89 diverse models and find that class-wise biases are highly correlated across
models. Our results suggest that model bias due to spurious feature reliance is
influenced far more by what the model is trained on than how it is trained.
*

Work carried out while at the University of Maryland.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

