Federated Linear Bandits
with Finite Adversarial Actions
Li Fan
University of Virginia
lf2by@virginia.edu

Ruida Zhou
Texas A&M University
ruida@tamu.edu

Chao Tian
Texas A&M University
chao.tian@tamu.edu

Cong Shen
University of Virginia
cong@virginia.edu

Abstract
We study a federated linear bandits model, where M clients communicate with a
central server to solve a linear contextual bandits problem with finite adversarial
action sets that may be different across clients. To address the unique challenges
of adversarial finite action sets, we propose the FedSupLinUCB algorithm, which
extends the principles of SupLinUCB and OFUL algorithms in linear
√ contextual
bandits. We prove that FedSupLinUCB achieves a total regret of Õ( dT ), where T
is the total number of arm pulls from all clients, and d is the ambient dimension of
the linear model. This matches the minimax lower bound and thus is order-optimal
(up to polylog terms). We study both asynchronous and synchronous cases and
2
show
√ that the communication cost can be controlled as O(dM log(d) log(T )) and
3
3
O( d M log(d)), respectively. The FedSupLinUCB design is further
extended
q P
T
to two scenarios: (1) variance-adaptive, where a total regret of Õ( d t=1 σt2 )
can be achieved with σt2 being the noise
√ variance of round t; and (2) adversarial
corruption, where a total regret of Õ( dT + dCp ) can be achieved with Cp being
the total corruption budget. Experiment results corroborate the theoretical analysis
and demonstrate the effectiveness of FedSupLinUCB on both synthetic and realworld datasets.

1

Introduction

In the canonical formulation of contextual bandits, a single player would repeatedly make arm-pulling
decisions based on contextual information with the goal of maximizing the long-term reward. With
the emerging federated learning paradigm (McMahan et al., 2017) where multiple clients and a
server jointly learn a global model with each client locally updating the model with its own data and
server only aggregating the local models periodically, researchers have started exploring contextual
bandits algorithms in such federated learning setting (Dubey and Pentland, 2020; Huang et al., 2021;
Li and Wang, 2022a,b). This federated contextual bandits framework broadens the applicability of
contextual bandits to practical scenarios such as recommender systems, clinical trials, and cognitive
radio. In these applications, although the goal is still to maximize the cumulative reward for the
overall system, decision-making and observations are naturally distributed at the participating clients.
Several intrinsic challenges arise with the federated contextual bandit formulation. One important
issue is that besides regret, we should also take into account the communication cost, which is
usually the system bottleneck. To reduce the communication cost while maintaining the same regret
guarantee, the clients should transmit the necessary information to the server only when the local
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

