Generalizing Nonlinear ICA Beyond Structural
Sparsity

Yujia Zheng1 , Kun Zhang1,2
Carnegie Mellon University
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{yujiazh, kunz1}@cmu.edu
1

Abstract
Nonlinear independent component analysis (ICA) aims to uncover the true latent
sources from their observable nonlinear mixtures. Despite its significance, the
identifiability of nonlinear ICA is known to be impossible without additional assumptions. Recent advances have proposed conditions on the connective structure
from sources to observed variables, known as Structural Sparsity, to achieve identifiability in an unsupervised manner. However, the sparsity constraint may not hold
universally for all sources in practice. Furthermore, the assumptions of bijectivity
of the mixing process and independence among all sources, which arise from the
setting of ICA, may also be violated in many real-world scenarios. To address these
limitations and generalize nonlinear ICA, we propose a set of new identifiability results in the general settings of undercompleteness, partial sparsity and source dependence, and flexible grouping structures. Specifically, we prove identifiability when
there are more observed variables than sources (undercomplete), and when certain
sparsity and/or source independence assumptions are not met for some changing
sources. Moreover, we show that even in cases with flexible grouping structures
(e.g., part of the sources can be divided into irreducible independent groups with
various sizes), appropriate identifiability results can also be established. Theoretical
claims are supported empirically on both synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

The unveiling of the true generating process of observations is fundamental to scientific discovery.
Nonlinear independent component analysis (ICA) provides a statistical framework that represents
a set of observed variables x as a nonlinear mixture of independent latent sources s, i.e., x = f (s).
Unlike linear ICA (Comon, 1994), the mixing function f can be an unknown nonlinear function, thus
generalizing the theory to more real-world tasks. However, the identifiability of nonlinear ICA has
been a long-standing problem for decades. The main obstacle is that, without additional assumptions,
there exist infinite spurious solutions returning independent variables that are mixtures of the true
sources (Hyvärinen and Pajunen, 1999). In the context of machine learning, this makes the theoretical
analysis of unsupervised learning of disentangled representations difficult (Locatello et al., 2019).
To overcome this challenge, recent work has introduced the auxiliary variable u, and assumed that
all sources are conditionally independent given u. Most of these methods require auxiliary variables
to be observable, such as class labels and domain indices (Hyvärinen and Morioka, 2016; Hyvärinen
et al., 2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020a; Sorrenson et al., 2020; Lachapelle et al., 2022; Lachapelle and
Lacoste-Julien, 2022), with the exceptions being those for time series (Hyvärinen and Morioka, 2017;
Hälvä et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2021, 2022). While the use of the auxiliary variable u allows for the
identifiability of nonlinear ICA with mild restrictions on the mixing process, it also necessitates a large
number of distinct values of u, which can be difficult to obtain in tasks with insufficient side informa37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

