A General Framework for Equivariant Neural
Networks on Reductive Lie Groups

Mario Geiger
Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, USA

Ilyes Batatia
Engineering Laboratory,
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ UK
Department of Chemistry,
ENS Paris-Saclay, Université Paris-Saclay
91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
ilyes.batatia@ens-paris-saclay.fr
Jose Munoz
EIA University, FTA Group
Antioquia, Colombia

Tess Smidt
Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, USA

Lior Silberman
Department of Mathematics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z2

Christoph Ortner
Department of Mathematics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z2

Abstract
Reductive Lie Groups, such as the orthogonal groups, the Lorentz group, or the
unitary groups, play essential roles across scientific fields as diverse as high energy
physics, quantum mechanics, quantum chromodynamics, molecular dynamics,
computer vision, and imaging. In this paper, we present a general Equivariant
Neural Network architecture capable of respecting the symmetries of the finitedimensional representations of any reductive Lie Group G. Our approach generalizes the successful ACE and MACE architectures for atomistic point clouds to
any data equivariant to a reductive Lie group action. We also introduce the lie-nn
software library, which provides all the necessary tools to develop and implement
such general G-equivariant neural networks. It implements routines for the reduction of generic tensor products of representations into irreducible representations,
making it easy to apply our architecture to a wide range of problems and groups.
The generality and performance of our approach are demonstrated by applying
it to the tasks of top quark decay tagging (Lorentz group) and shape recognition
(orthogonal group).

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 1989) have become a widely used and
powerful tool for computer vision tasks, in large part due to their ability to achieve translation
equivariance. This property led to improved generalization and a significant reduction in the number
of parameters. Translation equivariance is one of many possible symmetries occurring in machine
learning tasks.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

