Geometric Transformer with Interatomic Positional
Encoding
Yusong Wang1,2⇤†, Shaoning Li2,3,4⇤†, Tong Wang2‡, Bin Shao2
Nanning Zheng1 , Tie-Yan Liu2
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Microsoft Research AI4Science
3
Mila - Québec AI Institute 4 Université de Montréal
wangyusong2000@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
shaoning.li@umontreal.ca
{watong, binshao, tyliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
The widespread adoption of Transformer architectures in various data modalities
has opened new avenues for the applications in molecular modeling. Nevertheless, it remains elusive that whether the Transformer-based architecture can do
molecular modeling as good as equivariant GNNs. In this paper, by designing
Interatomic Positional Encoding (IPE) that parameterizes atomic environments as
Transformer’s positional encodings, we propose Geoformer, a novel geometric
Transformer to effectively model molecular structures for various molecular property prediction. We evaluate Geoformer on several benchmarks, including the QM9
dataset and the recently proposed Molecule3D dataset. Compared with both Transformers and equivariant GNN models, Geoformer outperforms the state-of-the-art
(SoTA) algorithms on QM9, and achieves the best performance on Molecule3D for
both random and scaffold splits. By introducing IPE, Geoformer paves the way
for molecular geometric modeling based on Transformer architecture. Codes are
available at https://github.com/microsoft/AI2BMD/tree/Geoformer.

1

Introduction

Transformer [46] has been a dominant architecture in modeling various data modalities such as
natural language, images, and videos. As such, it is natural to generalize Transformers in molecule
modeling. Molecules are represented as either 2D topology structures or 3D geometric structures.
Prevailing algorithms for modeling 2D topology [52, 36, 20] employ Transformers with global
attention, which treat the molecular structures as fully connected graphs and devise a diverse range
of positional encoding schemes. In contrast to topological graphs, geometric structures offer more
comprehensive description of molecules by providing the information of 3D coordinates. There
have been some recent attempts [28, 36, 55, 19, 29, 30, 50, 22, 8], to integrate specific geometric
features into Transformers. For example, Transformer-M [28] considers pairwise distances as a
learnable bias added to the attention weights as a supplement to the 2D topology encoding used in
Graphormer [52]. Nevertheless, they are insufficient to comprehensively encompass the intricacies of
the entire 3D molecular space, as they solely rely on distance information for positional encoding. In
⇤

Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research.
Equal contribution.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

