Semi-Implicit Denoising Diffusion Models (SIDDMs)

Yanwu Xu1,2 *, Mingming Gong3 , Shaoan Xie4 , Wei Wei1 , Matthias Grundmann1 ,
Kayhan Batmanghelich2†, Tingbo Hou1†
2

Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University,
{yanwuxu,kayhan}@bu.edu
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne
mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au
4
Carnegie Mellon University
shaoan@cmu.edu

Abstract
Despite the proliferation of generative models, achieving fast sampling during
inference without compromising sample diversity and quality remains challenging.
Existing models such as Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) deliver
high-quality, diverse samples but are slowed by an inherently high number of iterative steps. The Denoising Diffusion Generative Adversarial Networks (DDGAN)
attempted to circumvent this limitation by integrating a GAN model for larger
jumps in the diffusion process. However, DDGAN encountered scalability limitations when applied to large datasets. To address these limitations, we introduce a
novel approach that tackles the problem by matching implicit and explicit factors.
More specifically, our approach involves utilizing an implicit model to match the
marginal distributions of noisy data and the explicit conditional distribution of
the forward diffusion. This combination allows us to effectively match the joint
denoising distributions. Unlike DDPM but similar to DDGAN, we do not enforce
a parametric distribution for the reverse step, enabling us to take large steps during
inference. Similar to the DDPM but unlike DDGAN, we take advantage of the
exact form of the diffusion process. We demonstrate that our proposed method
obtains comparable generative performance to diffusion-based models and vastly
superior results to models with a small number of sampling steps. The code is
available at https://github.com/xuyanwu/SIDDMs.

1

Introduction

Generative models have achieved significant success in various domains such as image generation,
video synthesis, audio generation, and point cloud generation [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Different types
of generative models have been developed to tackle specific challenges. Variational autoencoders
(VAEs) [8] provide a variational lower bound for training models with explicit objectives. Generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [9] introduce a min-max game framework to implicitly model data
distribution and enable one-step generation. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs)
[10, 1], also known as score-based generative models, recover the original data distribution through
iterative denoising from an initial random Gaussian noise vector. However, these models face a
common challenge known as the “TRILEMMA” [11], which involves ensuring high-quality sampling,
mode coverage, and fast sampling speed simultaneously. Existing approaches, such as GANs, VAEs,
and DDPMs struggle to address all three aspects simultaneously. This paper focuses on tackling this
TRILEMMA and developing models capable of effectively modelling large-scale data generation.
*Work done as a student researcher of Google. † Equal Contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

