TWIGMA: A dataset of AI-Generated Images with
Metadata From Twitter
Yiqun T. Chen
Department of Biomedical Data Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
yiqunc@stanford.edu

James Zou
Departments of Biomedical Data Science;
Electrical Engineering; and Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jamesz@stanford.edu

Abstract
Recent progress in generative artificial intelligence (gen-AI) has enabled the generation of photo-realistic and artistically-inspiring photos at a single click, catering to
millions of users online. To explore how people use gen-AI models such as DALLE
and StableDiffusion, it is critical to understand the themes, contents, and variations
present in the AI-generated photos. In this work, we introduce TWIGMA (TWItter
Generative-ai images with MetadatA), a comprehensive dataset encompassing over
800,000 gen-AI images collected from Jan 2021 to March 2023 on Twitter, with
associated metadata (e.g., tweet text, creation date, number of likes), available at
https://zenodo.org/records/8031785. Through a comparative analysis of
TWIGMA with natural images and human artwork, we find that gen-AI images
possess distinctive characteristics and exhibit, on average, lower variability when
compared to their non-gen-AI counterparts. Additionally, we find that the similarity
between a gen-AI image and natural images is inversely correlated with the number
of likes. Finally, we observe a longitudinal shift in the themes of AI-generated
images on Twitter, with users increasingly sharing artistically sophisticated content
such as intricate human portraits, whereas their interest in simple subjects such as
natural scenes and animals has decreased. Our findings underscore the significance
of TWIGMA as a unique data resource for studying AI-generated images.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in text-to-image generation models, such as DALLE [33] and StableDiffusion [37], have revolutionized the creation of realistic and visually captivating images. The ability to
generate artistically inspiring images at the click of a button has attracted millions of daily active users.
However, the surge in popularity has also given rise to intriguing questions about the boundaries of
human and model creativity, as well as the diversity in topics and styles of the generated images.
For instance, let’s consider the StableDiffusion model: it passes the user-specified text input (known
as prompts) into a text encoder CLIP [32] to obtain an encoding that captures the essence of the
prompt. Next, the model utilizes a latent diffusion model that takes the text embedding as input and
stochastically generates an image that is guided by the text encoding. Therefore, the output image
is influenced by both the user’s input prompt and the complex diffusion process. Consequently, the
stochasticity and black-box nature of the diffusion process led to extensive practice and research in
the field of prompt engineering, where content creators iteratively refine their text prompts to generate
images that align closely with their desired targets [22, 28]. Similar to other emerging technologies
with significant capabilities, generative image models have given rise to a plethora of intricate legal
and ethical challenges. These include concerns such as the proliferation of AI-generated NSFW
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

