Optimistic Active Exploration of Dynamical Systems

Bhavya Sukhija1

Lenart Treven1 Cansu Sancaktar2 Sebastian Blaes2
Stelian Coros1 Andreas Krause1
ETH Zürich 1 MPI for Intelligent Systems2
{sukhijab,trevenl,scoros,krausea}@ethz.ch
{cansu.sancaktar,sebastian.blae}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Reinforcement learning algorithms commonly seek to optimize policies for solving
one particular task. How should we explore an unknown dynamical system such
that the estimated model globally approximates the dynamics and allows us to solve
multiple downstream tasks in a zero-shot manner? In this paper, we address this
challenge, by developing an algorithm – O PA X– for active exploration. O PA X uses
well-calibrated probabilistic models to quantify the epistemic uncertainty about the
unknown dynamics. It optimistically—w.r.t. to plausible dynamics—maximizes
the information gain between the unknown dynamics and state observations.
We show how the resulting optimization problem can be reduced to an optimal
control problem that can be solved at each episode using standard approaches. We
analyze our algorithm for general models, and, in the case of Gaussian process
dynamics, we give a first-of-its-kind sample complexity bound and show that the
epistemic uncertainty converges to zero. In our experiments, we compare O PA X
with other heuristic active exploration approaches on several environments. Our
experiments show that O PA X is not only theoretically sound but also performs
well for zero-shot planning on novel downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Most reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are designed to maximize cumulative rewards for a
single task at hand. Particularly, model-based RL algorithms, such as (Chua et al., 2018; Kakade
et al., 2020; Curi et al., 2020), excel in efficiently exploring the dynamical system as they direct
the exploration in regions with high rewards. However, due to the directional bias, their underlying
learned dynamics model fails to generalize in other areas of the state-action space. While this is
sufficient if only one control task is considered, it does not scale to the setting where the system is
used to perform several tasks, i.e., under the same dynamics optimized for different reward functions.
As a result, when presented with a new reward function, they often need to relearn a policy from
scratch, requiring many interactions with the system, or employ multi-task (Zhang and Yang, 2021)
or transfer learning (Weiss et al., 2016) methods. Traditional control approaches such as trajectory
optimization (Biagiotti and Melchiorri, 2008) and model-predictive control (García et al., 1989)
assume knowledge of the system’s dynamics. They leverage the dynamics model to solve an optimal
control problem for each task. Moreover, in the presence of an accurate model, important system
properties such as stability and sensitivity can also be studied. Hence, knowing an accurate dynamics
model bears many practical benefits. However, in many real-world settings, obtaining a model
using just physics’ first principles is very challenging. A promising approach is to leverage data for
learning the dynamics, i.e., system identification or active learning. To this end, the key question we
investigate in this work is: how should we interact with the system to learn its dynamics efficiently?
While active learning for regression and classification tasks is well-studied, active learning in RL
is much less understood. In particular, active learning methods that yield strong theoretical and
practical results, generally query data points based on information-theoretic criteria (Krause et al.,
2008; Settles, 2009; Balcan et al., 2010; Hanneke et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2015). In the context of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

