How to Select Which Active Learning Strategy is Best
Suited for Your Specific Problem and Budget

Guy Hacohen†‡ , Daphna Weinshall†
School of Computer Science & Engineering†
Edmond and Lily Safra Center for Brain Sciences‡
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem 91904, Israel
{guy.hacohen,daphna}@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
In the domain of Active Learning (AL), a learner actively selects which unlabeled
examples to seek labels from an oracle, while operating within predefined budget
constraints. Importantly, it has been recently shown that distinct query strategies
are better suited for different conditions and budgetary constraints. In practice, the
determination of the most appropriate AL strategy for a given situation remains an
open problem. To tackle this challenge, we propose a practical derivative-based
method that dynamically identifies the best strategy for a given budget. Intuitive
motivation for our approach is provided by the theoretical analysis of a simplified
scenario. We then introduce a method to dynamically select an AL strategy, which
takes into account the unique characteristics of the problem and the available
budget. Empirical results showcase the effectiveness of our approach across diverse
budgets and computer vision tasks.

1

Introduction

Active learning emerged as a powerful approach for promoting more efficient and effective learning
outcomes. In the traditional supervised learning framework, active learning enables the learner to
actively engage in the construction of the labeled training set by selecting a fixed-sized subset of
unlabeled examples for labeling by an oracle, where the number of labels requested is referred to
as the budget. Our study addresses the task of identifying in advance the most appropriate active
learning strategy for a given problem and budget.
The selection of an active learning strategy is contingent on both the learner’s inductive biases and the
nature of the problem at hand. But even when all this is fixed, recent research has shown that the most
suited active learning strategy varies depending on the size of the budget. When the budget is large,
methods based on uncertainty sampling are most effective. When the budget is small, methods based
on typicality are most suitable (see Fig. 1). In practice, determining the appropriate active learning
strategy based on the budget size is challenging, as a specific budget can be considered either small
or large depending on the problem at hand. This challenge is addressed in this paper.
Specifically, we start by analyzing a simplified theoretical framework (Section 2), for which we can
explicitly select the appropriate AL strategy using a derivative-based test. Motivated by the analysis
of this model, we propose SelectAL (Section 3), which incorporates a similar derivative-based test to
select between active learning strategies. SelectAL aims to provide a versatile solution for any budget,
by identifying the budget domain of the problem at hand and picking an appropriate AL method from
the set of available methods. SelectAL is validated through an extensive empirical study using several
vision datasets (Section 4). Our results demonstrate that SelectAL is effective in identifying the best
active learning strategy for any budget, achieving superior performance across all budget ranges.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

