Minimax Risks and Optimal Procedures for
Estimation under Functional Local Differential
Privacy

Bonwoo Lee
Jeongyoun Ahn∗
Cheolwoo Park∗
Korea Advanced Institute of Science & Technology
Daejeon, 34141 South Korea
righthim@kaist.ac.kr, jyahn@kaist.ac.kr, parkcw2021@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
As concerns about data privacy continue to grow, differential privacy (DP) has
emerged as a fundamental concept that aims to guarantee privacy by ensuring
individuals’ indistinguishability in data analysis. Local differential privacy (LDP)
is a rigorous type of DP that requires individual data to be privatized before being
sent to the collector, thus removing the need for a trusted third party to collect
data. Among the numerous (L)DP-based approaches, functional DP has gained
considerable attention in the DP community because it connects DP to statistical
decision-making by formulating it as a hypothesis-testing problem and also exhibits
Gaussian-related properties. However, the utility of privatized data is generally
lower than that of non-private data, prompting research into optimal mechanisms
that maximize the statistical utility for given privacy constraints. In this study,
we investigate how functional LDP preserves the statistical utility by analyzing
minimax risks of univariate mean estimation as well as nonparametric density estimation. We leverage the contraction property of functional LDP mechanisms and
classical information-theoretical bounds to derive private minimax lower bounds.
Our theoretical study reveals that it is possible to establish an interpretable, continuous balance between the statistical utility and privacy level, which has not been
achieved under the ϵ-LDP framework. Furthermore, we suggest minimax optimal
mechanisms based on Gaussian LDP (a type of functional LDP) that achieve the
minimax upper bounds and show via a numerical study that they are superior to the
counterparts derived under ϵ-LDP. The theoretical and empirical findings of this
work suggest that Gaussian LDP should be considered a reliable standard for LDP.

1

Introduction

It has been widely accepted that anonymization is insufficient in protecting privacy (Sweeney, 2000,
2002; Dinur and Nissim, 2003). The concerns about data privacy have grown significantly, particularly
with the advancement of computer science technology and the rise in data generated by individuals
and tech companies. Such concerns are shared by politics and industry, leading to the adoption of
France’s “Loi pour une République numérique (Law for the Digital Republic)" in October 2016
(Algan et al., 2016), EU’s General Data Protection Regulation in May 2018, and the California
Consumer Privacy Act (Wang et al., 2022), all of which regulate data protection, collection, and
processing. Also, data privacy techniques have been implemented in industries such as Google
(Erlingsson et al., 2014; Fanti et al., 2016), Apple (Thakurta et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2017), Microsoft
(Ding et al., 2017), and SAP (Kessler et al., 2019).
∗

Corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

