Analysis of Variance of Multiple Causal Networks

Zhongli Jiang
Department of Statistics, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
jiang548@purdue.edu
Dabao Zhang
Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, University of California, Irvine, CA
dabao.zhang@uci.edu

Abstract
Constructing a directed cyclic graph (DCG) is challenged by both algorithmic
difficulty and computational burden. Comparing multiple DCGs is even more
difficult, compounded by the need to identify dynamic causalities across graphs.
We propose to unify multiple DCGs with a single structural model and develop a
limited-information-based method to simultaneously construct multiple networks
and infer their disparities, which can be visualized by appropriate correspondence
analysis. The algorithm provides DCGs with robust non-asymptotic theoretical
properties. It is designed with two sequential stages, each of which involves
parallel computation tasks that are scalable to the network complexity. Taking
advantage of high-performance clusters, our method makes it possible to evaluate
the statistical significance of DCGs using the bootstrap method. We demonstrated
the effectiveness of our method by applying it to synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Study of causal networks described by directed cyclic graphs (DCGs) becomes increasingly popular
in a variety of fields, such as biomedical and social sciences [10, 3]. Detecting dynamic structures
across networks sheds light on mechanistic dynamics, with promising applications. For example,
gene regulatory networks related to various types of cancer differ from that of healthy cells in
a complicated way and discovery of deviated regulations helps identify cancer-related biological
pathways and hence design target-specific drugs [23, 18]. Interpersonal networks in social media have
become a favored way for people to get informed of breaking news and natural disasters nowadays.
Understanding their evolution over time may provide promising information to businesses, educators,
and governments [7]. However, the complex structure and large number of nodes impose challenges
on constructing even a single network, not to mention modelling and comparing multiple networks.
Structural models are widely used to describe causal networks and conduct causal inference [8, 15].
With available instrumental variables (IVs) from genomic variations, many methods have been
developed to construct large causal networks of gene regulation by integrating transcriptomic and
genotypic data. For instance, Liu et al. [14] proposed to assemble driver-responder relationships
identified from local structural models, a formidable task due to enormous numbers of possible
driver-responder pairs. Cai et al. [4] developed a sparsity-aware maximum likelihood (SML) method
by putting `1 penalty on causal effects. It may reach local maximum, leading to the identifiability
issue. Chen et al. [5] proposed a two-stage penalized least square (2SPLS) approach which allows
parallel computing and shows superior performance.
To infer sparse differences between two large networks, Ren and Zhang [16] recently developed a
parallel algorithm based on 2SPLS and achieved better performance than separately constructing the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

