VisAlign: Dataset for Measuring the Alignment
between AI and Humans in Visual Perception

Jiyoung Lee1 , Seungho Kim1 , Seunghyun Won2 , Joonseok Lee3 , Marzyeh Ghassemi4,5,6
James Thorne1 , Jaeseok Choi7 , O-Kil Kwon7 , Edward Choi1
1
KAIST, 2 Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 3 Seoul National University,
4
MIT, 5 University of Toronto, 6 Vector Institute, 7 Kangwon National University Hospital
1
{jiyounglee0523, shokim, thorne, edwardchoi}@kaist.ac.kr
2
shwon0213@gmail.com, 3 joonseok2010@gmail.com, 4 mghassem@mit.edu
7
{gobiobotia, okkwon}@kangwon.ac.kr

Abstract
AI alignment refers to models acting towards human-intended goals, preferences,
or ethical principles. In this paper, we focus on the models’ visual perception
alignment with humans, further referred to as AI-human visual alignment. Specifically, we propose a new dataset for measuring AI-human visual alignment in
terms of image classification. In order to evaluate AI-human visual alignment,
a dataset should encompass samples with various scenarios and have gold human perception labels. Our dataset consists of three groups of samples, namely
Must-Act (i.e., Must-Classify), Must-Abstain, and Uncertain, and further divided
into eight categories. All samples have a gold human perception label; even Uncertain (e.g., severely blurry) sample labels were obtained via crowd-sourcing.
The validity of our dataset is verified by sampling theory, statistical theories
related to survey design, and experts in the related fields. Using our dataset,
we analyze the visual alignment and reliability of five popular visual perception models and eight abstention methods. Our code and data is available at
https://github.com/jiyounglee-0523/VisAlign.

1

Introduction

AI alignment [62] seeks to align models to act towards human-intended goals [48, 78], preferences
[66, 61], or ethical principles [28]. Misaligned models may show unexpected and unsafe behaviors
which can bring about negative outcomes, including loss of human lives [54, 78]. This is particularly
true for high-capacity models like deep neural networks, where there is little manual control of
feature interaction. In such cases, analyzing the alignment between models and humans can be a
proxy measure for safe behavior [45]. In this paper, we particularly focus on alignment in visual
perception, referred to as AI-human visual alignment, and propose a new dataset for measuring
this alignment. Note that recent work in AI-human alignment tends to focus on societal topics
with ethical implications, such as racial or gender bias [70, 12, 42]. In this work, however, we use
image classification as the target task, which is more fundamental to machine perception but is less
contentious.
Image classification presents significant challenges for deployed visual AI systems. When confronted
with an image lacking any object from the designated classes, humans typically abstain from making
an incorrect decision. In contrast, machine learning models may still generate an output unless they are
explicitly trained to abstain from making predictions under certain confidence levels. Similarly, when
an image provides imperfect information (e.g., due to blurred vision or a dark environment), human
decisions tend to waver between a correct prediction and abstention. Conversely, machines often
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

