S ITUATED G EN: Incorporating Geographical and
Temporal Contexts into Generative Commonsense
Reasoning

Yunxiang Zhang
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, USA
yunxiang@umich.edu

Xiaojun Wan
Peking University
Beijing, China
wanxiaojun@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, commonsense reasoning in text generation has attracted much attention.
Generative commonsense reasoning is the task that requires machines, given a
group of keywords, to compose a single coherent sentence with commonsense
plausibility. While existing datasets targeting generative commonsense reasoning focus on everyday scenarios, it is unclear how well machines reason under
specific geographical and temporal contexts. We formalize this challenging task
as S ITUATED G EN, where machines with commonsense should generate a pair
of contrastive sentences given a group of keywords including geographical or
temporal entities. We introduce a corresponding English dataset consisting of
8,268 contrastive sentence pairs, which are built upon several existing commonsense reasoning benchmarks with minimal manual labor. Experiments show that
state-of-the-art generative language models struggle to generate sentences with
commonsense plausibility and still lag far behind human performance. Our dataset
is publicly available at https://github.com/yunx-z/situated_gen.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been substantial growth in new benchmarks evaluating commonsense
reasoning for natural language processing (NLP) models, especially large-scale Pretrained Language Models (PLMs). Most existing commonsense reasoning benchmarks adopt natural language
understanding formats due to easy evaluation (e.g., accuracy), including multiple-choice question
answering [44, 41, 20, 24], natural language inference [4], and detecting true/false statements [33, 43].
However, datasets measuring commonsense knowledge in natural language generation are still relatively scarce. We aim to fill this research gap with a novel benchmark since real-world users of NLP
systems would expect the generated outputs from LMs to be not only grammatically correct but also
adhere to commonsense knowledge.
C OMMON G EN [25], a generative commonsense reasoning challenge, has attracted wide attention
recently. Given a set of keywords (e.g., {dog, frisbee, catch, throw}), the task requires
models to compose a plausible sentence describing everyday scenario using all the provided keywords
(e.g., “The dog catches the frisbee when the boy throws it.”). While C OMMON G EN focuses on
social and physical commonsense in everyday life, it is unclear how well current commonsense
generation models reason with factual knowledge about specific entities, which is referred to as
entity commonsense [33]. In this work, we mainly consider geographical and temporal entities, as
they provide extra-linguistic contexts [52] for commonsense reasoning and appear in a significant
proportion of existing commonsense benchmarks (Section 4.2). To the best of our knowledge, we are
the first to incorporate these situations into generative commonsense reasoning.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

