Subspace Identification for Multi-Source Domain
Adaptation

Zijian Li2,3 , Ruichu Cai2∗, Guangyi Chen3,1 , Boyang Sun3 , Zhifeng Hao4 , Kun Zhang3,1∗
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
4
Shantou University

Abstract
Multi-source domain adaptation (MSDA) methods aim to transfer knowledge from
multiple labeled source domains to an unlabeled target domain. Although current methods achieve target joint distribution identifiability by enforcing minimal
changes across domains, they often necessitate stringent conditions, such as an
adequate number of domains, monotonic transformation of latent variables, and
invariant label distributions. These requirements are challenging to satisfy in
real-world applications. To mitigate the need for these strict assumptions, we
propose a subspace identification theory that guarantees the disentanglement of
domain-invariant and domain-specific variables under less restrictive constraints
regarding domain numbers and transformation properties, thereby facilitating domain adaptation by minimizing the impact of domain shifts on invariant variables.
Based on this theory, we develop a Subspace Identification Guarantee (SIG) model
that leverages variational inference. Furthermore, the SIG model incorporates
class-aware conditional alignment to accommodate target shifts where label distributions change with the domains. Experimental results demonstrate that our
SIG model outperforms existing MSDA techniques on various benchmark datasets,
highlighting its effectiveness in real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Multi-Source Domain Adaptation (MSDA) is a method of transferring knowledge from multiple
labeled source domains to an unlabeled target domain, to address the challenge of domain shift
between the training data and the test environment. Mathematically, in the context of MSDA, we
assume the existence of M source domains {S1 , S2 , ..., SM } and a single target domain T . For each
source domain Si , data are drawn from a distinct distribution, represented as px,y|uSi , where the
variables x, y, u correspond to features, labels, and domain indices, respectively. In a similar manner,
the distribution within the target domain T is given by px,y|uT . In the source domains, we have access
i
to mi annotated feature-label pairs of each domain, denoted by (xSi , ySi ) = (xSk i , ykSi )m
k=1 , while in
(T )
T
the target domain, only mT unannotated features are observed, represented as (x ) = (xTk )m
k=1 .
The primary goal of MSDA is to effectively leverage these labeled source data and unlabeled target
data to identify the target joint distribution px,y|uT .
However, identifying the target joint distribution of x, y|uT using only x|uT as observations present
a significant challenge, since the possible mappings from px,y|uT to px|uT are infinite when no extra
constraints are given. To solve this problem, some assumptions have been proposed to constrain the
domain shift, such as covariate shift [44], target shift [58, 1], and conditional shift [3, 56]. For example,
the most conventional covariate shift assumption posits that py|x is fixed across different domains
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

