Intrinsic Dimension Estimation for Robust Detection
of AI-Generated Texts
Eduard Tulchinskii1 , Kristian Kuznetsov1 , Laida Kushnareva2 , Daniil Cherniavskii3 ,
Sergey Nikolenko5 , Evgeny Burnaev1,3 , Serguei Barannikov1,4 , Irina Piontkovskaya2
1
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Russia;
2
AI Foundation and Algorithm Lab, Russia;
3
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute (AIRI), Russia;4 CNRS, Université Paris Cité, France;
5
St. Petersburg Department of the Steklov Institute of Mathematics, Russia

Abstract
Rapidly increasing quality of AI-generated content makes it difficult to distinguish
between human and AI-generated texts, which may lead to undesirable consequences for society. Therefore, it becomes increasingly important to study the
properties of human texts that are invariant over different text domains and varying
proficiency of human writers, can be easily calculated for any language, and can
robustly separate natural and AI-generated texts regardless of the generation model
and sampling method. In this work, we propose such an invariant for humanwritten texts, namely the intrinsic dimensionality of the manifold underlying the
set of embeddings for a given text sample. We show that the average intrinsic
dimensionality of fluent texts in a natural language is hovering around the value 9
for several alphabet-based languages and around 7 for Chinese, while the average
intrinsic dimensionality of AI-generated texts for each language is ≈ 1.5 lower,
with a clear statistical separation between human-generated and AI-generated distributions. This property allows us to build a score-based artificial text detector. The
proposed detector’s accuracy is stable over text domains, generator models, and
human writer proficiency levels, outperforming SOTA detectors in model-agnostic
and cross-domain scenarios by a significant margin. We release code and data1

1

Introduction

Modern large language models (LLMs) generate human-looking texts increasingly well, which
may also lead to worrisome consequences [Fagni et al., 2021, Adelani et al., 2020, Stokel-Walker,
2022]. Hence, the ability to detect AI-generated texts (artificial text detection, ATD) becomes
crucial for media, education, politics, creative industries and other spheres of human social activities.
A straightforward idea would be to train a classifier to detect artificial text; many such classifiers
exist [Zellers et al., 2019, Gehrmann et al., 2019, Solaiman et al., 2019], but most of them are designed
to detect samples of individual generation models, either using the model itself [Mitchell et al., 2023]
or training on a dataset of its generations. This leads to poor generalization to new models and
unknown data domains. Another idea, known as watermarking, is to inject some detectable artifacts
into model generations; for instance, Kirchenbauer et al. [2023] propose to intentionally inject a
statistical skew that can be detected in a text sample. However, later works showed that watermark
detectors can be broken by adversarial attacks, e.g., by text perturbations or paraphrasing [He et al.,
2023]. Since text generation is constantly evolving, Sadasivan et al. [2023] claim that perfect artificial
text detection is impossible; Krishna et al. [2023] address this statement and propose a retrieval-based
detector that could be implemented by text generation service providers: they should store the hash
1

github.com/ArGintum/GPTID

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

