Efficient Robust Bayesian Optimization
for Arbitrary Uncertain inputs

Lin Yang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
China
yanglin33@huawei.com

Junlong Lyu
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Hong Kong SAR, China
lyujunlong@huawei.com

Wenlong Lyu
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
China
lvwenlong2@huawei.com

Zhitang Chen
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Hong Kong SAR, China
chenzhitang2@huawei.com

Abstract
Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a sample-efficient optimization algorithm widely
employed across various applications. In some challenging BO tasks, input uncertainty arises due to the inevitable randomness in the optimization process, such
as machining errors, execution noise, or contextual variability. This uncertainty
deviates the input from the intended value before evaluation, resulting in significant performance fluctuations in final result. In this paper, we introduce a novel
robust Bayesian Optimization algorithm, AIRBO, which can effectively identify a
robust optimum that performs consistently well under arbitrary input uncertainty.
Our method directly models the uncertain inputs of arbitrary distributions by empowering the Gaussian Process with the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD)
and further accelerates the posterior inference via Nyström approximation. Rigorous theoretical regret bound is established under MMD estimation error and
extensive experiments on synthetic functions and real problems demonstrate that
our approach can handle various input uncertainties and achieve a state-of-the-art
performance.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a powerful sequential decision-making algorithm for high-cost blackbox optimization. Owing to its remarkable sample efficiency and capacity to balance exploration
and exploitation, BO has been successfully applied in diverse domains, including neural architecture search [32], hyper-parameter tuning [4, 29, 12], and robotic control [18, 5], among others.
Nevertheless, in some real-world problems, the stochastic nature of the optimization process, such
as machining error during manufacturing, execution noise of control, or variability in contextual
factor, inevitably introduces input randomness, rendering the design parameter x to deviate to x′
before evaluation. This deviation produces a fluctuation of function value y and eventually leads
to a performance instability of the outcome. In general, the input randomness is determined by the
application scenario and can be of arbitrary distribution, even quite complex ones. Moreover, in some
cases, we cannot observe the exact deviated input x′ but a rough estimation for the input uncertainty.
This is quite common for robotics and process controls. For example, consider a robot control task
shown in Figure 1a, a drone is sent to a target location x to perform a measurement task. However,
due to the execution noise caused by the fuzzy control or a sudden wind, the drone ends up at location
x′ ∼ P (x) and gets a noisy measurement y = f (x′ ) + ζ. Instead of observing the exact value of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

