(S)GD over Diagonal Linear Networks:
Implicit Bias, Large Stepsizes and Edge of Stability

Mathieu Even∗
Inria - ENS Paris

Scott Pesme∗
EPFL

Suriya Gunasekar
Microsoft Research

Nicolas Flammarion
EPFL

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the impact of stochasticity and large stepsizes on the
implicit regularisation of gradient descent (GD) and stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) over 2-layer diagonal linear networks. We prove the convergence of GD
and SGD with macroscopic stepsizes in an overparametrised regression setting and
provide a characterisation of their solution through an implicit regularisation problem. Our characterisation provides insights on how the choice of minibatch sizes
and stepsizes lead to qualitatively distinct behaviors in the solutions. Specifically,
we show that for sparse regression learned with 2-layer diagonal linear networks,
large stepsizes consistently benefit SGD, whereas they can hinder the recovery of
sparse solutions for GD. These effects are amplified for stepsizes in a tight window
just below the divergence threshold, known as the "edge of stability" regime.

1

Introduction

The stochastic gradient descent algorithm (SGD) [51] is the foundational algorithm for almost all
neural network training. Though a remarkably simple algorithm, it has led to many impressive
empirical results and is a key driver of deep learning. However the performances of SGD are quite
puzzling from a theoretical point of view as (1) its convergence is highly non-trivial and (2) there
exist many global minimums for the training objective which generalise very poorly [66].
To explain this second point, the concept of implicit regularisation has emerged: if overfitting is
harmless in many real-world prediction tasks, it must be because the optimisation process is implicitly
favoring solutions that have good generalisation properties for the task. The canonical example is
overparametrised linear regression with more trainable parameters than number of samples: although
there are infinitely many solutions that fit the samples, GD and SGD explore only a small subspace of
all the possible parameters. As a result, it can be shown that they implicitly converge to the closest
solution in terms of the ℓ2 distance, and this without explicit regularisation [66, 24].
Currently, most theoretical works on implicit regularisation have primarily focused on continuous
time approximations of (S)GD where the impact of crucial hyperparameters such as the stepsize
and the minibatch size are ignored. One such common simplification is to analyse gradient flow,
which is a continuous time limit of GD and minibatch SGD with an infinitesimal stepsize. By
definition, this analysis does not capture the effect of stepsize or stochasticity. Another approach
is to approximate SGD by a stochastic gradient flow [60, 48], which tries to capture the noise and
the stepsize using an appropriate stochastic differential equation. However, there are no theoretical
guarantees that these results can be transferred to minibatch SGD as used in practice. This is a
limitation in our understanding since the performances of most deep learning models are often
sensitive to the choice of stepsize and minibatch size. The importance of stepsize and SGD minibatch
size is common knowledge in practice and has also been systematically established in controlled
experiments [36, 42, 20].
∗

Denotes equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

