Efficient Diffusion Policies for Offline Reinforcement
Learning

Bingyi Kang∗ Xiao Ma∗

Chao Du Tianyu Pang Shuicheng Yan
Sea AI Lab
{bingykang,yusufma555,duchao0726}@gmail.com {tianyupang,yansc}@sea.com

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn optimal policies from offline
datasets, where the parameterization of policies is crucial but often overlooked.
Recently, Diffsuion-QL [37] significantly boosts the performance of offline RL by
representing a policy with a diffusion model, whose success relies on a parametrized
Markov Chain with hundreds of steps for sampling. However, Diffusion-QL suffers
from two critical limitations. 1) It is computationally inefficient to forward and
backward through the whole Markov chain during training. 2) It is incompatible
with maximum likelihood-based RL algorithms (e.g., policy gradient methods) as
the likelihood of diffusion models is intractable. Therefore, we propose efficient
diffusion policy (EDP) to overcome these two challenges. EDP approximately
constructs actions from corrupted ones at training to avoid running the sampling
chain. We conduct extensive experiments on the D4RL benchmark. The results
show that EDP can reduce the diffusion policy training time from 5 days to 5
hours on gym-locomotion tasks. Moreover, we show that EDP is compatible with
various offline RL algorithms (TD3, CRR, and IQL) and achieves new state-ofthe-art on D4RL by large margins over previous methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/sail-sg/edp.

1

Introduction

Normalized Score
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) is much Training Time
85.5
Pre-SOTA
desired in real-world applications as it can ex- 5 Days
Ours
77.6
tract knowledge from previous experiences, thus
73.4
71.3
avoiding costly or risky online interactions. Ex63
tending online RL algorithms to the offline do59.4
56.9
main faces the distributional shift [9] problem.
53.3
Existing methods mainly focus on addressing
5 Hours
this issue by constraining a policy to stay close
Locomotion Kitchen
Adroit
Antmaze
to the data-collecting policy [6, 39], making con- D-QL EDP
servative updates for Q-networks [17, 15, 40], or Figure 1: Efficiency and Generality. D-QL is
combining these two strategies [21, 12]. How- Diffusion-QL. Left: The training time on the locoever, Offline RL can also be viewed as a state- motion tasks in D4RL. Right: the performance of
conditional generative modeling problem of ac- EDP and previous SOTA on each domain in D4RL.
tions, where the parameterization of the pol- EDP is trained with TD3 on locomotion and IQL
icy network is important but largely overlooked. on the other three domains. (Best viewed in color.)
Most offline RL works follow the convention of
parameterizing the policy as a diagonal Gaussian distribution with the learned mean and variance.
This scheme might become inferior when the data distribution is complex, especially when offline
∗

equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

