D-CIPHER: Discovery of Closed-form Partial
Differential Equations

Krzysztof Kacprzyk
University of Cambridge
kk751@cam.ac.uk

Zhaozhi Qian
University of Cambridge
zq224@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge,
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Closed-form differential equations, including partial differential equations and
higher-order ordinary differential equations, are one of the most important tools
used by scientists to model and better understand natural phenomena. Discovering
these equations directly from data is challenging because it requires modeling
relationships between various derivatives that are not observed in the data (equationdata mismatch) and it involves searching across a huge space of possible equations.
Current approaches make strong assumptions about the form of the equation and
thus fail to discover many well-known phenomena. Moreover, many of them
resolve the equation-data mismatch by estimating the derivatives, which makes
them inadequate for noisy and infrequent observations. To this end, we propose
D-CIPHER, which is robust to measurement artifacts and can uncover a new and
very general class of differential equations. We further design a novel optimization
procedure, CoLLie, to help D-CIPHER search through this class efficiently. Finally,
we demonstrate empirically that it can discover many well-known equations that
are beyond the capabilities of current methods.

1

Introduction

Scientists have been using mathematical equations to describe the world for centuries. In particular,
closed-form differential equations turned out to be one of the best tools to model physical phenomena.
A differential equation describes a relationship between a quantity and its derivatives (rates of change);
it is called closed-form if this relationship is described by a mathematical expression consisting of a
finite number of variables, constants, arithmetic operations, and some well-known functions (e.g.,
exponent, logarithm, trigonometric functions)1 . Closed-form differential equations provide a general
description of reality in a concise representation that is amenable to closer inspection by scientists.
This renders them transparent and interpretable to human experts.
Discoveries of these equations required a thorough knowledge of the theory, strong mathematical
skills, substantial creativity, and good intuition. The goal of this work is to discover closed-form
differential equations directly from data thus accelerating the process of scientific discovery.
Challenges in discovering differential equations from data
• Partial and higher-order derivatives. Many algorithms [10, 42] can only identify Ordinary
Differential Equations (ODEs) which evolve only with respect to one variable (usually time). In
contrast, many natural phenomena are described by equations involving many variables (e.g.,
spatial coordinates) called Partial Differential Equations (PDEs). Many equations also involve
higher-order derivatives.
1

Detailed discussion in Appendix A.2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

