Learning via Wasserstein-Based High Probability
Generalisation Bounds
Paul Viallard∗
Inria, CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure,
PSL Research University, Paris, France
paul.viallard@inria.fr

Maxime Haddouche∗
Inria, University College London and
Université de Lille, France
maxime.haddouche@inria.fr

Umut Şimşekli
Inria, CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris, France
umut.simsekli@inria.fr

Benjamin Guedj
Inria and University College London,
France and UK
benjamin.guedj@inria.fr

Abstract
Minimising upper bounds on the population risk or the generalisation gap has been
widely used in structural risk minimisation (SRM) – this is in particular at the core
of PAC-Bayesian learning. Despite its successes and unfailing surge of interest
in recent years, a limitation of the PAC-Bayesian framework is that most bounds
involve a Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence term (or its variations), which might
exhibit erratic behavior and fail to capture the underlying geometric structure of the
learning problem – hence restricting its use in practical applications. As a remedy,
recent studies have attempted to replace the KL divergence in the PAC-Bayesian
bounds with the Wasserstein distance. Even though these bounds alleviated the
aforementioned issues to a certain extent, they either hold in expectation, are for
bounded losses, or are nontrivial to minimize in an SRM framework. In this work,
we contribute to this line of research and prove novel Wasserstein distance-based
PAC-Bayesian generalisation bounds for both batch learning with independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) data, and online learning with potentially non-i.i.d.
data. Contrary to previous art, our bounds are stronger in the sense that (i) they hold
with high probability, (ii) they apply to unbounded (potentially heavy-tailed) losses,
and (iii) they lead to optimizable training objectives that can be used in SRM. As a
result we derive novel Wasserstein-based PAC-Bayesian learning algorithms and
we illustrate their empirical advantage on a variety of experiments.

1

Introduction

Understanding generalisation is one of the main challenges in statistical learning theory, and even
more so in modern machine learning applications. Typically, a learning problem is described by a
tuple (H, Z, ℓ) consisting of a hypothesis (or predictor) space H, a data space Z, and a loss function
ℓ : H × Z → R. The goal is to estimate the population risk of a given hypothesis h, defined as
Rµ (h) = Ez∼µ [ℓ(h, z)], where µ denotes the unknown data distribution over Z.
As µ is not known, in practice, a hypothesis
h is usually built by (approximately) minimising the
Pm
1
empirical risk, given by R̂S (h) = m
ℓ(h,
zi ), where S = {zi ∈ Z}m
i=1 is a dataset of m data
i=1
points, independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) from µ. We define the generalisation gap of a
hypothesis h as R̂S (h) − Rµ (h).
∗

The authors contributed equally to this work

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

