LaFTer: Label-Free Tuning of Zero-shot Classifier
using Language and Unlabeled Image Collections

M. Jehanzeb Mirza†1,2
Leonid Karlinsky3
Wei Lin1
Mateusz Kozinski1
1
3
Horst Possegger
Rogerio Feris
Horst Bischof1,2
1

2

Institute of Computer Graphics and Vision, TU Graz, Austria.
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Embedded Machine Learning.
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, USA.
Project Page: https://jmiemirza.github.io/LaFTer/

Abstract
Recently, large-scale pre-trained Vision and Language (VL) models have set a new
state-of-the-art (SOTA) in zero-shot visual classification enabling open-vocabulary
recognition of potentially unlimited set of categories defined as simple language
prompts. However, despite these great advances, the performance of these zeroshot classifiers still falls short of the results of dedicated (closed category set)
classifiers trained with supervised fine-tuning. In this paper we show, for the
first time, how to reduce this gap without any labels and without any paired VL
data, using an unlabeled image collection and a set of texts auto-generated using a
Large Language Model (LLM) describing the categories of interest and effectively
substituting labeled visual instances of those categories. Using our label-free
approach, we are able to attain significant performance improvements over the
zero-shot performance of the base VL model and other contemporary methods and
baselines on a wide variety of datasets, demonstrating absolute improvement of
up to 11.7% (3.8% on average) in the label-free setting. Moreover, despite our
approach being label-free, we observe 1.3% average gains over leading few-shot
prompting baselines that do use 5-shot supervision.

1

Introduction

Vision and Language (VL) models [1–8] recently became the de-facto standard for generalized zeroshot learning enabling recognition of arbitrary (open) set of categories provided with just their text
descriptions and without requiring any additional data or training. However, this incredible flexibility
comes at a performance cost and all the VL models, including the most widely used CLIP [1], still
require additional supervised training (e.g. tuning its vision encoder) to compete with the closed
set (of target categories) supervised training methods. Naturally, this incurs undesirable adaptation
costs for those, otherwise very versatile and flexible, foundation models. Image annotations are often
expensive to collect, especially for legacy vision systems, such as traffic surveillance, quality control,
or security.
In this paper we propose LaFTer, an approach for completely label-free parameter efficient finetuning
of VL models to a set of target classes. Our goal is to substitute the need for expensive-to-obtain
image annotations with unsupervised finetuning of VL models. We show that since the VL models
share a common text-image embedding space (due to their contrastive learning objective), there is
a possibility to train using embeddings of samples from one modality (e.g., auto-labeled text) and
then successfully apply what we trained to classify embeddings of samples from the other modality
†

Correspondence: muhammad.mirza@icg.tugraz.at

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

