Android in the Wild: A Large-Scale Dataset for
Android Device Control
Christopher Rawles∗
Google Research

Alice Li∗
Google Research

Daniel Rodriguez
Google Research

Oriana Riva
Google Research

Timothy Lillicrap
Google DeepMind

Abstract
There is a growing interest in device-control systems that can interpret human
natural language instructions and execute them on a digital device by directly controlling its user interface. We present a dataset for device-control research, Android
in the Wild (A IT W), which is orders of magnitude larger than current datasets. The
dataset contains human demonstrations of device interactions, including the screens
and actions, and corresponding natural language instructions. It consists of 715k
episodes spanning 30k unique instructions, four versions of Android (v10–13),
and eight device types (Pixel 2 XL to Pixel 6) with varying screen resolutions.
It contains multi-step tasks that require semantic understanding of language and
visual context. This dataset poses a new challenge: actions available through the
user interface must be inferred from their visual appearance, and, instead of simple
UI element-based actions, the action space consists of precise gestures (e.g., horizontal scrolls to operate carousel widgets). We organize our dataset to encourage
robustness analysis of device-control systems, i.e., how well a system performs in
the presence of new task descriptions, new applications, or new platform versions.
We develop two agents and report performance across the dataset. The dataset
is available at https://github.com/google-research/google-research/
tree/master/android_in_the_wild.

1

Introduction

Users complete tasks on mobile devices via a sequence of touches and gestures on the screen. Tasks
can often be succinctly described using natural language commands, and, in many situations, it
is valuable to be able to speak or type commands rather than interacting directly with the device.
This has important implications for users who are unable to physically operate a device due to a
physical (e.g., visual or motor disabilities) or situational (e.g., driving, cooking, etc.) impairment. It
is therefore beneficial to build device-control systems that can interpret natural language instructions
and execute them on a device without any manual intervention.
Instead of using application-specific APIs, which are not generally available for any given application
or function, these systems directly manipulate user interface (UI) elements on a screen, exactly
as a human does [1, 28, 29, 35, 21]. Hence, to work correctly, it is essential for such systems to
understand the screen, which usually means detecting position and inferring semantics of its UI
elements. Device-control systems must also be able to map high-level commands to execution plans
that can be carried out on the device. For example, understanding that the command “open my recent
email with Jane” involves opening an email app, potentially tapping the search icon, typing "Jane",
etc. Further, to be useful, they must be able to generalize across a variety of task instructions and UIs.
∗

Equal contribution. Contact: crawles@google.com and lialice@google.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

