A Unified Framework for U-Net Design and Analysis

Christopher Williams ∗ 1 Fabian Falck ∗,1,2 George Deligiannidis 1
Chris Holmes 1,2 Arnaud Doucet 1 Saifuddin Syed 1
1
University of Oxford 2 The Alan Turing Institute
{williams,fabian.falck,deligian,cholmes, doucet,saifuddin.syed}@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
U-Nets are a go-to neural architecture across numerous tasks for continuous signals
on a square such as images and Partial Differential Equations (PDE), however their
design and architecture is understudied. In this paper, we provide a framework
for designing and analysing general U-Net architectures. We present theoretical
results which characterise the role of the encoder and decoder in a U-Net, their
high-resolution scaling limits and their conjugacy to ResNets via preconditioning. We propose Multi-ResNets, U-Nets with a simplified, wavelet-based encoder
without learnable parameters. Further, we show how to design novel U-Net architectures which encode function constraints, natural bases, or the geometry of
the data. In diffusion models, our framework enables us to identify that highfrequency information is dominated by noise exponentially faster, and show how
U-Nets with average pooling exploit this. In our experiments, we demonstrate how
Multi-ResNets achieve competitive and often superior performance compared to
classical U-Nets in image segmentation, PDE surrogate modelling, and generative
modelling with diffusion models. Our U-Net framework paves the way to study the
theoretical properties of U-Nets and design natural, scalable neural architectures
for a multitude of problems beyond the square.

1

Introduction

U-Nets (see Figure 1) are a central architecture in deep learning
for continuous signals. Across many tasks as diverse as image
segmentation [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], Partial Differential Equation (PDE)
surrogate modelling [6, 7] and score-based diffusion models [8, 9,
10, 11, 12], U-Nets are a go-to architecture yielding state-of-theart performance. In spite of their enormous success, a framework
for U-Nets which characterises for instance the specific role of
the encoder and decoder in a U-Net or which spaces these operate
on is lacking. In this work, we provide such a framework for
U-Nets. This allows us to design U-Nets for data beyond a square
domain, and enable us to incorporate prior knowledge about a
problem, for instance a natural basis, functional constraints, or
knowledge about its topology, into the neural architecture.

Skip connection

Skip connection

Bottleneck

The importance of preconditioning. We begin by illustrating
the importance of the core design principle of U-Nets: precon- Figure 1: A resolution 2 U-Net
ditioning. Preconditioning informally means that initialising an (Def. 1). If Ei = IdVi , this is a
optimisation problem with a ‘good’ solution greatly benefits learn- Multi-ResNet (see Def. 3).
ing [13, 14]. Consider a synthetic example using ResNets [15] which are natural in the context of
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

