Mesogeos: A multi-purpose dataset for data-driven
wildfire modeling in the Mediterranean
Spyros Kondylatos1, 2 , Ioannis Prapas1, 2 , Gustau Camps-Valls2 , and Ioannis Papoutsis1
1

Orion Lab, Institute for Astronomy, Astrophysics, Space Applications, and Remote Sensing,
National Observatory of Athens
2
Image Processing Laboratory (IPL), Universitat de València
{skondylatos, iprapas, ipapoutsis}@noa.gr
{gustau.camps}@uv.es

Abstract
We introduce Mesogeos1 , a large-scale multi-purpose dataset for wildfire modeling
in the Mediterranean. Mesogeos integrates variables representing wildfire drivers
(meteorology, vegetation, human activity) and historical records of wildfire ignitions and burned areas for 17 years (2006-2022). It is designed as a cloud-friendly
spatio-temporal dataset, namely a datacube, harmonizing all variables in a grid of
1km x 1km x 1-day resolution. The datacube structure offers opportunities to assess
machine learning (ML) usage in various wildfire modeling tasks. We extract two
ML-ready datasets that establish distinct tracks to demonstrate this potential: (1)
short-term wildfire danger forecasting and (2) final burned area estimation given
the point of ignition. We define appropriate metrics and baselines to evaluate the
performance of models in each track. By publishing the datacube, along with
the code to create the ML datasets and models, we encourage the community to
foster the implementation of additional tracks for mitigating the increasing threat
of wildfires in the Mediterranean.

1

Introduction

Wildfires play a key role in the ecosystem [1–4], yet they present risks to both humans and the
environment [5]. The threat is inflated by climate change, which aggravates the frequency and
extremity of wildfire events [6], particularly in Mediterranean-type climate regions [7, 8]. The
changes are expected to be more and more prevalent in the following years [9]; thus, there is a
pressing need for innovative solutions to enhance wildfire preparedness and management, enabling
adaptation to evolving conditions. The development of such solutions is hampered by the complexity
to model wildfires, resulting from the dynamic interactions between several fire drivers such as
climate, vegetation, and human activity [10], operating across different spatial and temporal scales.
Traditional models [11–13] ignore these intricate interactions. In contrast, Machine Learning (ML)
offers the potential to capture them in a data-centric manner. Nevertheless, the application of ML
in the context of wildfires requires careful consideration [14]. The wildfire occurrence is stochastic,
which means that the same environmental conditions may lead or not to a fire ignition. Moreover,
wildfires are rare events that can lead to imbalanced or sparse datasets. Despite the challenges, ML
has been employed successfully in several applications [15]. Particularly, Deep Learning (DL) has
been suggested as a method for modeling Earth System problems, including wildfires [16, 17].
1

Inspired from the Greek word Mεσóγειoς (Mesógeios), widely adopted to refer to the Mediterranean Sea.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

