Going beyond persistent homology
using persistent homology

Johanna Immonen∗
University of Helsinki
johanna.x.immonen@helsinki.fi

Amauri H. Souza∗
Aalto University
Federal Institute of Ceará

Vikas Garg
Aalto University
YaiYai Ltd

amauri.souza@aalto.fi

vgarg@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Representational limits of message-passing graph neural networks (MP-GNNs),
e.g., in terms of the Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) test for isomorphism, are well understood. Augmenting these graph models with topological features via persistent
homology (PH) has gained prominence, but identifying the class of attributed
graphs that PH can recognize remains open. We introduce a novel concept of
color-separating sets to provide a complete resolution to this important problem.
Specifically, we establish the necessary and sufficient conditions for distinguishing
graphs based on the persistence of their connected components, obtained from filter
functions on vertex and edge colors. Our constructions expose the limits of vertexand edge-level PH, proving that neither category subsumes the other. Leveraging
these theoretical insights, we propose RePHINE for learning topological features
on graphs. RePHINE efficiently combines vertex- and edge-level PH, achieving
a scheme that is provably more powerful than both. Integrating RePHINE into
MP-GNNs boosts their expressive power, resulting in gains over standard PH on
several benchmarks for graph classification.

1

Introduction

Topological data analysis (TDA) is a rapidly growing field that provides tools from algebraic topology
for uncovering the shape (or structure) of data, allowing for efficient feature extraction. Its flagship
tool is persistent homology (PH) [8], which seeks to characterize topological invariants (e.g., connected components, loops) of an underlying manifold based on data samples. Notably, PH has been
successfully applied in many scientific domains, including computer vision [17, 27], drug design
[23], fluid dynamics [24], and material science [25].
For graphs, PH has been used to provide global topological signatures for graph-level prediction tasks
[2, 12, 14, 33, 39] and act as local message modulators in graph neural networks (GNNs) for nodelevel tasks [4, 40]. By leveraging learnable filtration/vectorization maps, PH has also been integrated
into neural networks as a building block in the end-to-end learning process [2, 3, 13, 15, 26]. These
strategies allow us to exploit topological features to boost the predictive capabilities of graph models.
However, in stark contrast with the developments on the representational power of GNNs [1, 11, 28–
30, 34, 35, 37], the theoretical properties of PH on graphs remain much less explored. For instance,
open questions include: Which graph properties can PH capture? What is the characterization of
pairs of graphs that PH cannot separate? Can we improve the expressivity of PH on graphs?
In a recent work, Rieck [32] discusses the expressivity of PH on graphs in terms of the WeisfeilerLeman (WL) hierarchy [36]. The paper shows that, given different k-WL colorings, there exists a
filtration such that the corresponding persistence diagrams differ. This result provides a lower bound
for the expressivity in terms of WL hierarchy, but it does not describe the class of graphs which can
be distinguished via PH. In this paper, we aim to fully characterize this class of graphs.
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

