Characterizing the Optimal 0 − 1 Loss for Multi-class
Classification with a Test-time Attacker
Sihui Dai1∗ Wenxin Ding2∗ Arjun Nitin Bhagoji2 Daniel Cullina3
Ben Y. Zhao2 Haitao Zheng2 Prateek Mittal1
1
Princeton University 2 University of Chicago 3 Pennsylvania State University
{sihuid,pmittal}@princeton.edu
{wenxind, abhagoji}@uchicago.edu
{ravenben, htzheng}@cs.uchicago.edu
cullina@psu.edu

Abstract
Finding classifiers robust to adversarial examples is critical for their safe deployment. Determining the robustness of the best possible classifier under a given threat
model for a fixed data distribution and comparing it to that achieved by state-ofthe-art training methods is thus an important diagnostic tool. In this paper, we find
achievable information-theoretic lower bounds on robust loss in the presence of a
test-time attacker for multi-class classifiers on any discrete dataset. We provide
a general framework for finding the optimal 0 − 1 loss that revolves around the
construction of a conflict hypergraph from the data and adversarial constraints.
The prohibitive cost of this formulation in practice leads us to formulate other
variants of the attacker-classifier game that more efficiently determine the range of
the optimal loss. Our valuation shows, for the first time, an analysis of the gap to
optimal robustness for classifiers in the multi-class setting on benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Developing a theoretical understanding of the vulnerability of classifiers to adversarial examples
(27; 12; 8; 4) generated by a test-time attacker is critical to their safe deployment. Past work has
largely taken one of two approaches. The first has focused on generalization bounds on learning in
the presence of adversarial examples, by trying to determine the sample complexity of robust learning
(10; 25; 21). The second has been to characterize the lowest possible loss achievable within a specific
hypothesis class (22; 5; 6) for binary classification for a specified data distribution and attacker. The
hypothesis class of choice is often the set of all possible classification functions. The optimal loss
thus determined is a lower bound on robustness for classifiers used in practice, allowing practitioners
to measure progress for defenses and step away from the attack-defense arms race (19; 31; 9).
In this paper, we take on the second approach and propose methods to find the lowest possible
loss attainable by any measurable classifier in the presence of a test-time attacker in the multi-class
setting. The loss thus obtained is referred to as the optimal loss and the corresponding classifier,
the optimal classifier. We extend previous work (5; 6) which was restricted to the binary setting,
allowing us to compare the robustness of multi-class classifiers used in practice to the optimal loss.
Our first contribution is thus extending the conflict-graph framework for computing lower bounds
on robustness to the multi-class setting. In this framework, given a dataset and attacker, we construct
a conflict hypergraph which contains vertices representing training examples in the dataset, and
hyperedges representing overlaps between adversarial neighborhoods around each training example.
Using this hypergraph, we construct a linear program whose optimal value is a lower bound on
the 0 − 1 loss for all classifiers and whose solution is the optimal classifier. The lower bound on
robustness is thus achievable.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

