A normative theory of social conflict

Sergey Shuvaev1 , Evgeny Amelchenko2 , Dmitry Smagin3 ,
Natalia Kudryavtseva3 , Grigori Enikolopov2 , and Alexei Koulakov1
1
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA; 2 Department of Anesthesiology
and Center for Developmental Genetics, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA; 3 Institute
of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia.
koulakov@cshl.edu

Abstract
Social conflict is a survival mechanism yielding both normal and pathological
behaviors. To understand its underlying principles, we collected behavioral and
whole-brain neural data from mice advancing through stages of social conflict.
We modeled the animals’ interactions as a normal-form game using Bayesian
inference to account for the partial observability of animals’ strengths. We find that
our behavioral and neural data are consistent with the first-level Theory of Mind
(1-ToM) model where mice form “primary” beliefs about the strengths of all mice
involved and “secondary” beliefs that estimate the beliefs of their opponents. Our
model identifies the brain regions that carry the information about these beliefs and
offers a framework for studies of social behaviors in partially observable settings.

1

Introduction

Research into conflict behavior is an established domain within cognitive science and neuroscience
with a focus on exploring the origins of pathological aggression and defeat (Archer, 1988; Rosell and
Siever, 2015). The broad interest in this topic is driven by the pervasive occurrence of pathologically
aggressive behaviors such as school bullying and prison hostility that remain a significant societal
concern. Gaining insight into the neural and behavioral foundations of conflict behavior is a crucial
step toward mitigating the adverse consequences of aggression and preventing instances of hostility.
Toward this goal, the field of conflict studies has adopted an experimental approach. Researchers have
monitored rodent behavior and recorded corresponding brain activity, as rodents naturally exhibit
aggressive behaviors allowing experimenters to minimize additional stress for animals during data
collection. This approach has yielded valuable insights into the factors that promote aggression
(Archer, 1988; Wang and Anderson, 2010; Lorenz, 2005) and led to identifying brain regions affected
by conflict (Aleyasin et al., 2018; Diaz and Lin, 2020; Wei et al., 2021). The studies in this field,
however, rarely focused on the dynamic nature of aggressiveness in individuals, thus constraining
our ability to understand and predict harmful behaviors. Here, we use behavioral data modeling to
explore the strategies of aggressive behavior in individual mice over prolonged periods of time.
Our study contributes to the field as follows. We collected large-scale data on behavior and wholebrain neural activity that follows the emergence of aggression and defeat in individual mice. We
also introduced a family of models to characterize the learning rules, decision-making processes,
and cost functions underlying aggression. These models were applied to the observed behaviors of
individual mice to identify the best-fitting model. Using that model, we described the decision-making
mechanism consistent with the emergence of aggression and submissiveness. We then conducted an
analysis of the neural correlates of both explicit and hidden model variables across the entire brain,
thus validating the hidden dynamics of the model and linking specific brain regions to individual
model variables. While similar approaches were used in theoretical and computational neuroscience,
they have not been previously applied in studies of conflict.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

