ProteinShake
Building datasets and benchmarks for deep learning
on protein structures
Tim Kucera 1,2,3,⇤ , Carlos Oliver 1,2,3 ⇤ , Dexiong Chen 1,2,3 , and Karsten Borgwardt 1,2,3
1

Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
2
SIB, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Basel, Switzerland
3
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
⇤
These authors contributed equally.
{kucera, oliver, dchen, borgwardt}@biochem.mpg.de

Abstract
We present ProteinShake, a Python software package that simplifies dataset
creation and model evaluation for deep learning on protein structures. Users
can create custom datasets or load an extensive set of pre-processed datasets from
biological data repositories such as the Protein Data Bank (PDB) and AlphaFoldDB.
Each dataset is associated with prediction tasks and evaluation functions covering
a broad array of biological challenges. A benchmark on these tasks shows that pretraining almost always improves performance, the optimal data modality (graphs,
voxel grids, or point clouds) is task-dependent, and models struggle to generalize
to new structures. ProteinShake makes protein structure data easily accessible
and comparison among models straightforward, providing challenging benchmark
settings with real-world implications.
ProteinShake is available at https://proteinshake.ai.

1

Introduction

Over the decades, data describing protein sequence, structure, and function has been amassed in
databases such as UniProt [13] and RCSB PDB [6], as well as in a plethora of domain-specific
databases [5, 38, 12]. This abundance of data presents a prime application for deep learning models
and an opportunity to generate new insights with machine learning in challenging real-world scenarios.
The recent addition of millions of high quality structure predictions from AlphaFold [30] and other
structure prediction algorithms [32] adds a valuable resource to this pool of data, which researchers
are now eager to utilize.
However, the heterogeneity of protein data constitutes a problem for reproducible machine learning.
Structures are stored in heavy formats not developed for deep learning models, metadata is often
scattered across different databases, and files can be corrupted or of poor quality. Additionally, the
diverse approaches and network architectures in geometric deep learning require different representations of the protein structure, such as point clouds, graphs, or voxel grids. This results in highly
variable data processing steps and evaluation schemes across publications, and eventually prevents
comparison.
Ideally, datasets and evaluations should be standardized. This includes well-defined and transparent pre-processing steps of the data and reproducible data splits in the evaluation, with selected,
domain-appropriate metrics. As modern deep learning models tend to be generalists (i.e. operate
in multiple contexts and tasks) [45], the data curation process should be harmonized across differ37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

