Counterfactual Generation with Identifiability
Guarantees
Hanqi Yan1,4∗, Lingjing Kong2∗ , Lin Gui3 , Yuejie Chi2 , Eric Xing2,4 , Yulan He1,3 , Kun Zhang2,4
1
University of Warwick,2 Carnegie Mellon University,
3
King’s College London, 4 Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Counterfactual generation lies at the core of various machine learning tasks, including image translation and controllable text generation. This generation process
usually requires the identification of the disentangled latent representations, such
as content and style, that underlie the observed data. However, it becomes more
challenging when faced with a scarcity of paired data and labeling information.
Existing disentangled methods crucially rely on oversimplified assumptions, such
as assuming independent content and style variables, to identify the latent variables,
even though such assumptions may not hold for complex data distributions. For
instance, food reviews tend to involve words like “tasty”, whereas movie reviews
commonly contain words such as “thrilling” for the same positive sentiment. This
problem is exacerbated when data are sampled from multiple domains since the
dependence between content and style may vary significantly over domains. In
this work, we tackle the domain-varying dependence between the content and
the style variables inherent in the counterfactual generation task. We provide
identification guarantees for such latent-variable models by leveraging the relative
sparsity of the influences from different latent variables. Our theoretical insights
enable the development of a doMain AdapTive counTerfactual gEneration model,
called (MATTE). Our theoretically grounded framework achieves state-of-the-art
performance in unsupervised style transfer tasks, where neither paired data nor
style labels are utilized, across four large-scale datasets.

1

Introduction

Counterfactual generation serves as a crucial component in various machine learning applications,
such as controllable text generation and image translation. These applications aim at producing new
data with desirable style attributes (e.g., sentiment, tense, or hair color) while preserving the other
core information (e.g., topic or identity) [Li et al., 2019, 2022, Xie et al., 2023, Isola et al., 2017,
Zhu et al., 2017]. Consequently, the central challenge in counterfactual generation is to learn the
underlying disentangled representations.
To achieve this goal, prior work leverages either paired data that only differ in style components [Rao
and Tetreault, 2018, Shang et al., 2019, Xu et al., 2019b, Wang et al., 2019b], or utilizes style labeling
information [John et al., 2019, He et al., 2020, Dathathri et al., 2020, Yang and Klein, 2021, Liu
et al., 2022]. However, collecting paired data or labels can be labour-intensive and even infeasible in
many real-world applications [Chou et al., 2022, Calderon et al., 2022, Xie et al., 2023]. This has
prompted recent work [Kong et al., 2022, Xie et al., 2023] to delve into unsupervised identification of
latent variables by tapping into multiple domains. To attain identifiability guarantees, a prevalent
assumption made in these works [Kong et al., 2022, Xie et al., 2023] is that the content and the style
∗
Equal Contribution. Work was done when Hanqi Yan was a visiting student at MBZUAI. Correspondence
to: Yulan He (yulan.he@kcl.ac.uk) and Kun Zhang (kunz1@cmu.edu).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

