Task-Robust Pre-Training for Worst-Case
Downstream Adaptation

Jianghui Wang∗, Yang Chen∗ , Xingyu Xie, Cong Fang†, Zhouchen Lin†
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
jianghuiwang.ai@gmail.com, {yangchen, xyxie, fangcong, zlin}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-training has achieved remarkable success when transferred to downstream
tasks. In machine learning, we care about not only the good performance of
a model but also its behavior under reasonable shifts of condition. The same
philosophy holds when pre-training a foundation model. However, the foundation
model may not uniformly behave well for a series of related downstream tasks.
This happens, for example, when conducting mask recovery regression where the
recovery ability or the training instances diverge like pattern features are extracted
dominantly on pre-training, but semantic features are also required on a downstream
task. This paper considers pre-training a model that guarantees a uniformly good
performance over the downstream tasks. We call this goal as downstream-task
robustness. Our method first separates the upstream task into several representative
ones and applies a simple minimax loss for pre-training. We then design an efficient
algorithm to solve the minimax loss and prove its convergence in the convex setting.
In the experiments, we show both on large-scale natural language processing
and computer vision datasets our method increases the metrics on worse-case
downstream tasks. Additionally, some theoretical explanations for why our loss
is beneficial are provided. Specifically, we show fewer samples are inherently
required for the most challenging downstream task in some cases.

1

Introduction

The rapid development of machine learning is promoting a shift in the learning paradigm, where one
first trains a very large model, often called a foundation model, with massive data, and then adapts it
to desired tasks using much less data. The hope is to obtain a model that serves as an infrastructure
and is transferable to a wide range of tasks. Pre-training plays the role of an engine to acquire the
foundation model. Typical pre-training methods are to minimize the average expected risks of the
upstream tasks. Such pre-trained models can achieve good performance for a lot of downstream
tasks but may fail in some hard cases. For example, a vision pre-trained model for animal and plant
recognition may work well for typical characteristics species but fail when identifying mimicry
animals and plants; a common green mantis can be correctly recognized as a mantis, while an orchid
mantis might be falsely classified as an orchid.
In machine learning, one cares about not only the good performance of a model but also its behavior
under reasonable shifts of conditions. The same philosophy holds for pre-training a foundation model.
To guarantee a uniformly good performance over a series of tasks, one has to consider the robustness
of pre-training. We call this downstream-task robustness. The aim is to develop a pre-training method
to train the foundation model that admits a good adaptation performance over a series of downstream
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

