F OURIER H AND F LOW: Neural 4D Hand
Representation Using Fourier Query Flow

Jihyun Lee1

Junbong Jang1 Donghwan Kim1 Minhyuk Sung1 Tae-Kyun Kim1,2
1
2
KAIST
Imperial College London
{jyun.lee, junbongjang, kdoh2522, mhsung, kimtaekyun}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent 4D shape representations model continuous temporal evolution of implicit
shapes by (1) learning query flows without leveraging shape and articulation priors
or (2) decoding shape occupancies separately for each time value. Thus, they
do not effectively capture implicit correspondences between articulated shapes
or regularize jittery temporal deformations. In this work, we present F OURIER H AND F LOW, which is a spatio-temporally continuous representation for human
hands that combines a 3D occupancy field with articulation-aware query flows
represented as Fourier series. Given an input RGB sequence, we aim to learn
a fixed number of Fourier coefficients for each query flow to guarantee smooth
and continuous temporal shape dynamics. To effectively model spatio-temporal
deformations of articulated hands, we compose our 4D representation based on
two types of Fourier query flow: (1) pose flow that models query dynamics influenced by hand articulation changes via implicit linear blend skinning and (2)
shape flow that models query-wise displacement flow. In the experiments, our
method achieves state-of-the-art results on video-based 4D reconstruction while
being computationally more efficient than the existing 3D/4D implicit shape representations. We additionally show our results on motion inter- and extrapolation
and texture transfer using the learned correspondences of implicit shapes. To
the best of our knowledge, F OURIER H AND F LOW is the first neural 4D continuous hand representation learned from RGB videos. Our code is available at
https://github.com/jyunlee/FourierHandFlow.

Fourier Query

Flow

t

Figure 1: From monocular RGB sequence inputs, F OURIER H AND F LOW learns 4D hand shapes that
are continuous in both space and time. It models temporal shape evolutions with query flows learned
as a fixed number of coefficients for Fourier series to guarantee smooth temporal dynamics.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

