When Demonstrations Meet Generative World Models:
A Maximum Likelihood Framework for Offline
Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Siliang Zeng∗
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN, USA
zeng0176@umn.edu

Chenliang Li∗
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
chenliangli@tamu.edu

Alfredo Garcia
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
alfredo.garcia@tamu.edu

Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN, USA
mhong@umn.edu

Abstract
Offline inverse reinforcement learning (Offline IRL) aims to recover the structure
of rewards and environment dynamics that underlie observed actions in a fixed,
finite set of demonstrations from an expert agent. Accurate models of expertise in
executing a task has applications in safety-sensitive applications such as clinical
decision making and autonomous driving. However, the structure of an expert’s
preferences implicit in observed actions is closely linked to the expert’s model
of the environment dynamics (i.e. the “world” model). Thus, inaccurate models
of the world obtained from finite data with limited coverage could compound
inaccuracy in estimated rewards. To address this issue, we propose a bi-level
optimization formulation of the estimation task wherein the upper level is likelihood
maximization based upon a conservative model of the expert’s policy (lower level).
The policy model is conservative in that it maximizes reward subject to a penalty
that is increasing in the uncertainty of the estimated model of the world. We
propose a new algorithmic framework to solve the bi-level optimization problem
formulation and provide statistical and computational guarantees of performance
for the associated optimal reward estimator. Finally, we demonstrate that the
proposed algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art offline IRL and imitation
learning benchmarks by a large margin, over the continuous control tasks in
MuJoCo and different datasets in the D4RL benchmark2 .

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful and promising approach for solving large-scale sequential
decision-making problems [1, 2, 3]. However, RL struggles to scale to the real-world applications due
to two major limitations: 1) it heavily relies on the manually defined reward function [4], 2) it requires
the online interactions with the environment [5]. In many application scenarios such as dialogue
system [6] and robotics [7], it is difficult to manually design an appropriate reward for constructing
the practical reinforcement learning system. Moreover, for some safety-sensitive applications like
clinical decision making [8, 9] and autonomous driving [10, 11], online trials and errors are prohibited
∗
2

Equal Contribution.
Our implementation is available at https://github.com/Cloud0723/Offline-MLIRL

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

