ShiftAddViT: Mixture of Multiplication Primitives
Towards Efficient Vision Transformers
Haoran You* , Huihong Shi* , Yipin Guo* , and Yingyan (Celine) Lin
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
{haoran.you, celine.lin}@gatech.edu, eic-lab@groups.gatech.edu

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have shown impressive performance and have become a
unified backbone for multiple vision tasks. However, both the attention mechanism
and multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) in ViTs are not sufficiently efficient due to
dense multiplications, leading to costly training and inference. To this end, we propose to reparameterize pre-trained ViTs with a mixture of multiplication primitives,
e.g., bitwise shifts and additions, towards a new type of multiplication-reduced
model, dubbed ShiftAddViT, which aims to achieve end-to-end inference speedups
on GPUs without requiring training from scratch. Specifically, all MatMuls among
queries, keys, and values are reparameterized using additive kernels, after mapping
queries and keys to binary codes in Hamming space. The remaining MLPs or linear
layers are then reparameterized with shift kernels. We utilize TVM to implement
and optimize those customized kernels for practical hardware deployment on GPUs.
We find that such a reparameterization on (quadratic or linear) attention maintains
model accuracy, while inevitably leading to accuracy drops when being applied
to MLPs. To marry the best of both worlds, we further propose a new mixture
of experts (MoE) framework to reparameterize MLPs by taking multiplication
or its primitives as experts, e.g., multiplication and shift, and designing a new
latency-aware load-balancing loss. Such a loss helps to train a generic router for
assigning a dynamic amount of input tokens to different experts according to their
latency. In principle, the faster the experts run, the more input tokens they are
assigned. Extensive experiments on various 2D/3D Transformer-based vision tasks
consistently validate the effectiveness of our proposed ShiftAddViT, achieving up
to 5.18× latency reductions on GPUs and 42.9% energy savings, while maintaining a comparable accuracy as original or efficient ViTs. Codes and models are
available at https://github.com/GATECH-EIC/ShiftAddViT.

1

Introduction

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have emerged as powerful vision backbone substitutes to convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) due to their impressive performance [57, 16]. However, ViTs’ state-of-the-art
(SOTA) accuracy comes at the price of prohibitive hardware latency and energy consumption for both
training and inference, limiting their prevailing deployment and applications [34, 51], even though
pre-trained ViT models are publicly available. The bottlenecks are twofold based on many profiling
results: attention and MLPs, e.g., they account for 36%/63% of the FLOPs and 45%/46% of the
latency when running DeiT-Base [55] on an NVIDIA Jetson TX2 GPU [72, 19]). Previous efficient
ViT solutions mostly focus on macro-architecture designs [21, 39, 32, 55, 9, 61] and linear attention
optimization [59, 50, 5, 13, 6, 73]. However, they pay less attention on reducing the underlying
dominant multiplications as well as on co-optimizing both attention and MLPs.
We identify that one of the most effective yet still missing opportunities for accelerating ViTs is
to reparameterize their redundant multiplications with a mixture of multiplication primitives, i.e.,
*

Equal Contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

