Learning Mask-aware CLIP Representations for
Zero-Shot Segmentation

Siyu Jiao1,2,3∗, Yunchao Wei1,2,3 ,

Yaowei Wang3 ,

Yao Zhao1,2,3 ,

Humphrey Shi 4,5

1

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network
4
Georgia Institute of Technology 5 Picsart AI Research
jiaosiyu99@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, pre-trained vision-language models have been increasingly used to tackle
the challenging zero-shot segmentation task. Typical solutions follow the paradigm
of first generating mask proposals and then adopting CLIP to classify them. To
maintain the CLIP’s zero-shot transferability, previous practices favour to freeze
CLIP during training. However, in the paper, we reveal that CLIP is insensitive
to different mask proposals and tends to produce similar predictions for various
mask proposals of the same image. This insensitivity results in numerous false
positives when classifying mask proposals. This issue mainly relates to the fact that
CLIP is trained with image-level supervision. To alleviate this issue, we propose a
simple yet effective method, named Mask-aware Fine-tuning (MAFT). Specifically,
Image-Proposals CLIP Encoder (IP-CLIP Encoder) is proposed to handle arbitrary
numbers of image and mask proposals simultaneously. Then, mask-aware loss
and self-distillation loss are designed to fine-tune IP-CLIP Encoder, ensuring
CLIP is responsive to different mask proposals while not sacrificing transferability.
In this way, mask-aware representations can be easily learned to make the true
positives stand out. Notably, our solution can seamlessly plug into most existing
methods without introducing any new parameters during the fine-tuning process.
We conduct extensive experiments on the popular zero-shot benchmarks. With
MAFT, the performance of the state-of-the-art methods is promoted by a large
margin: 50.4% (+ 8.2%) on COCO, 81.8% (+ 3.2%) on Pascal-VOC, and 8.7%
(+4.3%) on ADE20K in terms of mIoU for unseen classes. Code is available at
github.com/jiaosiyu1999/MAFT.git.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation, one of the most widely researched topics in computer vision, has achieved
remarkable success [3; 39; 15; 16] with the development of deep learning techniques [14]. However,
traditional segmentation models are only capable of segmenting a few predefined categories within
a closed vocabulary [7; 2; 22; 21], which is much smaller than the number of categories used by
humans to describe the real world. Therefore, zero-shot segmentation [31; 1; 10; 13] is introduced to
segment objects using arbitrary categories described by texts.
Recently, large-scale visual-language pre-training models (e.g. CLIP [28] and ALIGN [17]) have
shown impressive transferability in recognizing novel categories, leading to their increased adoption
∗

Work done during an internship at Picsart AI Research (PAIR).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

