SANFlow: Semantic-Aware Normalizing Flow for
Anomaly Detection and Localization

Daehyun Kim1 Sungyong Baik2 Tae Hyun Kim3∗
Dept. of Artificial Intelligence1 , Dept. of Data Science2 , Dept. of Computer Science3
Hanyang University
{daehyun, dsybaik, taehyunkim}@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
Visual anomaly detection, the task of detecting abnormal characteristics in images,
is challenging due to the rarity and unpredictability of anomalies. In order to
reliably model the distribution of normality and detect anomalies, a few works
have attempted to exploit the density estimation ability of normalizing flow (NF).
However, previous NF-based methods forcibly transform the distribution of all
features into a single distribution (e.g., unit normal distribution), even when the
features can have locally distinct semantic information and thus follow different
distributions. We claim that forcibly learning to transform such diverse distributions
to a single distribution with a single network will cause the learning difficulty,
thereby limiting the capacity of a network to discriminate between normal and
abnormal data. As such, we propose to transform the distribution of features at
each location of a given input image to different distributions. Specifically, we
train NF to map the feature distributions of normal data to different distributions at
each location in the given image. Furthermore, to enhance the discriminability, we
also train NF to map the distribution of abnormal data to a distribution significantly
different from that of normal data. The experimental results highlight the efficacy
of the proposed framework in improving the density modeling and thus anomaly
detection performance.

1

Introduction

Abnormal events that deviate significantly from expected and typical characteristics are often unwanted and are referred to as anomalies. The objective of anomaly detection is to identify such
abnormal events. As such, anomaly detection is applicable across domains (e.g., video-surveillance,
product defect detection, medical image analysis, etc.), where abnormal events can indicate or lead to
critical issues. However, abnormal events occur rarely and can appear in various forms that cannot be
known in advance, making it infeasible to collect a large amount of abnormal data in many real-world
scenarios. The difficulty in collecting abnormal data has prevented anomaly detection from exploiting
the recent breakthrough in supervised learning, leaving the field still challenging.
Acknowledging the difficulty of collecting abnormal data, many works have formulated anomaly
detection as unsupervised learning, one-class learning, or few-shot learning [4, 5, 45, 49, 8, 47], in
which the goal is to accurately model a distribution of normal data. Then, any data that deviates from
the learned distribution of normal data is considered as an anomaly. The approaches to unsupervised
anomaly detection differ by how they recognize the differences between normal and abnormal data.
Reconstruction-based methods learn to reconstruct normal images and thus distinguish input images
as abnormal if the reconstruction error is high [1, 42, 12, 35]. Meanwhile, representation-based
approaches aim to learn a feature space, where normal images are brought close to each other
∗

Correspondence to: Tae Hyun Kim <taehyunkim@hanyang.ac.kr>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

