A2CiD2: Accelerating Asynchronous Communication
in Decentralized Deep Learning

Adel Nabli
Concordia University, Mila
Sorbonne University, ISIR, CNRS
adel.nabli@sorbonne-universite.fr

Eugene Belilovsky
Concordia University, Mila

Edouard Oyallon
Sorbonne University, ISIR, CNRS

Abstract
Distributed training of Deep Learning models has been critical to many recent
successes in the field. Current standard methods primarily rely on synchronous
centralized algorithms which induce major communication bottlenecks and synchronization locks at scale. Decentralized asynchronous algorithms are emerging as
a potential alternative but their practical applicability still lags. In order to mitigate
the increase in communication cost that naturally comes with scaling the number
of workers, we introduce a principled asynchronous, randomized, gossip-based optimization algorithm which works thanks to a continuous local momentum named
A2 CiD2 . Our method allows each worker to continuously process mini-batches
without stopping, and run a peer-to-peer averaging routine in parallel, reducing
idle time. In addition to inducing a significant communication acceleration at no
cost other than adding a local momentum variable, minimal adaptation is required
to incorporate A2 CiD2 to standard asynchronous approaches. Our theoretical
analysis proves accelerated rates compared to previous asynchronous decentralized
baselines and we empirically show that using our A2 CiD2 momentum significantly
decrease communication costs in poorly connected networks. In particular, we
show consistent improvement on the ImageNet dataset using up to 64 asynchronous
workers (A100 GPUs) and various communication network topologies.

1

Introduction

As Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) and their training datasets become larger and more complex, the
computational demands and the need for efficient training schemes continues to escalate. Distributed
training methods offer a solution by enabling the parallel optimization of model parameters across
multiple workers. Yet, many of the current distributed methods in use are synchronous, and have
significantly influenced the design of cluster computing environments. Thus, both the environments
and algorithms rely heavily on high synchronicity in machine computations and near-instantaneous
communication in high-bandwidth networks, favoring the adoption of centralized algorithms [7].
However, several studies [27, 44, 2, 28] are challenging this paradigm, proposing decentralized
asynchronous algorithms that leverage minor time-delays fluctuations between workers to enhance the parallelization of computations and communications. Unlike centralized algorithms,
decentralized approaches allow each node to contribute proportionally to its available resources,
eliminating the necessity for a global central worker to aggregate results. Combined with asynchronous peer-to-peer (p2p) communications, these methods can streamline the overall training
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

