Privacy Assessment on Reconstructed Images:
Are Existing Evaluation Metrics Faithful to
Human Perception?

Xiaoxiao Sun†
Australian National University

Nidham Gazagnadou‡
Sony AI

Vivek Sharma‡
Sony AI

xiaoxiao.sun@anu.edu.au

nidham.gazagnadou@sony.com

viveksharma@sony.com

Lingjuan Lyu‡
Sony AI

Hongdong Li†
Australian National University

Liang Zheng†
Australian National University

lingjuan.lv@sony.com

hongdong.li@anu.edu.au

liang.zheng@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Hand-crafted image quality metrics, such as PSNR and SSIM, are commonly used
to evaluate model privacy risk under reconstruction attacks. Under these metrics,
reconstructed images that are determined to resemble the original one generally
indicate more privacy leakage. Images determined as overall dissimilar, on the other
hand, indicate higher robustness against attack. However, there is no guarantee that
these metrics well reflect human opinions, which offers trustworthy judgement for
model privacy leakage. In this paper, we comprehensively study the faithfulness
of these hand-crafted metrics to human perception of privacy information from
the reconstructed images. On 5 datasets ranging from natural images, faces, to
fine-grained classes, we use 4 existing attack methods to reconstruct images from
many different classification models and, for each reconstructed image, we ask
multiple human annotators to assess whether this image is recognizable. Our
studies reveal that the hand-crafted metrics only have a weak correlation with
the human evaluation of privacy leakage and that even these metrics themselves
often contradict each other. These observations suggest risks of current metrics
in the community. To address this potential risk, we propose a learning-based
measure called SemSim to evaluate the Semantic Similarity between the original
and reconstructed images. SemSim is trained with a standard triplet loss, using
an original image as an anchor, one of its recognizable reconstructed images
as a positive sample, and an unrecognizable one as a negative. By training on
human annotations, SemSim exhibits a greater reflection of privacy leakage on the
semantic level. We show that SemSim has a significantly higher correlation with
human judgment compared with existing metrics. Moreover, this strong correlation
generalizes to unseen datasets, models and attack methods. We envision this work
as a milestone for image quality evaluation closer to the human level. The project
webpage can be accessed at https://sites.google.com/view/semsim.

1

Introduction

This paper studies the evaluation of privacy risks of image classification models, with a focus on
reconstruction attacks [6, 43]. During inference, a target classifier, a reconstruction attack algorithm
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

