Bridging Reinforcement Learning Theory
and Practice with the Effective Horizon
Cassidy Laidlaw
Stuart Russell
Anca Dragan
Unversity of California, Berkeley
{cassidy_laidlaw,russell,anca}@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) works impressively in some environments and
fails catastrophically in others. Ideally, RL theory should be able to provide an
understanding of why this is, i.e. bounds predictive of practical performance.
Unfortunately, current theory does not quite have this ability. We compare standard
deep RL algorithms to prior sample complexity bounds by introducing a new
dataset, B RIDGE. It consists of 155 deterministic MDPs from common deep
RL benchmarks, along with their corresponding tabular representations, which
enables us to exactly compute instance-dependent bounds. We choose to focus
on deterministic environments because they share many interesting properties of
stochastic environments, but are easier to analyze. Using B RIDGE, we find that
prior bounds do not correlate well with when deep RL succeeds vs. fails, but
discover a surprising property that does. When actions with the highest Q-values
under the random policy also have the highest Q-values under the optimal policy
(i.e. when it is optimal to be greedy on the random policy’s Q function), deep
RL tends to succeed; when they don’t, deep RL tends to fail. We generalize this
property into a new complexity measure of an MDP that we call the effective
horizon, which roughly corresponds to how many steps of lookahead search would
be needed in that MDP in order to identify the next optimal action, when leaf nodes
are evaluated with random rollouts. Using B RIDGE, we show that the effective
horizon-based bounds are more closely reflective of the empirical performance of
PPO and DQN than prior sample complexity bounds across four metrics. We also
find that, unlike existing bounds, the effective horizon can predict the effects of
using reward shaping or a pre-trained exploration policy. Our code and data are
available at https://github.com/cassidylaidlaw/effective-horizon.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has produced impressive results in robotics [1], strategic games
[2], and control [3]. However, the same deep RL algorithms that achieve superhuman performance
in some environments completely fail to learn in others. Sometimes, using techniques like reward
shaping or pre-training help RL, and in other cases they don’t. Our goal is to provide a theoretical
understanding of why this is—a theoretical analysis that is predictive of practical RL performance.
Unfortunately, there is a large gap between the current theory and practice of RL. Despite RL theorists
often focusing on algorithms using strategic exploration (e.g., UCB exploration bonuses; Azar et al.
[4], Jin et al. [5]), the most commonly-used deep RL algorithms, which explore randomly, resist
such analysis. In fact, theory suggests that RL with random exploration is exponentially hard in
the worst case [6], but this is not predictive of practical performance. Some theoretical research
has explored instance-dependent bounds, identifying properties of MDPs when random exploration
should perform better than this worst case [7, 8]. However, it is not clear whether these properties
correlate with when RL algorithms work vs. fail—and our results will reveal that they tend not to.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

