Transportability for Bandits
with Data from Different Environments
Alexis Bellot, Alan Malek, Silvia Chiappa
Google DeepMind
London, UK
abellot@google.com

Abstract
A unifying theme in the design of intelligent agents is to efficiently optimize
a policy based on what prior knowledge of the problem is available and what
actions can be taken to learn more about it. Bandits are a canonical instance of
this task that has been intensely studied in the literature. Most methods, however,
typically rely solely on an agent’s experimentation in a single environment (or
multiple closely related environments). In this paper, we relax this assumption
and consider the design of bandit algorithms from a combination of batch data
and qualitative assumptions about the relatedness across different environments,
represented in the form of causal models. In particular, we show that it is possible to
exploit invariances across environments, wherever they may occur in the underlying
causal model, to consistently improve learning. The resulting bandit algorithm
has a sub-linear regret bound with an explicit dependency on a term that captures
how informative related environments are for the task at hand; and may have
substantially lower regret than experimentation-only bandit instances.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandits (MABs) constitute one of the most widely used frameworks for modeling
decision-making under uncertainty. In this framework, an agent repeatedly takes actions in an
environment with the goal of optimizing a desired objective, such as efficiently inferring the action
with highest reward or maximizing cumulative rewards in the long run [34]. As in most reinforcement
learning problems, there is a substantial amount of exploration involved while the agent learns about
reward distributions under different available actions. This process can be costly in many applications;
from an ethical perspective, for example, physicians may not risk compromising their patient’s health
with unknown treatments. It is therefore important to be efficient with experimentation while learning
an optimal policy. In the literature, structured bandit instances can help navigate the explorationexploitation trade-off effectively, for example with assumptions on the functional association between
action and reward that facilitate estimation such as linear bandits [1, 15, 19] and causal bandits
[23, 36, 28, 27, 24, 26, 12, 29, 7].
An alternative approach to alleviate the cost of active experimentation is to consider leveraging
prior data or prior experimentation in related environments to inform an agent’s decision-making,
which leads to the hybrid learning paradigm. The expectation (or rather hope) is that informative
prior data or prior experimentation can serve to narrow down reward distributions and warm start
the MAB so as to converge to optimal actions faster and ultimately achieve higher cumulative
reward. Current methods can be categorized into multi-task learning [41, 40, 13] and meta-learning
[10, 42, 4, 20, 33, 30]. The former aims to solve a prescribed set of related bandit tasks with shared
structure, e.g. multiple player scenarios with similar reward distributions. The latter considers an
arbitrary number of bandit problems whose parameters are sampled i.i.d. from a meta-prior that
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

