Flow-Based Feature Fusion for Vehicle-Infrastructure
Cooperative 3D Object Detection

Haibao Yu1,2 , Yingjuan Tang2,3 , Enze Xie1 , Jilei Mao2 , Ping Luo1,4 , Zaiqing Nie2 ∗
1
The University of Hong Kong
2
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
3
Beijing Institute of Technology 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract
Cooperatively utilizing both ego-vehicle and infrastructure sensor data can significantly enhance autonomous driving perception abilities. However, the uncertain
temporal asynchrony and limited communication conditions can lead to fusion
misalignment and constrain the exploitation of infrastructure data. To address
these issues in vehicle-infrastructure cooperative 3D (VIC3D) object detection, we
propose the Feature Flow Net (FFNet), a novel cooperative detection framework.
FFNet is a flow-based feature fusion framework that uses a feature flow prediction module to predict future features and compensate for asynchrony. Instead of
transmitting feature maps extracted from still-images, FFNet transmits feature flow,
leveraging the temporal coherence of sequential infrastructure frames. Furthermore,
we introduce a self-supervised training approach that enables FFNet to generate
feature flow with feature prediction ability from raw infrastructure sequences. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms existing
cooperative detection methods while only requiring about 1/100 of the transmission
cost of raw data and covers all latency in one model on the DAIR-V2X dataset.
The code is available at https://github.com/haibao-yu/FFNet-VIC3D.

1

Introduction

BEV mAP (IoU=0.5)

Accurate 3D object detection is a critical task in
63
autonomous driving as it provides crucial informaFFNet (Ours)
FFNet-C1 (Ours)
62
tion about the location and classification of surroundEarly Fusion
ing obstacles. Traditional 3D object detection meth61
ods rely on onboard sensor data from the ego ve60
hicle, which has a limited perception field and of59
ten fails in blind or long-range zones, resulting in
DiscoNet
Late Fusion
58
safety concerns. To address these challenges, vehicleinfrastructure cooperative autonomous driving has
57
gained much attention, particularly using infrastruc56
V2VNet
ture sensors like cameras and LiDARs, which are
104
105
103
106
Transmission Cost (Byte)
usually installed higher than ego vehicles, providing
a broader field of view (40; 42; 25; 24). By utilizing
additional infrastructure sensor data, it is possible Figure 1: Performance vs. Transmission Cost on DAIR-V2X
Dataset. All results are reported with 200ms latency. FFNet
to obtain more meaningful information and improve achieves a new state-of-the-art 62.87% mAP@BEV while only
autonomous driving perception ability. In this paper, requiring about 1/100 of the transmission cost of early fusion.
we focus on solving the vehicle-infrastructure cooperative 3D (VIC3D) object detection problem to
enhance the safety and performance of autonomous driving systems in challenging traffic scenarios.
∗

Corresponding author. Work done while at AIR.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

