Improving Compositional Generalization using
Iterated Learning and Simplicial Embeddings

Yi Ren
University of British Columbia∗
renyi.joshua@gmail.com

Samuel Lavoie
Université de Montréal & Mila
samuel.lavoie.m@gmail.com

Mikhail Galkin
Intel AI Lab
mikhail.galkin@intel.com

Danica J. Sutherland
University of British Columbia & Amii
dsuth@cs.ubc.ca

Aaron Courville
Université de Montréal & Mila
aaron.courville@gmail.com

Abstract
Compositional generalization, the ability of an agent to generalize to unseen combinations of latent factors, is easy for humans but hard for deep neural networks. A
line of research in cognitive science has hypothesized a process, “iterated learning,”
to help explain how human language developed this ability; the theory rests on simultaneous pressures towards compressibility (when an ignorant agent learns from
an informed one) and expressivity (when it uses the representation for downstream
tasks). Inspired by this process, we propose to improve the compositional generalization of deep networks by using iterated learning on models with simplicial
embeddings, which can approximately discretize representations. This approach
is further motivated by an analysis of compositionality based on Kolmogorov
complexity. We show that this combination of changes improves compositional
generalization over other approaches, demonstrating these improvements both
on vision tasks with well-understood latent factors and on real molecular graph
prediction tasks where the latent structure is unknown.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have shown an amazing ability to generalize to new samples on domains where
they have been extensively trained, approaching or surpassing human performance on tasks including
image classification [62], Go [70], reading comprehension [13], and more. A growing body of
literature, however, demonstrates that some tasks that can be easily solved by a human can be hard for
deep models. One important such problem is compositional generalization ([18], comp-gen for short).
For example, Schott et al. [65] study manually-created vision datasets where the true generating
factors are known, and demonstrate that a wide variety of current representation learning methods
struggle to learn the underlying mechanism. To achieve true “artificially intelligent” methods that can
succeed at a variety of difficult tasks, it seems necessary to demonstrate compositional generalization.
One contribution of this paper is to lay out a framework towards understanding and improving
compositional generalization, and argue that most currently-common training methods fall short.
∗

Work done in part during an internship at Mila.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

