Feature Likelihood Divergence: Evaluating the
Generalization of Generative Models Using Samples

Marco Jiralerspong∗
Université de Montréal and Mila
Chongli Qin
Google Deepmind

Avishek (Joey) Bose
McGill University and Mila

Yoram Bachrach
Google Deepmind

Ian Gemp
Google Deepmind

Gauthier Gidel†
Université de Montréal and Mila

Abstract
The past few years have seen impressive progress in the development of deep generative models capable of producing high-dimensional, complex, and photo-realistic
data. However, current methods for evaluating such models remain incomplete:
standard likelihood-based metrics do not always apply and rarely correlate with
perceptual fidelity, while sample-based metrics, such as FID, are insensitive to
overfitting, i.e., inability to generalize beyond the training set. To address these
limitations, we propose a new metric called the Feature Likelihood Divergence
(FLD), a parametric sample-based metric that uses density estimation to provide a
comprehensive trichotomic evaluation accounting for novelty (i.e., different from
the training samples), fidelity, and diversity of generated samples. We empirically
demonstrate the ability of FLD to identify overfitting problem cases, even when
previously proposed metrics fail. We also extensively evaluate FLD on various
image datasets and model classes, demonstrating its ability to match intuitions
of previous metrics like FID while offering a more comprehensive evaluation of
generative models. Code is available at https://github.com/marcojira/fld.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling is one of the fastest-growing areas of deep learning, with success stories
spanning the artificial intelligence spectrum [Karras et al., 2020, Brown et al., 2020, Wu et al., 2021,
Rombach et al., 2022]. Despite the growth of applications—and unlike supervised or reinforcement
learning—there is a lack of a clear consensus on an evaluation protocol in high-dimensional data
regimes in which these models excel. In particular, the standard metric of evaluating log-likelihood
of held-out test data [Bishop and Nasrabadi, 2006, Goodfellow et al., 2016, Murphy, 2022] fails to
provide a meaningful evaluation signal due to its large variability between repetitions [Nowozin et al.,
2016] and lack of direct correlation with sample fidelity [Theis et al., 2015].
Departing from pure likelihood-based evaluation, sample-based metrics offer appealing benefits
such as being able to evaluate any generative model family via their generated samples. Furthermore,
sample-based metrics such as Inception score (IS) [Salimans et al., 2016], Fréchet Inception distance
(FID) [Heusel et al., 2017], precision, and recall [Lucic et al., 2018, Sajjadi et al., 2018] have been
shown to correlate with sample quality, i.e. the perceptual visual quality of a generated sample,
and the perceptual sample diversity. Despite being the current defacto gold standard, sample-based
∗

e-mail correspondence to marco.jiralerspong@mila.quebec
Canada Cifar AI Chair
‡
Our metric (FLD) was named Feature Likelihood Score (FLS) in the previous versions of this paper.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

