Coupled Reconstruction of Cortical Surfaces by
Diffeomorphic Mesh Deformation

Hao Zheng Hongming Li Yong Fan
University of Pennsylvania
hzheng1@upenn.edu, {hongming.li,yong.fan}@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Abstract
Accurate reconstruction of cortical surfaces from brain magnetic resonance images
(MRIs) remains a challenging task due to the notorious partial volume effect in
brain MRIs and the cerebral cortex’s thin and highly folded patterns. Although
many promising deep learning-based cortical surface reconstruction methods have
been developed, they typically fail to model the interdependence between inner
(white matter) and outer (pial) cortical surfaces, which can help generate cortical
surfaces with spherical topology. To robustly reconstruct the cortical surfaces
with topological correctness, we develop a new deep learning framework to jointly
reconstruct the inner, outer, and their in-between (midthickness) surfaces and
estimate cortical thickness directly from 3D MRIs. Our method first estimates the
midthickness surface and then learns three diffeomorphic flows jointly to optimize
the midthickness surface and deform it inward and outward to the inner and outer
cortical surfaces respectively, regularized by topological correctness. Our method
also outputs a cortex thickness value for each surface vertex, estimated from its
diffeomorphic deformation trajectory. Our method has been evaluated on two
large-scale neuroimaging datasets, including ADNI and OASIS, achieving state-ofthe-art cortical surface reconstruction performance in terms of accuracy, surface
regularity, and computation efficiency.

1

Introduction

The analysis of the cerebral cortex using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is crucial in understanding neurodegenerative diseases [9, 43] and psychological disorders [42]. Since the cerebral
cortex is a thin (a few millimeters thick) and highly folded sheet between the inner (white matter:
WM) and outer (pial) surfaces, voxel-based segmentation methods cannot accurately capture its
complicated morphology [17]. Instead, triangular meshes have been widely used for cortical surface
reconstruction (CSR) [14] in order to accurately measure cortical thickness, volume, and gyrification.
Although well-established methods for CSR (e.g., FreeSurfer [17], BrainSuite [48]) can produce
promising results, they often require significant computational resources (e.g., 6h/subject [17]) and
may necessitate manual editing in order to attain sub-voxel precision.
Recently, deep learning (DL) methods have achieved significant improvement in CSR in terms of
both accuracy (sub-voxel error) and efficiency (orders of magnitude faster) [10, 13, 19, 20, 26, 30,
31, 41, 47, 59]. These DL methods can be broadly classified into two categories according to the
representation of the output surfaces. (I) Implicit surface representation, such as signed distance
function [13, 19], occupancy filed [13], and level set [41], can be predicted by neural networks,
and cortical surface is then generated by a marching cubes algorithm [27]. (II) Explicit surface
reconstruction methods take a coarse or fine initial mesh as input and directly predict a target
mesh [10, 20, 26, 30, 31, 59]. A detailed comparison of the existing DL-based CSR methods is
summarized in Table 1.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

