DäRF: Boosting Radiance Fields from Sparse Inputs
with Monocular Depth Adaptation

Jiuhn Song ∗ Seonghoon Park∗
Honggyu An∗
Seokju Cho
Min-Seop Kwak
Sungjin Cho
Seungryong Kim †
Korea University

Abstract
Neural radiance field (NeRF) shows powerful performance in novel view synthesis
and 3D geometry reconstruction, but it suffers from critical performance degradation when the number of known viewpoints is drastically reduced. Existing works
attempt to overcome this problem by employing external priors, but their success
is limited to certain types of scenes or datasets. Employing monocular depth estimation (MDE) networks, pretrained on large-scale RGB-D datasets, with powerful
generalization capability would be a key to solving this problem: however, using
MDE in conjunction with NeRF comes with a new set of challenges due to various
ambiguity problems exhibited by monocular depths. In this light, we propose a
novel framework, dubbed DäRF, that achieves robust NeRF reconstruction with a
handful of real-world images by combining the strengths of NeRF and monocular
depth estimation through online complementary training. Our framework imposes
the MDE network’s powerful geometry prior to NeRF representation at both seen
and unseen viewpoints to enhance its robustness and coherence. In addition, we
overcome the ambiguity problems of monocular depths through patch-wise scaleshift fitting and geometry distillation, which adapts the MDE network to produce
depths aligned accurately with NeRF geometry. Experiments show our framework
achieves state-of-the-art results both quantitatively and qualitatively, demonstrating
consistent and reliable performance in both indoor and outdoor real-world datasets.
Project page is available at https://ku-cvlab.github.io/DaRF/.

1

Introduction

Neural radiance field (NeRF) [27] has gained significant attention for its powerful performance in
reconstructing 3D scenes and synthesizing novel views. However, despite its impressive performance,
NeRF often comes with a considerable limitation in that its performance highly relies on the presence
of densely well-calibrated input images which are difficult to acquire. As the number of input images
is reduced, NeRF’s novel view synthesis quality drops significantly, displaying failure cases such as
erroneous overfitting to the input images [15, 29], artifacts clouding empty spaces [29], or degenerate
geometry that yields incomprehensible jumble when rendered at unseen viewpoints [16]. These
challenges derive from its under-constrained nature, causing it to have extreme difficulty mapping
a pixel in input images to a correct 3D location. In addition, NeRF’s volume rendering allows the
model to map a pixel to multiple 3D locations [11], exacerbating this problem.
Previous few-shot NeRF methods attempt to solve these issues by imposing geometric regularization [29, 16, 20] or exploiting external 3D priors [11, 37] such as depth information extracted from
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

