BIRD: Generalizable Backdoor Detection and
Removal for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Xuan Chen1 , Wenbo Guo1, 2 , Guanhong Tao1 , Xiangyu Zhang1 , Dawn Song2
1
Purdue University
2
UC Berkeley
{chen4124, henrygwb, taog, xyzhang}@cs.purdue.edu
{henrygwb, dawnsong}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Backdoor attacks pose a severe threat to the supply chain management of deep
reinforcement learning (DRL) policies. Despite initial defenses proposed in recent
studies, these methods have very limited generalizability and scalability. To address
this issue, we propose BIRD, a technique to detect and remove backdoors from a
pretrained DRL policy in a clean environment without requiring any knowledge
about the attack specifications and accessing its training process. By analyzing
the unique properties and behaviors of backdoor attacks, we formulate trigger
restoration as an optimization problem and design a novel metric to detect backdoored policies. We also design a finetuning method to remove the backdoor,
while maintaining the agent’s performance in the clean environment. We evaluate
BIRD against three backdoor attacks in ten different single-agent or multi-agent
environments. Our results verify the effectiveness, efficiency, and generalizability
of BIRD, as well as its robustness to different attack variations and adaptions.

1

Introduction

Recent studies [59, 20, 49, 8] demonstrate that an attacker can inject a backdoor into a DRL agent’s
policy. In particular, the attacker adds a trigger into the environmental state during the training
process and forces the agent to take a backdoored/poisoned action that diminishes its total reward
given by the environment. To accomplish this, they manipulate the agent’s reward function and assign
a high reward whenever the agent takes a poisoned action at a poisoned state. We denote the original
reward given by the environment as the actual reward and the attacker-manipulated reward function
as the poisoned reward function. As a result, the agent learns to take poisoned actions at these states,
expecting the environment to assign a high actual reward to it. However, taking the poisoned actions
actually diminishes the agent’s actual reward and even causes the agent to fail its corresponding tasks.
Given that a backdoored agent performs normally at clean states, it is challenging to detect and remove
the backdoor from a pretrained policy without accessing the training process, having knowledge about
the attack specifications (i.e., trigger, poisoned actions, poisoned reward function), and accessing
the poisoned states during testing. Most existing backdoor defenses do not consider the sequential
decision-making nature of DRL policies [46, 48, 16, 28, 13, 9, 25, 61, 30, 42, 51, 52] or assume access
to the agent training process [11, 66, 56, 66]. Only a few methods provide defense for pretrained
policies [2, 15]. However, they have several limitations that hinder their practicality. Specifically, the
method proposed in [2] can only be applied to attacks with a perturbation patch as the trigger and
cannot detect whether a policy is backdoored or not. Similarly, the defense proposed in [15] is only
applicable to attacks where the trigger is an adversarial agent’s specific actions.
We propose a generalizable backdoor detection and removal method for DRL policies. Given a
pretrained agent’s policy network and value function, along with the corresponding clean environment,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

