SheetCopilot: Bringing Software Productivity to the
Next Level through Large Language Models
Hongxin Li∗1,2 , Jingran Su∗3,4 , Yuntao Chen†3 , Qing Li†4 , and Zhaoxiang Zhang†1,2,3,5
2

1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), Institute of
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI, CAS
4
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
5
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Abstract
Computer end users have spent billions of hours completing daily tasks like tabular
data processing and project timeline scheduling. Most of these tasks are repetitive
and error-prone, yet most end users lack the skill to automate these burdensome
works. With the advent of large language models (LLMs), directing software with
natural language user requests become a reachable goal. In this work, we propose
a SheetCopilot agent that takes natural language task and control spreadsheet to
fulfill the requirements. We propose a set of atomic actions as an abstraction of
spreadsheet software functionalities. We further design a state machine-based task
planning framework for LLMs to robustly interact with spreadsheets. We curate a
representative dataset containing 221 spreadsheet control tasks and establish a fully
automated evaluation pipeline for rigorously benchmarking the ability of LLMs in
software control tasks. Our SheetCopilot correctly completes 44.3% of tasks for
a single generation, outperforming the strong code generation baseline by a wide
margin. Our project page: https://sheetcopilot.github.io/.

1

Introduction

The ability to intuitively direct sophisticated software through natural language has long been an
aspiration pursued across generations. With the emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) that
can comprehend and respond to human directives, this vision is within closer reach now than ever.
LLMs augmented with tools [24, 25, 20, 26, 2, 27] and reasoning abilities [32, 18, 30, 31] have
shown promising results in recent research.
While LLMs continue advancing rapidly, their ability to interoperate seamlessly with existing
software tools remains under-explored and not fully understood. Enabling LLMs to harness the rich
functionality of countless existing software tools could unlock nearly limitless potential [21].
Progress in endowing LLMs with the ability to direct complex software systems has been hindered
by the lack of both a standardized framework for model-application interaction and a comprehensive
benchmark for evaluating their performance. Several challenges exist in designing a framework to
facilitate interaction between LLMs and sophisticated software applications, including 1) Translating
the complex internal state and vast functionality of applications into text forms comprehensible for
∗

Equal contribution. E-mails: lihongxin2021@ia.ac.cn, jing-ran.su@connect.polyu.hk
Equally advising corresponding authors. E-mails: zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn, csqli@comp.polyu.edu.hk,
chenyuntao08@gmail.com
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

