Towards Characterizing the First-order Query
Complexity of Learning (Approximate) Nash
Equilibria in Zero-sum Matrix Games

Hedi Hadiji
Laboratoire des signaux et systèmes
Univ. Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CentraleSupélec

Sarah Sachs, Tim van Even
Korteweg-de Vries Institute for Mathematics
University of Amsterdam

Wouter Koolen
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica and University of Twente

Abstract
In the first-order query model for zero-sum K × K matrix games, players observe
the expected pay-offs for all their possible actions under the randomized action
played by their opponent. This classical model has received renewed interest after
the discovery by Rakhlin and Sridharan that ε-approximate Nash equilibria can be
computed efficiently from O(ln K/ε) instead of O(ln K/ε2 ) queries. Surprisingly,
the optimal number of such queries, as a function of both ε and K, is not known.
We make progress on this question on two fronts. First, we fully characterise the
query complexity of learning exact equilibria (ε = 0), by showing that they require
a number of queries that is linear in K, which means that it is essentially as hard as
querying the whole matrix, which can also be done with K queries. Second, for
ε > 0, the current query complexity upper bound stands at O(min(ln(K)/ε, K)).
We argue that, unfortunately, obtaining a matching lower bound is not possible with
existing techniques: we prove that no lower bound can be derived by constructing
hard matrices whose entries take values in a known countable set, because such
matrices can be fully identified by a single query. This rules out, for instance,
reducing to an optimization problem over the hypercube by encoding it as a binary
payoff matrix. We then introduce a new technique for lower bounds, which allows
1
)) for any ε ⩽ 1/(cK 4 ), where c
us to obtain lower bounds of order Ω̃(log( Kε
is a constant independent of K. We further discuss possible future directions to
improve on our techniques in order to close the gap with the upper bounds.

1

Introduction

Computing the saddle point
min max f (x, y)

x∈X y∈Y

for convex-concave functions f : X × Y → R is of general interest throughout optimization,
economics and machine learning. We study the computation of an approximate saddle point (x⋆ , y⋆ ),
satisfying maxy∈Y f (x⋆ , y) − minx∈X f (x, y⋆ ) ⩽ 2ε for some given ε ⩾ 0. Starting with an
unknown f from a known class F, we consider sequential learning in the first-order feedback model,
where the learner gets to observe gradients of the objective. Formally, each query (x, y) results in
feedback (∇x f (x, y), ∇y f (x, y)). We are interested in the following question:
How many first-order queries are necessary and sufficient for a sequential learner to output an
approximate saddle point for any f ∈ F?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

