Semantic Image Synthesis with
Unconditional Generator
JungWoo Chae12∗ Hyunin Cho1∗ Sooyeon Go1 Kyungmook Choi1
2

Youngjung Uh1†

1
Yonsei Unviersity, Seoul, South Korea
LG CNS AI Research, Seoul, South Korea

{cjwyonsei, hyunin9528, sooyeon8658, kyungmook.choi, yj.uh}@yonsei.ac.kr
{cjwoolgcns}@lgcns.com

Abstract
Semantic image synthesis (SIS) aims to generate realistic images that match given
semantic masks. Despite recent advances allowing high-quality results and precise
spatial control, they require a massive semantic segmentation dataset for training
the models. Instead, we propose to employ a pre-trained unconditional generator
and rearrange its feature maps according to proxy masks. The proxy masks are
prepared from the feature maps of random samples in the generator by simple
clustering. The feature rearranger learns to rearrange original feature maps to match
the shape of the proxy masks that are either from the original sample itself or from
random samples. Then we introduce a semantic mapper that produces the proxy
masks from various input conditions including semantic masks. Our method is
versatile across various applications such as free-form spatial editing of real images,
sketch-to-photo, and even scribble-to-photo. Experiments validate advantages of
our method on a range of datasets: human faces, animal faces, and buildings. Code
will be available online soon.
z

Segmentation Mask
GT
Segmentation Mask

❆

Conditional
G

Sketch

Free-form Mask

Proxy Mask

Proxy Mask

Generated Image

Generated Image

z
Semantic
Semantic
Semantic
Mapper
Mapper
Mapper

Unconditional
G
pair

Proxy Mask

Train
Generated Image

Real Image

Conditional GAN

Inference

Generated Image

Ours

Figure 1: Conditional GANs vs Ours (Left) Conditional GANs train a generator using expensive
pairs of semantic masks and images. (Right) On the other hand, our method does not require a large
number of image-mask pairs in training process and uses a pre-trained unconditional generator for
semantic image synthesis. Furthermore, it accommodates various types of inputs such as sketches or
even simpler scribbles.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

