Bootstrapped Training of Score-Conditioned
Generator for Offline Design of Biological Sequences

Minsu Kim1
Federico Berto1
Sungsoo Ahn2
Jinkyoo Park1
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)
{min-su, fberto, jinkyoo.park}@kaist.ac.kr
{sungsoo.ahn}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We study the problem of optimizing biological sequences, e.g., proteins, DNA,
and RNA, to maximize a black-box score function that is only evaluated in an
offline dataset. We propose a novel solution, bootstrapped training of scoreconditioned generator (B OOT G EN) algorithm. Our algorithm repeats a two-stage
process. In the first stage, our algorithm trains the biological sequence generator
with rank-based weights to enhance the accuracy of sequence generation based
on high scores. The subsequent stage involves bootstrapping, which augments the
training dataset with self-generated data labeled by a proxy score function. Our
key idea is to align the score-based generation with a proxy score function, which
distills the knowledge of the proxy score function to the generator. After training, we aggregate samples from multiple bootstrapped generators and proxies to
produce a diverse design. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms competitive baselines on biological sequential design tasks. We provide
reproducible source code: https://github.com/kaist-silab/bootgen.

1

Introduction

The automatic design of biological sequences, e.g., DNA, RNA, and proteins, with a specific property, e.g., high binding affinity, is a vital task within the field of biotechnology [5, 54, 41, 33]. To
solve this problem, researchers have developed algorithms to optimize a biological sequence to maximize a score function [40, 9, 10, 2, 29]. Here, the main challenge is the expensive evaluation of the
score function that requires experiments in a laboratory setting or clinical trials.
To resolve this issue, recent works have investigated offline model-based optimization [32, 21, 44,
52, 12, 45, MBO]. Given an offline dataset of biological sequences paired with scores, offline MBO
algorithms train a proxy for the score function, e.g., a deep neural network (DNN), and maximize
the proxy function without querying the true score function. Therefore, such offline MBO algorithms bypass the expense of iteratively querying the true score function whenever a new solution
is proposed. However, even optimizing such a proxy function is challenging due to the vast search
space over the biological sequences.
On the one hand, several works [21, 44, 52, 12] considered applying gradient-based maximization
of the proxy function. However, when the proxy function is parameterized using a DNN, these
methods often generate solutions where the true score is low despite the high proxy score. This is
due to the fragility of DNNs against adversarial optimization of inputs [52, 44, 21]. Furthermore,
the gradient-based methods additionally require reformulating biological sequence optimization as
a continuous optimization, e.g., continuous relaxation [21, 44, 12] or mapping discrete designs to a
continuous latent space [52].

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

