Interactive Visual Reasoning under Uncertainty

Manjie Xu 1, ‹, :
manjietsu@bit.edu.cn
Wei Liang 1, 3,
liangwei@bit.edu.cn

Guangyuan Jiang 2, ‹
jgy@stu.pku.edu.cn

Chi Zhang 4,
zhangchi@bigai.ai

Yixin Zhu 2,
yixin.zhu@pku.edu.cn

‹

M. Xu and G. Jiang contributed equally.
corresponding authors
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Institute for AI, Peking University
3
Yangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology, Jiaxing, China
4
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
1

https://sites.google.com/view/ivre

Abstract
One of the fundamental cognitive abilities of humans is to quickly resolve uncertainty by generating hypotheses and testing them via active trials. Encountering a
novel phenomenon accompanied by ambiguous cause-effect relationships, humans
make hypotheses against data, conduct inferences from observation, test their theory via experimentation, and correct the proposition if inconsistency arises. These
iterative processes persist until the underlying mechanism becomes clear. In this
work, we devise the IVRE (pronounced as ivory) environment for evaluating
artificial agents’ reasoning ability under uncertainty. IVRE is an interactive
environment featuring rich scenarios centered around Blicket detection. Agents in
IVRE are placed into environments with various ambiguous action-effect pairs
and asked to determine each object’s role. They are encouraged to propose effective
and efficient experiments to validate their hypotheses based on observations and
actively gather new information. The game ends when all uncertainties are resolved
or the maximum number of trials is consumed. By evaluating modern artificial
agents in IVRE, we notice a clear failure of today’s learning methods compared
to humans. Such inefficacy in interactive reasoning ability under uncertainty calls
for future research in building human-like intelligence.

1

Introduction

Situated in a room, you rarely have a clear idea of what specific factor caused a sudden lights-out. You
might begin to check the light switch, the main circuit breaker, or the light bulb itself. With a series
of experiments, you can finally realize the actual cause. This is a canonical example of reasoning and
resolving uncertainty through interaction: when encountering a novel scenario, humans typically lack
sufficient information and knowledge to arrive at a definitive conclusion based solely on the initial
observation. Instead, we formulate hypotheses, subject them to testing, and utilize newly gathered
data to address the preceding uncertainty in our reasoning process (Halpern, 2017).
:

Work done while M. Xu was an intern at Peking University.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

