Online Ad Procurement in Non-stationary
Autobidding Worlds

Jason Cheuk Nam Liang
MIT
jcnliang@mit.edu

Haihao Lu
University of Chicago
haihao.lu@chicagobooth.edu

Baoyu Zhou
University of Michigan
zbaoyu@umich.edu

Abstract
Today’s online advertisers procure digital ad impressions through interacting with
autobidding platforms: advertisers convey high level procurement goals via setting
levers such as budget, target return-on-investment, max cost per click, etc. Then ads
platforms subsequently procure impressions on advertisers’ behalf, and report final
procurement conversions (e.g. click) to advertisers. In practice, advertisers may
receive minimal information on platforms’ procurement details, and procurement
outcomes are subject to non-stationary factors like seasonal patterns, occasional
system corruptions, and market trends which make it difficult for advertisers to optimize lever decisions effectively. Motivated by this, we present an online learning
framework that helps advertisers dynamically optimize ad platform lever decisions
while subject to general long-term constraints in a realistic bandit feedback environment with non-stationary procurement outcomes. In particular, we introduce a
primal-dual algorithm for online decision making with multi-dimensional decision
variables, bandit feedback and long-term uncertain constraints. We show that our
algorithm achieves low regret in many worlds when procurement outcomes are generated through procedures that are stochastic, adversarial, adversarially corrupted,
periodic, and ergodic, respectively, without having to know which procedure is the
ground truth. Finally, we emphasize that our proposed algorithm and theoretical
results extend beyond the applications of online advertising.

1

Introduction

Automated bidding (or autobidding for short) has become the dominant mode for advertisers to
procure digital ad inventories and impressions, contributing to more than $120 billion dollar ad
spend in 2022 and more than 90% of total online ad transaction volumes [2, 1]. In an autobidding
platform, advertisers only need to convey their high-level procurement goals for an ad campaign to
the platform, which then takes charge of procuring ads on advertisers’ behalf. Such procurement
goals are communicated to a platform through platform levers, which are adjustable parameters that
advertisers can control to influence the bidding process and campaign performance. To exemplify,
Figure 1 displays certain several levers presented on the Google Ads interface, where an advertiser can
set per-campaign budgets, target cost-per-actions, campaign duration, campaign schedules, targeting,
etc; similar examples are also shown in related literature [21].
As the primary avenue for advertisers to run ad campaigns on autobidding platforms and influence
ad conversion outcomes (e.g., clicks), making efficient lever decisions is vital to advertisers to
achieve their procurement objectives. However, advertisers face many challenges in practice when
optimizing for lever decisions, namely high-dimensional decision making under long-term constraints,
non-stationary autobidding environments, and limited procurement feedback.
High-dimensional decision making and long-term constraint satisfaction. Making multiple
lever decisions involves evaluating numerous possible combinations of lever configurations, which is
computationally intensive and time-consuming in real-time decision making setups. Also, advertisers
need to understand the potential interactions and dependencies between levers, as adjusting one
lever may have unintended consequences or interactions with other levers, making it challenging to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

