UniPC: A Unified Predictor-Corrector Framework for
Fast Sampling of Diffusion Models

Wenliang Zhao∗ Lujia Bai∗ Yongming Rao

Jie Zhou

Jiwen Lu†

Tsinghua University

Abstract
Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) have demonstrated a very promising ability
in high-resolution image synthesis. However, sampling from a pre-trained DPM is
time-consuming due to the multiple evaluations of the denoising network, making
it more and more important to accelerate the sampling of DPMs. Despite recent
progress in designing fast samplers, existing methods still cannot generate satisfying images in many applications where fewer steps (e.g., <10) are favored. In this
paper, we develop a unified corrector (UniC) that can be applied after any existing
DPM sampler to increase the order of accuracy without extra model evaluations,
and derive a unified predictor (UniP) that supports arbitrary order as a byproduct.
Combining UniP and UniC, we propose a unified predictor-corrector framework
called UniPC for the fast sampling of DPMs, which has a unified analytical form for
any order and can significantly improve the sampling quality over previous methods,
especially in extremely few steps. We evaluate our methods through extensive experiments including both unconditional and conditional sampling using pixel-space
and latent-space DPMs. Our UniPC can achieve 3.87 FID on CIFAR10 (unconditional) and 7.51 FID on ImageNet 256×256 (conditional) with only 10 function
evaluations. Code is available at https://github.com/wl-zhao/UniPC.

1

Introduction

Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) [33, 13, 35] have become the new prevailing generative models
and have achieved competitive performance on many tasks including image synthesis [8, 29, 13],
video synthesis [15], text-to-image generation [27, 29, 12], voice synthesis [5], etc. Different from
GANs [10] and VAEs [20], DPMs are trained to explicitly match the gradient of the data density
(i.e., score), which is more stable and less sensitive to hyper-parameters. However, sampling from
a pre-trained DPM usually requires multiple model evaluations to gradually perform denoising
from Gaussian noise [13], consuming more inference time and computational costs compared with
single-step generative models like GANs.
Recently, there have been increasing efforts to accelerate the sampling of DPMs [31, 28, 34, 25, 40].
Among those, training-free methods [34, 25, 40] enjoy a wider usage in applications because they
can be directly applied to off-the-shelf pre-trained DPMs. Although these methods have significantly
reduced the sampling steps from 1000 to less than 20 steps, the sampling quality with extremely few
steps (e.g., <10) has been rarely investigated. Few-step sampling can be used in many scenarios
where we need to efficiently obtain plausible samples, such as designing a proper prompt for a textto-image diffusion model [29, 30] and computing losses on the generated samples during the training
of some diffusion-based visual systems [1, 6]. However, current fast samplers usually struggle to
generate high-quality samples within 10 steps (see Figure 1).
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

