Geometry-Informed Neural Operator
for Large-Scale 3D PDEs

Zongyi Li

Nikola Borislavov Kovachki

Shourya Prakash Otta
Christian Hundt

Chris Choy

Mohammad Amin Nabian
Kamyar Azizzadenesheli

Boyi Li

Jean Kossaifi

Maximilian Stadler
Anima Anandkumar

NVIDIA

Abstract
We propose the geometry-informed neural operator (GINO), a highly efficient
approach for learning the solution operator of large-scale partial differential equations with varying geometries. GINO uses a signed distance function (SDF) and
point-cloud representations of the input shape and neural operators based on graph
and Fourier architectures to learn the solution operator. The graph neural operator
handles irregular grids and transforms them into and from regular latent grids on
which Fourier neural operator can be efficiently applied. GINO is discretizationconvergent, meaning the trained model can be applied to arbitrary discretizations
of the continuous domain and it converges to the continuum operator as the discretization is refined. To empirically validate the performance of our method on
large-scale simulation, we generate the industry-standard aerodynamics dataset
of 3D vehicle geometries with Reynolds numbers as high as five million. For
this large-scale 3D fluid simulation, numerical methods are expensive to compute surface pressure. We successfully trained GINO to predict the pressure on
car surfaces using only five hundred data points. The cost-accuracy experiments
show a 26, 000× speed-up compared to optimized GPU-based computational fluid
dynamics (CFD) simulators on computing the drag coefficient. When tested on
new combinations of geometries and boundary conditions (inlet velocities), GINO
obtains a one-fourth reduction in error rate compared to deep neural network
approaches.

1

Introduction

Computational sciences aim to understand natural phenomena and develop computational models to
study the physical world around us. Many natural phenomena follow the first principles of physics
and are often described as evolution on function spaces, governed by partial differential equations
(PDE). Various numerical methods, including finite difference and finite element methods, have been
developed as computational approaches for solving PDEs. However, these methods need to be run at
very high resolutions to capture detailed physics, which are time-consuming and expensive, and often
beyond the available computation capacity. For instance, in computational fluid dynamics (CFD),
given a shape design, the goal is to solve the Navier-Stokes equation and estimate physical properties
such as pressure and velocity. Finding the optimal shape design often requires solving thousands of
trial shapes, each of which can take more than ten hours even with GPUs [1].
To overcome these computational challenges, recent works propose deep learning-based methods,
particularly neural operators [2], to speed up the simulation and inverse design. Neural operators
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

