Rank-N-Contrast: Learning Continuous
Representations for Regression

Kaiwen Zha1,∗ Peng Cao1,∗
1

Jeany Son2

MIT CSAIL

2

Yuzhe Yang1

Dina Katabi1

GIST

Abstract
Deep regression models typically learn in an end-to-end fashion without explicitly
emphasizing a regression-aware representation. Consequently, the learned representations exhibit fragmentation and fail to capture the continuous nature of sample
orders, inducing suboptimal results across a wide range of regression tasks. To fill
the gap, we propose Rank-N-Contrast (R N C), a framework that learns continuous
representations for regression by contrasting samples against each other based on
their rankings in the target space. We demonstrate, theoretically and empirically,
that R N C guarantees the desired order of learned representations in accordance with
the target orders, enjoying not only better performance but also significantly improved robustness, efficiency, and generalization. Extensive experiments using five
real-world regression datasets that span computer vision, human-computer interaction, and healthcare verify that R N C achieves state-of-the-art performance, highlighting its intriguing properties including better data efficiency, robustness to spurious targets and data corruptions, and generalization to distribution shifts. Code is
available at: https://github.com/kaiwenzha/Rank-N-Contrast.
L1

SupCon

R N C (Ours)

Temp. (℃)

30
20
10
0

Figure 1: Learned representations of different methods on a real-world temperature regression task [7]
(details in Sec. 5). Existing general regression learning (L1 ) or representation learning (SupCon) schemes fail to
recognize the underlying continuous information in data. In contrast, R N C learns continuous representations
that capture the intrinsic sample orders w.r.t. the regression targets.

1

Introduction

Regression problems are pervasive and fundamental in the real world, spanning various tasks and
domains including estimating age from human appearance [36], predicting health scores via human
physiological signals [11], and detecting gaze directions using webcam images [52]. Due to the
∗
The two authors contributed equally and order was determined by a random coin flip. Correspondence to
Kaiwen Zha <kzha@mit.edu>, Peng Cao <pengcao@mit.edu>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

