Partial Label Learning with Dissimilarity Propagation
guided Candidate Label Shrinkage

1

Yuheng Jia1, 3∗, Fuchao Yang2 , Yongqiang Dong1∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
College of Software Engineering, Southeast University Nanjing 210096, China
3
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its
Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
yhjia@seu.edu.cn, yangfc@seu.edu.cn, dongyq@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
In partial label learning (PLL), each sample is associated with a group of candidate
labels, among which only one label is correct. The key of PLL is to disambiguate
the candidate label set to find the ground-truth label. To this end, we first construct
a constrained regression model to capture the confidence of the candidate labels,
and multiply the label confidence matrix by its transpose to build a second-order
similarity matrix, whose elements indicate the pairwise similarity relationships of
samples globally. Then we develop a semantic dissimilarity matrix by considering
the complement of the intersection of the candidate label set, and further propagate
the initial dissimilarity relationships to the whole data set by leveraging the local
geometric structure of samples. The similarity and dissimilarity matrices form
an adversarial relationship, which is further utilized to shrink the solution space
of the label confidence matrix and promote the dissimilarity matrix. We finally
extend the proposed model to a kernel version to exploit the non-linear structure
of samples and solve the proposed model by the inexact augmented Lagrange
multiplier method. By exploiting the adversarial prior, the proposed method can
significantly outperform state-of-the-art PLL algorithms when evaluated on 10
artificial and 7 real-world partial label data sets. We also prove the effectiveness
of our method with some theoretical guarantees. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Yangfc-ML/DPCLS.

1

Introduction

Partial label learning (PLL) [14, 15, 17] is an emerging weakly supervised learning framework. In
PLL, each sample is associated with a set of candidate labels, among which only one is the groundtruth label. Different from conventional supervised learning, PLL avoids precisely annotating label
on each sample, which greatly reduces the labeling cost. Accordingly, PLL has been applied to many
real-world scenarios such as automatic image annotation [1, 20], web mining [9], and ecoinformatics
[8].
Formally speaking, let X = Rd be the d-dimensional feature space and Y = {1, 2, ..., q} be the label
space with q labels. Given the partial label training set D = {(xi , Si ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ m}, where xi ∈ X
is a d-dimensional feature vector to represent the i-th sample and Si ⊆ Y is the associated candidate
label set, among which only one label is correct. PLL aims to induce a multi-class classifier f :
X → Y from D, which is very challenging as the ground-truth label of a sample is concealed in the
candidate label set.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

