Slow and Weak Attractor Computation Embedded in
Fast and Strong E-I Balanced Neural Dynamics

Xiaohan Lin1,2 Liyuan Li3,4 Boxin Shi1,5 Tiejun Huang1,5 Yuanyuan Mi6 Si Wu2∗
1
Nat’l Key Lab for Multimedia Information Processing, Nat’l Eng. Lab of Visual Technology,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies
School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences
Beijing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental Health
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research
Center of Quantitative Biology, Peking University
3
Department of Mathematics, Peking University
4
Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zurich
5
Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peking University
6
Department of Psychology, Tsinghua University
{lin.xiaohan,liyuanli,shiboxin,tjhuang,siwu}@pku.edu.cn
miyuanyuan@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Attractor networks require neuronal connections to be highly structured in order to maintain attractor states that represent information, while excitation and
inhibition balanced networks (E-INNs) require neuronal connections to be random and sparse to generate irregular neuronal ﬁring. Despite being regarded as
canonical models of neural circuits, both types of networks are usually studied
independently, and it remains unclear how they coexist in the brain, given their
very different structural demands. In this study, we investigate the compatibility
of continuous attractor neural networks (CANNs) and E-INNs. In line with recent experimental data, we ﬁnd that a neural circuit can exhibit both the traits of
CANNs and E-INNs when the neuronal synapses consist of two sets: one set is
strong and fast for irregular ﬁring, and the other set is weak and slow for attractor dynamics. In addition, both simulations and theoretical analysis reveal that
the network exhibits enhanced performance compared to the case of using only
one set of synapses, with accelerated convergence of attractor states and retained
E-I balanced condition for localized input. We hope that this study provides insight into how structured neural computations are realized by irregular ﬁrings of
neurons.

1

Introduction

The core of theoretical neuroscience is to understand how different neural circuit models generate
different dynamical behaviors, and consequently accomplish different brain functions. Among the
proposed models in the literature, continuous attractor neural networks (CANNs) and excitationinhibition balanced neural networks (E-INNs) are two canonical models that have been widely and
successfully applied to describe many brain functions and neuronal response properties. Speciﬁcally,
CANNs have been applied to explain the representation of continuous features in the brain, including, for instances, orientation tuning in the primary visual cortex [2], action intention in the motor
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

