Optimize Planning Heuristics to Rank, not to Estimate
Cost-to-Goal
Leah Chrestien
Czech Technical University in Prague
leah.chrestien@aic.fel.cvut.cz

Tomás̆ Pevný
Czech Technical University in Prague,
and Gen Digital, Inc.
pevnytom@fel.cvut.cz

Stefan Edelkamp
Czech Technical University in Prague
edelkste@fel.cvut.cz

Antonín Komenda
Czech Technical University in Prague
antonin.komenda@fel.cvut.cz

Abstract
In imitation learning for planning, parameters of heuristic functions are optimized
against a set of solved problem instances. This work revisits the necessary and
sufficient conditions of strictly optimally efficient heuristics for forward search
algorithms, mainly A* and greedy best-first search, which expand only states on
the returned optimal path. It then proposes a family of loss functions based on
ranking tailored for a given variant of the forward search algorithm. Furthermore,
from a learning theory point of view, it discusses why optimizing cost-to-goal h∗ is
unnecessarily difficult. The experimental comparison on a diverse set of problems
unequivocally supports the derived theory.

1

Introduction

Automated planning finds a sequence of actions that will reach a goal in a model of the environment
provided by the user. It is considered to be one of the core problems in Artificial Intelligence and it is
behind some of its successful applications [39, 27, 46]. Early analysis of planning tasks [31] indicated
that optimizing the heuristic function steering the search for a given problem domain towards the goal
can dramatically improve the performance of the search. Automated optimization of the heuristic
function therefore becomes a central request in improving the performance of planners [6, 13].
Learning in planning means optimizing heuristic functions from plans of already solved problems
and their instances. This definition includes the selection of proper heuristics in a set of pattern
databases [17, 22, 33, 12], a selection of a planner from a portfolio [25], learning planning operators
from instances [32, 56], learning for macro-operators and entanglements [9, 29], and learning heuristic
functions by general function approximators (e.g. neural networks) [45, 19, 16, 5].
The majority of research [45, 53, 19, 16] optimizes the heuristic function to estimate the cost-to-goal,
as it is well known that it is an optimal heuristic for many best-first heuristic search algorithms
including A* or IDA* [21, 28]. These works optimize the heuristic function to solve regression
problems. But even a true cost-to-goal h∗ does not guarantee that the forward search will find the
optimal solution while expanding the minimal number of states. This paper defines a stricter version
of optimally efficiency [10, 24] as follows. Forward search (or its heuristic) is called strictly optimally
efficient iff it expands only states on one optimal solution path returned by the search, i.e., if this
optimal solution path has l + 1 states, the search will expand only l states.
This work focuses exclusively on a forward search with merit functions. It presents theoretical
arguments as to why the order (rank) of states provided by the heuristic function is more important
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

