Parallel-mentoring for Offline Model-based
Optimization

Can (Sam) Chen1,2∗, Christopher Beckham2,3 , Zixuan Liu5 , Xue Liu1,2 , Christopher Pal2,3,4
1

3

McGill University, 2 MILA - Quebec AI Institute,
Polytechnique Montreal, 4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair, 5 University of Washington

Abstract
We study offline model-based optimization to maximize a black-box objective
function with a static dataset of designs and scores. These designs encompass a
variety of domains, including materials, robots and DNA sequences. A common
approach trains a proxy on the static dataset to approximate the black-box objective
function and performs gradient ascent to obtain new designs. However, this often
results in poor designs due to the proxy inaccuracies for out-of-distribution designs.
Recent studies indicate that: (a) gradient ascent with a mean ensemble of proxies
generally outperforms simple gradient ascent, and (b) a trained proxy provides
weak ranking supervision signals for design selection. Motivated by (a) and (b),
we propose parallel-mentoring as an effective and novel method that facilitates
mentoring among parallel proxies, creating a more robust ensemble to mitigate the
out-of-distribution issue. We focus on the three-proxy case and our method consists
of two modules. The first module, voting-based pairwise supervision, operates on
three parallel proxies and captures their ranking supervision signals as pairwise
comparison labels. These labels are combined through majority voting to generate
consensus labels, which incorporate ranking supervision signals from all proxies
and enable mutual mentoring. However, label noise arises due to possible incorrect
consensus. To alleviate this, we introduce an adaptive soft-labeling module with
soft-labels initialized as consensus labels. Based on bi-level optimization, this
module fine-tunes proxies in the inner level and learns more accurate labels in
the outer level to adaptively mentor proxies, resulting in a more robust ensemble.
Experiments validate the effectiveness of our method. Our code is available here.

1

Introduction

Designing new objects or entities to optimize specific properties is a widespread challenge, encompassing various domains such as materials, robots, and DNA sequences [1]. Traditional approaches
often involve interacting with a black-box function to propose new designs, but this can be expensive
or even dangerous in some cases [2–6]. In response, recent work [1] has focused on a more realistic
setting known as offline model-based optimization (MBO). In this setting, the objective is to maximize
a black-box function using only a static (offline) dataset of designs and scores.
A prevalent approach to addressing the problem is to train a deep neural network (DNN) model
parameterized as fθ (·), on the static dataset, with the trained DNN serving as a proxy. The proxy
allows for gradient ascent on existing designs, generating improved designs by leveraging the gradient
information provided by the DNN model. However, this method encounters an issue with the trained
proxy being susceptible to out-of-distribution problems. Specifically, the proxy produces inaccurate
predictions when applied to data points that deviate significantly from the training distribution.
∗

Correspondence to can.chen@mila.quebec.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

