Penguin: Parallel-Packed Homomorphic Encryption
for Fast Graph Convolutional Network Inference

Ran Ran
North Carolina State University
rran@ncsu.edu
Wei Wang
Anonym, Inc.
wei@anonymco.com

Nuo Xu
Lehigh University
nux219@lehigh.edu

Tao Liu
Lawrence Technological University
tliu3@ltu.edu

Gang Quan
Florida International University
gaquan@fiu.edu

Wujie Wen
North Carolina State University
wwen2@ncsu.edu

Abstract
The marriage of Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) and Homomorphic Encryption (HE) enables the inference of graph data on the cloud with significantly
enhanced client data privacy. However, the tremendous computation and memory
overhead associated with HE operations challenges the practicality of HE-based
GCN inference. GCN inference involves a sequence of expensive matrix-matrix
multiplications, and we observe that directly applying the state-of-the-art HE-based
secure matrix-matrix multiplication solutions to accelerate HE-GCN inference
is far less efficient as it does not exploit the unique aggregation mechanism of
two-dimension graph node-features in GCN layer computation. As a result, in this
paper, we propose a novel HE-based ciphertext packing technique, i.e.,Penguin,
that can take advantage of the unique computation pattern during the HE-GCN
inference to significantly reduce the computation and memory overhead associated
with HE operations. Specifically, Penguin employs (i) an effective two-dimension
parallel packing technique for feature ciphertext with optimal graph node partitioning and graph feature interleaving, and (ii) an interleaved assembly technique
that can effectively make use of blank slots to merge ciphertexts after feature
reduction and thus significantly reduce costly rotation operations. We perform
detailed theoretical analysis to support our arguments. In the meantime, our experimental results also show that Penguin can achieve up to ∼ 10× speedup and
around ∼ 79% reduction in computational memory overhead, significantly outperforming state-of-the-art solutions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work that can ensure the protection of both graph structure and features when
accelerating HE-GCN inference on encrypted data. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/ranran0523/Penguin.

1

Introduction

Graph Convolution Neural Networks (GCNs) have recently demonstrated phenomenal performance
for many privacy-sensitive applications such as social networks [34], cross-domain recommendation
systems [35], and personal healthcare [18]. A popular solution for clients seeking to leverage these
advanced GCN models is to utilize cloud-based inference services. However, clients often hesitate
to share their graph data with the public cloud due to concerns about sensitive information, such as
graph structure and node features that reveal personal social relationships and medical records. To
address this privacy concern, one viable approach is to adopt the Homomorphic Encryption (HE)
scheme [3, 6, 7]. By performing the entire inference computation on the cloud using encrypted data,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

