What’s Left? Concept Grounding
with Logic-Enhanced Foundation Models

Joy Hsu∗
Stanford University

Jiayuan Mao∗
MIT

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT

Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

Abstract
Recent works such as VisProg and ViperGPT have smartly composed foundation
models for visual reasoning—using large language models (LLMs) to produce
programs that can be executed by pre-trained vision-language models. However,
they operate in limited domains, such as 2D images, not fully exploiting the
generalization of language: abstract concepts like “left” can also be grounded in
3D, temporal, and action data, as in moving to your left. This limited generalization
stems from these inference-only methods’ inability to learn or adapt pre-trained
models to a new domain. We propose the Logic-Enhanced FoundaTion Model
(LEFT), a unified framework that learns to ground and reason with concepts
across domains with a differentiable, domain-independent, first-order logic–based
program executor. LEFT has an LLM interpreter that outputs a program represented
in a general, logic-based reasoning language, which is shared across all domains
and tasks. LEFT’s executor then executes the program with trainable domainspecific grounding modules. We show that LEFT flexibly learns concepts in four
domains: 2D images, 3D scenes, human motions, and robotic manipulation. It
exhibits strong reasoning ability in a wide variety of tasks, including those that are
complex and not seen during training, and can be easily applied to new domains.

…

left
Query: Is there an object
to the left of the target?

LLM

exists(Object, lambda x:
left(x, iota(Object, lambda y: target(y)))

Figure 1: LEFT is a unified concept learning and reasoning framework that grounds modular concepts
across domains, and flexibly reasons with concepts across tasks with a foundation model.

1

Introduction

The power of language lies in its generalization based on abstraction. A single concept, such as left,
can be used across domains: in perception, we recognize the left leg from a chair’s 3D point cloud;
in navigation, we go home by turning left around the cafe at the end of the block; in manipulation,
we pick and place a mug on the left of a plate. Left has domain-specific groundings in each of these
∗

Equal contribution. Email: joycj@stanford.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

