Wasserstein Gradient Flows for Optimizing Gaussian
Mixture Policies
Hanna Ziesche∗ and Leonel Rozo∗
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
Renningen, Germany
name.surname@de.bosch.com

Abstract
Robots often rely on a repertoire of previously-learned motion policies for performing tasks of diverse complexities. When facing unseen task conditions or when
new task requirements arise, robots must adapt their motion policies accordingly.
In this context, policy optimization is the de facto paradigm to adapt robot policies
as a function of task-specific objectives. Most commonly-used motion policies
carry particular structures that are often overlooked in policy optimization algorithms. We instead propose to leverage the structure of probabilistic policies by
casting the policy optimization as an optimal transport problem. Specifically, we
focus on robot motion policies that build on Gaussian mixture models (GMMs)
and formulate the policy optimization as a Wasserstein gradient flow over the
GMMs space. This naturally allows us to constrain the policy updates via the
L2 -Wasserstein distance between GMMs to enhance the stability of the policy optimization process. Furthermore, we leverage the geometry of the Bures-Wasserstein
manifold to optimize the Gaussian distributions of the GMM policy via Riemannian
optimization. We evaluate our approach on common robotic settings: Reaching
motions, collision-avoidance behaviors, and multi-goal tasks. Our results show that
our method outperforms common policy optimization baselines in terms of task
success rate and low-variance solutions.

1

Introduction

One of the main premises about autonomous robots is their ability to successfully perform a large
range of tasks in unstructured environments. This demands robots to adapt their task models
according to environment changes or new task requirements, and consequently to adjust their actions
to successfully perform under unseen conditions [1]. In general, robotic tasks, such as picking or
inserting an object, are usually executed by composing previously-learned skills [2], each represented
by a motion policy. Therefore, in order to successfully perform under new settings, the robot should
adapt its motion policies according to the new task requirements and environment conditions.
Research on methods for robot motion policy adaptation is vast [3, 4], with approaches mainly building
on black-box optimizers [5, 6], end-to-end deep reinforcement learning [7, 8], and policy search [9].
Regardless of the optimization method, most approaches disregard the intrinsic policy structure in
the adaptation strategy. However, several motion policy models (e.g., dynamic movement primitives
(DMP)[10], Gaussian mixture models (GMM) [11], probabilistic movement primitives (ProMPs) [12,
13], and neural networks [14], among others), carry specific physical or probabilistic structures that
should not be ignored. First, these policy models are often learned from demonstrations in a starting
learning phase [2], thus the policy structure already encapsulates relevant prior information about the
skill. Second, structure-unaware adaptation strategies optimize the policy parameters disregarding
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

