Exploring Why Object Recognition Performance
Degrades Across Income Levels and Geographies with
Factor Annotations
Laura Gustafson, Megan Richards, Melissa Hall, Caner Hazirbas, Diane Bouchacourt, Mark Ibrahim
Fundamental AI Research (FAIR), Meta

Abstract
Despite impressive advances in object-recognition, deep learning systems’ performance degrades significantly across geographies and lower income levels—raising
pressing concerns of inequity. Addressing such performance gaps remains a challenge, as little is understood about why performance degrades across incomes or
geographies. We take a step in this direction by annotating images from Dollar
Street, a popular benchmark of geographically and economically diverse images,
labeling each image with factors such as color, shape, and background. These annotations unlock a new granular view into how objects differ across incomes/regions.
We then use these object differences to pinpoint model vulnerabilities across incomes and regions. We study a range of modern vision models, finding that
performance disparities are most associated with differences in texture, occlusion,
and images with darker lighting. We illustrate how insights from our factor labels can surface mitigations to improve models’ performance disparities. As an
example, we show that mitigating a model’s vulnerability to texture can improve
performance on the lower income level. We release all the factor annotations
along with an interactive dashboard to facilitate research into more equitable
vision systems.

1

Introduction

The widespread adoption of object-recognition systems afforded by advances in deep learning comes
with a responsibility: systems should work equally well across groups of individuals. Previous
work demonstrates object-recognition performance is far from equal across income levels and
geographies [De Vries et al., 2019, Goyal et al., 2022, Rojas et al., 2022]. This disparity encompasses
publicly available recognition systems, state-of-the-art supervised and self-supervised models. Most
worrisome among these findings is that the performance degradation disproportionately affects lower
income households. When Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems are deployed in applications such as
medical imaging, their biases can lead to disproportional harm. For example, models diagnosing
COVID-19 were found to rely on geographically-biased features such as the hospital’s font to
diagnose patients [Roberts et al., 2021].
While existing work measures performance disparities across incomes and geographies, addressing
the performance gaps remains a challenge. Key to progress is understanding not just that, but why
such disparities arise. One hypothesis raised in DeVries et al. [2019] is that objects as well as their
environments can vary drastically across regions. When factors such as object shape or lighting in
a region differ from those commonly seen during training, the shift can cause model performance
to drop. However, no systematic study exists characterizing how such factors vary across regions
and incomes. Identifying the factors associated with model disparities can shed light on research
directions to improve performance degradation across incomes and geographies.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

