Multi-task Graph Neural Architecture Search with
Task-aware Collaboration and Curriculum
Yijian Qin1,2 , Xin Wang1,2∗, Ziwei Zhang1 , Hong Chen1 , Wenwu Zhu1,2∗
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, 2 BNRist†
qinyj19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xin_wang,zwzhang}@tsinghua.edu.cn
h-chen20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Graph neural architecture search (GraphNAS) has shown great potential for automatically designing graph neural architectures for graph related tasks. However,
multi-task GraphNAS, capable of handling multiple tasks simultaneously and capturing the complex relationships and dependencies between them, has been largely
unexplored in literature. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel multi-task
graph neural architecture search with task-aware collaboration and curriculum
(MTGC3 ), which is able to simultaneously discover optimal architectures for different tasks and learn the collaborative relationships among different tasks in a
joint manner. Specifically, we design the structurally diverse supernet to manage
multiple architectures and graph structures in a unified framework, which combines
with our proposed soft task-collaborative module to learn the transferability relationships between tasks. To further improve the architecture search procedure, we
develop the task-wise curriculum training strategy that reweighs the influence of
different tasks based on their relative difficulties. Extensive experiments show that
our proposed MTGC3 model achieves state-of-the-art performance against several
baselines in multi-task scenarios, demonstrating its ability to discover effective
architectures and capture collaborative relationships for multiple tasks.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data has attracted lots of attentions in recent years for its flexible representation
ability in various domains. Graph neural networks (GNNs) such as GCN [17], GAT [39], and GIN [47]
have been proposed and achieved great success in many graph applications. To save human efforts on
designing GNN architectures for different tasks, graph neural architecture search (GraphNAS) [19, 7,
42] has been proposed to search for optimal GNN architectures. These automatically designed GNN
architectures have achieved competitive or better performances compared with manually designed
GNNs for a single task.
On the other hand, multi-task scenarios are ubiquitous for graph data. For example, in drug discovery,
predicting multiple properties of molecules can be regarded as multiple tasks. Properly capturing the
relationship between these tasks allows for better learning of them. Nevertheless, there has been no
work reported on automatically searching GNN architectures for multi-task scenarios in the literature.
In this paper, we study the important yet unexplored problem of multi-task GraphNAS for the first time.
Given that different GNNs employ different architectures for adaption to various graph tasks, we tackle
this problem through jointly customizing an architecture for each individual task and considering
the task collaborations to share useful information among different tasks. However, discovering
∗
†

Corresponding Authors.
BNRist is the abbreviation of Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

