Sequential Preference Ranking for
Efficient Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback

Minyoung Hwang1 , Gunmin Lee1 , Hogun Kee1 , Chanwoo Kim2 ,
Kyungjae Lee2∗ , Songhwai Oh1∗
{minyoung.hwang, gunmin.lee, hogun.kee}@rllab.snu.ac.kr,
jenior97@cau.ac.kr, kyungjae.lee@ai.cau.ac.kr, songhwai@snu.ac.kr

1

Electrical and Computer Engineering and ASRI
Seoul National University
Seoul, 08826, Korea

2

Department of Artificial Intelligence
Chung-Ang University
Seoul 06974, Korea

Abstract
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) alleviates the problem of
designing a task-specific reward function in reinforcement learning by learning it
from human preference. However, existing RLHF models are considered inefficient
as they produce only a single preference data from each human feedback. To tackle
this problem, we propose a novel RLHF framework called SeqRank, that uses
sequential preference ranking to enhance the feedback efficiency. Our method
samples trajectories in a sequential manner by iteratively selecting a defender
from the set of previously chosen trajectories K and a challenger from the set
of unchosen trajectories U \ K, where U is the replay buffer. We propose two
trajectory comparison methods with different defender sampling strategies: (1)
sequential pairwise comparison that selects the most recent trajectory and (2)
root pairwise comparison that selects the most preferred trajectory from K. We
construct a data structure and rank trajectories by preference to augment additional
queries. The proposed method results in at least 39.2% higher average feedback
efficiency than the baseline and also achieves a balance between feedback efficiency
and data dependency. We examine the convergence of the empirical risk and the
generalization bound of the reward model with Rademacher complexity. While
both trajectory comparison methods outperform conventional pairwise comparison,
root pairwise comparison improves the average reward in locomotion tasks and
the average success rate in manipulation tasks by 29.0% and 25.0%, respectively.
Project page: https://rllab-snu.github.io/projects/SeqRank

1

Introduction

Designing a suitable reward function in reinforcement learning often requires task-specific prior
knowledge [1] and sufficient time to design the reward function to capture the true task objective.
Without this effort, the agent may be easily led to suboptimal policies. These limitations motivate the
use of reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), which can directly learn from human’s
preferences without the need for a hand-crafted reward function [1]. A conventional way to learn a
reward function in RLHF is pairwise comparison: querying human preference between two different
trajectories as described in Figure 1. Despite the significant success of RLHF, conventional pairwise
comparison requires a human to remember at least two trajectories to determine a single preference.
∗

Corresponding Authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

