StableRep: Synthetic Images from Text-to-Image
Models Make Strong Visual Representation Learners

Yonglong Tian1,∗
1

Lijie Fan1,2,∗

Phillip Isola2

Google Research,

2

MIT CSAIL,

Huiwen Chang1
∗

Dilip Krishnan1

equal contribution

Code: https://github.com/google-research/syn-rep-learn

Abstract
We investigate the potential of learning visual representations using synthetic
images generated by text-to-image models. This is a natural question in the light of
the excellent performance of such models in generating high-quality images. We
consider specifically the Stable Diffusion, one of the leading open source text-toimage models. We show that (1) when the generative model is configured with
proper classifier-free guidance scale, training self-supervised methods on synthetic
images can match or beat the real image counterpart; (2) by treating the multiple
images generated from the same text prompt as positives for each other, we develop
a multi-positive contrastive learning method, which we call StableRep. With solely
synthetic images, the representations learned by StableRep surpass the performance
of representations learned by SimCLR and CLIP using the same set of text prompts
and corresponding real images, on large scale datasets. When we further add
language supervision, StableRep trained with 20M synthetic images achieves better
accuracy than CLIP trained with 50M real images.

Data Engine

Generative Models
Stable Diffusion (SD)

Real data
Real data

Encoder

Synthetic Data
Embedding

(A) Traditional Representation Learning

Synthetic data

Encoder

Embedding

(B) Representation Learning with Synthetic Data

Figure 1: Left: traditional visual representation learning relies on a dataset of real images to train an image
embedding function. Right: we view generative models as datasets that allow us to sample images from the data
distribution. In our study, we leverage text-to-image models (Stable Diffusion [61]) and treat multiple images
synthesized from the same prompt as positives for contrastive representation learning.

1

Introduction

Data has assumed a paramount role as the key component for the success of modern machine learning
systems. Such systems, especially foundation models in various domains, heavily rely on vast and
diverse datasets to acquire knowledge, make accurate predictions, and generate content. The quality,
quantity, and diversity of the data significantly impacts the performance and effectiveness of these
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

