Symbolic Discovery of Optimization Algorithms

Xiangning Chen1 2 § ∗
Kaiyuan Wang1

Chen Liang1 §
Hieu Pham1

Cho-Jui Hsieh2
§

1

Da Huang1
Xuanyi Dong1

Yifeng Lu1

Esteban Real1
Thang Luong1

Quoc V. Le1

Equal & Core Contribution
2

Google

UCLA

Abstract
We present a method to formulate algorithm discovery as program search, and
apply it to discover optimization algorithms for deep neural network training. We
leverage efficient search techniques to explore an infinite and sparse program space.
To bridge the large generalization gap between proxy and target tasks, we also
introduce program selection and simplification strategies. Our method discovers
a simple and effective optimization algorithm, Lion (EvoLved Sign Momentum).
It is more memory-efficient than Adam as it only keeps track of the momentum.
Different from adaptive optimizers, its update has the same magnitude for each
parameter calculated through the sign operation. We compare Lion with widely
used optimizers, such as Adam and Adafactor, for training a variety of models
on different tasks. On image classification, Lion boosts the accuracy of ViT by
up to 2% on ImageNet and saves up to 5x the pre-training compute on JFT. On
vision-language contrastive learning, we achieve 88.3% zero-shot and 91.1% finetuning accuracy on ImageNet, surpassing the previous best results by 2% and 0.1%,
respectively. On diffusion models, Lion outperforms Adam by achieving a better
FID score and reducing the training compute by up to 2.3x. For autoregressive,
masked language modeling, and fine-tuning, Lion exhibits a similar or better
performance compared to Adam. Our analysis of Lion reveals that its performance
gain grows with the training batch size. It also requires a smaller learning rate
than Adam due to the larger norm of the update produced by the sign function.
Additionally, we examine the limitations of Lion and identify scenarios where its
improvements are small or not statistically significant.

1

Introduction

Optimization algorithms, i.e., optimizers, play a fundamental role in training neural networks.
There are a large number of handcrafted optimizers, mostly adaptive ones, introduced in recent
years [2, 3, 7, 27, 58, 105]. However, Adam [48] with decoupled weight decay [60], also referred to as
AdamW, and Adafactor with factorized second moments [86], are still the de facto standard optimizers
for training most deep neural networks, especially the recent state-of-the-art language [12, 23, 90],
vision [21, 26, 102] and multimodal [75, 84, 100] models.
∗

Work done as a student researcher at Google Brain.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

