MADG: Margin-based Adversarial Learning for
Domain Generalization
Aveen Dayal
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
ai21resch11003@iith.ac.in
Linga Reddy Cenkeramaddi
University of Agder
linga.cenkeramaddi@uia.no

Vimal K B
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
vimalkb96@gmail.com
C Krishna Mohan
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
ckm@cse.iith.ac.in

Abhinav Kumar
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
abhinavkumar@ee.iith.ac.in

Vineeth N Balasubramanian
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
vineethnb@cse.iith.ac.in

Abstract
Domain Generalization (DG) techniques have emerged as a popular approach to
address the challenges of domain shift in Deep Learning (DL), with the goal of
generalizing well to the target domain unseen during the training. In recent years,
numerous methods have been proposed to address the DG setting, among which
one popular approach is the adversarial learning-based methodology. The main idea
behind adversarial DG methods is to learn domain-invariant features by minimizing
a discrepancy metric. However, most adversarial DG methods use 0-1 loss based
H∆H divergence metric. In contrast, the margin loss-based discrepancy metric
has the following advantages: more informative, tighter, practical, and efficiently
optimizable. To mitigate this gap, this work proposes a novel adversarial learning
DG algorithm, MADG, motivated by a margin loss-based discrepancy metric. The
proposed MADG model learns domain-invariant features across all source domains
and uses adversarial training to generalize well to the unseen target domain. We
also provide a theoretical analysis of the proposed MADG model based on the
unseen target error bound. Specifically, we construct the link between the source
and unseen domains in the real-valued hypothesis space and derive the generalization bound using margin loss and Rademacher complexity. We extensively
experiment with the MADG model on popular real-world DG datasets, VLCS,
PACS, OfficeHome, DomainNet, and TerraIncognita. We evaluate the proposed
algorithm on DomainBed’s benchmark and observe consistent performance across
all the datasets.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated exceptional performance
across various fields, including robotics [1], medical imaging [2], agriculture [3], and more. However,
the effectiveness of DNNs in supervised learning environments relies heavily on the independently
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) assumption of the training and test (target) data. Unfortunately, in
reality, this assumption can be compromised due to domain shifts in target data [4]. For example, a
model trained on different domains of image data may perform poorly when presented with an image
of a known label featuring an unseen background or viewpoint, as explained in [5]. To address this
issue, researchers have developed techniques under the framework of domain adaptation (DA) [6].
The key idea behind DA is to adapt a model trained on a source dataset to minimize the generalization
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

