Trading-off price for data quality to achieve fair online
allocation
Mathieu Molina
Inria, FairPlay Team, Palaiseau, France
mathieu.molina@inria.fr

Nicolas Gast
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS
Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France
nicolas.gast@inria.fr

Patrick Loiseau
Inria, FairPlay Team, Palaiseau, France
patrick.loiseau@inria.fr

Vianney Perchet
CREST, ENSAE, Palaiseau, France
Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France
vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
We consider the problem of online allocation subject to a long-term fairness penalty.
Contrary to existing works, however, we do not assume that the decision-maker
observes the protected attributes—which is often unrealistic in practice. Instead
they can purchase data that help estimate them from sources of different quality;
and hence reduce the fairness penalty at some cost. We model this problem as a
multi-armed bandit problem where each arm corresponds to the choice of a data
source, coupled with the online allocation problem. We propose an algorithm
√ that
jointly solves both problems and show that it has a regret bounded by O( T ). A
key difficulty is that the rewards received by selecting a source are correlated by
the fairness penalty, which leads to a need for randomization (despite a stochastic
setting). Our algorithm takes into account contextual information available before
the source selection, and can adapt to many different fairness notions. We also
show that in some instances, the estimates used can be learned on the fly.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of online allocation with a long-term fairness penalty: A decision maker
interacts sequentially with different types of users with the global objective of maximizing some
cumulative rewards (e.g., number of views, clicks, or conversions); but she also has a second objective
of taking globally “fair” decisions with respect to some protected/sensitive attributes such as gender or
ethnicity (the exact concepts of fairness will be discussed later). This problem is important because it
models a large number of practical online allocation situations where the additional fairness constraint
might be crucial. For instance, in online advertising (where the decision maker chooses to which
users an ad is shown), some ads are actually positive opportunities such as job offers, and targeted
advertising has been shown to be prone to discrimination Lambrecht & Tucker (2019); Speicher et al.
(2018); Ali et al. (2019). Those questions also arise in many different fields such as workforce hiring
(Dickerson et al., 2018), recommendation systems (Burke, 2017), or placement in refugee settlements
(Ahani et al., 2021).
There has been a flourishing trend of research addressing fairness constraints in machine learning—
see e.g., (Chouldechova, 2017; Hardt et al., 2016; Kleinberg & Raghavan, 2018; Barocas et al., 2019;
Emelianov et al., 2020; Molina & Loiseau, 2022)—and in sequential decision-making problems—see
e.g., (Joseph et al., 2016; Jabbari et al., 2017; Heidari & Krause, 2018)—as algorithmic decisions have
real consequences on the lives of individuals, with unfortunate observed discrimination (Buolamwini
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

