CSLP-AE: A Contrastive Split-Latent Permutation
Autoencoder Framework for Zero-Shot
Electroencephalography Signal Conversion

Anders Vestergaard Nørskov
Alexander Neergaard Zahid
Morten Mørup
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
andersxa@gmail.com
{aneol,mmor}@dtu.dk
https://github.com/andersxa/CSLP-AE

Abstract
Electroencephalography (EEG) is a prominent non-invasive neuroimaging technique providing insights into brain function. Unfortunately, EEG data exhibit a
high degree of noise and variability across subjects hampering generalizable signal
extraction. Therefore, a key aim in EEG analysis is to extract the underlying neural
activation (content) as well as to account for the individual subject variability (style).
We hypothesize that the ability to convert EEG signals between tasks and subjects
requires the extraction of latent representations accounting for content and style.
Inspired by recent advancements in voice conversion technologies, we propose a
novel contrastive split-latent permutation autoencoder (CSLP-AE) framework that
directly optimizes for EEG conversion. Importantly, the latent representations are
guided using contrastive learning to promote the latent splits to explicitly represent
subject (style) and task (content). We contrast CSLP-AE to conventional supervised, unsupervised (AE), and self-supervised (contrastive learning) training and
find that the proposed approach provides favorable generalizable characterizations
of subject and task. Importantly, the procedure also enables zero-shot conversion
between unseen subjects. While the present work only considers conversion of
EEG, the proposed CSLP-AE provides a general framework for signal conversion
and extraction of content (task activation) and style (subject variability) components
of general interest for the modeling and analysis of biological signals.

1

Introduction

Electroencephalography (EEG) is a non-invasive method for recording brain activity, commonly used
in neuroscience research to analyze event-related potentials (ERPs) and gain insights into cognitive
processes and brain function [28]. However, EEG signals are often noisy, contain artifacts, and exhibit
high sensitivity to subject variability [13, 43], making it challenging to analyze and interpret the data.
In particular, the inherent subject variability is well known to confound recovery of the task content
of the signal, and a study by Gibson et al. [17] demonstrated that across-subject variation in EEG
variability and signal strength was more significant than across-task variation. A major challenge
modeling EEG data is thus to remove the intrinsic subject variability in order to recover generalizable
patterns of the underlying neural patterns of activation.
Supervised methods explicitly classifying tasks can potentially filter subject variability and recover
generalizable patterns of neural activity. However, explicitly disentangling subject and task content
in EEG signals is valuable not only for classifying task content but also for characterizing the subject
variability which ultimately can provide biomarkers of individual variability. As such, rather than
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

