Distribution-Free Model-Agnostic Regression
Calibration via Nonparametric Methods

Shang Liu∗
Imperial College Business School
Imperial College London
s.liu21@imperial.ac.uk

Zhongze Cai∗
Imperial College Business School
Imperial College London
z.cai22@imperial.ac.uk

Xiaocheng Li
Imperial College Business School
Imperial College London
xiaocheng.li@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the uncertainty quantification problem for regression
models. Specifically, we consider an individual calibration objective for characterizing the quantiles of the prediction model. While such an objective is well-motivated
from downstream tasks such as newsvendor cost, the existing methods have been
largely heuristic and lack of statistical guarantee in terms of individual calibration.
We show via simple examples that the existing methods focusing on populationlevel calibration guarantees such as average calibration or sharpness can lead to
harmful and unexpected results. We propose simple nonparametric calibration
methods that are agnostic of the underlying prediction model and enjoy both computational efficiency and statistical consistency. Our approach enables a better
understanding of the possibility of individual calibration, and we establish matching upper and lower bounds for the calibration error of our proposed methods.
Technically, our analysis combines the nonparametric analysis with a covering
number argument for parametric analysis, which advances the existing theoretical
analyses in the literature of nonparametric density estimation and quantile bandit problems. Importantly, the nonparametric perspective sheds new theoretical
insights into regression calibration in terms of the curse of dimensionality and
reconciles the existing results on the impossibility of individual calibration. To
our knowledge, we make the first effort to reach both individual calibration and
finite-sample guarantee with minimal assumptions in terms of conformal prediction. Numerical experiments show the advantage of such a simple approach under
various metrics, and also under covariates shift. We hope our work provides a
simple benchmark and a starting point of theoretical ground for future research on
regression calibration.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning methods have witnessed great success on a wide range of tasks in the
past decade for their high accuracy in dealing with various kinds of complicated data. Uncertainty
quantification has played an important role in the interpretation and risk assessment of machine
learning models for downstream tasks such as optimization and decision-making. People observe
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

