KuaiSim: A Comprehensive Simulator for
Recommender Systems

Kesen Zhao1 , Shuchang Liu2∗, Qingpeng Cai2†, Xiangyu Zhao1† ,
Ziru Liu1 , Dong Zheng2 , Peng Jiang2 , Kun Gai3
1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 Kuaishou Technology, 3 Unaffiliated
{kesenzhao2-c,ziruliu2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk
{liushuchang, caiqingpeng, zhengdong, jiangpeng}@kuaishou.com
xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk, gai.kun@qq.com

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based recommender systems (RSs) have garnered
considerable attention due to their ability to learn optimal recommendation policies
and maximize long-term user rewards. However, deploying RL models directly
in online environments and generating authentic data through A/B tests can pose
challenges and require substantial resources. Simulators offer an alternative approach by providing training and evaluation environments for RS models, reducing
reliance on real-world data. Existing simulators have shown promising results but
also have limitations such as simplified user feedback, lack of consistency with
real-world data, the challenge of simulator evaluation, and difficulties in migration
and expansion across RSs. To address these challenges, we propose KuaiSim, a
comprehensive user environment that provides user feedback with multi-behavior
and cross-session responses. The resulting simulator can support three levels of
recommendation problems: the request level list-wise recommendation task, the
whole-session level sequential recommendation task, and the cross-session level
retention optimization task. For each task, KuaiSim also provides evaluation protocols and baseline recommendation algorithms that further serve as benchmarks
for future research. We also restructure existing competitive simulators on the
KuaiRand Dataset and compare them against KuaiSim to further assess their performance and behavioral differences. Furthermore, to showcase KuaiSim’s flexibility
in accommodating different datasets, we demonstrate its versatility and robustness
when deploying it on the ML-1m dataset. The implementation code is available
online to ease reproducibility 3 .

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based recommender systems (RSs) have drawn considerable attention
in both academia and industry [45, 49, 5, 3, 4, 52, 51, 55]. They regard the recommendation
procedures as sequential interactions between users and agents, and learn an optimal recommendation
policy that maximizes the long-term cumulative reward from users. While it is theoretically superior to
standard learning-to-rank methods [2], it is usually sub-optimal to evaluate the RL model using offline
data, because of the missing online exploration and the impossibility of counterfactual evaluation.
As an alternative, one may directly deploy RL models in online environments and let them interact
with real users. In practice, this turns out to be challenging and resource-intensive [58], since an
untrained or premature recommendation model can adversely impact the user experience and lead to
undesirable real-time data, subsequently affecting the model’s training performance [20]. In order to
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work
Corresponding author
3
https://github.com/Applied-Machine-Learning-Lab/KuaiSim

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Bechmarks.

