Nonparametric Identifiability of Causal
Representations from Unknown Interventions
Julius von Kügelgen1,2 , Michel Besserve1 , Liang Wendong1 , Luigi Gresele1 , Armin Kekić1 ,
Elias Bareinboim3 , David M. Blei3 , and Bernhard Schölkopf1
1

2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
3
Columbia University, USA

Abstract
We study causal representation learning, the task of inferring latent causal variables
and their causal relations from high-dimensional functions (“mixtures”) of the variables. Prior work relies on weak supervision, in the form of counterfactual pre- and
post-intervention views or temporal structure; places restrictive assumptions, such
as linearity, on the mixing function or latent causal model; or requires partial knowledge of the generative process, such as the causal graph or intervention targets. We
instead consider the general setting in which both the causal model and the mixing
function are nonparametric. The learning signal takes the form of multiple datasets,
or environments, arising from unknown interventions in the underlying causal
model. Our goal is to identify both the ground truth latents and their causal graph
up to a set of ambiguities which we show to be irresolvable from interventional data.
We study the fundamental setting of two causal variables and prove that the observational distribution and one perfect intervention per node suffice for identifiability,
subject to a genericity condition. This condition rules out spurious solutions that
involve fine-tuning of the intervened and observational distributions, mirroring similar conditions for nonlinear cause-effect inference. For an arbitrary number of variables, we show that at least one pair of distinct perfect interventional domains per
node guarantees identifiability. Further, we demonstrate that the strengths of causal
influences among the latent variables are preserved by all equivalent solutions,
rendering the inferred representation appropriate for drawing causal conclusions
from new data. Our study provides the first identifiability results for the general
nonparametric setting with unknown interventions, and elucidates what is possible
and impossible for causal representation learning without more direct supervision.

1

Introduction

Causal representation learning (CRL) seeks to describe high-dimensional, low-level observations
through a small number of interpretable, causally-related latent variables [108, 110]. In doing so, its
goal is to combine the strengths of classical causal inference with those of modern machine learning.
A causal model represents an entire family of distributions arising from interventions on a system of
variables [10, 95, 100]. This provides a principled way for reasoning about distribution shifts, which
facilitates out-of-distribution generalization and planning [9, 64, 96, 102]. However, causal models
require that most (or at least some) relevant causal variables are directly observed. While reasonable
in domains such as economics [7], social [91] or biomedical science [48, 57], this assumption
has challenged the application of causal methodology to complex and high-dimensional data [85].
Machine learning, on the other hand, has proven successful at learning useful “representations”—
latent vectors generating the observables via some nonlinear map—of high-dimensional data such as
images, video, or text [16, 20, 77, 106]. However, most methods rely on independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) data and only extract associational information. As a consequence, they often fail
under distribution shifts and do not generalize beyond the training distribution [107], as exhibited by
their reliance on spurious correlations [13, 87] or their vulnerability to adversarial examples [40, 119].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

