Out-of-distribution Detection Learning with
Unreliable Out-of-distribution Sources
Haotian Zheng1,2∗ Qizhou Wang1∗ Zhen Fang3 Xiaobo Xia4
Feng Liu5 Tongliang Liu4 Bo Han1†
1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University
3
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney
4
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney
5
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
htzheng.xdu@gmail.com {csqzwang, bhanml}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
zhen.fang@uts.edu.au xiaoboxia.uni@gmail.com
fengliu.ml@gmail.com tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection discerns OOD data where the predictor cannot
make valid predictions as in-distribution (ID) data, thereby increasing the reliability
of open-world classification. However, it is typically hard to collect real out-ofdistribution (OOD) data for training a predictor capable of discerning ID and
OOD patterns. This obstacle gives rise to data generation-based learning methods,
synthesizing OOD data via data generators for predictor training without requiring
any real OOD data. Related methods typically pre-train a generator on ID data
and adopt various selection procedures to find those data likely to be the OOD
cases. However, generated data may still coincide with ID semantics, i.e., mistaken
OOD generation remains, confusing the predictor between ID and OOD data. To
this end, we suggest that generated data (with mistaken OOD generation) can be
used to devise an auxiliary OOD detection task to facilitate real OOD detection.
Specifically, we can ensure that learning from such an auxiliary task is beneficial if
the ID and the OOD parts have disjoint supports, with the help of a well-designed
training procedure for the predictor. Accordingly, we propose a powerful data
generation-based learning method named Auxiliary Task-based OOD Learning
(ATOL) that can relieve the mistaken OOD generation. We conduct extensive
experiments under various OOD detection setups, demonstrating the effectiveness
of our method against its advanced counterparts. The code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/tmlr-group/ATOL.

1

Introduction

Deep learning in the open world should not only make accurate predictions for in-distribution (ID)
data meanwhile should detect out-of-distribution (OOD) data whose semantics are different from
ID cases [15, 56, 22, 81, 85, 82]. It drives recent studies in OOD detection [43, 23, 33, 66, 80, 24],
which is important for many safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving and medical
analysis. Previous works have demonstrated that well-trained predictors can wrongly take many
OOD data as ID cases [1, 15, 21, 48], motivating recent studies towards effective OOD detection.
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Correspondence to Bo Han (bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

