V ERI X: Towards Verified Explainability of
Deep Neural Networks

Min Wu
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
minwu@cs.stanford.edu

Haoze Wu
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
haozewu@cs.stanford.edu

Clark Barrett
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
barrett@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We present V ERI X (VERIfied eXplainability), a system for producing optimal
robust explanations and generating counterfactuals along decision boundaries
of machine learning models. We build such explanations and counterfactuals
iteratively using constraint solving techniques and a heuristic based on featurelevel sensitivity ranking. We evaluate our method on image recognition benchmarks
and a real-world scenario of autonomous aircraft taxiing.

1

Introduction

Broad deployment of artificial intelligence (AI) systems in safety-critical domains, such as autonomous driving [18] and healthcare [63], necessitates the development of approaches for trustworthy AI. One key ingredient for trustworthiness is explainability: the ability for an AI system to
communicate the reasons for its behavior in terms that humans can understand.
Early work on explainable AI includes well-known model-agnostic explainers which produce explanations that remain valid for nearby inputs in feature space. In particular, LIME [42] and SHAP [38]
learn simple, and thus interpretable, models locally around a given input. Following LIME, work
on Anchors [43] attempts to identify a subset of such input explanations that are (almost) sufficient
to ensure the corresponding output value. Such approaches can produce explanations efficiently,
however, they do not provide any formal guarantees and are thus inappropriate for use in high-risk
scenarios. For instance, in healthcare, if a diagnosis model used by a dermatologist has an explanation
claiming that it depends only on a patient’s skin lesions (such as “plaque”, “pustule”, and “ulcer”
in [10]), yet in actuality, patients with similar such lesions but different skin tones (“Fitzpatrick
I-II, III-IV, V-VI” [19]) receive dissimilar diagnoses, then the explanation is not only wrong, but
may actually mask bias in the model. Another drawback of model-agnostic approaches is that they
often depend on access to training data, which may not always be available (perhaps due to privacy
concerns). And even if available, distribution shift can compromise the results.
Recent efforts towards formal explainable AI [40] aim to compute rigorously defined explanations
that can guarantee soundness, in the sense that fixing certain input features is sufficient to ensure the
invariance of a model’s prediction. However, their work only considers unbounded perturbations,
which may be too course-grained to be useful (for other limitations, see Section 5). To mitigate
those drawbacks, [33] bring in two types of bounded perturbations, ϵ-ball and k-NN box closure,
and show how to compute optimal robust explanations with respect to these perturbations for natural
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

