Transformers over Directed Acyclic Graphs

Yuankai Luo
Beihang University
luoyk@buaa.edu.cn
Veronika Thost∗
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
veronika.thost@ibm.com

Lei Shi∗
Beihang University
leishi@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Transformer models have recently gained popularity in graph representation learning as they have the potential to learn complex relationships beyond the ones
captured by regular graph neural networks. The main research question is how to
inject the structural bias of graphs into the transformer architecture, and several
proposals have been made for undirected molecular graphs and, recently, also for
larger network graphs. In this paper, we study transformers over directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs) and propose architecture adaptations tailored to DAGs: (1) An
attention mechanism that is considerably more efficient than the regular quadratic
complexity of transformers and at the same time faithfully captures the DAG structure, and (2) a positional encoding of the DAG’s partial order, complementing the
former. We rigorously evaluate our approach over various types of tasks, ranging
from classifying source code graphs to nodes in citation networks, and show that
it is effective in two important aspects: in making graph transformers generally
outperform graph neural networks tailored to DAGs and in improving SOTA graph
transformer performance in terms of both quality and efficiency.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data is ubiquitous in various disciplines [Gilmer et al., 2017, Zitnik et al., 2018,
Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020] and hence graph representation learning has the potential to provide
huge impact. There are various types of graph neural networks (GNNs), the majority of which is
based on a so-called message-passing scheme where node representations are computed iteratively
by aggregating the embeddings of neighbor nodes [Gilmer et al., 2017]. Yet, this mechanism in its
basic form has limited expressivity [Xu et al., 2018] and research is focusing on extensions.
Transformer models have recently gained popularity in graph learning as they have the potential to
learn complex relationships beyond the ones captured by regular GNNs, in a different way [Dwivedi
and Bresson, 2020, Kreuzer et al., 2021]. Technically, they can be considered as graph neural
networks operating on fully-connected computational graphs, decoupled from the input graphs. The
main research question in this context is how to inject the structural bias of the given input graphs
(i.e., which nodes are actually connected) into the transformer architecture by adapting their attention
and positional encoding appropriately. Several promising proposals have been made to encode
undirected molecular graphs [Ying et al., 2021, Ross et al., 2022] and recent works take into account
the scalability challenge [Dwivedi et al., 2022], also over larger network graphs [Rampášek et al.,
2022, Chen et al., 2022b].
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

