Truncated Affinity Maximization: One-class
Homophily Modeling for Graph Anomaly Detection

Hezhe Qiao, Guansong Pang∗
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
hezheqiao.2022@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, gspang@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
We reveal a one-class homophily phenomenon, which is one prevalent property
we find empirically in real-world graph anomaly detection (GAD) datasets, i.e.,
normal nodes tend to have strong connection/affinity with each other, while the
homophily in abnormal nodes is significantly weaker than normal nodes. However,
this anomaly-discriminative property is ignored by existing GAD methods that
are typically built using a conventional anomaly detection objective, such as data
reconstruction. In this work, we explore this property to introduce a novel unsupervised anomaly scoring measure for GAD – local node affinity – that assigns
a larger anomaly score to nodes that are less affiliated with their neighbors, with
the affinity defined as similarity on node attributes/representations. We further
propose Truncated Affinity Maximization (TAM) that learns tailored node representations for our anomaly measure by maximizing the local affinity of nodes to
their neighbors. Optimizing on the original graph structure can be biased by nonhomophily edges (i.e., edges connecting normal and abnormal nodes). Thus, TAM
is instead optimized on truncated graphs where non-homophily edges are removed
iteratively to mitigate this bias. The learned representations result in significantly
stronger local affinity for normal nodes than abnormal nodes. Extensive empirical
results on 10 real-world GAD datasets show that TAM substantially outperforms
seven competing models, achieving over 10% increase in AUROC/AUPRC compared to the best contenders on challenging datasets. Our code is available at
https://github.com/mala-lab/TAM-master/.

1

Introduction

Graph anomaly detection (GAD) aims to identify abnormal nodes that are different from the majority
of the nodes in a graph. It has attracted great research interest in recent years due to its broad realworld applications, e.g., detection of abusive reviews or malicious/fraudulent users [9, 16, 32, 37, 57].
Since graph data is non-Euclidean with diverse graph structure and node attributes, it is challenging
to effectively model the underlying normal patterns and detect abnormal nodes in different graphs.
To address this challenge, graph neural networks (GNNs) have been widely used for GAD. The
GNN-based methods are often built using a data reconstruction [8, 11, 31, 59, 65] or self-supervised
learning [15, 17, 28, 54, 63] objective. The data reconstruction approaches focus on learning node
representations for GAD by minimizing the errors of reconstructing both node attributes and graph
structure, while the self-supervised approaches focus on designing a proxy task that is related to
anomaly detection, such as prediction of neighbor hops [17] and prediction of the relationship between
a node and a subgraph [28], to learn the node representations for anomaly detection.
These approaches, however, ignore one prevalent anomaly-discriminative property we find empirically
in real-world GAD datasets, namely one-class homophily, i.e., normal nodes tend to have strong
connection/affinity with each other, while the homophily in abnormal nodes is significantly weaker
∗

Corresponding author: G. Pang

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

