Learning and Collusion in Multi-unit Auctions∗

Simina Brânzei
Purdue University

Mahsa Derakhshan
Northeastern University

Negin Golrezaei
MIT

Yanjun Han
New York University

Abstract
In a carbon auction, licenses for CO2 emissions are allocated among multiple interested players. Inspired by this setting, we consider repeated multi-unit auctions
with uniform pricing, which are widely used in practice. Our contribution is to
analyze these auctions in both the offline and online settings, by designing efficient bidding algorithms with low regret and giving regret lower bounds. We also
analyze the quality of the equilibria in two main variants of the auction, finding
that one variant is susceptible to collusion among the bidders while the other is
not.

1

Introduction

In a multi-unit auction, a seller brings multiple identical units of a good to a group of players (buyers)
interested in purchasing the items. Due to the complexity and depth of the model, the multi-unit
auction has been explored in a significant volume of research [MRH89, EWK98, DN07, DLN12,
FFLS12, ACP+ 14, DN15, BCI+ 05, BGN03, GML13, DHP17, BMT19] and recommended as a lens
to the entire field of algorithmic mechanism design [Nis14]. The prior literature has often focused on
understanding the equilibria of the auction under various solution concepts and designing revenue
or welfare maximizing one-shot mechanisms.
We consider the setting where each player i has a value vi,j for receiving a j-th unit in their bundle,
which is reported to the auctioneer in the form of a bid bi,j . After receiving the bids, the auctioneer
computes a price p per unit, then sorts the bids in descending order and allocates the j-th unit to the
player that submitted the j-th highest bid, charging them p for the unit. The price p is set so that all
units are sold and the resulting allocation has the property that each player gets their favorite bundle
given their preferences.
This allocation rule represents the well-known Walrasian mechanism in the multi-unit setting: compute the market (aka competitive or Walrasian) equilibrium with respect to the reported valuations.
The template for the mechanism is: elicit the valuations from the buyers and then assign a set of
prices to the goods such that when each buyer takes their favorite bundle of goods at the given
prices, the market clears, i.e. all goods are sold and there is no excessive demand for any good (see,
e.g., [BLNL14]). Due to the strong fairness and efficiency properties of the market equilibrium,
the resulting allocation is envy-free with respect to the reported valuations. A strand of research
concentrated on achieving fair pricing in auctions, which often involves setting uniform prices for
identical units [GHK+ 05].
Repeated auctions take place in many real world settings, such as when allocating licenses for carbon (CO2 emissions) [CK02], ads on online platforms [BBW15, GJM21], U.S. Treasury notes to
investors or trade exchanges over the internet [MT15]. Repeated mechanisms often give rise to
complex patterns of behavior. For example, the bidders may use the past transaction prices as a way
of discovering the valuations of the competing bidders, or engage in collusion using bid rotation
∗
Authors are listed in alphabetical order. This work was done in part while the authors were visiting the
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing. Simina was supported in part by NSF CAREER grant CCF2238372.
Negin was supported in part by the Young Investigator Program (YIP) Award from the Office of Naval
Research (ONR) N00014-21-1-277.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

