M ONARCH M IXER: A Simple Sub-Quadratic
GEMM-Based Architecture
Daniel Y. Fu1 , Simran Arora∗,1 , Jessica Grogan∗,2 , Isys Johnson∗,2 , Sabri Eyuboglu∗,1 ,
Armin W. Thomas∗,3 , Benjamin Spector1 , Michael Poli1 , Atri Rudra2 , Christopher Ré1
∗
Equal Contribution. 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University.
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, SUNY.
3
Department of Psychology, Stanford University.
danfu@cs.stanford.edu, simarora@stanford.edu,
{jrgrogan,isysjohn}@buffalo.edu, {eyuboglu,athms,bfs,poli}@stanford.edu,
atri@buffalo.edu, chrismre@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models are increasingly being scaled in both sequence length
and model dimension to reach longer contexts and better performance. However,
existing architectures such as Transformers scale quadratically along both these
axes. We ask: are there performant architectures that can scale sub-quadratically
along sequence length and model dimension? We introduce M ONARCH M IXER
(M2), a new architecture that uses the same sub-quadratic primitive along both
sequence length and model dimension: Monarch matrices, a simple class of expressive structured matrices that captures many linear transforms, achieves high
hardware efficiency on GPUs, and scales sub-quadratically. As a proof of concept,
we explore the performance of M2 in three domains: non-causal BERT-style language modeling, ViT-style image classification, and causal GPT-style language
modeling. For non-causal BERT-style modeling, M2 matches BERT-base and
BERT-large in downstream GLUE quality with up to 27% fewer parameters, and
achieves up to 9.1× higher throughput at sequence length 4K. On ImageNet, M2
outperforms ViT-b by 1% in accuracy, with only half the parameters. Causal
GPT-style models introduce a technical challenge: enforcing causality via masking
introduces a quadratic bottleneck. To alleviate this bottleneck, we develop a novel
theoretical view of Monarch matrices based on multivariate polynomial evaluation
and interpolation, which lets us parameterize M2 to be causal while remaining
sub-quadratic. Using this parameterization, M2 matches GPT-style Transformers
at 360M parameters in pretraining perplexity on The PILE—showing for the first
time that it may be possible to match Transformer quality without attention or
MLPs.1

1

Introduction

Machine learning models in natural language processing and computer vision are being stretched to
longer sequences and higher-dimensional representations to enable longer context and higher quality,
respectively [6, 10, 62, 84]. However, existing architectures exhibit time and space complexities that
grow quadratically in sequence length and/or model dimension—which limits context length and
makes scaling expensive. For example, attention and MLP in Transformers scale quadratically in
sequence length and model dimension [15]. In this paper, we explore a natural question: can we find
a performant architecture that is sub-quadratic in both sequence length and model dimension?
1

Code is available at https://github.com/HazyResearch/m2.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

