QuantSR: Accurate Low-bit Quantization for
Efficient Image Super-Resolution

Haotong Qin∗1,2 , Yulun Zhang∗B2 , Yifu Ding1 , Yifan Liu2 ,
Xianglong LiuB1 , Martin Danelljan2 , Fisher Yu2
1
Beihang University 2 ETH Zürich

Abstract
Low-bit quantization in image super-resolution (SR) has attracted copious attention
in recent research due to its ability to reduce parameters and operations significantly. However, many quantized SR models suffer from accuracy degradation
compared to their full-precision counterparts, especially at ultra-low bit widths
(2-4 bits), limiting their practical applications. To address this issue, we propose
a novel quantized image SR network, called QuantSR, which achieves accurate
and efficient SR processing under low-bit quantization. To overcome the representation homogeneity caused by quantization in the network, we introduce the
Redistribution-driven Learnable Quantizer (RLQ). This is accomplished through
an inference-agnostic efficient redistribution design, which adds additional information in both forward and backward passes to improve the representation ability of
quantized networks. Furthermore, to achieve flexible inference and break the upper
limit of accuracy, we propose the Depth-dynamic Quantized Architecture (DQA).
Our DQA allows for the trade-off between efficiency and accuracy during inference
through weight sharing. Our comprehensive experiments show that QuantSR outperforms existing state-of-the-art quantized SR networks in terms of accuracy while
also providing more competitive computational efficiency. In addition, we demonstrate the scheme’s satisfactory architecture generality by providing QuantSR-C
and QuantSR-T for both convolution and Transformer versions, respectively. Our
code and models are released at https://github.com/htqin/QuantSR.

1

Introduction

Single image super-resolution (SR) is the task of obtaining a high-resolution (HR) version of a
low-resolution (LR) image by retrieving high-frequency details. It is an ill-posed problem since
there are multiple HR candidates for the same LR input. To address this issue, researchers have
explored the use of deep neural networks, including convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and
Transformers [18, 26, 38, 41, 25, 3, 39, 43], to achieve high-quality reconstruction. However, existing
SR models rely on expensive computational resources, which significantly limits the real-world SR
applications on resource-constrained edge devices. Therefore, there is an urgent requirement to
develop model compression techniques for SR models to reduce the computational overhead.
Model quantization [5, 14, 24, 8] has emerged as a powerful compression technique that compresses
weights and activations in computing units (such as convolutional and linear layers) into low-bit
representations. This results in heavy floating-point operations being converted into efficient integer
ones, making quantization highly desirable for edge devices and friendly for memristor-based
hardware. Meanwhile, the quantization process primarily focuses on parameter compression within
operations. It is considered architecture- and task-agnostic, making it popular among the deep learning
∗

Equal contribution

B

Corresponding authors: Yulun Zhang and Xianglong Liu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

