Many-body Approximation for Non-negative Tensors

Kazu Ghalamkari
RIKEN AIP
kazu.ghalamkari@riken.jp
Mahito Sugiyama
National Institute of Informatics
SOKENDAI
mahito@nii.ac.jp

Yoshinobu Kawahara
Osaka University
RIKEN AIP
kawahara@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
We present an alternative approach to decompose non-negative tensors, called manybody approximation. Traditional decomposition methods assume low-rankness in
the representation, resulting in difficulties in global optimization and target rank
selection. We avoid these problems by energy-based modeling of tensors, where a
tensor and its mode correspond to a probability distribution and a random variable,
respectively. Our model can be globally optimized in terms of the KL divergence
minimization by taking the interaction between variables (that is, modes), into
account that can be tuned more intuitively than ranks. Furthermore, we visualize
interactions between modes as tensor networks and reveal a nontrivial relationship
between many-body approximation and low-rank approximation.We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in tensor completion and approximation.

1

Introduction

Tensors are generalizations of vectors and matrices. Data in fields such as neuroscience [8], bioinformatics [22], signal processing [7], and computer vision [30] are often stored in the form of tensors,
and features are extracted from them. Tensor decomposition and its non-negative version [33] are
popular methods to extract features by approximating tensors by the sum of products of smaller
tensors. These methods usually seek to minimize the reconstruction error, the difference between an
original tensor and the tensor reconstructed from obtained smaller tensors.
In tensor decomposition approaches, a low-rank structure is typically assumed, where a given tensor
is essentially represented by a linear combination of a small number of bases. Such decomposition
requires two kinds of information: structure and the number of bases used in the decomposition. The
structure specifies the type of decomposition such as CP decomposition [15] and Tucker decomposition [37]. Tensor networks, which were initially introduced in physics, have become popular in the
machine learning community recently because they help intuitive and flexible model design, including
tensor train decomposition [29], tensor ring decomposition [41], and tensor tree decomposition [25].
Traditional tensor structures in physics, such as MERA [32] and PEPS [4], are also used in machine
learning. The number of bases is often referred to as the rank. Larger ranks increase the capability of
the model while increasing the computational cost, resulting in the tradeoff problem of rank tuning
that requires a careful treatment by the user. Since these low-rank structure-based decompositions
via reconstruction error minimization are non-convex, which causes initial value dependence [17,
Chapter 3], the problem of finding an appropriate setting of the low-rank structure is highly nontrivial
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

