Anytime Model Selection in Linear Bandits

Parnian Kassraie1 Nicolas Emmenegger1 Andreas Krause1 Aldo Pacchiano2,3
1
ETH Zurich 2 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard 3 Boston University
{pkassraie, nicolaem, krausea}@ethz.ch
pacchian@bu.edu

Abstract
Model selection in the context of bandit optimization is a challenging problem,
as it requires balancing exploration and exploitation not only for action selection,
but also for model selection. One natural approach is to rely on online learning
algorithms that treat different models as experts. Existing methods, however, scale
poorly (polyM ) with the number of models M in terms of their regret. Our key
insight is that, for model selection in linear bandits, we can emulate full-information
feedback to the online learner with a favorable bias-variance trade-off. This allows
us to develop ALE XP, which has an exponentially improved (log M ) dependence
on M for its regret. ALE XP has anytime guarantees on its regret, and neither
requires knowledge of the horizon n, nor relies on an initial purely exploratory stage.
Our approach utilizes a novel time-uniform analysis of the Lasso, establishing a
new connection between online learning and high-dimensional statistics.

1

Introduction

When solving bandit problems or performing Bayesian optimization, we need to commit to a reward
model a priori, based on which we estimate the reward function and build a policy for selecting
the next action. In practice, there are many ways to model the reward by considering different feature
maps or hypothesis spaces, e.g., for optimizing gene knockouts [Gonzalez et al., 2015, Pacchiano
et al., 2022] or parameter estimation in biological dynamical systems [Ulmasov et al., 2016, Imani
et al., 2019]. It is not known a priori which model is going to yield the most sample efficient bandit
algorithm, and we can only select the right model as we gather empirical evidence. This leads us
to ask, can we perform adaptive model selection, while simultaneously optimizing for reward?
In an idealized setting with no sampling limits, given a model class of size M , we could initialize M
bandit algorithms (a.k.a agents) in parallel, each using one of the available reward models. Then, as
the algorithms run, at every step we can select the most promising agent, according to the cumulative
rewards that are obtained so far. Model selection can then be cast into an online optimization problem
on a M -dimensional probability simplex, where the probability of selecting an agent is dependent on
its cumulative reward, and the optimizer seeks to find the distribution with the best return in hindsight.
This approach is impractical for large model classes, since at every step, it requires drawing M
different samples in parallel from the environment so that the reward for each agent is realized.
In realistic applications of bandit optimization, we can only draw one sample at a time, and so we need
to design an algorithm which allocates more samples to the agents that are deemed more promising.
Prior work [e.g., Maillard and Munos, 2011, Agarwal et al., 2017] propose to run a single meta
algorithm which interacts with the environment by first selecting an agent, and then selecting an action
according to the suggestion of that agent. The online model selection problem can still be emulated in
this setup, however this time the optimizer receives partial feedback, coming from only one agent. Consequently, many agents need to be queried, and the overall regret scales with polyM , again restricting
this approach to small model classes. In fact, addressing the limited scope of such algorithms, Agarwal
et al. [2017] raise an open problem on the feasibility of obtaining a log M dependency for the regret.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

