Solving Inverse Physics Problems with Score Matching
Benjamin Holzschuh 1,2 ∗

Simona Vegetti 2

Nils Thuerey 1

1

2

Technical University of Munich, 85748 Garching, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics, 85748 Garching, Germany

Abstract
We propose to solve inverse problems involving the temporal evolution of physics
systems by leveraging recent advances from diffusion models. Our method moves
the system’s current state backward in time step by step by combining an approximate inverse physics simulator and a learned correction function. A central
insight of our work is that training the learned correction with a single-step loss
is equivalent to a score matching objective, while recursively predicting longer
parts of the trajectory during training relates to maximum likelihood training of a
corresponding probability flow. We highlight the advantages of our algorithm compared to standard denoising score matching and implicit score matching, as well as
fully learned baselines for a wide range of inverse physics problems. The resulting
inverse solver has excellent accuracy and temporal stability and, in contrast to other
learned inverse solvers, allows for sampling the posterior of the solutions. Code
and experiments are available at https://github.com/tum-pbs/SMDP.

1

Introduction

Many physical systems are time-reversible on a microscopic scale. For example, a continuous
material can be represented by a collection of interacting particles [Gur82; BLL02] based on which
we can predict future states. We can also compute earlier states, meaning we can evolve the
simulation backward in time [Mar+96]. When taking a macroscopic perspective, we only know
average quantities within specific regions [Far93], which constitutes a loss of information, and as a
consequence, time is no longer reversible. In the following, we target inverse problems to reconstruct
the distribution of initial macroscopic states for a given end state. This problem is genuinely tough
[ZDG96; Góm+18; Del+18; LP22], and existing methods lack tractable approaches to represent and
sample the distribution of states.
Our method builds on recent advances from the field of diffusion-based approaches [Soh+15; HJA20;
Son+21b]: Data samples x ∈ RD are gradually corrupted into Gaussian white noise via a stochastic
differential equation (SDE) dx = f (x, t)dt + g(t)dW , where the deterministic component of the
SDE f : RD × R≥0 → RD is called drift and the coefficient of the D-dimensional Brownian motion
W denoted by g : R≥0 → R≥0 is called diffusion. If the score ∇x log pt (x) of the data distribution
pt (x) of corrupted samples at time t is known, then the dynamics of the SDE can be reversed in time,
allowing for the sampling of data from noise. Diffusion models are trained to approximate the score
with a neural network sθ , which can then be used as a plug-in estimate for the reverse-time SDE.
However, in our physics-based approach, we consider an SDE that describes the physics system as
dx = P(x)dt + g(t)dW , where P : RD → RD is a physics simulator that replaces the drift term of
diffusion models. Instead of transforming the data distribution to noise, we transform a simulation
state at t = 0 to a simulation state at t = T with Gaussian noise as a perturbation. Based on a given
∗

Correspondence to: benjamin.holzschuh@tum.de

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

