Lockdown: Backdoor Defense for Federated Learning
with Isolated Subspace Training

Tiansheng Huang, Sihao Hu, Ka-Ho Chow, Fatih Ilhan, Selim Furkan Tekin, Ling Liu
School of Computer Science
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
{thuang374, shu335, kchow35, filhan3, stekin6}@gatech.edu, ling.liu@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is vulnerable to backdoor attacks due to its distributed
computing nature. Existing defense solution usually requires larger amount of
computation in either the training or testing phase, which limits their practicality
in the resource-constrain scenarios. A more practical defense, i.e., neural network
(NN) pruning based defense has been proposed in centralized backdoor setting.
However, our empirical study shows that traditional pruning-based solution suffers
poison-coupling effect in FL, which significantly degrades the defense performance.
This paper presents Lockdown, an isolated subspace training method to mitigate
the poison-coupling effect. Lockdown follows three key procedures. First, it
modifies the training protocol by isolating the training subspaces for different
clients. Second, it utilizes randomness in initializing isolated subspacess, and
performs subspace pruning and subspace recovery to segregate the subspaces
between malicious and benign clients. Third, it introduces quorum consensus
to cure the global model by purging malicious/dummy parameters. Empirical
results show that Lockdown achieves superior and consistent defense performance
compared to existing representative approaches against backdoor attacks. Another
value-added property of Lockdown is the communication-efficiency and model
complexity reduction, which are both critical for resource-constrain FL scenario.
Our code is available at https://github.com/git-disl/Lockdown.

1

Introduction
Model distribution

Subspace distribution

Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al.,
2016) is a privacy-preserving machine learning paradigm that allows the training surrogates
(clients) to collectively train a global model with
data in local devices. However, because the
training data and potentially the training process
on the clients lacks supervision, it is possible
that attackers can launch data poisoning attack
on the global model (Tolpegin et al., 2020), so Figure 1: Illustration of isolated subspace training.
as to manipulate the prediction of the model.
The blue circles and the shaded area respectively
Backdoor attack is one of the data poisoning represent the parameters of the model and the trainattacks, which is stealthy and disruptive to the ing subspace. Left: vanilla FL where malicious
normal behavior of the model. Specifically, the clients can poison all the parameters. Right: isoprediction of the model can be manipulated such lated subspace training where malicious clients can
that it consistently predicts one (or some) chosen only poison a subspace of them.
label whenever it is given samples with a backdoor trigger. Backdoor attack poses serious threats to
Malicious client

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

Benign client

