Improving Self-supervised Molecular Representation
Learning using Persistent Homology

Yuankai Luo
Beihang University
luoyk@buaa.edu.cn

Lei Shi
Beihang University
leishi@buaa.edu.cn

Veronika Thost
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab,
IBM Research
veronika.thost@ibm.com

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has great potential for molecular representation
learning given the complexity of molecular graphs, the large amounts of unlabelled
data available, the considerable cost of obtaining labels experimentally, and the
hence often only small training datasets. The importance of the topic is reflected
in the variety of paradigms and architectures that have been investigated recently,
most focus on designing views for contrastive learning. In this paper, we study
SSL based on persistent homology (PH), a mathematical tool for modeling topological features of data that persist across multiple scales. It has several unique
features which particularly suit SSL, naturally offering: different views of the
data, stability in terms of distance preservation, and the opportunity to flexibly
incorporate domain knowledge. We (1) investigate an autoencoder, which shows
the general representational power of PH, and (2) propose a contrastive loss that
complements existing approaches. We rigorously evaluate our approach for molecular property prediction and demonstrate its particular features in improving the
embedding space: after SSL, the representations are better and offer considerably
more predictive power than the baselines over different probing tasks; our loss
increases baseline performance, sometimes largely; and we often obtain substantial
improvements over very small datasets, a common scenario in practice.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) has great potential for molecular representation learning given the
complexity of molecules, the large amounts of unlabelled data available, the considerable cost of
obtaining labels experimentally, and the resulting often small datasets. The importance of the topic is
reflected in the variety of paradigms and architectures that are investigated [Xia et al., 2023a].
Most existing approaches use contrastive learning (CL) as proposed in [You et al., 2020]. CL aims at
learning an embedding space by comparing training samples and encouraging representations from
positive pairs of samples to be close in the embedding space while representations from negative
pairs are pushed away from each other. However, usually, each given molecule is considered as its
own class, that is, a positive sample pair consists of two different views of the same molecule; and all
other samples in a batch are used as the negative pairs during training. We observe that this represents
a very coarse-grained comparison basically ignoring all commonalities and differences between
the given molecules. Therefore also current efforts in molecular CL are put in constructing views
that capture the possible relations between molecules: GraphCL [You et al., 2020] proposes four
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

