A Comprehensive Benchmark for
Neural Human Radiance Fields
Kenkun Liu1,2∗ , Derong Jin2 , Ailing Zeng1† , Xiaoguang Han2 , Lei Zhang1
1
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
https://kenkunliu.github.io/HMNeRFBench/

Abstract
The past two years have witnessed a significant increase in interest concerning
NeRF-based human body rendering. While this surge has propelled considerable
advancements, it has also led to an influx of methods and datasets. This explosion
complicates experimental settings and makes fair comparisons challenging. In this
work, we design and execute thorough studies into unified evaluation settings and
metrics to establish a fair and reasonable benchmark for human NeRF models.
To reveal the effects of extant models, we benchmark them against diverse and
hard scenes. Additionally, we construct a cross-subject benchmark pre-trained
on large-scale datasets to assess generalizable methods. Finally, we analyze the
essential components for animatability and generalizability, and make HumanNeRF
from monocular videos generalizable, as the inaugural baseline. We hope these
benchmarks and analyses could serve the community.

1

Introduction

The free-view human body rendering and animation have gained significant attention due to their
broad applications in industries such as film-making, video games, metaverse, and AR/VR. Recently,
the neural radiance field (NeRF) [33] provides a new neural implicit representation that employs a
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to encode object density and view-dependent color for each point in a
3D scene, which has been widely adopted for human body rendering. The vanilla NeRF requires
a batch of multi-view images for training to represent a single static scene, which is far from real
applications. Thus, some works [35, 23, 42, 58, 53] attempt to reduce the number of views while
some other works [46, 7, 30, 22, 9] try to adapt the per-scene training setting to be one-shot training.
Furthermore, there are also some works [39, 15, 50, 5, 44, 27] trying to model dynamic scenes.
The extended NeRFs for humans [38, 49, 12, 54, 10, 37, 32, 8, 24] follow similar pathways of
development. Specifically, there have developed two streams of methods for human body rendering,
i.e., scene-specific methods and generalizable methods. The former aims to encode a human’s
high-fidelity appearance with as few train views and video frames as possible and then synthesize the
human image in novel views or novel poses. One of the representative works is NeuralBody [38],
which requires four views and 100-300 frames for training. Another work, HumanNeRF [49], takes
a step further with only monocular video frames for training. It exploits the prior of human body
shape and deformation, making the single-view frames competitive to multi-view images. Recently,
generalizable methods have tried to train a universal model that can be directly used to synthesize a
novel-view human image. Like NHP [24], it only needs three views as input to render the human’s
image in any given view. Additionally, to achieve novel pose rendering, MPSNeRF [16] first warps
observed appearance information to canonical space and then to the target pose space.
∗
†

Work done during an internship at IDEA.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

