HOH: Markerless Multimodal Human-Object-Human
Handover Dataset with Large Object Count

Noah Wiederhold
Clarkson University
wiedern@clarkson.edu

Ava Megyeri
Clarkson University
megyeram@clarkson.edu

Sean Banerjee
Clarkson University
sbanerje@clarkson.edu

DiMaggio Paris
Clarkson University
parisda@clarkson.edu

Natasha Kholgade Banerjee
Clarkson University
nbanerje@clarkson.edu

Figure 1: HOH is a markerless 3D multimodal dataset on human-human handovers with 136 objects
and 20 participant pairs, 40 accounting for role-reversal. We show 3D point clouds of the upper body,
giver (pink) and receiver (yellow) hands, and objects (colorized) fused from 4 Kinects from various
time points of handover and across various participant pairs and objects. The dataset demonstrates
diversity of object geometry, participant posture, interaction approaches, and grasp types. Shown are
right-seated givers. The dataset also consists of left-seated givers.

Abstract
We present the HOH (Human-Object-Human) Handover Dataset, a large object
count dataset with 136 objects, to accelerate data-driven research on handover
studies, human-robot handover implementation, and artificial intelligence (AI) on
handover parameter estimation from 2D and 3D data of two-person interactions.
HOH contains multi-view RGB and depth data, skeletons, fused point clouds,
grasp type and handedness labels, object, giver hand, and receiver hand 2D and 3D
segmentations, giver and receiver comfort ratings, and paired object metadata and
aligned 3D models for 2,720 handover interactions spanning 136 objects and 20
giver-receiver pairs—40 with role-reversal—organized from 40 participants. We
also show experimental results of neural networks trained using HOH to perform
grasp, orientation, and trajectory prediction. As the only fully markerless handover
capture dataset, HOH represents natural human-human handover interactions,
overcoming challenges with markered datasets that require specific suiting for
body tracking, and lack high-resolution hand tracking. To date, HOH is the largest
handover dataset in terms of object count, participant count, pairs with role reversal
accounted for, and total interactions captured.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

