HIQL: Offline Goal-Conditioned RL
with Latent States as Actions
Seohong Park1 Dibya Ghosh1 Benjamin Eysenbach2 Sergey Levine1
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Princeton University
seohong@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised pre-training has recently become the bedrock for computer vision
and natural language processing. In reinforcement learning (RL), goal-conditioned
RL can potentially provide an analogous self-supervised approach for making use
of large quantities of unlabeled (reward-free) data. However, building effective
algorithms for goal-conditioned RL that can learn directly from diverse offline data
is challenging, because it is hard to accurately estimate the exact value function for
faraway goals. Nonetheless, goal-reaching problems exhibit structure, such that
reaching distant goals entails first passing through closer subgoals. This structure
can be very useful, as assessing the quality of actions for nearby goals is typically
easier than for more distant goals. Based on this idea, we propose a hierarchical
algorithm for goal-conditioned RL from offline data. Using one action-free value
function, we learn two policies that allow us to exploit this structure: a high-level
policy that treats states as actions and predicts (a latent representation of) a subgoal
and a low-level policy that predicts the action for reaching this subgoal. Through
analysis and didactic examples, we show how this hierarchical decomposition
makes our method robust to noise in the estimated value function. We then apply
our method to offline goal-reaching benchmarks, showing that our method can
solve long-horizon tasks that stymie prior methods, can scale to high-dimensional
image observations, and can readily make use of action-free data. Our code is
available at https://seohong.me/projects/hiql/

1

Introduction

Many of the most successful machine learning systems for computer vision [15, 36] and natural
language processing [10, 18] leverage large amounts of unlabeled or weakly-labeled data. In the
reinforcement learning (RL) setting, offline goal-conditioned RL provides an analogous way to
potentially leverage large amounts of multi-task data without reward labels or video data without
action labels: offline learning [54, 55] enables leveraging previously collected and passively observed
data, and goal-conditioned RL [44, 79] enables learning from unlabeled, reward-free data. However,
offline goal-conditioned RL poses major challenges. First, learning an accurate goal-conditioned
value function for any state and goal pair is challenging when considering very broad and long-horizon
goal-reaching tasks. This often results in a noisy value function and thus potentially an erroneous
policy. Second, while the offline setting unlocks the potential for using previously collected data, it
is not straightforward to incorporate vast quantities of existing action-free video data into standard
RL methods. In this work, we aim to address these challenges by developing an effective offline
goal-conditioned RL method that can learn to reach distant goals, readily make use of data without
reward labels, and even utilize data without actions.
One straightforward approach to offline goal-conditioned RL is to first train a goal-conditioned value
function and then train a policy that leads to states with high values. However, many prior papers have
observed that goal-conditioned RL is very difficult, particularly when combined with offline training
and distant goals [35, 38, 102]. We observe that part of this difficulty stems from the “signal-to-noise”
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

