Sequential Predictive Two-Sample and Independence
Testing

Aleksandr Podkopaev
Walmart Global Tech
sasha.podkopaev@walmart.com

Aaditya Ramdas
Carnegie Mellon University
aramdas@cmu.edu

Abstract
We study the problems of sequential nonparametric two-sample and independence
testing. Sequential tests process data online and allow using observed data to
decide whether to stop and reject the null hypothesis or to collect more data, while
maintaining type I error control. We build upon the principle of (nonparametric)
testing by betting, where a gambler places bets on future observations and their
wealth measures evidence against the null hypothesis. While recently developed
kernel-based betting strategies often work well on simple distributions, selecting a
suitable kernel for high-dimensional or structured data, such as images, is often
nontrivial. To address this drawback, we design prediction-based betting strategies
that rely on the following fact: if a sequentially updated predictor starts to consistently determine (a) which distribution an instance is drawn from, or (b) whether an
instance is drawn from the joint distribution or the product of the marginal distributions (the latter produced by external randomization), it provides evidence against
the two-sample or independence nulls respectively. We empirically demonstrate the
superiority of our tests over kernel-based approaches under structured settings. Our
tests can be applied beyond the case of independent and identically distributed data,
remaining valid and powerful even when the data distribution drifts over time.

1

Introduction

We consider two closely-related problems of nonparametric two-sample and independence testing. In
the former, given observations from two distributions P and Q, the goal is to test the null hypothesis
that the distributions are the same: H0 : P = Q, against the alternative that they are not: H1 : P ̸= Q.
In the latter, given observations from some joint distribution PXY , the goal is to test the null hypothesis
that the random variables are independent: H0 : PXY = PX ×PY , against the alternative that they are
not: H1 : PXY ̸= PX × PY . Kernel tests, such as kernel-MMD [Gretton et al., 2012] for two-sample
and HSIC [Gretton et al., 2005] for independence testing, are amongst the most popular methods for
solving these tasks which work well on data from simple distributions. However, their performance is
sensitive to the choice of a kernel and respective parameters, like bandwidth, and applying such tests
requires additional effort. Further, selecting kernels for structured data, like images, is a nontrivial
task. Lastly, kernel tests suffer from decaying power in high dimensions [Ramdas et al., 2015].
Predictive two-sample and independence tests (2STs and ITs respectively) aim to address such
limitations of kernelized approaches. The idea of using classifiers for two-sample testing dates back
to Friedman [2004] who proposed using the output scores as a dimension reduction method. More
recent works focused on the direct evaluation of a learned model for testing. In an initial arXiv
2016 preprint, Kim et al. [2021] proposed and analyzed predictive 2STs based on sample-splitting,
namely testing whether the accuracy of a model trained on the first split of data and estimated
on the second split is significantly better than chance. The authors established the consistency of
asymptotic and exact tests in high-dimensional settings and provided rates for the case of Gaussian
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

