H-Consistency Bounds:
Characterization and Extensions
Anqi Mao
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
aqmao@cims.nyu.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research & CIMS
New York, NY 10011
mohri@google.com

Yutao Zhong
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
yutao@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
A series of recent publications by Awasthi, Mao, Mohri, and Zhong [2022b] have
introduced the key notion of H-consistency bounds for surrogate loss functions.
These are upper bounds on the zero-one estimation error of any predictor in a hypothesis set, expressed in terms of its surrogate loss estimation error. They are both
non-asymptotic and hypothesis set-specific and thus stronger and more informative
than Bayes-consistency. However, determining if they hold and deriving these
bounds have required a specific proof and analysis for each surrogate loss. Can
we derive more general tools and characterizations? This paper provides both a
general characterization and an extension of H-consistency bounds for multi-class
classification. We present new and tight H-consistency bounds for both the family
of constrained losses and that of comp-sum losses, which covers the familiar crossentropy, or logistic loss applied to the outputs of a neural network. We further
extend our analysis beyond the completeness assumptions adopted in previous
studies and cover more realistic bounded hypothesis sets. Our characterizations are
based on error transformations, which are explicitly defined for each formulation.
We illustrate the application of our general results through several special examples.
A by-product of our analysis is the observation that a recently derived multi-class
H-consistency bound for cross-entropy reduces to an excess bound and is not
significant. Instead, we prove a much stronger and more significant guarantee.

1

Introduction

Bayes-consistency is an important property of surrogate loss functions. It requires that minimizing
the surrogate excess error over the family of all measurable functions leads to the minimization of
the target error loss in the limit [Steinwart, 2007]. This property applies to a broad family of convex
margin-based losses in binary classification [Zhang, 2004a, Bartlett et al., 2006], as well as some
extensions in multi-class classification [Tewari and Bartlett, 2007]. However, Bayes-consistency does
not apply to the hypothesis sets commonly used for learning, such as the family of linear models or
that of neural networks, which of course do not include all measurable functions. Furthermore, it is
also only an asymptotic property and does not supply any convergence guarantee.
To address these limitations, a series of recent publications by Awasthi, Mao, Mohri, and Zhong
[2022b] introduced the key notion of H-consistency bounds for surrogate loss functions. These are
upper bounds on the zero-one estimation error of any predictor in a hypothesis set, expressed in terms
of its surrogate loss estimation error. They are both non-asymptotic and hypothesis set-specific and
thus stronger and more informative than Bayes-consistency. However, determining the validity of
these bounds and deriving them have required a specific proof and analysis for each surrogate loss.
Can we derive more general tools and characterizations for H-consistency bounds?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

