Conformal Prediction for Time Series with
Modern Hopfield Networks

Andreas Auer ∗ Martin Gauch∗ ,† Daniel Klotz∗ Sepp Hochreiter∗
∗
ELLIS Unit Linz and LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning,
Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
†
Google Research, Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract
To quantify uncertainty, conformal prediction methods are gaining continuously
more interest and have already been successfully applied to various domains.
However, they are difficult to apply to time series as the autocorrelative structure
of time series violates basic assumptions required by conformal prediction. We
propose HopCPT, a novel conformal prediction approach for time series that not
only copes with temporal structures but leverages them. We show that our approach
is theoretically well justified for time series where temporal dependencies are
present. In experiments, we demonstrate that our new approach outperforms stateof-the-art conformal prediction methods on multiple real-world time series datasets
from four different domains.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty estimates are imperative to make actionable predictions for complex time-dependent
systems (e.g., Gneiting & Katzfuss, 2014; Zhu & Laptev, 2017). This is particularly evident for
environmental phenomena such as flood forecasting (e.g., Krzysztofowicz, 2001), since they exhibit
pronounced seasonality. Conformal Prediction (CP, Vovk et al., 1999) provides uncertainty estimates
based on prediction intervals. It achieves finite-sample marginal coverage with almost no assumptions,
except that the data is exchangeable (Vovk et al., 2005; Vovk, 2012). However, CP for time series is
not trivial because temporal dependencies often violate the exchangeability assumption.
HopCPT. For time series models that predict a given system, the errors are typically specific to
the input describing the current situation. To apply CP, HopCPT uses continuous Modern Hopfield
Networks (MHNs). The MHN uses large weights for past situations that were similar to the current
one and weights close to zero for past situations that were dissimilar to the current one (Figure 1). The
CP procedure uses the weighted errors to construct strong uncertainty estimates close to the desired
coverage level. This exploits that similar situations (which we call a regime) tend to follow the same
error distribution. HopCPT achieves new state-of-the-art efficiency, even under non-exchangeability
and on large datasets.
Our main contributions are:
1. We propose HopCPT, a CP method for time series, a domain where CP struggled so far.
2. We introduce the concept of error regimes to CP, which softens the excitability requirements
and enables efficient CP for time series.
3. HopCPT uses MHN for a similarity-based sample reweighting. In contrast to existing
approaches, HopCPT can learn from large datasets and predict intervals at arbitrary coverage
levels without retraining.
4. HopCPT achieves state-of-the-art results for conformal time series prediction tasks from
various real-world applications.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

