Distributional Policy Evaluation: a Maximum Entropy
approach to Representation Learning

Riccardo Zamboni
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy
riccardo.zamboni@polimi.it

Alberto Maria Metelli
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy
albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it

Marcello Restelli
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
The Maximum Entropy (Max-Ent) framework has been effectively employed in a
variety of Reinforcement Learning (RL) tasks. In this paper, we first propose a novel
Max-Ent framework for policy evaluation in a distributional RL setting, named
Distributional Maximum Entropy Policy Evaluation (D-Max-Ent PE). We derive a
generalization-error bound that depends on the complexity of the representation
employed, showing that this framework can explicitly take into account the features
used to represent the state space while evaluating a policy. Then, we exploit these
favorable properties to drive the representation learning of the state space in a
Structural Risk Minimization fashion. We employ state-aggregation functions as
feature functions and we specialize the D-Max-Ent approach into an algorithm,
named D-Max-Ent Progressive Factorization, which constructs a progressively
finer-grained representation of the state space by balancing the trade-off between
preserving information (bias) and reducing the effective number of states, i.e., the
complexity of the representation space (variance). Finally, we report the results
of some illustrative numerical simulations, showing that the proposed algorithm
matches the expected theoretical behavior and highlighting the relationship between
aggregations and sample regimes.

1

Introduction

In Distributional Reinforcement Learning (D-RL) [Bellemare et al., 2023], an agent aims to estimate
the entire distribution of the returns achievable by acting according to a specific policy. This is
in contrast to and more complex than classic Reinforcement Learning (RL) [Szepesvári, 2010,
Sutton and Barto, 2018], where the objective is to predict the expected return only. In recent years,
several algorithms for D-RL have been proposed, both in evaluation and control settings. The push
towards distributional approaches was particularly driven by additional flavors they can bring into
the discourse, such as risk-averse considerations, robust control, and many regularization techniques
[Chow et al., 2015, Brown et al., 2020, Keramati et al., 2020]. Most of them varied in how the
distribution of the returns is modeled. The choice of the model was shown to have a cascading effect
on how such a distribution can be learned, how efficiently and with what guarantees, and how it can
be used for the control problem. Similarly to this tradition, this paper investigates the potential of
looking into the entire distribution of returns to address the representation learning of the state-action
spaces, that is to find a good feature representation of the decision-making space so as to make the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

