Gradient Informed Proximal Policy Optimization

Sanghyun Son

Laura Yu Zheng Ryan Sullivan Yi-Ling Qiao Ming C. Lin
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
{shh1295,lyzheng,rsulli,yilingq,lin}@umd.edu

Abstract
We introduce a novel policy learning method that integrates analytical gradients
from differentiable environments with the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
algorithm. To incorporate analytical gradients into the PPO framework, we introduce the concept of an α-policy that stands as a locally superior policy. By
adaptively modifying the α value, we can effectively manage the influence of
analytical policy gradients during learning. To this end, we suggest metrics for
assessing the variance and bias of analytical gradients, reducing dependence on
these gradients when high variance or bias is detected. Our proposed approach
outperforms baseline algorithms in various scenarios, such as function optimization, physics simulations, and traffic control environments. Our code can be found
online: https://github.com/SonSang/gippo.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) techniques often take gradient-free experiences or trajectories to collect
information and learn policies—suitable for many applications such as video games and recommender
systems. In contrast, differentiable programming offers analytical gradients that describe the actionresult relationship (Equation 2). In particular, recent developments in programming tools [Paszke
et al., 2017] have enabled direct access to accurate analytical gradients of the environmental dynamics,
as exemplified in physics simulations [de Avila Belbute-Peres et al., 2018, Degrave et al., 2019,
Geilinger et al., 2020, Freeman et al., 2021, Qiao et al., 2021], instead of using differentiable
models for approximation [Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011, Deisenroth et al., 2013]. Policy
gradients estimated from the integration of these analytical gradients and the reparameterization trick
(RP gradient) [Kingma and Welling, 2013] often display less variance than likelihood ratio policy
gradients (LR gradient) [Williams and Peng, 1989, Glynn, 1990], derived using the log-derivative
trick. Consequently, a subset of research has explored the utilization of these analytical gradients for
RL applications, especially in physics domains [Qiao et al., 2021, Mora et al., 2021, Xu et al., 2022].
Nevertheless, in environments with inherent chaotic nature, the RP gradient is found to exhibit high
variance [Parmas et al., 2018] and even empirical bias [Suh et al., 2022]. Therefore, a strategic
approach is necessary for the adoption of analytical gradients in policy learning [Metz et al., 2021].
One such strategy involves the interpolation of the LR and RP gradients based on their variance
and bias [Parmas et al., 2018, Suh et al., 2022], made possible by the fact that both are different
estimators of the same policy gradient. However, this approach requires estimating the LR and RP
gradient for each sample trajectory to compute sample variance, a process that can be time-consuming
(Appendix 7.7). Additionally, for on-policy RL methods that do not initially estimate the LR gradient,
such as Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [Schulman et al., 2015a] or Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) [Schulman et al., 2017] algorithms, it remains uncertain how to evaluate the
variance and bias of analytical gradients. These gradients, however, continue to be desirable when
they exhibit low variance and provide insightful information about environmental dynamics.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

