Energy Guided Diffusion for Generating Neurally
Exciting Images

Paweł A. Pierzchlewicz*,1-2 , Konstantin F. Willeke1-2 , Arne F. Nix1-2 , Pavithra Elumalai2 ,
Kelli Restivo3-4 , Tori Shinn3-4 , Cate Nealley3-4 , Gabrielle Rodriguez3-4 ,
Saumil Patel3-4 , Katrin Franke3-4 , Andreas S. Tolias3-5 , Fabian H. Sinz1-4
1
Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, Tübingen University, Tübingen, Germany
2
Institute of Computer Science and Campus Institute Data Science, University of Göttingen, Germany
3
Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
4
Center for Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
5
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University, Houston, TX, USA
∗
ppierzc@cs.uni-goettingen.de

Abstract
In recent years, most exciting inputs (MEIs) synthesized from encoding models of
neuronal activity have become an established method for studying tuning properties
of biological and artificial visual systems. However, as we move up the visual
hierarchy, the complexity of neuronal computations increases. Consequently, it
becomes more challenging to model neuronal activity, requiring more complex
models. In this study, we introduce a novel readout architecture inspired by the
mechanism of visual attention. This new architecture, which we call attention
readout, together with a data-driven convolutional core outperforms previous taskdriven models in predicting the activity of neurons in macaque area V4. However,
as our predictive network becomes deeper and more complex, synthesizing MEIs
via straightforward gradient ascent (GA) can struggle to produce qualitatively
good results and overfit to idiosyncrasies of a more complex model, potentially
decreasing the MEI’s model-to-brain transferability. To solve this problem, we
propose a diffusion-based method for generating MEIs via Energy Guidance (EGG).
We show that for models of macaque V4, EGG generates single neuron MEIs
that generalize better across varying model architectures than the state-of-the-art
GA, while at the same time reducing computational costs by a factor of 4.7x,
facilitating experimentally challenging closed-loop experiments. Furthermore,
EGG diffusion can be used to generate other neurally exciting images, like most
exciting naturalistic images that are on par with a selection of highly activating
natural images, or image reconstructions that generalize better across architectures.
Finally, EGG is simple to implement, requires no retraining of the diffusion model,
and can easily be generalized to provide other characterizations of the visual system,
such as invariances. Thus, EGG provides a general and flexible framework to study
the coding properties of the visual system in the context of natural images.1

1

Introduction

From the early works of Hubel and Wiesel [1], visual neuroscience has used the preferred stimuli
of visual neurons to gain insight into the information processing in the brain. In recent years, deep
learning has made big strides in predicting neuronal responses [2–16] enabling in silico stimulus
1

The code is available at https://github.com/sinzlab/energy-guided-diffusion

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

