SPRING: Studying the Paper and Reasoning to Play
Games
Yue Wu14∗, Shrimai Prabhumoye2 , So Yeon Min1 , Yonatan Bisk1 , Ruslan Salakhutdinov1 ,

1

Amos Azaria3 , Tom Mitchell1 , Yuanzhi Li1,4
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 NVIDIA, 3 Ariel University, 4 Microsoft Research

Abstract
Open-world survival games pose signiﬁcant challenges for AI algorithms due to
their multi-tasking, deep exploration, and goal prioritization requirements. Despite reinforcement learning (RL) being popular for solving games, its high sample complexity limits its effectiveness in complex open-world games like Crafter
or Minecraft. We propose a novel approach, SPRING, to read Crafter’s original academic paper and use the knowledge learned to reason and play the game
through a large language model (LLM). Prompted with the LATEX source as game
context and a description of the agent’s current observation, our SPRING framework employs a directed acyclic graph (DAG) with game-related questions as
nodes and dependencies as edges. We identify the optimal action to take in the
environment by traversing the DAG and calculating LLM responses for each node
in topological order, with the LLM’s answer to ﬁnal node directly translating to
environment actions. In our experiments, we study the quality of in-context “reasoning” induced by different forms of prompts under the setting of the Crafter environment. Our experiments suggest that LLMs, when prompted with consistent
chain-of-thought, have great potential in completing sophisticated high-level trajectories. Quantitatively, SPRING with GPT-4 outperforms all state-of-the-art RL
baselines, trained for 1M steps, without any training. Finally, we show the potential of Crafter as a test bed for LLMs. Code at github.com/holmeswww/SPRING

1

Introduction

Open-world survival games like Minecraft (Fan et al., 2022) and Crafter (Hafner, 2021) pose significant challenges for AI algorithms due to a combination of factors: procedural generation requires
strong generalization; diverse action space requires multi-task capabilities; technology tree requires
long-term planning and deep exploration; diverse and conﬂicting objectives requires goal prioritization. In particular, Crafter is designed for efﬁcient simulation and fast iteration. Similar to Minecraft,
Crafter features key challenges such as multi-tasking, exploration with a deep and wide tech-tree,
requiring the agent to craft multiple tools and interact with multiple objects to survive in the game.
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been the go-to approach for game-based problems, with numerous
successes in games like Go (Silver et al., 2017), robotics (Fu et al., 2020; Hafner et al., 2023) and
various video games (Vinyals et al., 2019; Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Badia et al., 2020; Hafner et al.,
2023). While RL demonstrated impressive performance, it still suffers from certain limitations,
such as high sample complexity and difﬁculty in incorporating prior knowledge. Such drawbacks
make it exceptionally challenging to apply RL to diverse and complex open-world benchmarks like
Crafter (Hafner, 2021) or Minecraft (Fan et al., 2022). Addressing the beneﬁts and drawbacks of RL
is therefore crucial for achieving a sample-efﬁcient solution.
∗

Work done during internship at Microsoft. For correspondence, contact ywu5@andrew.cmu.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

