Weakly Coupled Deep Q-Networks

Ibrahim El Shar
Hitachi America Ltd., University of Pittsburgh
Sunnyvale, CA
ibrahim.elshar@hal.hitachi.com

Daniel Jiang
Meta, University of Pittsburgh
New York, NY
drjiang@meta.com

Abstract
We propose weakly coupled deep Q-networks (WCDQN), a novel deep reinforcement learning algorithm that enhances performance in a class of structured
problems called weakly coupled Markov decision processes (WCMDP). WCMDPs
consist of multiple independent subproblems connected by an action space constraint, which is a structural property that frequently emerges in practice. Despite
this appealing structure, WCMDPs quickly become intractable as the number of
subproblems grows. WCDQN employs a single network to train multiple DQN
“subagents,” one for each subproblem, and then combine their solutions to establish
an upper bound on the optimal action value. This guides the main DQN agent
towards optimality. We show that the tabular version, weakly coupled Q-learning
(WCQL), converges almost surely to the optimal action value. Numerical experiments show faster convergence compared to DQN and related techniques in settings
with as many as 10 subproblems, 310 total actions, and a continuous state space.

1

Introduction

Despite achieving many noteworthy and highly visible successes, it remains widely acknowledged
that practical implementation of reinforcement learning (RL) is, in general, challenging [15]. This
is particularly true in real-world settings where, unlike in simulated settings, interactions with
the environment are costly to obtain. One promising path toward more sample-efficient learning
in real-world situations is to incorporate known structural properties of the underlying Markov
decision process (MDP) into the learning algorithm. As elegantly articulated by [44], structural
properties can be considered a type of “side information” that can be exploited by the RL agent
for its benefit. Instantiations of this concept are plentiful and diverse: examples include factored
decompositions [33, 10, 47], latent or contextual MDPs [21, 39, 52], block MDPs [14], linear MDPs
[32], shape-constrained value and/or policy functions [49, 37, 31], MDPs adhering to closure under
policy improvement [8], and multi-timescale or hierarchical MDPs [23, 13], to name just a few.
In this paper, we focus on a class of problems called weakly coupled MDPs (WCMDPs) and show
how one can leverage their inherent structure through a tailored RL approach. WCMDPs, often
studied in the field of operations research, consist of multiple subproblems that are independent from
each other except for a coupling constraint on the action space [24]. This type of weakly coupled
structure frequently emerges in practice, spanning domains like supply chain management [24],
recommender systems [65], online advertising [9], revenue management [53], and stochastic job
scheduling [63]. Such MDPs can quickly become intractable when RL algorithms are applied naively,
given that their state and action spaces grow exponentially with the number of subproblems [45].
One can compute an upper bound on the optimal value of a WCMDP by performing a Lagrangian relaxation on the action space coupling constraints. Importantly, the weakly coupled structure allows the
relaxed problem to be completely decomposed across the subproblems, which are significantly easier
to solve than the full MDP [24, 1]. Our goal in this paper is to devise a method that can integrate the
Lagrangian relaxation upper bounds into the widely adopted value-based RL approaches of Q-learning
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

