A Rigorous Link between Deep Ensembles and
(Variational) Bayesian Methods

Veit D. Wild∗
University of Oxford

Sahra Ghalebikesabi
University of Oxford

Dino Sejdinovic
University of Adelaide

Jeremias Knoblauch
University College London

Abstract
We establish the first mathematically rigorous link between Bayesian, variational
Bayesian, and ensemble methods. A key step towards this is to reformulate the
non-convex optimisation problem typically encountered in deep learning as a
convex optimisation in the space of probability measures. On a technical level,
our contribution amounts to studying generalised variational inference through
the lens of Wasserstein gradient flows. The result is a unified theory of various
seemingly disconnected approaches that are commonly used for uncertainty quantification in deep learning—including deep ensembles and (variational) Bayesian
methods. This offers a fresh perspective on the reasons behind the success of deep
ensembles over procedures based on standard variational inference, and allows the
derivation of new ensembling schemes with convergence guarantees. We showcase this by proposing a family of interacting deep ensembles with direct parallels
to the interactions of particle systems in thermodynamics, and use our theory to
prove the convergence of these algorithms to a well-defined global minimiser on
the space of probability measures.

1

Introduction

A major challenge in modern deep learning is the accurate quantification of uncertainty. To develop
trustworthy AI systems, it will be crucial for them to recognize their own limitations and to convey
the inherent uncertainty in the predictions. Many different approaches have been suggested for this.
In variational inference (VI), a prior distribution for the weights and biases in the neural network is
assigned and the best approximation to the Bayes posterior is selected from a class of parameterised
distributions (Graves, 2011; Blundell et al., 2015; Gal and Ghahramani, 2016; Louizos and Welling,
2017). An alternative approach is to (approximately) generate samples from the Bayes posterior via
Monte Carlo methods (Welling and Teh, 2011; Neal, 2012). Deep ensembles are another approach,
and rely on a train-and-repeat heuristic to quantify uncertainty (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017).
Much ink has been spilled over whether one can see deep ensembles as a Bayesian procedure (Wilson, 2020; Izmailov et al., 2021; D’Angelo and Fortuin, 2021) and over how these seemingly different methods might relate to each other. Building on this discussion, we shed further light on
the connections between Bayesian inference and deep ensemble techniques by taking a different
vantage point. In particular, we show that methods as different as variational inference, Langevin
sampling (Ermak, 1975), and deep ensembles can be derived from a well-studied generally infinitedimensional regularised optimisation problem over the space of probability measures (see e.g. Guedj
and Shawe-Taylor, 2019; Knoblauch et al., 2022). As a result, we find that the differences between
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
∗

veit.wild@stats.ox.ac.uk

