Disentangling Cognitive Diagnosis with Limited
Exercise Labels
Xiangzhi Chen1
Kun Zhang1

Le Wu1, 3, ∗
Fei Liu1
Lei Chen2
Richang Hong1, 3
Meng Wang1, 4

1

2
Hefei University of Technology
Tsinghua University
Institute of Dataspace, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3

{cxz.hfut, lewu.ustc}@gmail.com feiliu@mail.hfut.edu.cn
{chenlei.hfut, zhang1028kun, hongrc.hfut, eric.mengwang}@gmail.com

Abstract
Cognitive diagnosis is an important task in intelligence education, which aims at
measuring students’ proficiency on specific knowledge concepts. Given a fully
labeled exercise-concept matrix, most existing models focused on mining students’
response records for cognitive diagnosis. Despite their success, due to the huge
cost of labeling exercises, a more practical scenario is that limited exercises are
labeled with concepts. Performing cognitive diagnosis with limited exercise labels
is under-explored and remains pretty much open. In this paper, we propose Disentanglement based Cognitive Diagnosis (DCD) to address the challenges of limited
exercise labels. Specifically, we utilize students’ response records to model student
proficiency, exercise difficulty and exercise label distribution. Then, we introduce
two novel modules - group-based disentanglement and limited-labeled alignment
modules - to disentangle the factors relevant to concepts and align them with real
limited labels. Particularly, we introduce the tree-like structure of concepts with
negligible cost for group-based disentangling, as concepts of different levels exhibit different independence relationships. Extensive experiments on widely used
benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our proposed model.

1

Introduction

In the field of intelligent education systems, cognitive diagnosis (CD) [25, 26] is a fundamental and
essential task, which aims at measuring students’ proficiency on specific knowledge concepts through
the student performance prediction process. CD can serve various applications, such as computerized
adaptive testing [2], targeted training [20], and exercise recommendation [24, 14]. We show a toy
example of CD in Fig. 1-(a). The exercise-concept matrix (known as Q-matrix) is labeled to indicate
which concepts are tested in each exercise. For example, concepts k3 and k5 are tested in exercise v3 .
The CD model diagnosed that student u2 has a higher proficiency on the two concepts than that of u1
because u2 answered correctly on the exercise while u1 answered incorrectly. It’s obvious that fully
labeled Q-matrix plays an essential role in interpretability (i.e., diagnostic report) for CD models.
Most existing CD models focus on enhancing the mining process of response records to achieve
better diagnosis results. These models typically use a fully labeled Q-matrix that has been annotated
by domain experts to train their models. For example, the classical DINA model [8] assumes that
students must master all knowledge concepts associated with an exercise to answer it correctly,
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

