Unleashing the Power of Randomization in
Auditing Differentially Private ML
Krishna Pillutla1
H. Brendan McMahan1
1

Google Research

2

Galen Andrew1
Alina Oprea1,2

Northeastern University

Peter Kairouz1
Sewoong Oh1,3
3

University of Washington

Abstract
We present a rigorous methodology for auditing differentially private machine
learning algorithms by adding multiple carefully designed examples called canaries. We take a first principles approach based on three key components. First,
we introduce Lifted Differential Privacy (LiDP) which expands the definition of
differential privacy to handle randomized datasets. This gives us the freedom to design randomized canaries. Second, we audit LiDP by trying to distinguish between
the model trained with K canaries versus K − 1 canaries in the dataset, leaving
one canary out. By drawing the canaries i.i.d., LiDP can leverage the symmetry
in the design and reuse each privately trained model to run multiple statistical
tests, one for each canary. Third, we introduce novel confidence intervals that take
advantage of the multiple test statistics by adapting to the empirical higher-order
correlations. Together, this new recipe demonstrates significant improvements in
sample complexity, both theoretically and empirically, using synthetic and real data.
Further, recent advances in designing stronger canaries can be readily incorporated
into the new framework.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP), introduced in [22], has gained widespread adoption by governments,
companies, and researchers by formally ensuring plausible deniability for participating individuals.
This is achieved by guaranteeing that a curious observer of the output of a query cannot be confident
in their answer to the following binary hypothesis test: did a particular individual participate in
the dataset or not? For example, introducing sufficient randomness when training a model on a
certain dataset ensures a desired level of differential privacy. This in turn ensures that an individual’s
sensitive information cannot be inferred from the trained model with high confidence. However,
calibrating the right amount of noise can be a challenging process. It is easy to make mistakes in
implementing a DP mechanism due to intricacies involving micro-batching, sensitivity analysis,
and privacy accounting. Even with correct implementation, there are several incidents of published
DP algorithms with miscalculated privacy guarantees that falsely report higher levels of privacy
[16, 34, 40, 47, 57, 58]. Data-driven approaches to auditing a mechanism for a violation of a claimed
privacy guarantee can significantly mitigate the danger of unintentionally leaking sensitive data.
Popular approaches for auditing privacy share three common components [e.g. 31–33, 45, 69].
Conceptually, these approaches are founded on the definition of DP and involve producing counterexamples that potentially violate the DP condition. Algorithmically, this leads to the standard recipe
of injecting a single carefully designed example, referred to as a canary, and running a statistical
hypothesis test for its presence from the outcome of the mechanism. Analytically, a high-confidence
bound on the DP condition is derived by calculating the confidence intervals of the corresponding
Bernoulli random variables from n independent trials of the mechanism.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

