Robust Distributed Learning: Tight Error Bounds and
Breakdown Point under Data Heterogeneity

Youssef Allouah∗ Rachid Guerraoui

Nirupam Gupta

Rafaël Pinot

Geovani Rizk

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland

Abstract
The theory underlying robust distributed learning algorithms, designed to resist
adversarial machines, matches empirical observations when data is homogeneous.
Under data heterogeneity however, which is the norm in practical scenarios, established lower bounds on the learning error are essentially vacuous and greatly
mismatch empirical observations. This is because the heterogeneity model considered is too restrictive and does not cover basic learning tasks such as least-squares
regression. We consider in this paper a more realistic heterogeneity model, namely
(G, B)-gradient dissimilarity, and show that it covers a larger class of learning
problems than existing theory. Notably, we show that the breakdown point under
heterogeneity is lower than the classical fraction 1/2. We also prove a new lower
bound on the learning error of any distributed learning algorithm. We derive a
matching upper bound for a robust variant of distributed gradient descent, and
empirically show that our analysis reduces the gap between theory and practice.

1

Introduction

Distributed machine learning algorithms involve multiple machines (or workers) collaborating with
the help of a server to learn a common model over their collective datasets. These algorithms enable
training large and complex machine learning models, by distributing the computational burden among
several workers. They are also appealing as they allow workers to retain control over their local
training data. Conventional distributed machine learning algorithms are known to be vulnerable to
adversarial workers, which may behave unpredictably. Such behavior may result from software and
hardware bugs, data poisoning, or malicious players controlling part of the network. In the parlance of
distributed computing, such adversarial workers are referred to as Byzantine [24]. Due to the growing
influence of distributed machine learning in public applications, a significant amount of work has been
devoted to addressing the problem of robustness to Byzantine workers, e.g., see [34, 11, 2, 19, 13, 15].
A vast majority of prior work on robustness however assumes data homogeneity, i.e., local datasets are
generated from the same distribution. This questions their applicability in realistic distributed learning
scenarios with heterogeneous data, where local datasets are generated from different distributions.
Under data homogeneity, Byzantine workers can only harm the system when the other workers
compute stochastic gradient estimates, by exploiting the noise in gradient computations. This
vulnerability can be circumvented using variance-reduction schemes [19, 13, 14]. In contrast, under
data heterogeneity, variance-reduction schemes are not very helpful, as suggested by preliminary
work [12, 20, 3]. In short, data heterogeneity is still poorly understood in robust distributed learning.
In particular, existing robustness guarantees are extremely conservative, and often refuted by empirical
observations. Indeed, the heterogeneity model generally assumed is typically violated in practice and
does not even cover basic machine learning tasks such as least-squares regression.
∗

Correspondence to: Youssef Allouah <youssef.allouah@epfl.ch>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

