White-Box Transformers via Sparse Rate Reduction

Yaodong Yu1 Sam Buchanan2 Druv Pai1 Tianzhe Chu1 Ziyang Wu1 Shengbang Tong1
Benjamin D. Haeffele3 Yi Ma1
1

University of California, Berkeley

2

TTIC

3

Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
In this paper, we contend that the objective of representation learning is to compress
and transform the distribution of the data, say sets of tokens, towards a mixture of
low-dimensional Gaussian distributions supported on incoherent subspaces. The
quality of the final representation can be measured by a unified objective function
called sparse rate reduction. From this perspective, popular deep networks such
as transformers can be naturally viewed as realizing iterative schemes to optimize
this objective incrementally. Particularly, we show that the standard transformer
block can be derived from alternating optimization on complementary parts of
this objective: the multi-head self-attention operator can be viewed as a gradient
descent step to compress the token sets by minimizing their lossy coding rate, and
the subsequent multi-layer perceptron can be viewed as attempting to sparsify the
representation of the tokens. This leads to a family of white-box transformer-like
deep network architectures which are mathematically fully interpretable. Despite
their simplicity, experiments show that these networks indeed learn to optimize
the designed objective: they compress and sparsify representations of large-scale
real-world vision datasets such as ImageNet, and achieve performance very close
to thoroughly engineered transformers such as ViT. Code is at https://github.
com/Ma-Lab-Berkeley/CRATE.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning has seen tremendous empirical success in processing massive amounts
of high-dimensional and multi-modal data. Much of this success is owed to effective learning of
the data distribution and then transforming the distribution to a parsimonious, i.e. structured and
compact, representation [39, 50, 52, 62], which facilitates many downstream tasks (e.g., in vision,
classification [23, 40], recognition and segmentation [25, 38, 77], and generation [31, 65, 66]). To
this end, many models and methods have been proposed and practiced, each with its own strengths
and limitations. Here, we give several popular methods a brief accounting as context for a complete
understanding and unification that we seek in this work.
Transformer models and self-attention. Transformers [28] are one of the latest popular models
for learning a representation for high-dimensional structured data, such as text [28, 30, 37], images
[40, 75], and other types of signals [48, 57]. After the first block, which converts each data point
(such as a text corpus or image) into a set or sequence of tokens, further processing is performed
on the token sets, in a medium-agnostic manner [28, 40]. A cornerstone of the transformer model
is the so-called self-attention layer, which exploits the statistical correlations among the sequence
of tokens to refine the token representation. Transformers have been highly successful in learning
compact representations that perform well on many downstream tasks. Yet the transformer network
1

{yyu,yima}@eecs.berkeley.edu, {druvpai,chutzh,zywu,tsb}@berkeley.edu
sam@ttic.edu
3
bhaeffele@jhu.edu
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

