URL: A Representation Learning Benchmark for
Transferable Uncertainty Estimates

Michael Kirchhof
University of Tübingen
michael.kirchhof@uni-tuebingen.de

Bálint Mucsányi
University of Tübingen

Seong Joon Oh
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center

Enkelejda Kasneci
TUM University

Abstract
Representation learning has significantly driven the field to develop pretrained
models that can act as a valuable starting point when transferring to new datasets.
With the rising demand for reliable machine learning and uncertainty quantification,
there is a need for pretrained models that not only provide embeddings but also
transferable uncertainty estimates. To guide the development of such models,
we propose the Uncertainty-aware Representation Learning (URL) benchmark.
Besides the transferability of the representations, it also meaExamplessures the
zero-shot transferability of the uncertainty estimate using a novel metric. We apply
URL to evaluate eleven uncertainty quantifiers that are pretrained on ImageNet and
transferred to eight downstream datasets. We find that approaches that focus on
the uncertainty of the representation itself or estimate the prediction loss directly
outperform those that are based on the probabilities of upstream classes. Yet,
achieving transferable uncertainty quantification remains an open challenge. Our
findings indicate that it is not necessarily in conflict with traditional representation
learning goals. Code is available at https://github.com/mkirchhof/url.

1

Introduction

Pretrained models are a vital component of many machine learning applications. The driving force
behind their development has been representation learning benchmarks, e.g. Roth et al. (2020); Chen
et al. (2020): They task models to output representations e(x) of input data x that generalize across
datasets in a zero-shot manner. These pretrained representations provide a valuable starting point for
downstream applications, requiring less supervised data to be fine-tuned for specific tasks.
At the same time, uncertainty quantification remains a major challenge in the recent efforts towards
reliable machine learning (Collier et al., 2023; Tran et al., 2022). Uncertainty quantification refers to
estimating the degree of uncertainty or risk u(x) ∈ R in a model’s prediction. This is particularly
important in high-stakes applications such as medical image classification. Here, the model can
refrain from making predictions if the uncertainty, e.g., u(x) := 1 − maxy P (Y = y|x), is too high
(Zou et al., 2023; Bouvier et al., 2022). Beyond classification, uncertainty is an inherent property
of vision and language (e.g., low image resolution or ambiguous text inputs) that cannot be learned
away even with large amounts of data (Chun et al., 2022; Kendall and Gal, 2017). Consequently,
recent literature suggests representing images not as points e(x), but as probabilistic embeddings
(Kirchhof et al., 2023; Collier et al., 2023; Chun et al., 2021). Here, u(x) is the variance parameter of
a distribution around e(x) in the embedding space, representing the input’s inherent ambiguity. This
can then be utilized for uncertainty-aware retrieval.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

