LagrangeBench: A Lagrangian Fluid Mechanics
Benchmarking Suite

Artur P. Toshev∗,1
artur.toshev@tum.de
Fabian Fritz1

Stefan Adami2
1

2

Gianluca Galletti∗,1
g.galletti@tum.de
Nikolaus A. Adams1,2

Chair of Aerodynamics and Fluid Mechanics
Technical University of Munich
85748 Garching b. München, Germany

Munich Institute of Integrated Materials, Energy and Process Engineering
Technical University of Munich
85748 Garching b. München, Germany

Abstract
Machine learning has been successfully applied to grid-based PDE modeling in
various scientific applications. However, learned PDE solvers based on Lagrangian
particle discretizations, which are the preferred approach to problems with free surfaces or complex physics, remain largely unexplored. We present LagrangeBench,
the first benchmarking suite for Lagrangian particle problems, focusing on temporal
coarse-graining. In particular, our contribution is: (a) seven new fluid mechanics
datasets (four in 2D and three in 3D) generated with the Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) method including the Taylor-Green vortex, lid-driven cavity,
reverse Poiseuille flow, and dam break, each of which includes different physics
like solid wall interactions or free surface, (b) efficient JAX-based API with various
recent training strategies and three neighbor search routines, and (c) JAX implementation of established Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) like GNS and SEGNN
with baseline results. Finally, to measure the performance of learned surrogates we
go beyond established position errors and introduce physical metrics like kinetic
energy MSE and Sinkhorn distance for the particle distribution. Our codebase is
available under the URL: https://github.com/tumaer/lagrangebench.

1

Introduction

Partial differential equations (PDEs) are ubiquitous in engineering and physics as they describe the
temporal and spatial evolution of dynamical systems. However, for practical applications, a closed
analytical solution often does not exist and thus requires numerical methods like finite elements or
finite volumes. We can broadly classify such numerical methods into two distinct families: Eulerian
and Lagrangian. In Eulerian schemes (grid-based or mesh-based methods), spatially fixed finite
nodes, control volumes, cells, or elements are used to discretize the continuous space. In Lagrangian
schemes (mesh-free or particle methods), the discretization is carried out using finite material points,
often referred to as particles, which move with the local deformation of the continuum. Eulerian
and Lagrangian methods offer unique schemes with different characteristics dependent on the PDEs’
∗

equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

