No Representation Rules Them All in Category Discovery

Sagar Vaze

Andrea Vedaldi

Andrew Zisserman

Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/data/clevr4/

Abstract
In this paper we tackle the problem of Generalized Category Discovery (GCD).
Specifically, given a dataset with labelled and unlabelled images, the task is to
cluster all images in the unlabelled subset, whether or not they belong to the
labelled categories. Our first contribution is to recognize that most existing GCD
benchmarks only contain labels for a single clustering of the data, making it difficult
to ascertain whether models are using the available labels to solve the GCD task, or
simply solving an unsupervised clustering problem. As such, we present a synthetic
dataset, named ‘Clevr-4’, for category discovery. Clevr-4 contains four equally
valid partitions of the data, i.e. based on object shape, texture, color or count. To
solve the task, models are required to extrapolate the taxonomy specified by the
labelled set, rather than simply latching onto a single natural grouping of the data.
We use this dataset to demonstrate the limitations of unsupervised clustering in the
GCD setting, showing that even very strong unsupervised models fail on Clevr-4.
We further use Clevr-4 to examine the weaknesses of existing GCD algorithms, and
propose a new method which addresses these shortcomings, leveraging consistent
findings from the representation learning literature to do so. Our simple solution,
which is based on ‘mean teachers’ and termed µGCD, substantially outperforms
implemented baselines on Clevr-4. Finally, when we transfer these findings to
real data on the challenging Semantic Shift Benchmark (SSB), we find that µGCD
outperforms all prior work, setting a new state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Developing algorithms which can classify images within complex visual taxonomies, i.e. image
recognition, remains a fundamental task in machine learning [1–3]. However, most models require
these taxonomies to be pre-defined and fully specified, and are unable to construct them automatically
from data. The ability to build a taxonomy is not only desirable in many applications, but is also
considered a core aspect of human cognition [4–6]. The task of constructing a taxonomy is epitomized
by the Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) problem [7, 8]: given a dataset of images which is
labelled only in part, the goal is to label all remaining images, using categories that occur in the
labelled subset, or by identifying new ones. For instance, in a supermarket, given only labels for
‘spaghetti’ and ‘penne’ pasta products, a model must understand the concept of ‘pasta shape’ well
enough to generalize to ‘macaroni’ and ‘fusilli’. It must not cluster new images based on, for instance,
the color of the packaging, even though the latter also yields a valid, but different, taxonomy.
GCD is related to self-supervised learning [9] and unsupervised clustering [10], which can discover
some meaningful taxonomies automatically [11]. However, these cannot solve the GCD problem,
which requires recovering any of the different and incompatible taxonomies that apply to the same
data. Instead, the key to GCD is in extrapolating a taxonomy which is only partially known. In this
paper, our objective is to better understand the GCD problem and improve algorithms’ performance.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

