Linear Time Algorithms for k-means with Multi-Swap
Local Search
Junyu Huang1,2 , Qilong Feng1,2,∗ , Ziyun Huang3 , Jinhui Xu4 , Jianxin Wang1,2,5,∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University,
Changsha 410083, China
2
Xiangjiang Laboratory, Changsha 410205, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Penn State Erie,
The Behrend College
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo,
NY, USA
5
The Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Bioinformatics, Central South University,
Changsha 410083, China
junyuhuangcsu@foxmail.com, csufeng@mail.csu.edu.cn,
zxh201@psu.edu, jinhui@buffalo.edu, jxwang@mail.csu.edu.cn

Abstract
The local search methods have been widely used to solve the clustering problems.
In practice, local search algorithms for clustering problems mainly adapt the singleswap strategy, which enables them to handle large-scale datasets and achieve
linear running time in the data size. However, compared with multi-swap local
search algorithms, there is a considerable gap on the approximation ratios of the
single-swap local search algorithms. Although the current multi-swap local search
algorithms provide small constant approximation, the proposed algorithms tend to
have large polynomial running time, which cannot be used to handle large-scale
datasets. In this paper, we propose a multi-swap local search algorithm for the
k-means problem with linear running time in the data size. Given a swap size t, our
proposed algorithm can achieve a (50(1 + 1t ) + ϵ)-approximation, which improves
the current best result 509 (ICML 2019) with linear running time in the data size.
Our proposed method, compared with previous multi-swap local search algorithms,
is the first one to achieve linear running time in the data size. To obtain a more
practical algorithm for the problem with better clustering quality and running time,
we propose a sampling-based method which accelerates the process of clustering
cost update during swaps. Besides, a recombination mechanism is proposed to
find potentially better solutions. Empirical experiments show that our proposed
algorithms achieve better performances compared with branch and bound solver
(NeurIPS 2022) and other existing state-of-the-art local search algorithms on both
small and large datasets.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental problem in the field of machine learning with many real-world applications. The goal of clustering is to partition a given set of data points into different clusters according
to their similarity such that data points within the same cluster share high similarity as much as
possible. Among different objective functions, the k-means clustering aims to minimize the sum of
the squared distances between data points to their closest centers. More formally, given a set P ⊂ Rd
∗

Corresponding Authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

