Curriculum Learning with Infant Egocentric Videos

Saber Sheybani
Department of Intelligent Systems Engineering
Indiana University Bloomington
sheybani@iu.edu
Justin N. Wood
Department of Informatics
Indiana University Bloomington
woodjn@iu.edu

Himanshu Hansaria
Department of Computer Science
Indiana University Bloomington
hhansar@iu.edu

Linda B. Smith
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
Indiana University Bloomington
smith4@iu.edu

Zoran Tiganj
Department of Computer Science
Indiana University Bloomington
ztiganj@iu.edu

Abstract
Infants possess a remarkable ability to rapidly learn and process visual inputs. As an infant’s mobility
increases, so does the variety and dynamics of their visual inputs. Is this change in the properties
of the visual inputs beneficial or even critical for the proper development of the visual system? To
address this question, we used video recordings from infants wearing head-mounted cameras to
train a variety of self-supervised learning models. Critically, we separated the infant data by age
group and evaluated the importance of training with a curriculum aligned with developmental order.
We found that initiating learning with the data from the youngest age group provided the strongest
learning signal and led to the best learning outcomes in terms of downstream task performance. We
then showed that the benefits of the data from the youngest age group are due to the slowness and
simplicity of the visual experience. The results provide strong empirical evidence for the importance
of the properties of the early infant experience and developmental progression in training. More
broadly, our approach and findings take a noteworthy step towards reverse engineering the learning
mechanisms in newborn brains using image-computable models from artificial intelligence.

1

Introduction

A common, implicit assumption in the machine-learning literature is that at the massive scale of
daily life, the world presents the same visual statistics to all perceivers. Many researchers therefore
believe that it will be possible to mimic biological learning through incremental statistical learning
performed over large datasets. However, this assumption may be incorrect because the input received
by the visual system depends on the momentary spatial relation of the eyes to the world and is thus
dependent on the behavior and goals of the perceiver. Over the first year of life, infants’ motor abilities,
behaviors, and interests change substantially [Lee and Galloway, 2012, Largo and Kakebeeke, 1994],
producing gradually changing datasets for learning. A growing literature on infant egocentric vision
also indicates that the semantic content of visual information (faces, hands, objects, scenes) changes
systematically with development over the first year post birth as a product of changing motor skills
and interests [Smith et al., 2018, Jayaraman et al., 2017, Kretch et al., 2014, Jayaraman et al., 2015].
Experimental studies provide converging evidence of systematic changes in the types of semantic
content that infants prefer – and choose – to look at [Spelke, 1985, Frank et al., 2014, 2009, Kwon
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

