What Distributions are Robust to Indiscriminate
Poisoning Attacks for Linear Learners?

Fnu Suya1 Xiao Zhang2 Yuan Tian3 David Evans1
University of Virginia 2 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
3
University California Los Angeles
suya@virginia.edu, xiao.zhang@cispa.de, yuant@ucla.edu, evans@virginia.edu
1

Abstract
We study indiscriminate poisoning for linear learners where an adversary injects a
few crafted examples into the training data with the goal of forcing the induced
model to incur higher test error. Inspired by the observation that linear learners on
some datasets are able to resist the best known attacks even without any defenses,
we further investigate whether datasets can be inherently robust to indiscriminate
poisoning attacks for linear learners. For theoretical Gaussian distributions, we
rigorously characterize the behavior of an optimal poisoning attack, defined as the
poisoning strategy that attains the maximum risk of the induced model at a given
poisoning budget. Our results prove that linear learners can indeed be robust to
indiscriminate poisoning if the class-wise data distributions are well-separated with
low variance and the size of the constraint set containing all permissible poisoning
points is also small. These findings largely explain the drastic variation in empirical
attack performance of the state-of-the-art poisoning attacks on linear learners across
benchmark datasets, making an important initial step towards understanding the
underlying reasons some learning tasks are vulnerable to data poisoning attacks.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models, especially current large-scale models, require large amounts of labeled
training data, which are often collected from untrusted third parties [6]. Training models on these
potentially malicious data poses security risks. A typical application is in spam filtering, where the
spam detector is trained using data (i.e., emails) that are generated by users with labels provided often
implicitly by user actions. In this setting, spammers can generate spam messages that inject benign
words likely to occur in spam emails such that models trained on these spam messages will incur
significant drops in filtering accuracy as benign and malicious messages become indistinguishable [37,
20]. These kinds of attacks are known as poisoning attacks. In a poisoning attack, the attacker injects
a relatively small number of crafted examples into the original training set such that the resulting
trained model (known as the poisoned model) performs in a way that satisfies certain attacker goals.
One commonly studied poisoning attacks in the literature are indiscriminate poisoning attacks [4, 54,
35, 45, 5, 46, 25, 31, 10], in which the attackers aim to let induced models incur larger test errors
compared to the model trained on a clean dataset. Other poisoning goals, including targeted [42, 56,
24, 21, 18] and subpopulation [22, 46] attacks, are also worth studying and may correspond to more
realistic attack goals. We focus on indiscriminate poisoning attacks as these attacks interfere with the
fundamental statistical properties of the learning algorithm [45, 25], but include a summary of prior
work on understanding limits of poisoning attacks in other settings in the related work section.
Indiscriminate poisoning attack methods have been developed that achieve empirically strong poisoning attacks in many settings [45, 46, 25, 31], but these works do not explain why the proposed
attacks are sometimes ineffective. In addition, the evaluations of these attacks can be deficient in
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

