Automated Classification of Model Errors on ImageNet

Momchil Peychev∗, Mark Niklas Müller∗, Marc Fischer, Martin Vechev
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{momchil.peychev, mark.mueller, marc.fischer, martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
While the ImageNet dataset has been driving computer vision research over the
past decade, significant label noise and ambiguity have made top-1 accuracy
an insufficient measure of further progress. To address this, new label-sets and
evaluation protocols have been proposed for ImageNet showing that state-of-the-art
models already achieve over 95% accuracy and shifting the focus on investigating
why the remaining errors persist. Recent work in this direction employed a panel of
experts to manually categorize all remaining classification errors for two selected
models. However, this process is time-consuming, prone to inconsistencies, and
requires trained experts, making it unsuitable for regular model evaluation thus
limiting its utility. To overcome these limitations, we propose the first automated
error classification framework, a valuable tool to study how modeling choices affect
error distributions. We use our framework to comprehensively evaluate the error
distribution of over 900 models. Perhaps surprisingly, we find that across model
architectures, scales, and pre-training corpora, top-1 accuracy is a strong predictor
for the portion of all error types. In particular, we observe that the portion of severe
errors drops significantly with top-1 accuracy indicating that, while it underreports
a model’s true performance, it remains a valuable performance metric. We release
all our code at https://github.com/eth-sri/automated-error-analysis.

1

Introduction

I MAGE N ET (Deng et al., 2009; Russakovsky et al., 2015) has established itself as one of the most
influential and widely used datasets in computer vision, driving progress in object recognition
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012), object detection (Tan et al., 2020), and image segmentation (Minaee
et al., 2022). As state-of-the-art models have come close to, and by some metrics exceeded, human
performance, the significance of further progress in top-1 and top-5 accuracy has, been questioned in
the face of label errors and systematic biases (Beyer et al., 2020; Tsipras et al., 2020).
The most severe such bias is the lack of multi-label annotations in the original I MAGE N ET dataset,
with recent studies finding that roughly a fifth of images show multiple entities. While state-of-the-art
models have learned to exploit labeling biasses on these images (Tsipras et al., 2020), best practices
have shifted to reporting multi-label accuracy (MLA) computed using new multi-label annotations
(Beyer et al., 2020; Shankar et al., 2020). Further, many I MAGE N ET and especially organism classes,
are hard to distinguish even by trained humans (Horn et al., 2015; Northcutt et al., 2021a; Lee et al.,
2017), leading to persistent labeling errors.
In the face of these challenges and with state-of-the-art models exceeding 95% MLA, the focus has
increasingly shifted towards analyzing and understanding the remaining model errors instead of
blindly pursuing improvements in headline accuracy numbers. To this end, Vasudevan et al. (2022)
review all remaining errors of two state-of-the-art models using a panel of experts and classify them
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

