Reinforcement Learning with
Fast and Forgetful Memory

Steven Morad
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
sm2558@cam.ac.uk

Ryan Kortvelesy
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
rk627@cam.ac.uk

Stephan Liwicki
Toshiba Europe Ltd.
Cambridge, UK
stephan.liwicki@toshiba.eu

Amanda Prorok
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
asp45@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Nearly all real world tasks are inherently partially observable, necessitating the use
of memory in Reinforcement Learning (RL). Most model-free approaches summarize the trajectory into a latent Markov state using memory models borrowed
from Supervised Learning (SL), even though RL tends to exhibit different training and efficiency characteristics. Addressing this discrepancy, we introduce Fast
and Forgetful Memory, an algorithm-agnostic memory model designed specifically for RL. Our approach constrains the model search space via strong structural
priors inspired by computational psychology. It is a drop-in replacement for recurrent neural networks (RNNs) in recurrent RL algorithms, achieving greater
reward than RNNs across various recurrent benchmarks and algorithms without
changing any hyperparameters. Moreover, Fast and Forgetful Memory exhibits
training speeds two orders of magnitude faster than RNNs, attributed to its logarithmic time and linear space complexity. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/proroklab/ffm.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) was originally designed to solve Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
[Sutton and Barto, 2018], but many real world tasks violate the Markov property, confining superhuman RL agents to simulators. When MDPs produce noisy or incomplete observations, they
become Partially Observable MDPs (POMDPs). Using memory, we can summarize the trajectory
into a Markov state estimate, extending convergence guarantees from traditional RL approaches to
POMDPs [Kaelbling et al., 1998].
In model-free RL, there are two main approaches to modeling memory: (1) RL-specific architectures that explicitly model a probabilistic belief over Markov states [Kaelbling et al., 1998] and (2)
general-purpose models such as RNNs or transformers that distill the trajectory into a fixed-size
latent Markov state. Ni et al. [2022] and Yang and Nguyen [2021] reveal that with suitable hyperparameters, general-purpose memory often outperforms more specialized belief-based memory.
Most applications of memory to RL tend to follow Hausknecht and Stone [2015], using RNNs like
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) or the Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) to summarize the trajectory,
with other works evaluating transformers, and finding them tricky and data-hungry to train [Parisotto
et al., 2020]. Morad et al. [2023] evaluate a large collection of recent memory models across many
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

