Post-processing Private Synthetic Data
for Improving Utility on Selected Measures

Hao Wang, Shivchander Sudalairaj, John Henning,
Kristjan Greenewald, Akash Srivastava∗
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Existing private synthetic data generation algorithms are agnostic to downstream
tasks. However, end users may have specific requirements that the synthetic data
must satisfy. Failure to meet these requirements could significantly reduce the
utility of the data for downstream use. We introduce a post-processing technique
that improves the utility of the synthetic data with respect to measures selected by
the end user, while preserving strong privacy guarantees and dataset quality. Our
technique involves resampling from the synthetic data to filter out samples that
do not meet the selected utility measures, using an efficient stochastic first-order
algorithm to find optimal resampling weights. Through comprehensive numerical
experiments, we demonstrate that our approach consistently improves the utility
of synthetic data across multiple benchmark datasets and state-of-the-art synthetic
data generation algorithms.

1

Introduction

The advancement of machine learning (ML) techniques relies on large amounts of training data.
However, data collection also poses a significant risk of exposing private information. In recent years,
several instances of privacy breaches have surfaced [NS06, Con18], making it urgent to find a reliable
way to share data. Today, the de facto standard for privacy protection is differential privacy (DP)
[DR14]. DP ensures that useful information of a private dataset can be released while simultaneously
preventing adversaries from identifying individuals’ personal data. DP has been utilized effectively in
a wide variety of settings, by actors including the US Census [Abo18] and various large corporations
[App17, Fac20, RE19, HBMAL19, IBM23].
Generating private synthetic data is a crucial application of DP. It allows data scientists to train
their ML models on the synthetic data while preserving a certain level of utility when deploying
these models on real test data. The U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has
emphasized its significance by hosting a series of competitions [RTMT21, MMS21]. There is also
significant work introducing new DP synthetic data generation mechanisms, including GAN-based
[XLW+ 18, BJWW+ 19, JYVDS19, TWB+ 19], marginal-based [ZCP+ 17, MSM19, MMS21], and
workload-based [VTB+ 20, ABK+ 21, LVW21, MMSM22, VAA+ 22] methods. Existing methods
for generating private synthetic data are task-agnostic—they do not take into account the downstream
use cases of the synthetic data in the data generation process. However, end users often have specific
requirements for synthetic datasets to be successfully analyzed by their existing data science pipelines,
which are often well-established, well-understood, heavily vetted, and difficult or expensive to change.
Unfortunately, synthetic data generated by existing methods may not always meet these requirements,
resulting in reduced utility for their downstream use cases. This raises a fundamental question:
∗

email: {hao, shiv.sr, john.l.henning, kristjan.h.greenewald, akash.srivastava}@ibm.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

