Brain Dissection: fMRI-trained Networks Reveal
Spatial Selectivity in the Processing of Natural Images

Gabriel H. Sarch

Michael J. Tarr

Katerina Fragkiadaki∗

Leila Wehbe∗

Carnegie Mellon University
{gsarch,mt01}@andrew.cmu.edu,katef@cs.cmu.edu,lwehbe@cmu.edu
∗

Equal advising

brain-dissection.github.io

Abstract
The alignment between deep neural network (DNN) features and cortical responses
currently provides the most accurate quantitative explanation for higher visual
areas [1, 2, 3, 4]. At the same time, these model features have been critiqued as
uninterpretable explanations, trading one black box (the human brain) for another
(a neural network). In this paper, we train networks to directly predict, from scratch,
brain responses to images from a large-scale dataset of natural scenes [5]. We then
use “network dissection” [6], an explainable AI technique used for enhancing neural
network interpretability by identifying and localizing the most significant features
in images for individual units of a trained network, and which has been used to
study category selectivity in the human brain [7]. We adapt this approach to create
a hypothesis-neutral model that is then used to explore the tuning properties of
specific visual regions beyond category selectivity, which we call “brain dissection”.
We use brain dissection to examine a range of ecologically important, intermediate
properties, including depth, surface normals, curvature, and object relations across
sub-regions of the parietal, lateral, and ventral visual streams, and scene-selective
regions. Our findings reveal distinct preferences in brain regions for interpreting
visual scenes, with ventro-lateral areas favoring closer and curvier features, medial
and parietal areas opting for more varied and flatter 3D elements, and the parietal
region uniquely preferring spatial relations. Scene-selective regions exhibit varied
preferences, as the retrosplenial complex prefers distant and outdoor features,
while the occipital and parahippocampal place areas favor proximity, verticality,
and in the case of the OPA, indoor elements. Such findings show the potential
of using explainable AI to uncover spatial feature selectivity across the visual
cortex, contributing to a deeper, more fine-grained understanding of the functional
characteristics of human visual cortex when viewing natural scenes.

1

Introduction

Humans possess an extraordinary ability to process and interpret visual information; however, our
understanding of how such information is represented and processed within the brain remains
incomplete. While advances in modeling visual cortex have been made through the use of abstract
stimuli and the study of evoked neuronal responses, these efforts have primarily focused on low-level
visual features [8] or high-level categorical selectivity [9]. In reality, the brain utilizes numerous
ecologically-relevant intermediate features to perceive the world, such as 3D information, physical
relationships, and object properties [10, 11].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

