Text Alignment Is An Efficient Unified Model
for Massive NLP Tasks
Yuheng Zha∗ Yichi Yang∗ Ruichen Li Zhiting Hu
UC San Diego
{yzha, yiy067, rul014, zhh019}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs), typically designed as a function of next-word
prediction, have excelled across extensive NLP tasks. Despite the generality,
next-word prediction is often not an efficient formulation for many of the tasks,
demanding an extreme scale of model parameters (10s or 100s of billions) and
sometimes yielding suboptimal performance. In practice, it is often desirable to
build more efficient models—despite being less versatile, they still apply to a
substantial subset of problems, delivering on par or even superior performance
with much smaller model sizes. In this paper, we propose text alignment as an
efficient unified model for a wide range of crucial tasks involving text entailment,
similarity, question answering (and answerability), factual consistency, and so
forth. Given a pair of texts, the model measures the degree of alignment between
their information. We instantiate an alignment model (A LIGN) through lightweight
finetuning of RoBERTa (355M parameters) using 5.9M examples from 28 datasets.
Despite its compact size, extensive experiments show the model’s efficiency and
strong performance: (1) On over 20 datasets of aforementioned diverse tasks,
the model matches or surpasses FLAN-T5 models that have around 2x or 10x
more parameters; the single unified model also outperforms task-specific models
finetuned on individual datasets; (2) When applied to evaluate factual consistency
of language generation on 23 datasets, our model improves over various baselines,
including the much larger GPT-3.5 (ChatGPT) and sometimes even GPT-4; (3)
The lightweight model can also serve as an add-on component for LLMs such as
GPT-3.5 in question answering tasks, improving the average exact match (EM)
score by 17.94 and F1 score by 15.05 through identifying unanswerable questions.2

1

Introduction

Recent large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional generalizability in a wide
range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks. As the underlying formulation of these LLMs,
next-word prediction is proven to be a general function applicable to diverse language problems.
However, it is often not being an efficient solution for many tasks. LLMs often need to scale up to
over tens of billions of parameters to achieve meaningful performance [1], with popular models like
GPT-3 boasting as many as 175B parameters [2]. Additionally, even with their extreme scale, LLMs
sometimes still find themselves outperformed by smaller models. For example, ChatGPT/GPT-3.5
falls behind existing finetuned baselines on most classical natural language understanding tasks [3].
As a result, in many cases it is desirable to navigate the spectrum of generality-vs-efficiency tradeoff,
for example, by developing smaller but general-purpose models that excel in a substantial subset of
tasks. Despite being less versatile than the extreme-scale LLMs, these models are more efficient and
∗
2

Equal contribution.
Code is made available at https://github.com/yuh-zha/Align

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

