Predict, Refine, Synthesize: Self-Guiding Diffusion
Models for Probabilistic Time Series Forecasting

Marcel Kollovieh2∗ † Abdul Fatir Ansari1∗ Michael Bohlke-Schneider1
Jasper Zschiegner1
1

AWS AI Labs

2

Hao Wang1

Yuyang Wang1

Technical University of Munich

Correspondence to: ansarnd@amazon.de

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved state-of-the-art performance in generative modeling tasks across various domains. Prior works on time series diffusion models have primarily focused on developing conditional models tailored to specific
forecasting or imputation tasks. In this work, we explore the potential of taskagnostic, unconditional diffusion models for several time series applications. We
propose TSDiff, an unconditionally-trained diffusion model for time series. Our
proposed self-guidance mechanism enables conditioning TSDiff for downstream
tasks during inference, without requiring auxiliary networks or altering the training
procedure. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on three different
time series tasks: forecasting, refinement, and synthetic data generation. First, we
show that TSDiff is competitive with several task-specific conditional forecasting
methods (predict). Second, we leverage the learned implicit probability density
of TSDiff to iteratively refine the predictions of base forecasters with reduced
computational overhead over reverse diffusion (refine). Notably, the generative
performance of the model remains intact — downstream forecasters trained on
synthetic samples from TSDiff outperform forecasters that are trained on samples from other state-of-the-art generative time series models, occasionally even
outperforming models trained on real data (synthesize).

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting informs key business decisions [27], for example in finance [47], renewable
energy [56], and healthcare [7]. Recently, deep learning-based models have been successfully applied
to the problem of time series forecasting [46, 31, 5]. Instantiations of these methods use, among other
techniques, autoregressive modeling [46, 42], sequence-to-sequence modeling [54], and normalizing
flows [43, 8]. These techniques view forecasting as the problem of conditional generative modeling:
generate the future, conditioned on the past.
Diffusion models [48, 20] have shown outstanding performance on generative tasks across various
domains [10, 28, 30, 36, 44] and have quickly become the framework of choice for generative
modeling. Recent studies used conditional diffusion models for time series forecasting and imputation
tasks [44, 52, 1, 6]. However, these models are task specific, i.e., their applicability is limited to the
specific imputation or forecasting task they have been trained on. Consequently, they also forego the
desirable unconditional generative capabilities of diffusion models.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work conducted during an internship at Amazon.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

