Black-Box Differential Privacy for Interactive ML

Haim Kaplan∗

Yishay Mansour†

Shay Moran‡

Kobbi Nissim§

Uri Stemmer¶

Abstract
In this work we revisit an interactive variant of joint differential privacy, recently
introduced by Naor et al. [2023], and generalize it towards handling online processes in which existing privacy definitions seem too restrictive. We study basic
properties of this definition and demonstrate that it satisfies (suitable variants) of
group privacy, composition, and post processing.
In order to demonstrate the advantages of this privacy definition compared to
traditional forms of differential privacy, we consider the basic setting of online
classification. We show that any (possibly non-private) learning rule can be effectively transformed to a private learning rule with only a polynomial overhead in
the mistake bound. This demonstrates a stark difference with traditional forms
of differential privacy, such as the one studied by Golowich and Livni [2021],
where only a double exponential overhead in the mistake bound is known (via an
information theoretic upper bound).

1

Introduction

In this work we study privacy of interactive machine learning processes. As a motivating story,
consider a chatbot that continuously improves itself by learning from the conversations it conducts
with users. As these conversations might contain sensitive information, we would like to provide
privacy guarantees to the users, in the sense that the content of their conversations with the chatbot
would not leak. This setting fleshes out the following two requirements.
(1) Clearly, the answers given by the chatbot to user ui must depend on the queries made by user
ui . For example, the chatbot should provide different answers when asked by user ui for the
weather forecast in Antarctica, and when asked by ui for a pasta recipe.
This is in contrast to the plain formulation of differential privacy, where it is required that all of
the mechanism outputs would be (almost) independent of any single user input. Therefore, the
privacy requirement we are aiming for is that the conversation of user ui will remain “hidden”
from other users, and would not leak through the other users’ interactions with the chatbot.
Moreover, this should remain true even if a “privacy attacker” (aiming to extract information
about the conversation user ui had) conducts many different conversations with the chatbot.
(2) The interaction with the chatbot is, by design, interactive and adaptive, as it aims to conduct
dialogues with the users. This allows the privacy attacker (mentioned above) to choose its
queries to the chatbot adaptively. Privacy, hence, needs to be preserved even in the presence of
adaptive attackers.
While each of these two requirements was studied in isolation, to the best of our knowledge, they have
not been (explicitly) unified into a combined privacy framework. Requirement (1) was formalized
∗

Tel Aviv University and Google Research. haimk@tau.ac.il.
Tel Aviv University and Google Research. mansour.yishay@gmail.com.
‡
Technion and Google Research. smoran@technion.ac.il.
§
Georgetown University. kobbi.nissim@georgetown.edu.
¶
Tel Aviv University and Google Research. u@uri.co.il.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

