Exposing Attention Glitches with
Flip-Flop Language Modeling

Bingbin Liu1
1

Jordan T. Ash2 Surbhi Goel3 Akshay Krishnamurthy2 Cyril Zhang2

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Microsoft Research NYC

3

University of Pennsylvania

bingbinl@cs.cmu.edu, surbhig@cis.upenn.edu,
{ash.jordan, akshaykr, cyrilzhang}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Why do large language models sometimes output factual inaccuracies and exhibit
erroneous reasoning? The brittleness of these models, particularly when executing
long chains of reasoning, currently seems to be an inevitable price to pay for
their advanced capabilities of coherently synthesizing knowledge, pragmatics, and
abstract thought. Towards making sense of this fundamentally unsolved problem,
this work identifies and analyzes the phenomenon of attention glitches, in which
the Transformer architecture’s inductive biases intermittently fail to capture robust
reasoning. To isolate the issue, we introduce flip-flop language modeling (FFLM),
a parametric family of synthetic benchmarks designed to probe the extrapolative
behavior of neural language models. This simple generative task requires a model to
copy binary symbols over long-range dependencies, ignoring the tokens in between.
We find that Transformer FFLMs suffer from a long tail of sporadic reasoning
errors, some of which we can eliminate using various regularization techniques.
Our preliminary mechanistic analyses show why the remaining errors may be very
difficult to diagnose and resolve. We hypothesize that attention glitches account
for (some of) the closed-domain hallucinations in natural LLMs.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in scale have yielded large language models (LLMs) with extraordinary proficiency in nuanced reasoning with factual knowledge. Despite these achievements, LLMs are known to
produce incorrect outputs, often referred to colloquially as “hallucinations” or “distractions” (Ji et al.,
2023). Generally, hallucinations refer to the phenomenon that a model’s outputs are syntactically
and grammatically accurate but factually incorrect. There are various types of hallucinations, and the
focus of this work is the “closed-domain” variety (Saparov and He, 2022; OpenAI, 2023), where the
model predictions contain factually incorrect or made-up information according to a given context,
regardless of their correctness in the real world.
Perhaps surprisingly, such hallucinations can be observed even on simple algorithmic reasoning tasks.
As a warmup, consider the queries shown in Figure 1 (and Appendix B.1), where we prompt LLMs
to solve addition problems of various lengths. The responses simultaneously illustrate the following:
1. Nontrivial algorithmic generalization: In cases where the models succeed, it is unlikely that these
exact numerical sequences appeared in the training data. To correctly output the first digit of
the answer, the LLM must resolve a long dependency chain which generally depends on every
digit in the input. Somewhere within these networks’ internal representations, implementations
of addition algorithms have emerged.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

