Personalized Dictionary Learning for
Heterogeneous Datasets

Geyu Liang
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
lianggy@umich.edu

Naichen Shi
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
naichens@umich.edu

Raed Al Kontar
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
alkontar@umich.edu

Salar Fattahi
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
fattahi@umich.edu

Abstract
We introduce a relevant yet challenging problem named Personalized Dictionary
Learning (PerDL), where the goal is to learn sparse linear representations from
heterogeneous datasets that share some commonality. In PerDL, we model each
dataset’s shared and unique features as global and local dictionaries. Challenges
for PerDL not only are inherited from classical dictionary learning (DL), but also
arise due to the unknown nature of the shared and unique features. In this paper, we
rigorously formulate this problem and provide conditions under which the global
and local dictionaries can be provably disentangled. Under these conditions, we
provide a meta-algorithm called Personalized Matching and Averaging (PerMA)
that can recover both global and local dictionaries from heterogeneous datasets.
PerMA is highly efficient; it converges to the ground truth at a linear rate under
suitable conditions. Moreover, it automatically borrows strength from strong
learners to improve the prediction of weak learners. As a general framework
for extracting global and local dictionaries, we show the application of PerDL
in different learning tasks, such as training with imbalanced datasets and video
surveillance.

1

Introduction

Given a set of n signals Y = [y1 , . . . , yn ] ∈ Rd×n , dictionary learning (DL) aims to find a dictionary
D ∈ Rd×r and a corresponding code X = [x1 , . . . , xn ] ∈ Rr×n such that: (1) each data sample
yi can be written as yi = Dxi for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, and (2) the code X has as few nonzero elements as
possible. The columns of the dictionary D, also known as atoms, encode the “common features”
whose linear combinations form the data samples. A typical approach to solve DL is via the following
optimization problem:
min ∥Y − DX∥2F + λ∥X∥ℓq ,
(DL)
X,D

Here ∥ · ∥ℓq is often modeled as a ℓ1 -norm (Arora et al., 2015; Agarwal et al., 2016) or ℓ0 -(pseudo)norm (Spielman et al., 2012; Liang et al., 2022) and has the role of promoting sparsity in the
estimated sparse code. Due to its effective feature extraction and representation, DL has found
immense applications in data analytics, with applications ranging from clustering and classification
(Ramirez et al. (2010); Tošić and Frossard (2011)), to image denoising (Li et al. (2011)), to document
detection(Kasiviswanathan et al. (2012)), to medical imaging (Zhao et al. (2021)), and to many others.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

