Residual Q-Learning: Offline and Online Policy
Customization without Value
Chenran Li1∗, Chen Tang1∗, Haruki Nishimura2 , Jean Mercat2 ,
Masayoshi Tomizuka1 , Wei Zhan1
1
University of California Berkeley, 2 Toyota Research Institute, USA
{chenran_li,chen_tang,tomizuka,wzhan}@berkeley.edu
{haruki.nishimura,jean.mercat}@tri.global

Abstract
Imitation Learning (IL) is a widely used framework for learning imitative behavior
from demonstrations. It is especially appealing for solving complex real-world
tasks where handcrafting reward function is difficult, or when the goal is to mimic
human expert behavior. However, the learned imitative policy can only follow
the behavior in the demonstration. When applying the imitative policy, we may
need to customize the policy behavior to meet different requirements coming from
diverse downstream tasks. Meanwhile, we still want the customized policy to
maintain its imitative nature. To this end, we formulate a new problem setting
called policy customization. It defines the learning task as training a policy that
inherits the characteristics of the prior policy while satisfying some additional
requirements imposed by a target downstream task. We propose a novel and
principled approach to interpret and determine the trade-off between the two task
objectives. Specifically, we formulate the customization problem as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) with a reward function that combines 1) the inherent
reward of the demonstration; and 2) the add-on reward specified by the downstream
task. We propose a novel framework, Residual Q-learning (RQL), which can solve
the formulated MDP by leveraging the prior policy without knowing the inherent
reward or value function of the prior policy. We derive a family of residual Qlearning algorithms that can realize offline and online policy customization, and
show that the proposed algorithms can effectively accomplish policy customization
tasks in various environments. Demo videos and code are available on our website:
https://sites.google.com/view/residualq-learning.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) is a widely used framework for learning imitative behavior from demonstrations. It is especially appealing for solving complicated real-world tasks where handcrafting reward
function is difficult, or when the goal is to mimic expert behavior. For instance, IL has been widely
studied for synthesizing human-like agents from large-scale human demonstrations on challenging
real-world tasks, such as autonomous driving [4, 7, 2] and robot manipulation [59, 37, 39]. However,
when applying the imitative policy in open real-world scenarios, we may encounter different circumstances that impose diverse requirements beyond merely following the behavior in the demonstration,
such as reaching particular goals [45], enforcing safety [36], or complying with certain behavior
preferences [61]. In this case, we need to customize the imitative policy to meet those task-specific
objectives. Meanwhile, in many applications, we may still want the customized policy to possess
some inherent characteristics of the expert demonstration (e.g., human-like).
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

