Undirected Probabilistic Model for Tensor
Decomposition

Zerui Tao1,2 Toshihisa Tanaka1,2 Qibin Zhao2,1∗
zerui.tao@riken.jp tanakat@cc.tuat.ac.jp qibin.zhao@riken.jp
1
Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology 2 RIKEN AIP

Abstract
Tensor decompositions (TDs) serve as a powerful tool for analyzing multiway data.
Traditional TDs incorporate prior knowledge about the data into the model, such
as a directed generative process from latent factors to observations. In practice,
selecting proper structural or distributional assumptions beforehand is crucial for
obtaining a promising TD representation. However, since such prior knowledge is
typically unavailable in real-world applications, choosing an appropriate TD model
can be challenging. This paper aims to address this issue by introducing a flexible
TD framework that discards the structural and distributional assumptions, in order
to learn as much information from the data. Specifically, we construct a TD model
that captures the joint probability of the data and latent tensor factors through a deep
energy-based model (EBM). Neural networks are then employed to parameterize
the joint energy function of tensor factors and tensor entries. The flexibility of EBM
and neural networks enables the learning of underlying structures and distributions.
In addition, by designing the energy function, our model unifies the learning
process of different types of tensors, such as static tensors and dynamic tensors
with time stamps. The resulting model presents a doubly intractable nature due to
the presence of latent tensor factors and the unnormalized probability function. To
efficiently train the model, we derive a variational upper bound of the conditional
noise-contrastive estimation objective that learns the unnormalized joint probability
by distinguishing data from conditional noises. We show advantages of our model
on both synthetic and several real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Tensor decompositions (TDs) serve as powerful tools for analyzing high-order and high-dimensional
data, aiming to capture the inter-dependencies among different modes by utilizing multiple latent
factors. TDs have demonstrated remarkable success in various machine learning tasks, including
data imputation [53, 9], factor analysis [4], time-series forecasting [27], model compression [28, 41],
generative models [10, 20] among others.
Existing TDs typically incorporate predefined directed graphical models into the generative process.
These models specify the priors of latent factors and the conditional probabilities of observations,
following specific contraction rules associated with the latent factors. Traditional contraction rules
predominantly employ multi-linear products, like CP [15], Tucker [42], tensor train [29] and other
variants [19, 6]. However, selecting an appropriate contraction rule for specific datasets is often challenging in real-world applications. Recent research, known as tensor network structure search [TNSS,
22, 23], has demonstrated that selecting an appropriate TN contraction rule significantly enhances
the factorization performance. Another promising approach involves learning non-linear mappings
from the data, utilizing techniques like nonparametric models [5, 45, 53] and deep neural networks
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

