Exact Optimality of Communication-Privacy-Utility
Tradeoffs in Distributed Mean Estimation
Berivan Isik
Stanford University
berivan.isik@stanford.edu
Ayfer Ozgur
Stanford University
aozgur@stanford.edu

Tsachy Weissman
Stanford University
tsachy@stanford.edu

Wei-Ning Chen
Stanford University
wnchen@stanford.edu
Albert No
Hongik University
albertno@hongik.ac.kr

Abstract
We study the mean estimation problem under communication and local differential
privacy constraints. While previous work has proposed order-optimal algorithms
for the same problem (i.e., asymptotically optimal as we spend more bits), exact
optimality (in the non-asymptotic setting) still has not been achieved. In this work,
we take a step towards characterizing the exact-optimal approach in the presence of
shared randomness (a random variable shared between the server and the user) and
identify several conditions for exact optimality. We prove that one of the conditions
is to utilize a rotationally symmetric shared random codebook. Based on this, we
propose a randomization mechanism where the codebook is a randomly rotated
simplex – satisfying the properties of the exact-optimal codebook. The proposed
mechanism is based on a k-closest encoding which we prove to be exact-optimal
for the randomly rotated simplex codebook.

1

Introduction

The distributed mean estimation problem has attracted attention from the machine learning community
as it is a canonical statistical formulation for many stochastic optimization problems such as distributed SGD [1, 3, 31, 32] and federated learning [33, 34]. As these tasks require data collection from
the users, the mean estimation problem has often been studied under privacy constraints to protect
users’ sensitive information. More specifically, several works [2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 29, 35] have analyzed and
improved the tradeoff between the utility and ε-local differential privacy (ε-LDP) – the predominant
paradigm in privacy mechanisms, which guarantees that an adversary cannot distinguish the user data
from the outcome of the privacy mechanism [10, 24]. Among them, [4, 8, 9] developed algorithms
that
optimal, achieving an optimal mean squared error (MSE) proportional to
 are asymptotically

d
Θ n min(ε,ε
,
where
n
is the number of users, and d is the input dimension. Later, [7] proved the
2)
corresponding lower bounds that hold for all privacy regimes. However, only PrivUnit [4] enjoys
exact optimality among a large family of mechanisms, as proved by [2], while others provide only
order optimality and their performance in practice depends heavily on the constant factors.
Another important consideration in the applications of mean estimation is the communication cost
during user data collection. For instance, in federated learning, clients need to send overparameterized
machine learning models at every round, which becomes a significant bottleneck due to limited
resources and bandwidth available to the clients [22, 25, 28]. This has motivated extensive research on
mean estimation [31, 34, 38] and distributed SGD [1, 3, 13, 26, 37] under communication constraints;
and communication-efficient federated learning [17, 18, 21, 33].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

