POMDP Planning for Object Search in Partially
Unknown Environment
Yongbo Chen∗
School of Computing,
Australian National University
Canberra, ACT, 2601, Australia
Yongbo.Chen@anu.edu.au

Hanna Kurniawati
School of Computing,
Australian National University
Canberra, ACT, 2601, Australia
Hanna.Kurniawati@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Efficiently searching for target objects in complex environments that contain
various types of furniture, such as shelves, tables, and beds, is crucial for
mobile robots, but it poses significant challenges due to various factors
such as localization errors, limited field of view, and visual occlusion. To
address this problem, we propose a Partially Observable Markov Decision
Process (POMDP) formulation with a growing state space for object search
in a 3D region. We solve this POMDP by carefully designing a perception
module and developing a planning algorithm, called Growing Partially
Observable Monte-Carlo Planning (GPOMCP), based on online MonteCarlo tree search and belief tree reuse with a novel upper confidence bound.
We have demonstrated that belief tree reuse is reasonable and achieves
good performance when the belief differences are limited. Additionally, we
introduce a guessed target object with an updating grid world to guide the
search in the information-less and reward-less cases, like the absence of any
detected objects. We tested our approach using Gazebo simulations on four
scenarios of target finding in a realistic indoor living environment with the
Fetch robot simulator. Compared to the baseline approaches, which are
based on POMCP, our results indicate that our approach enables the robot
to find the target object with a higher success rate faster while using the
same computational requirements.

1

Introduction

Finding an object in a partially known and cluttered environment is critical for many robotics
tasks. For instance, a robot operating in human environments, such as our homes may need
to find mugs, glasses, or books that may be placed on top of various furniture like beds,
tables, or chairs and partially occluded by other objects. While the positions of the furniture
are commonly known, the positions of the smaller objects, such as the mugs and glasses,
are not generally known and move very often. Humans can typically find those smaller
objects by relying on prior knowledge, assuming the object they are searching for has been
seen before[1] and removing occlusions as necessary. This kind of target objects-oriented
problems is also called "Mechanical Search" problem [7].
This paper proposes a planning method based on a novel solver, called Growing Partially
Observable Monte-Carlo Planning (GPOMCP), that enables mobile manipulators to do just
that: Finding a target object that might be occluded by other objects in a partially unknown
environment by moving to positions with better visibility or by removing occlusion when
necessary.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

