Probabilistic Inference in Reinforcement Learning
Done Right

Jean Tarbouriech
Google DeepMind

Tor Lattimore
Google DeepMind

Brendan O’Donoghue
Google DeepMind

jtarbouriech@google.com

lattimore@google.com

bodonoghue@google.com

Abstract
A popular perspective in Reinforcement learning (RL) casts the problem as probabilistic inference on a graphical model of the Markov decision process (MDP).
The core object of study is the probability of each state-action pair being visited
under the optimal policy. Previous approaches to approximate this quantity can
be arbitrarily poor, leading to algorithms that do not implement genuine statistical
inference and consequently do not perform well in challenging problems. In this
work, we undertake a rigorous Bayesian treatment of the posterior probability of
state-action optimality and clarify how it flows through the MDP. We first reveal
that this quantity can indeed be used to generate a policy that explores efficiently,
as measured by regret. Unfortunately, computing it is intractable, so we derive a
new variational Bayesian approximation yielding a tractable convex optimization
problem and establish that the resulting policy also explores efficiently. We call our
approach VAPOR and show that it has strong connections to Thompson sampling, Klearning, and maximum entropy exploration. We conclude with some experiments
demonstrating the performance advantage of a deep RL version of VAPOR.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is the problem of learning to control an unknown system by taking
actions to maximize its cumulative reward through time [76]. As the agent navigates the environment,
it receives noisy observations which it can use to update its (posterior) beliefs about the environment
[21]. Unlike supervised learning, where the performance of an algorithm does not influence the data
it will later observe, in RL the policy of the agent affects the data it will collect, which in turn affects
the policy, and so on. As a result, an agent must sometimes take actions that lead to states where it
has epistemic uncertainty about the value of those states, and sometimes take actions that lead to
more certain payoff. The tension between these two modes is the exploration-exploitation trade-off
[2, 35]. In this light, RL is a statistical inference problem wrapped in a control problem, and the two
problems must be tackled simultaneously for good data efficiency.
It is natural to apply Bayesian probabilistic inference to the uncertain parameters in RL [21] and, since
the goal of the agent is to find the optimal policy, a relevant object of study is the posterior probability
of optimality for each state-action pair. In fact, the popular ‘RL as inference’ approach, most clearly
summarized in the tutorial and review of [37], embeds the control problem into a graphical model
by introducing optimality binary random variables that indicate whether a state-action is optimal.
In the ‘RL as inference’ setup these optimality variables are assumed to be observed and take the
value one with probability depending on the local reward. This surrogate potential seems like a
peculiar and arbitrary choice, yet it has been widely accepted due to its mathematical convenience:
for deterministic dynamics, the resulting probabilistic inference is equivalent to maximum entropy
RL [80, 87]. However, this approximation leads to a critical shortcoming: The surrogate potential
functions do not take into account the Bayesian (epistemic) uncertainty, and consequently do not
perform genuine statistical inference on the unknowns in the MDP. This leads to ‘posteriors’ that are
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

