Are Emergent Abilities of Large
Language Models a Mirage?

Rylan Schaeffer
Computer Science
Stanford University
rschaef@cs.stanford.edu

Brando Miranda
Computer Science
Stanford University
brando9@cs.stanford.edu

Sanmi Koyejo
Computer Science
Stanford University
sanmi@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Recent work claims that large language models display emergent abilities: abilities
not present in smaller-scale models that are present in larger-scale models. What
makes emergent abilities intriguing is two-fold: their sharpness, transitioning
seemingly instantaneously from not present to present, and their unpredictability,
appearing at seemingly unforeseeable model scales. Here, we present an alternative
explanation for emergent abilities: for a particular task and model family, when analyzing fixed model outputs, emergent abilities appear due to the researcher’s choice
of metric rather than due to fundamental changes in models with scale. Specifically,
nonlinear or discontinuous metrics produce seemingly emergent abilities, whereas
linear or continuous metrics produce smooth, continuous, predictable changes in
model performance. We present our alternative explanation in a simple mathematical model, then test it in three complementary ways: we (1) make, test and confirm
three predictions on the effect of metric choice using the InstructGPT/GPT-3 family
on tasks with claimed emergent abilities; (2) make, test and confirm two predictions
about metric choices in a meta-analysis of emergent abilities on the Beyond the
Imitation Game Benchmark (BIG-Bench); and (3) show how to choose metrics to
produce never-before-seen seemingly emergent abilities in multiple vision tasks
across diverse deep network architectures. Via all three analyses, we provide
evidence that emergent abilities disappear with different metrics or with better
statistics, and may not be a fundamental property of scaling AI models.

1

Introduction

Emergent properties of complex systems have long been studied across disciplines, from physics to
biology to mathematics. The idea of emergence was popularized by Nobel Prize-winning physicist
P.W. Anderson’s “More Is Different" [1], which argues that as the complexity of a system increases,
new properties may materialize that cannot be predicted even from a precise quantitative understanding of the system’s microscopic details. Recently, the idea of emergence gained significant attention
in machine learning due to observations that large language models (LLMs) such as GPT [4], PaLM
[7] and LaMDA [35] exhibit so-called “emergent abilities" [38, 9, 33, 4] (Fig. 1).
The term “emergent abilities of LLMs" was recently and crisply defined as “abilities that are not
present in smaller-scale models but are present in large-scale models; thus they cannot be predicted by
simply extrapolating the performance improvements on smaller-scale models" [38]. Such emergent
abilities were first discovered in the GPT-3 family [4]. Subsequent work emphasized the discovery,
writing that “[although model] performance is predictable at a general level, performance on a
specific task can sometimes emerge quite unpredictably and abruptly at scale" [9]. These quotations
collectively identify the two defining properties of emergent abilities in LLMs:
1. Sharpness, transitioning seemingly instantaneously from not present to present
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

