Rotating Features for Object Discovery

Sindy Löwe
AMLab
University of Amsterdam

Phillip Lippe
QUVA Lab
University of Amsterdam

Francesco Locatello
Institute of Science and
Technology Austria (ISTA)

Max Welling
AMLab
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
The binding problem in human cognition, concerning how the brain represents
and connects objects within a fixed network of neural connections, remains a
subject of intense debate. Most machine learning efforts addressing this issue in an
unsupervised setting have focused on slot-based methods, which may be limiting
due to their discrete nature and difficulty to express uncertainty. Recently, the
Complex AutoEncoder was proposed as an alternative that learns continuous and
distributed object-centric representations. However, it is only applicable to simple
toy data. In this paper, we present Rotating Features, a generalization of complexvalued features to higher dimensions, and a new evaluation procedure for extracting
objects from distributed representations. Additionally, we show the applicability of
our approach to pre-trained features. Together, these advancements enable us to
scale distributed object-centric representations from simple toy to real-world data.
We believe this work advances a new paradigm for addressing the binding problem
in machine learning and has the potential to inspire further innovation in the field.

1

Introduction

Discovering and reasoning about objects is essential for human perception and cognition [8, 72], allowing us to interact with our environment, reason about it, and adapt to new situations [42, 43, 83].
To represent and connect symbol-like entities such as objects, our brain flexibly and dynamically
combines distributed information. However, the binding problem remains heavily debated, questioning how the brain achieves this within a relatively fixed network of neural connections [28].
Most efforts to address the binding problem in machine learning center on slot-based methods
[4, 23, 27, 33, 41, 46, 64, 88]. These approaches divide their latent representations into “slots”,
creating a discrete separation of object representations within a single layer of the architecture at
some arbitrary depth. While highly interpretable and easy to use for downstream applications, this
simplicity may limit slot-based approaches from representing the full diversity of objects. Their
discrete nature makes it challenging to represent uncertainty in the separation of objects; and it
remains unclear how slots may be recombined to learn flexible part-whole hierarchies [31]. Finally, it
seems unlikely that the brain assigns entirely distinct groups of neurons to each perceived object.
Recently, Löwe et al. [48] proposed the Complex AutoEncoder (CAE), which learns continuous and
distributed object-centric representations. Taking inspiration from neuroscience, it uses complexvalued activations to learn to encode feature information in their magnitudes and object affiliation in
their phase values. This allows the network to express uncertainty in its object separations and embeds
Correspondence to loewe.sindy@gmail.com
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

