SyncTREE: Fast Timing Analysis for Integrated
Circuit Design through a Physics-informed Tree-based
Graph Neural Network∗

Yuting Hu
University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY, USA
yhu54@buffalo.edu

Jiajie Li
University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY, USA
jli433@buffalo.edu

Florian Klemme
University of Stuttgart
Stuttgart, Germany
klemme@iti.uni-stuttgart.de
Tengfei Ma
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY, USA
tengfei.ma@stonybrook.edu

Gi-Joon Nam
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
gnam@us.ibm.com

Hussam Amrouch
Technical University of Munich
München, Germany
amrouch@tum.de

Jinjun Xiong
University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY, USA
jinjun@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Nowadays integrated circuits (ICs) are underpinning all major information technology innovations including the current trends of artificial intelligence (AI). Modern
IC designs often involve analyses of complex phenomena (such as timing, noise,
and power etc.) for tens of billions of electronic components, like resistance (R),
capacitance (C), transistors and gates, interconnected in various complex structures.
Those analyses often need to strike a balance between accuracy and speed as
those analyses need to be carried out many times throughout the entire IC design
cycles. With the advancement of AI, researchers also start to explore news ways
in leveraging AI to improve those analyses. This paper focuses on one of the
most important analyses, timing analysis for interconnects. Since IC interconnects
can be represented as an RC-tree, a specialized graph as tree, we design a novel
tree-based graph neural network, SyncTREE, to speed up the timing analysis by
incorporating both the structural and physical properties of electronic circuits.
Our major innovations include (1) a two-pass message-passing (bottom-up and
top-down) for graph embedding, (2) a tree contrastive loss to guide learning, and
(3) a closed formular-based approach to conduct fast timing. Our experiments show
that, compared to conventional GNN models, SyncTREE achieves the best timing
prediction in terms of both delays and slews, all in reference to the industry golden
numerical analyses results on real IC design data.

1

Introduction

Electronic design automation (EDA) tools are indispensable for designing today’s complex integrated
circuits (ICs) that can have multi-billion transistors (switches) and logic gates. EDA tools can be
∗

Corresponding authors: Hussam Amrouch (amrouch@tum.de), Jinjun Xiong (jinjun@buffalo.edu)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

