Spectral Entry-wise Matrix Estimation for Low-Rank
Reinforcement Learning
Stefan Stojanovic
EECS
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
stesto@kth.se

Yassir Jedra
EECS
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
jedra@kth.se

Alexandre Proutiere
EECS
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
alepro@kth.se

Abstract
We study matrix estimation problems arising in reinforcement learning (RL) with
low-rank structure. In low-rank bandits, the matrix to be recovered specifies the
expected arm rewards, and for low-rank Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), it
may for example characterize the transition kernel of the MDP. In both cases, each
entry of the matrix carries important information, and we seek estimation methods
with low entry-wise error. Importantly, these methods further need to accommodate
for inherent correlations in the available data (e.g. for MDPs, the data consists
of system trajectories). We investigate the performance of simple spectral-based
matrix estimation approaches: we show that they efficiently recover the singular
subspaces of the matrix and exhibit nearly-minimal entry-wise error. These new
results on low-rank matrix estimation make it possible to devise reinforcement
learning algorithms that fully exploit the underlying low-rank structure. We provide
two examples of such algorithms: a regret minimization algorithm for low-rank
bandit problems, and a best policy identification algorithm for reward-free RL in
low-rank MDPs. Both algorithms yield state-of-the-art performance guarantees.

1

Introduction

Learning succinct representations of the reward function or of the system state dynamics in bandit
and RL problems is empirically known to significantly accelerate the search for efficient policies [38,
55, 13]. It also comes with interesting theoretical challenges. The design of algorithms learning and
leveraging such representations and with provable performance guarantees has attracted considerable
attention recently, but remains largely open. In particular, significant efforts have been made towards
such design when the representation relies on a low-rank structure. In bandits, assuming such a
structure means that the arm-to-reward function can be characterized by a low-rank matrix [37, 32,
7, 27]. In MDPs, it implies that the reward function, the Q-function or the transition kernels are
represented by low-rank matrices [56, 4, 46, 60, 49]. In turn, the performance of algorithms exploiting
low-rank structures is mainly determined by the accuracy with which we are able to estimate these
matrices.
In this paper, we study matrix estimation problems arising in low-rank bandit and RL problems. Two
major challenges are associated with these problems. (i) The individual entries of the matrix carry
important operational meanings (e.g. in bandits, an entry could correspond to the average reward of
an arm), and we seek estimation methods with low entry-wise error. Such requirement calls for a
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

