Temporal Dynamic Quantization for Diffusion Models

Junhyuk So1∗ Jungwon Lee2∗ Daehyun Ahn3 Hyungjun Kim3 Eunhyeok Park1,2
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH
2
Graduate School of Artificial and Intelligence, POSTECH
3
SqueezeBits. Inc

Abstract
The diffusion model has gained popularity in vision applications due to its remarkable generative performance and versatility. However, high storage and computation
demands, resulting from the model size and iterative generation, hinder its use on
mobile devices. Existing quantization techniques struggle to maintain performance
even in 8-bit precision due to the diffusion model’s unique property of temporal
variation in activation. We introduce a novel quantization method that dynamically
adjusts the quantization interval based on time step information, significantly improving output quality. Unlike conventional dynamic quantization techniques, our
approach has no computational overhead during inference and is compatible with
both post-training quantization (PTQ) and quantization-aware training (QAT). Our
extensive experiments demonstrate substantial improvements in output quality with
the quantized diffusion model across various datasets.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling is crucial in machine learning for applications such as image [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8],
voice [9, 10], and text synthesis [11, 12, 13]. Diffusion models [3, 2, 4], which progressively refine
input images through a denoising process involving hundreds of iterative inferences, have recently
gained prominence due to their superior performance compared to alternatives like GANs [14].
However, the high cost of diffusion models presents a significant barrier to their widespread adoption.
These models have large sizes, often reaching several gigabytes, and demand enormous computation
of iterative inferences for a single image generation. Consequently, executing diffusion models
on resource-limited mobile devices is practically infeasible, thus most applications are currently
implemented on expensive, high-performance servers.
To fully exploit the potential of diffusion models, several methods to reduce the computational cost
and memory requirement of diffusion models while preserving the generative performance have been
proposed. For example, J. Song et al. [2] and L. Liu et al. [15] proposed a more efficient sampling
scheduler, and T. Salimans & J. Ho proposed to reduce the number of sampling steps using knowledge
distillation technique [16, 17]. As a result, high-fidelity images can be generated with fewer sampling
steps, making the use of diffusion models more affordable and feasible. Despite these advancements,
the denoising process of diffusion models still demands a substantial computational cost, necessitating
further performance enhancements and model compression.
While the majority of previous approaches have focused on reducing the number of sampling steps to
accelerate the denoising process, it is also important to lighten the individual denoising steps. Since the
single denoising step can be regarded as a conventional deep learning model inference, various model
compression techniques can be used. Quantization is a widely used compression technique where
both weights and activations are mapped to the low-precision domain. While advanced quantization
schemes have been extensively studied for conventional Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) and
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

