On the Complexity of Differentially Private
Best-Arm Identification with Fixed Confidence
Achraf Azize
Équipe Scool, Univ. Lille, Inria,
CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189- CRIStAL
F-59000 Lille, France
achraf.azize@inria.fr
Aymen Al Marjani
UMPA, ENS Lyon
Lyon, France
aymen.al_marjani@ens-lyon.fr

Marc Jourdan
Équipe Scool, Univ. Lille, Inria,
CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189- CRIStAL
F-59000 Lille, France
marc.jourdan@inria.fr
Debabrota Basu
Équipe Scool, Univ. Lille, Inria,
CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189- CRIStAL
F-59000 Lille, France
debabrota.basu@inria.fr

Abstract
Best Arm Identification (BAI) problems are progressively used for data-sensitive
applications, such as designing adaptive clinical trials, tuning hyper-parameters,
and conducting user studies to name a few. Motivated by the data privacy concerns
invoked by these applications, we study the problem of BAI with fixed confidence
under ϵ-global Differential Privacy (DP). First, to quantify the cost of privacy, we
derive a lower bound on the sample complexity of any δ-correct BAI algorithm
satisfying ϵ-global DP. Our lower bound suggests the existence of two privacy
regimes depending on the privacy budget ϵ. In the high-privacy regime (small
ϵ), the hardness depends on a coupled effect of privacy and a novel informationtheoretic quantity, called the Total Variation Characteristic Time. In the low-privacy
regime (large ϵ), the sample complexity lower bound reduces to the classical nonprivate lower bound. Second, we propose AdaP-TT, an ϵ-global DP variant of the
Top Two algorithm. AdaP-TT runs in arm-dependent adaptive episodes and adds
Laplace noise to ensure a good privacy-utility trade-off. We derive an asymptotic
upper bound on the sample complexity of AdaP-TT that matches with the lower
bound up to multiplicative constants in the high-privacy regime. Finally, we provide
an experimental analysis of AdaP-TT that validates our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

We study the stochastic multi-armed bandit problem [LS20], which allows us to reflect on fundamental
information-utility trade-offs involved in interactive sequential learning. Specifically, in a bandit problem, a learning agent is exposed to interact with K unknown probability distributions {ν1 , . . . , νK }
with bounded expectations, referred as the reward distributions (or arms). ν ≜ {ν1 , . . . , νK } is
called a bandit instance. At every step t > 0, the agent chooses to interact with one of the reward
distributions νAt for an At ∈ [K], and obtains a sample (or reward) rt from it. The goal of the agent
can be of two types: (a) maximise the reward accumulated over time, or equivalently to minimise the
regret, and (b) to find the reward distribution (or arm) with highest expected reward. The first problem
is called the regret-minimisation problem [ACBF02], while the second one is called the Best Arm

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

