Mitigating Test-Time Bias for Fair Image Retrieval

Fanjie Kong
Duke University
fanjie.kong@duke.edu

Shuai Yuan
Duke University
shuai@cs.duke.edu

Weituo Hao
TikTok Inc.
weituohao@tiktok.com

Ricardo Henao
Duke University
KAUST
ricardo.henao@duke.edu

Abstract
We address the challenge of generating fair and unbiased image retrieval results
given neutral textual queries (with no explicit gender or race connotations), while
maintaining the utility (performance) of the underlying vision-language (VL)
model. Previous methods aim to disentangle learned representations of images and
text queries from gender and racial characteristics. However, we show these are
inadequate at alleviating bias for the desired equal representation result, as there
usually exists test-time bias in the target retrieval set. So motivated, we introduce a
straightforward technique, Post-hoc Bias Mitigation (PBM), that post-processes
the outputs from the pre-trained vision-language model. We evaluate our algorithm
on real-world image search datasets, Occupation 1 and 2, as well as two largescale image-text datasets, MS-COCO and Flickr30k. Our approach achieves the
lowest bias, compared with various existing bias-mitigation methods, in text-based
image retrieval result while maintaining satisfactory retrieval performance. The
source code is publicly available at https://github.com/timqqt/Fair_Text_
based_Image_Retrieval.

1

Introduction

Image search on the web based on text-based image retrieval (TBIR) (Lew et al., 2006) involves
interpreting a user’s (text) query and returning corresponding images that are considered relevant
in terms of semantic meaning (Chen et al., 2015). With recent advancements in multi-modal
representation learning, Vision-Language (VL) models such as CLIP have been widely used to
enhance the efficacy of text-based image retrieval (Radford et al., 2021; Cao et al., 2022). These
models are usually trained on vast datasets that consist of millions of text-image pairs scrapped from
the web, which inevitably manifest societal biases especially for neutral queries (Wang et al., 2021a;
Hall et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2021b), i.e., queries without explicit demographic (gender or race)
connotations. In Figure 1, we show image retrieval results for the neutral query “Bus Driver” using
CLIP and an unbiased alternative delivered by the proposed approach.
In our work, we adhere to equal representation as our fairness objective (Mehrotra and Celis, 2021;
Kay et al., 2015), as an alternative to proportional representation (Jalal et al., 2021; Berg et al., 2022).
The latter, which aligns the demographic proportions in the retrieval results with those in the dataset,
which is susceptible to biases during collection (Kay et al., 2015). Instead, equal representation for
all demographic groups of interest attempts to mitigate (obscure) the influence of any inherent biases.
Previous works have been dedicated to developing unbiased VL models that promote fairness in
TBIR tasks (Wang et al., 2021a; Berg et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023; Chuang
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

