ConDaFormer: Disassembled Transformer with
Local Structure Enhancement for
3D Point Cloud Understanding

Lunhao Duan∗ 1 Shanshan Zhao∗ 2
Nan Xue
Mingming Gong 3 Gui-Song Xia† 1 Dacheng Tao 4
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
JD Explore Academy 3 University of Melbourne 4 University of Sydney
1

Abstract
Transformers have been recently explored for 3D point cloud understanding with
impressive progress achieved. A large number of points, over 0.1 million, make the
global self-attention infeasible for point cloud data. Thus, most methods propose to
apply the transformer in a local region, e.g., spherical or cubic window. However, it
still contains a large number of Query-Key pairs, which require high computational
costs. In addition, previous methods usually learn the query, key, and value using a
linear projection without modeling the local 3D geometric structure. In this paper,
we attempt to reduce the costs and model the local geometry prior by developing a
new transformer block, named ConDaFormer ‡ . Technically, ConDaFormer disassembles the cubic window into three orthogonal 2D planes, leading to fewer points
when modeling the attention in a similar range. The disassembling operation is
beneficial to enlarging the range of attention without increasing the computational
complexity but ignores some contexts. To provide a remedy, we develop a local
structure enhancement strategy that introduces a depth-wise convolution before
and after the attention. This scheme can also capture the local geometric information. Taking advantage of these designs, ConDaFormer captures both long-range
contextual information and local priors. The effectiveness is demonstrated by
experimental results on several 3D point cloud understanding benchmarks. Our
code will be available.

1

Introduction

As a fundamental vision task, 3D point cloud analysis [56, 58, 12, 97] has been studied extensively
due to its critical role in various applications, such as robotics and augmented reality. The inherent
irregularity and sparsity of point clouds make the standard convolution fail to extract the geometric
features directly. As a result, different strategies have been proposed for 3D point cloud data
processing, which can be roughly divided into the voxel-based methods [12], the projection-based [7],
and the point-based [58, 97]. Many methods achieve remarkable performance in point cloud analysis
tasks, such as point cloud segmentation [15] and 3D object detection [64].
In recent years, transformers [70] have shown a powerful capability of modeling long-range dependencies in the natural language processing community [17, 60]. Following ViT [19], transformers [18, 22, 13, 93, 44] also achieve competitive or better performance in comparison with the
CNN architectures in many 2D vision tasks, such as object detection and semantic segmentation.
* Equal Contribution. This work was done when Lunhao Duan was a research intern at JD Explore Academy.
†
‡

Correspondence Author.
Con, Da, and Former indicate Convolution, Disassembled, and Transformer, respectively.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

