TransHP: Image Classification with Hierarchical
Prompting

Wenhao Wang ∗
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney

Yifan Sun
Baidu Inc.
Yi Yang †
Zhejiang University

Wei Li
Zhejiang University

Abstract
This paper explores a hierarchical prompting mechanism for the hierarchical image
classification (HIC) task. Different from prior HIC methods, our hierarchical
prompting is the first to explicitly inject ancestor-class information as a tokenized
hint that benefits the descendant-class discrimination. We think it well imitates
human visual recognition, i.e., humans may use the ancestor class as a prompt to
draw focus on the subtle differences among descendant classes. We model this
prompting mechanism into a Transformer with Hierarchical Prompting (TransHP).
TransHP consists of three steps: 1) learning a set of prompt tokens to represent
the coarse (ancestor) classes, 2) on-the-fly predicting the coarse class of the input
image at an intermediate block, and 3) injecting the prompt token of the predicted
coarse class into the intermediate feature. Though the parameters of TransHP
maintain the same for all input images, the injected coarse-class prompt conditions
(modifies) the subsequent feature extraction and encourages a dynamic focus on
relatively subtle differences among the descendant classes. Extensive experiments
show that TransHP improves image classification on accuracy (e.g., improving
ViT-B/16 by +2.83% ImageNet classification accuracy), training data efficiency
(e.g., +12.69% improvement under 10% ImageNet training data), and model
explainability. Moreover, TransHP also performs favorably against prior HIC
methods, showing that TransHP well exploits the hierarchical information. The
code is available at: https://github.com/WangWenhao0716/TransHP.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical image classification (HIC) aims to exploit the semantic hierarchy to improve prediction
accuracy. More concretely, HIC provides additional coarse labels (e.g., Rose) which indicate the
ancestors of the relatively fine labels (e.g., China Rose and Rose Peace). The coarse labels usually do
not need manual annotation and can be automatically generated based on the fine labels, e.g., through
WordNet [1] or word embeddings [2]. Since it barely increases any annotation cost while bringing
substantial benefit, HIC is of realistic value and has drawn great research interest [3, 4].
This paper explores a novel hierarchical prompting mechanism that well imitates the human visual
recognition for HIC. Specifically, a person may confuse two close visual concepts (e.g., China Rose
and Rose Peace) when the scope of interest is large (e.g., the whole Plantae). However, given a
prompt narrowing down the category range (e.g., the rose family), the person can shift his/her focus to
the subtle variations within the coarse class. We duplicate this procedure for deep visual recognition
∗
†

Work done during Wenhao Wang’s internship at Baidu Inc.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

