Supervised Pretraining Can Learn
In-Context Reinforcement Learning

Jonathan N. Lee∗1
Chelsea Finn1
1

Annie Xie∗1

Aldo Pacchiano2 3

Ofir Nachum

Yash Chandak1

Emma Brunskill1

Stanford University 2 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard 3 Boston University

Abstract
Large transformer models trained on diverse datasets have shown a remarkable ability to learn in-context, achieving high few-shot performance on tasks they were not
explicitly trained to solve. In this paper, we study the in-context learning capabilities of transformers in decision-making problems, i.e., reinforcement learning (RL)
for bandits and Markov decision processes. To do so, we introduce and study the
Decision-Pretrained Transformer (DPT), a supervised pretraining method where a
transformer predicts an optimal action given a query state and an in-context dataset
of interactions from a diverse set of tasks. While simple, this procedure produces
a model with several surprising capabilities. We find that the trained transformer
can solve a range of RL problems in-context, exhibiting both exploration online
and conservatism offline, despite not being explicitly trained to do so. The model
also generalizes beyond the pretraining distribution to new tasks and automatically
adapts its decision-making strategies to unknown structure. Theoretically, we show
DPT can be viewed as an efficient implementation of Bayesian posterior sampling,
a provably sample-efficient RL algorithm. We further leverage this connection
to provide guarantees on the regret of the in-context algorithm yielded by DPT,
and prove that it can learn faster than algorithms used to generate the pretraining
data. These results suggest a promising yet simple path towards instilling strong
in-context decision-making abilities in transformers.

1

Introduction

For supervised learning, transformer-based models trained at scale have shown impressive abilities
to perform tasks given an input context, often referred to as few-shot prompting or in-context
learning [1]. In this setting, a pretrained model is presented with a small number of supervised inputoutput examples in its context, and is then asked to predict the most likely completion (i.e. output)
of an unpaired input, without parameter updates. Over the last few years, in-context learning has
been applied to solve a range of tasks [2] and a growing number works are beginning to understand
and analyze in-context learning for supervised learning [3, 4, 5, 6]. In this work, our focus is to
study and understand in-context learning applied to sequential decision-making, specifically in the
context of reinforcement learning (RL) settings. Decision-making (e.g. RL) is considerably more
dynamic and complex than supervised learning. Understanding and leveraging in-context learning
here could potentially unlock significant improvements in an agent’s ability to adapt and make
few-shot decisions in response to observations from the world. Such capabilities are instrumental for
practical applications ranging from robotics to recommendation systems.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to jnl@stanford.edu and anniexie@stanford.edu. Code is
available at https://github.com/jon–lee/decision-pretrained-transformer

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

