TriRE: A Multi-Mechanism Learning Paradigm for
Continual Knowledge Retention and Promotion

Preetha Vijayan1,∗, Prashant Bhat2,3, * , Bahram Zonooz2,3,† , Elahe Arani2,†
1
NavInfo Europe 2 Eindhoven University of Technology (TU/e) 3 TomTom
preetha.vijayan@navinfo.eu, {p.s.bhat, e.arani, b.zonooz}@tue.nl

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) has remained a persistent challenge for deep neural networks due to catastrophic forgetting (CF) of previously learned tasks. Several
techniques such as weight regularization, experience rehearsal, and parameter
isolation have been proposed to alleviate CF. Despite their relative success, these research directions have predominantly remained orthogonal and suffer from several
shortcomings, while missing out on the advantages of competing strategies. On
the contrary, the brain continually learns, accommodates, and transfers knowledge
across tasks by simultaneously leveraging several neurophysiological processes,
including neurogenesis, active forgetting, neuromodulation, metaplasticity, experience rehearsal, and context-dependent gating, rarely resulting in CF. Inspired by
how the brain exploits multiple mechanisms concurrently, we propose TriRE, a
novel CL paradigm that encompasses retaining the most prominent neurons for
each task, revising and solidifying the extracted knowledge of current and past
tasks, and actively promoting less active neurons for subsequent tasks through
rewinding and relearning. Across CL settings, TriRE significantly reduces task
interference and surpasses different CL approaches considered in isolation.1

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) over a sequence of tasks remains an uphill task for deep neural networks
(DNNs) due to catastrophic forgetting of older tasks, often resulting in a rapid decline in performance
and, in the worst-case scenario, complete loss of previously learned information [38]. Several
approaches, such as parameter isolation [43, 4], weight regularization [56, 45], and experience
rehearsal [41, 42, 9] have been proposed in the literature to address the problem of catastrophic
forgetting in DNNs. Despite their relative success, these research directions have predominantly
remained orthogonal and suffer from several shortcomings. Parameter isolation approaches suffer
from capacity saturation and scalability issues in longer task sequences, while weight regularization
approaches cannot discriminate classes from different tasks, thus failing miserably in scenarios
such as class-incremental learning (Class-IL) [28]. In scenarios where buffer size is limited due
to memory constraints (e.g., edge devices), rehearsal-based approaches are prone to overfitting on
the buffered data [7]. As these research directions have rarely crossed paths, there is a need for
an integrated approach to leverage the advantages of competing methods to effectively mitigate
catastrophic forgetting in CL.
Catastrophic forgetting is a direct consequence of a more general problem, namely the stabilityplasticity dilemma [2, 36]: the extent to which the CL model must be plastic to accommodate newly
acquired knowledge and stable to not interfere with previously learned information [38]. In stark
∗
1

Equal contribution. † Equal advisory role.
Code is available at https://github.com/NeurAI-Lab/TriRE

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

