Do Not Marginalize Mechanisms, Rather Consolidate!

Moritz Willig
Technical University of Darmstadt
moritz.willig@cs.tu-darmstadt.de
Devendra Singh Dhami
Eindhoven University of Technology∗
Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI)
d.s.dhami@tue.nl

Matej Zečević
Technical University of Darmstadt
matej.zecevic@tu-darmstadt.de
Kristian Kersting
Technical University Darmstadt
Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI)
German Research Center for AI (DFKI)
kersting@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Structural causal models (SCMs) are a powerful tool for understanding the complex
causal relationships that underlie many real-world systems. As these systems grow
in size, the number of variables and complexity of interactions between them does,
too. Thus, becoming convoluted and difficult to analyze. This is particularly true in
the context of machine learning and artificial intelligence, where an ever increasing
amount of data demands for new methods to simplify and compress large scale
SCM. While methods for marginalizing and abstracting SCM already exist today,
they may destroy the causality of the marginalized model. To alleviate this, we
introduce the concept of consolidating causal mechanisms to transform large-scale
SCM while preserving consistent interventional behaviour. We show consolidation
is a powerful method for simplifying SCM, discuss reduction of computational
complexity and give a perspective on generalizing abilities of consolidated SCM.

1

Introduction

Even complex real world systems might be modeled using structural causal models (SCM) [Pearl,
2009] and several methods exist for doing so automatically from data [Spirtes et al., 2000, Pearl,
2009, Peters et al., 2017]. While technically reflecting the causal structure of the systems under
consideration, SCM might not entail intuitive interpretations to the user. Large scale SCM like,
appearing for example in genomics, medical data [Squires et al., 2022, Ribeiro-Dantas et al., 2023] or
machine learning [Schölkopf et al., 2021, Berrevoets et al., 2023], may become increasingly complex
and thereby less interpretable. Contrary to this, computing average treatment effects might be too
uninformative given the specific application, as the complete causal mechanism is compressed into a
single number. Ideally a user could express the factors of interest and yield a reduced causal system
that isolates the relevant mechanism from the rest of the model.
In contrast to other probabilistic models, SCM model the additional aspect of interventions. Consider
for example a row of dominoes and its corresponding causal graph as shown in Figure 1. If the starting
stone it tipped over, it will affect the following stones, causing the whole row to fall. Humans usually
have a good intuition about predicting the unfolding of such physical systems [Gerstenberg, 2022,
Beck and Riggs, 2014, Zhou et al., 2023]. Second to that, it is easy to imagine what would happen,
if we were to hold onto a domino stone, that is, intervening actively upon the domino sequence.
Alternatively, we can programmatically simulate these systems to reason about their outcomes. A
simulator tediously computes and updates positions, rotations and collision states of all objects in
∗

DSD contributed while being with hessian.AI and TU Darmstadt before joining TU\e.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

