Principled Weight Initialisation for
Input-Convex Neural Networks

Pieter-Jan Hoedt & Günter Klambauer
LIT AI Lab & ELLIS Unit Linz
Institute for Machine Learning
Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria
{hoedt, klambauer}@ml.jku.at

Abstract
Input-Convex Neural Networks (ICNNs) are networks that guarantee convexity
in their input-output mapping. These networks have been successfully applied
for energy-based modelling, optimal transport problems and learning invariances.
The convexity of ICNNs is achieved by using non-decreasing convex activation
functions and non-negative weights. Because of these peculiarities, previous initialisation strategies, which implicitly assume centred weights, are not effective
for ICNNs. By studying signal propagation through layers with non-negative
weights, we are able to derive a principled weight initialisation for ICNNs. Concretely, we generalise signal propagation theory by removing the assumption that
weights are sampled from a centred distribution. In a set of experiments, we
demonstrate that our principled initialisation effectively accelerates learning in
ICNNs and leads to better generalisation. Moreover, we find that, in contrast to
common belief, ICNNs can be trained without skip-connections when initialised
correctly. Finally, we apply ICNNs to a real-world drug discovery task and show
that they allow for more effective molecular latent space exploration.

1

Introduction

Input-Convex Networks. Input-Convex Neural Networks (ICNNs) are networks for which each
output neuron is convex with respect to the inputs. The convexity is a result of using non-decreasing
convex activation functions and weight matrices with non-negative entries (Amos et al., 2017).
ICNNs were originally introduced in the context of energy modelling (Amos et al., 2017). Also
in other contexts, ICNNs have proven to be useful. E.g. Sivaprasad et al. (2021) show that ICNNs
can be used as regular classification models, Makkuva et al. (2020) rely on the convexity to model
optimal transport mappings, and Nesterov et al. (2022) illustrate how ICNNs can be used to learn
invariances by simplifying the search for level sets — i.e. inputs for which the output prediction remains unchanged. ICNNs have also been used in model predictive control, where recently an inputconvex variant of LSTMs was proposed to reduce convergence time while ensuring closed-loop
stability (Wang and Wu, 2023). Despite their successful application for various tasks, convergence
can be notably slow (Sivaprasad et al., 2021, Fig. 1 (d)). We hypothesize that this slow training is the
result of poor initialisation of the positive weights in ICNNs. This poor initialisation leads to distribution shifts that make learning harder, as illustrated in Figure 1. Therefore, we propose a principled
initialisation strategy for layers with non-negative weight matrices (cf. Chang et al., 2020).
Importance of initialisation strategies. Initialisation strategies have enabled faster and more stable
learning in deep networks (LeCun et al., 1998; Glorot and Bengio, 2010; He et al., 2015). The goal
of a good initialisation strategy is to produce similar statistics in every layer. This can be done in the
forward pass (LeCun et al., 1998; Mishkin and Matas, 2016; Klambauer et al., 2017; Chang et al.,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

