Does Localization Inform Editing? Surprising
Differences in Causality-Based Localization vs.
Knowledge Editing in Language Models

Peter Hase1,2

Mohit Bansal2 Been Kim1 Asma Ghandeharioun1
2
Google Research
UNC Chapel Hill

1

{peter, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu
{beenkim, aghandeharioun}@google.com

Abstract
Language models learn a great quantity of factual information during pretraining,
and recent work localizes this information to specific model weights like mid-layer
MLP weights [21]. In this paper, we find that we can change how a fact is stored
in a model by editing weights that are in a different location than where existing
methods suggest that the fact is stored. This is surprising because we would
expect that localizing facts to specific model parameters would tell us where to
manipulate knowledge in models, and this assumption has motivated past work on
model editing methods. Specifically, we show that localization conclusions from
representation denoising (also known as Causal Tracing) do not provide any insight
into which model MLP layer would be best to edit in order to override an existing
stored fact with a new one. This finding raises questions about how past work relies
on Causal Tracing to select which model layers to edit [21, 22]. Next, we consider
several variants of the editing problem, including erasing and amplifying facts.
For one of our editing problems, editing performance does relate to localization
results from representation denoising, but we find that which layer we edit is a
far better predictor of performance. Our results suggest, counterintuitively, that
better mechanistic understanding of how pretrained language models work may
not always translate to insights about how to best change their behavior.1

1

Introduction

Language models learn a variety of facts about the world during pretraining that can be elicited via
natural language prompts [28]. Recent work explores how these facts are stored in model weights and
expressed in response to particular prompts, suggesting that MLP weights act as key-value memories
that support factual association [12, 21, 13]. Besides improving our scientific understanding of
pretrained language models, this kind of investigative work may enable the design of better model
editing methods for injecting new facts into model weights, and indeed it has been used to motivate
the ROME and MEMIT model-editing methods [21, 22]. These recent methods set a new state of
the art for weight edits that successfully rewrite stored facts in language models. Model editing
methods could be broadly useful for correcting factual errors in pretrained models, avoiding morally
undesirable outputs, and updating models with changing knowledge over time.
The connection between localization (identifying components of a model responsible for a certain
behavior) and editing (changing model components in order to change model behavior) is predicated
on the reasonable assumption that one should go about editing a model by first localizing a behavior
to a specific component and then choosing to edit that particular component. In the case of ROME and
1

Code for all experiments is available at https://github.com/google/belief-localization

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

