Task-aware world model learning
with meta weighting via bi-level optimization

Huining Yuan Hongkun Dou Xingyu Jiang Yue Deng∗
School of Astronautics, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{hnyuan, douhk, jxy33zrhd, ydeng}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Aligning the world model with the environment for the agent’s specific task is
crucial in model-based reinforcement learning. While value-equivalent models may
achieve better task awareness than maximum-likelihood models, they sacrifice a
large amount of semantic information and face implementation issues. To combine
the benefits of both types of models, we propose Task-aware Environment Modeling
Pipeline with bi-level Optimization (TEMPO), a bi-level model learning framework
that introduces an additional level of optimization on top of a maximum-likelihood
model by incorporating a meta weighter network that weights each training sample.
The meta weighter in the upper level learns to generate novel sample weights
by minimizing a proposed task-aware model loss. The model in the lower level
focuses on important samples while maintaining rich semantic information in state
representations. We evaluate TEMPO on a variety of continuous and discrete
control tasks from the DeepMind Control Suite and Atari video games. Our
results demonstrate that TEMPO achieves state-of-the-art performance regarding
asymptotic performance, training stability, and convergence speed.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) achieves intelligent behavior by optimizing sequential decision-making
through a trial-and-error process (Sutton and Barto, 2018). While RL has shown outstanding success
in tasks like Go and video games, the enormous quantity of samples required to train such agents
poses great limitations on RL’s application in real-world scenarios involving human operators, real
robots, or computationally expensive simulators (Moerland et al., 2023).
Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) aims to enhance the sample efficiency and generalization capability of RL agents through two interleaved stages: model learning and behavior learning.
In the model learning stage, an approximate world model of the environment is learned using real
environmental samples to provide the agent with the ability to generate simulated experiences or predict the outcome of actions. In the behavior learning stage, the agent learns its policy by interacting
with the model without having to take actions in the real environment. This paradigm has received a
lot of attention, and significant progress has been made in both model learning and behavior learning.
(Sutton, 1991; Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018; Janner et al., 2019; Kaiser et al., 2019; Hafner et al.,
2019a; Schrittwieser et al., 2020).
One of the most common approaches to building a model is to learn a deep generative model
through maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) on environmental trajectories (Buesing et al., 2018;
Hafner et al., 2019b,a, 2020; Ozair et al., 2021). Such models can leverage advances in probabilistic
modeling, and can easily be combined with state-of-the-art model-free RL agents for task behavior
(Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018; Kaiser et al., 2019). However, MLE reconstructs all information from
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

