GPT-ST: Generative Pre-Training of Spatio-Temporal
Graph Neural Networks
Zhonghang Li1,2
Lianghao Xia2
Yong Xu1,3,4
Chao Huang2∗
1
South China University of Technology, 2 University of Hong Kong,
3
PAZHOU LAB, 4 Guangdong Key Lab of Communication and Computer Network
{bjdwh.zzh,chaohuang75}@gmail.com

aka_xia@foxmail.com

yxu@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, there has been a rapid development of spatio-temporal prediction
techniques in response to the increasing demands of traffic management and travel
planning. While advanced end-to-end models have achieved notable success in
improving predictive performance, their integration and expansion pose significant challenges. This work aims to address these challenges by introducing a
spatio-temporal pre-training framework that seamlessly integrates with downstream
baselines and enhances their performance. The framework is built upon two key designs: (i) We propose a spatio-temporal mask autoencoder as a pre-training model
for learning spatio-temporal dependencies. The model incorporates customized parameter learners and hierarchical spatial pattern encoding networks. These modules
are specifically designed to capture spatio-temporal customized representations
and intra- and inter-cluster region semantic relationships, which have often been
neglected in existing approaches. (ii) We introduce an adaptive mask strategy as
part of the pre-training mechanism. This strategy guides the mask autoencoder
in learning robust spatio-temporal representations and facilitates the modeling of
different relationships, ranging from intra-cluster to inter-cluster, in an easy-to-hard
training manner. Extensive experiments conducted on representative benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. We have made our model
implementation publicly available at https://github.com/HKUDS/GPT-ST.

1

Introduction

Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) is a rapidly growing research field driven by advancements
in sensors and communications technology [1, 12]. Spatio-Temporal (ST) prediction, including
traffic flow and ride demand, aims to forecast future trends, facilitating decision-making in traffic
management and risk response [43], and enhancing people’s lives with future travel plans [6]. Deep
learning methods, such as RNNs and CNNs, have been widely adopted to model temporal and spatial
correlations [5, 51, 50, 45]. Recently, GNNs have gained attention for spatial and temporal prediction
tasks, achieving remarkable results. Initially, researchers built adjacency matrices based on region
attributes, such as distance [48, 54]. Subsequent studies introduced learnable graph structures to
capture spatial correlations [40, 39], while others focused on dynamic relationships between regions,
proposing methods for constructing dynamic graphs [14, 40]. These advancements have significantly
contributed to the development of spatio-temporal prediction techniques.
Despite the remarkable results achieved by existing methods in spatio-temporal prediction, there
are several issues that remain inadequately addressed. i) Lack of customized representations of
specific spatio-temporal patterns. Customization can be categorized into two key aspects: timedynamic and node-specific properties in both the time and spatial domains. Time-dynamic patterns
exhibit variations across different time periods, such as contrasting patterns between weekends and
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

