Defending Pre-trained Language Models as Few-shot
Learners against Backdoor Attacks

Zhaohan Xi1∗

Tianyu Du2∗ Changjiang Li1,3 Ren Pang1 Shouling Ji2
Jinghui Chen1 Fenglong Ma1 Ting Wang1,3
1
Pennsylvania State University 2 Zhejiang University 3 Stony Brook University
{zhaohan.xi, rbp5354, jzc5917, fenglong}@psu.edu
{zjradty, sji}@zju.edu.cn
{changjli, twang}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Pre-trained language models (PLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance
as few-shot learners. However, their security risks under such settings are largely
unexplored. In this work, we conduct a pilot study showing that PLMs as fewshot learners are highly vulnerable to backdoor attacks while existing defenses
are inadequate due to the unique challenges of few-shot scenarios. To address
such challenges, we advocate MDP, a novel lightweight, pluggable, and effective
defense for PLMs as few-shot learners. Specifically, MDP leverages the gap
between the masking-sensitivity of poisoned and clean samples: with reference to
the limited few-shot data as distributional anchors, it compares the representations
of given samples under varying masking and identifies poisoned samples as ones
with significant variations. We show analytically that MDP creates an interesting
dilemma for the attacker to choose between attack effectiveness and detection
evasiveness. The empirical evaluation using benchmark datasets and representative
attacks validates the efficacy of MDP. Code available at https://github.com/z
haohan-xi/PLM-prompt-defense.

1

Introduction

The prompt-based learning paradigm is revolutionizing the ways of using pre-trained language
models (PLMs) [7, 27, 28, 1] in various NLP tasks. Unlike the conventional fine-tuning paradigm
that requires re-training the PLM, the prompt-based paradigm reformulates the downstream task as a
masked language modeling problem and uses proper prompts to coax the model to produce textual
outputs [17]. For example, to analyze the sentiment of a movie review, one may append the prompt
“the movie is ___” to the given review and guide the model to predict the missing sentiment word
(e.g., “terrible” or “great”). Recent work shows that with proper prompting, even moderate-sized
PLMs can be adapted as performant few-shot learners when training data is limited [9].
In contrast to its increasing popularity, the security implications of this prompt-based paradigm are
largely under-explored. Recent work [8, 34, 2] shows that similar to their fine-tuned counterparts,
prompt-based PLMs are susceptible to textual backdoor attacks, in which misclassification rules
are injected into PLMs, only to be activated by poisoned samples containing “triggers” (e.g., the
rare word of “cr”). However, how to effectively mitigate such threats, especially under the few-shot
setting, remains an open challenge.
In this work, we conduct a pilot study showing that few-shot scenarios entail unique challenges
for defending against textual backdoor attacks, including scarce training data, intricate interactions
with prompts, and limited computational capacity. For instance, many existing defenses [3, 24, 36]
designed for the fine-tuning paradigm require reliable statistical estimates of the downstream datasets
∗
Equal contribution.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

