Shared Adversarial Unlearning: Backdoor Mitigation
by Unlearning Shared Adversarial Examples

Shaokui Wei1

Mingda Zhang1 Hongyuan Zha1,2 Baoyuan Wu1∗
1
School of Data Science,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China
2
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, China

Abstract
Backdoor attacks are serious security threats to machine learning models where an
adversary can inject poisoned samples into the training set, causing a backdoored
model which predicts poisoned samples with particular triggers to particular target
classes, while behaving normally on benign samples. In this paper, we explore the
task of purifying a backdoored model using a small clean dataset. By establishing
the connection between backdoor risk and adversarial risk, we derive a novel
upper bound for backdoor risk, which mainly captures the risk on the shared
adversarial examples (SAEs) between the backdoored model and the purified
model. This upper bound further suggests a novel bi-level optimization problem for
mitigating backdoor using adversarial training techniques. To solve it, we propose
Shared Adversarial Unlearning (SAU). Specifically, SAU first generates SAEs, and
then, unlearns the generated SAEs such that they are either correctly classified by
the purified model and/or differently classified by the two models, such that the
backdoor effect in the backdoored model will be mitigated in the purified model.
Experiments on various benchmark datasets and network architectures show that
our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance for backdoor defense.
The code is available at https://github.com/SCLBD/BackdoorBench (PyTorch) and
https://github.com/shawkui/MindTrojan (MindSpore).

1

Introduction

Recent decades have witnessed a growing application of deep neural network (DNN) techniques
in various domains, such as face recognition, autonomous driving, and medical image processing
[1, 17, 32, 44]. However, DNNs are known to be vulnerable to malicious attacks that can compromise
their security and reliability. One of the emerging threats is the backdoor attack, where an attacker
attempts to inject stealthy backdoor into a DNN model by manipulating a small portion of the training
data such that the poisoned model will behave normally for clean inputs while misclassifying any
input with the trigger pattern to a target label. Since the poisoned models can have real-world
consequences, such as allowing an attacker to gain unauthorized access to a system or to cause
physical harm, it is crucial to develop effective methods for backdoor defense in developing and
deploying DNNs.
Adversarial training (AT) is one of the most effective methods for improving the robustness of DNNs
[33]. AT is typically formulated as a min-max optimization problem, where the inner maximization
aims to find adversarial perturbations that fool the model, while the outer minimization is to reduce
the adversarial risk. Recently, several works have explored the use of AT for defending against
backdoor attacks. However, these works face some limitations and challenges. Weng et al. [52] and
∗

Corresponds to Baoyuan Wu (wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

