Beyond NTK with Vanilla Gradient Descent: A
Mean-Field Analysis of Neural Networks with
Polynomial Width, Samples, and Time

Arvind Mahankali∗
Stanford University
amahanka@stanford.edu

Jeff Z. HaoChen†
Stanford University
jhaochen@stanford.edu

Margalit Glasgow
Stanford University
mglasgow@stanford.edu

Kefan Dong
Stanford University
kefandong@stanford.edu

Tengyu Ma
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Abstract
Despite recent theoretical progress on the non-convex optimization of two-layer
neural networks, it is still an open question whether gradient descent on neural
networks without unnatural modifications can achieve better sample complexity
than kernel methods. This paper provides a clean mean-field analysis of projected
gradient flow on polynomial-width two-layer neural networks. Different from prior
works, our analysis does not require unnatural modifications of the optimization
algorithm. We prove that with sample size n = O(d3.1 ) where d is the dimension
of the inputs, the network trained with projected gradient flow converges in poly(d)
time to a non-trivial error that is not achievable by kernel methods using n ≪ d4
samples, hence demonstrating a clear separation between unmodified gradient
descent and NTK. As a corollary, we show that projected gradient descent with a
positive learning rate and a polynomial number of iterations converges to low error
with the same sample complexity.

1

Introduction

Training neural networks requires optimizing non-convex losses, which is often practically feasible
but still not theoretically understood. The lack of understanding of non-convex optimization limits
the design of new principled optimizers for training neural networks that use theoretical insights.
Early analysis on optimizing neural networks with linear or quadratic activations [29, 36, 51, 35,
65, 38, 48, 39, 60] relies on linear algebraic tools that do not extend to nonlinear and non-quadratic
activations. The neural tangent kernel (NTK) approach analyzes nonconvex optimization under certain
hyperparameter settings, e.g., when the initialization scale is large and the learning rate is small
(see, e.g., Du et al. [30], Jacot et al. [43], Li and Liang [50], Arora et al. [10], Daniely et al. [26]).
However, subsequent research shows that neural networks trained with practical hyperparameter
settings typically outperform their corresponding NTK kernels [9]. Furthermore, the initialization and
learning rate under the NTK regime does not yield optimal generalization guarantees [76, 22, 77, 34].
Many recent works study modified versions of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and prove sample
complexity and runtime guarantees beyond NTK [23, 2, 58, 52, 1, 7, 5, 79, 78, 25, 6, 67, 70, 20, 59].
These modified algorithms often contain multiple stages that optimize different blocks of parameters
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

