Neural Injective Functions for Multisets, Measures
and Graphs via a Finite Witness Theorem

Tal Amir1

Steven J. Gortler2

Ilai Avni1

Ravina Ravina1

Nadav Dym1,3

1

Faculty of Mathematics, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, USA
3
Faculty of Computer Science, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
2

Abstract
Injective multiset functions have a key role in the theoretical study of machine
learning on multisets and graphs. Yet, there remains a gap between the provably injective multiset functions considered in theory, which typically rely on
polynomial moments, and the multiset functions used in practice, which rely on
neural moments — whose injectivity on multisets has not been studied to date.
In this paper, we bridge this gap by showing that moments of neural networks
do define injective multiset functions, provided that an analytic non-polynomial
activation is used. The number of moments required by our theory is optimal
essentially up to a multiplicative factor of two. To prove this result, we state and
prove a finite witness theorem, which is of independent interest.
As a corollary to our main theorem, we derive new approximation results for
functions on multisets and measures, and new separation results for graph neural
networks. We also provide two negative results: (1) moments of piecewise-linear
neural networks cannot be injective multiset functions; and (2) even when momentbased multiset functions are injective, they can never be bi-Lipschitz.

1

Introduction

Multisets are a slight generalization of sets: like sets, they are an unordered collection of elements
{{x1 , . . . , xk }}, but unlike sets, repetitions are allowed. Multisets arise naturally in many machinelearning tasks. They are the natural way to represent point clouds in R3 , neighborhoods of vertices in
graphs, and any other data that has an intrinsic order that is immaterial to the task at hand.
We refer to functions and architectures whose inputs are multisets in Rd as multiset functions and
multiset architectures. By definition, these functions do not depend on the order in which the multiset
elements are given. This is important not only because the order is irrelevant and thus should not affect
the output, but also because otherwise a model may overfit the training data by making predictions
based on its intrinsic order.
Multiset architectures are typically constructed using a combination of permutation-invariant operations such as sum- and max-pooling [34], attention mechanisms [23] and sorting [46]. One simple
and popular approach, pioneered in the seminal Deep-Sets paper [45], employs multiset functions
based solely on sum-pooling. Namely, if the elements of all multisets come from some fixed alphabet
Ω, any function f : Ω → Rm induces a multiset function fˆ, to which we refer as the moment of f :
fˆ ({{x1 , . . . , xk }}) =

k
X

f (xi ).

i=1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

(1)

