Modality-Independent Teachers Meet
Weakly-Supervised Audio-Visual Event Parser

Yung-Hsuan Lai,1 Yen-Chun Chen,2 Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,3
1
National Taiwan University 2 Microsoft 3 NVIDIA
r10942097@ntu.edu.tw, chen.yenchun.tw@gmail.com, frankwang@nvidia.com

Abstract
Audio-visual learning has been a major pillar of multi-modal machine learning,
where the community mostly focused on its modality-aligned setting, i.e., the
audio and visual modality are both assumed to signal the prediction target. With
the Look, Listen, and Parse dataset (LLP), we investigate the under-explored
unaligned setting, where the goal is to recognize audio and visual events in a
video with only weak labels observed. Such weak video-level labels only tell what
events happen without knowing the modality they are perceived (audio, visual, or
both). To enhance learning in this challenging setting, we incorporate large-scale
contrastively pre-trained models as the modality teachers. A simple, effective, and
generic method, termed Visual-Audio Label Elaboration (VALOR), is innovated
to harvest modality labels for the training events. Empirical studies show that the
harvested labels significantly improve an attentional baseline by 8.0 in average
F-score (Type@AV). Surprisingly, we found that modality-independent teachers
outperform their modality-fused counterparts since they are noise-proof from the
other potentially unaligned modality. Moreover, our best model achieves the new
state-of-the-art on all metrics of LLP by a substantial margin (+5.4 F-score for
Type@AV). VALOR is further generalized to Audio-Visual Event Localization and
achieves the new state-of-the-art as well.1

1

Introduction

Multi-modal learning has become a pivotal topic in modern machine learning research. Audio-visual
learning is undoubtedly one of the primary focuses, as human frequently uses both hearing and vision
to perceive the surrounding environment. Countless researchers have devoted to its modality-aligned
setting with a strong assumption that the audio and visual modality both contain learnable clues to the
desired prediction target. Numerous audio-visual tasks and algorithms have then been proposed, such
as audio-visual speech recognition [1, 66, 68], audio-visual action recognition [22, 53, 81], sound
generation from visual data [18, 69, 84], audio-visual question answering [40, 89], and many more.
However, almost all real-world events can be audible while invisible, and vice versa, depending on
how they are perceived. For example, a mother doing dishes in the kitchen might hear a baby crying
from the living room, but be unable to directly see what is happening to the baby.
Having observed this potential modality mismatch in generic videos, Tian et al. [73] proposed the
Audio-Visual Video Parsing (AVVP) task, which aims to recognize events in videos independently
of the audio and visual modalities and also temporally localize these events. AVVP presents an
unaligned setting of audio-visual learning since all 25 event types considered can be audio-only,
visual-only, or audio-visual. Unfortunately, due to the laborious labeling process, Tian et al. [73]
created this dataset (Look, Listen, and Parse; LLP) in a weakly-supervised setting.2 More specifically,
1
2

Code is available at: https://github.com/Franklin905/VALOR.
AVVP, LLP are used interchangeably in the literature. We use AVVP for the task, and LLP for the dataset.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

