Towards Data-Agnostic Pruning At Initialization:
What Makes a Good Sparse Mask?

Hoang Pham1 , The-Anh Ta2 , Shiwei Liu3,6 , Lichuan Xiang4 , Dung D. Le5 ,
Hongkai Wen4 , Long Tran-Thanh4
1
FPT Software AI Center, 2 CSIRO’s Data61, 3 University of Texas at Austin,
4
University of Warwick, 5 VinUniversity 6 Eindhoven University of Technology
hoang.pv1602@gmail.com, theanh.ta@csiro.au,
{L.Xiang.2, Hongkai.Wen, Long.Tran-Thanh}@warwick.ac.uk
dung.ld@vinuni.edu.vn, shiwei.liu@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
Pruning at initialization (PaI) aims to remove weights of neural networks before
training in pursuit of training efficiency besides the inference. While off-the-shelf
PaI methods manage to find trainable subnetworks that outperform random pruning, their performance in terms of both accuracy and computational reduction is
far from satisfactory compared to post-training pruning and the understanding
of PaI is missing. For instance, recent studies show that existing PaI methods
only able to find good layerwise sparsities not weights, as the discovered subnetworks are surprisingly resilient against layerwise random mask shuffling and
weight re-initialization. In this paper, we study PaI from a brand-new perspective
– the topology of subnetworks. In particular, we propose a principled framework
for analyzing the performance of PaI methods with two quantities, namely, the
number of effective paths and effective nodes. These quantities allow for a more
comprehensive understanding of PaI methods, giving us an accurate assessment
of different subnetworks at initialization. We systematically analyze the behavior
of various PaI methods through our framework and observe a guiding principle
for constructing effective subnetworks: at a specific sparsity, the top-performing
subnetwork always presents a good balance between the number of effective nodes
and the number of effective paths. Inspired by this observation, we present a novel
data-agnostic pruning method by solving a multi-objective optimization problem.
By conducting extensive experiments across different architectures and datasets,
our results demonstrate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art PaI methods
while it is able to discover subnetworks that have much lower inference FLOPs (up
to 3.4×). Code is available at: https://github.com/pvh1602/NPB.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance in a wide range of machine learning
applications [3, 13, 39, 38]. However, the huge computational resource requirements limit their
applications, especially in edge computing and other future smart cyber-physical systems [23, 48, 37,
47, 2]. To overcome this issue, a number of approaches have been proposed to reduce the size of deep
neural networks without compromising performance, among which pruning has received voluminous
attention [10, 24, 8]. Traditional pruning approaches mainly focus on accelerating inference, which
usually require a pre-trained dense network [33, 20, 31].
As large language models (LLMs) [3, 43, 44] continue to gain popularity, endeavors start to explore
the possibility to prune models before training while matching the dense performance. Lottery Ticket
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

