Retrieval-Augmented Multiple Instance Learning

Yufei Cui1 , Ziquan Liu2 , Yixin Chen3 , Yuchen Lu4 , Xinyue Yu4 ,
Xue Liu , Tei-Wei Kuo56 , Miguel R. D. Rodrigues2 , Chun Jason Xue3 , Antoni B. Chan3
1

1

Mila, McGill University 2 University College London 3 City University of Hong Kong
4
Mila, Université de Montréal 5 National Taiwan University 6 MBZUAI

Abstract
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) is a crucial weakly supervised learning method
applied across various domains, e.g., medical diagnosis based on whole slide
images (WSIs). Recent advancements in MIL algorithms have yielded exceptional
performance when the training and test data originate from the same domain,
such as WSIs obtained from the same hospital. However, this paper reveals a
performance deterioration of MIL models when tested on an out-of-domain test set,
exemplified by WSIs sourced from a novel hospital. To address this challenge, this
paper introduces the Retrieval-AugMented MIL (RAM-MIL) framework, which
integrates Optimal Transport (OT) as the distance metric for nearest neighbor
retrieval. The development of RAM-MIL is driven by two key insights. First, a
theoretical discovery indicates that reducing the input’s intrinsic dimension can
minimize the approximation error in attention-based MIL. Second, previous studies
highlight a link between input intrinsic dimension and the feature merging process
with the retrieved data. Empirical evaluations conducted on WSI classification
demonstrate that the proposed RAM-MIL framework achieves state-of-the-art
performance in both in-domain scenarios, where the training and retrieval data
are in the same domain, and more crucially, in out-of-domain scenarios, where
the (unlabeled) retrieval data originates from a different domain. Furthermore,
the use of the transportation matrix derived from OT renders the retrieval results
interpretable at the instance level, in contrast to the vanilla l2 distance, and allows
for visualization for human experts.

1

Introduction

As the standard supervised learning paradigm, single instance learning has been the focus of machine
learning research and its performance has been improved significantly since the advent of deep
learning [1]. Nonetheless, a notable drawback of single instance learning lies in its reliance on a
substantial volume of labeled data [2], which poses practical challenges as a result of the high expense
and time-consuming nature of fine-grained data labeling. Consequently, multiple instance learning
(MIL) [3] has gained increasing popularity, given its ability to be trained with limited supervision.
This trend has particularly gained momentum within the domain of histopathology, where the analysis
of medical images at a gigabyte scale, such as whole slide images (WSI), has emerged as a focal
point in recent studies [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11].
Even though the performance of MIL on cancer diagnosis [13, 12] is remarkable, existing algorithms
are only evaluated on the in-domain test set and have the risk of performance degradation when
confronted with distribution shifts between the training and test sets [14, 15]. The distribution shift
problem is particularly important in the context of automated medical diagnosis models, since the
models are deployed across diverse hospitals in distinct regions, each may employing varying imaging
1

E-mail: yufeicui92@gmail.com, yufei.cui@mila.quebec
Code can be found at https://github.com/ralphc1212/ram-mil.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

