Efficient Exploration in Continuous-time
Model-based Reinforcement Learning

Lenart Treven
ETH Zürich
trevenl@ethz.ch

Jonas Hübotter
ETH Zürich
jhuebotter@student.ethz.ch

Florian Dörfler
ETH Zürich
dorfler@ethz.ch

Bhavya Sukhija
ETH Zürich
sukhijab@ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Reinforcement learning algorithms typically consider discrete-time dynamics,
even though the underlying systems are often continuous in time. In this paper,
we introduce a model-based reinforcement learning algorithm that represents
continuous-time dynamics using nonlinear ordinary differential equations (ODEs).
We capture epistemic uncertainty using well-calibrated probabilistic models,
and use the optimistic principle for exploration. Our regret bounds surface the
importance of the measurement selection strategy (MSS), since in continuous
time we not only must decide how to explore, but also when to observe the
underlying system. Our analysis demonstrates that the regret is sublinear
when modeling ODEs with Gaussian Processes (GP) for common choices of
MSS, such as equidistant sampling. Additionally, we propose an adaptive,
data-dependent, practical MSS that, when combined with GP dynamics, also
achieves sublinear regret with significantly fewer samples. We showcase the
benefits of continuous-time modeling over its discrete-time counterpart, as well
as our proposed adaptive MSS over standard baselines, on several applications.

1

Introduction

Real-world systems encountered in natural sciences and engineering applications, such as robotics
(Spong et al., 2006), biology (Lenhart and Workman, 2007; Jones et al., 2009), medicine (Panetta and
Fister, 2003), etc., are fundamentally continuous in time. Therefore, ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) are the natural modeling language. However, the reinforcement learning (RL) community
predominantly models problems in discrete time, with a few notable exceptions (Doya, 2000; Yildiz
et al., 2021; Lutter et al., 2021). The discretization of continuous-time systems imposes limitations on
the application of state-of-the-art RL algorithms, as they are tied to specific discretization schemes.
Discretization of continuous-time systems sacrifices several essential properties that could be
preserved in a continuous-time framework (Nesic and Postoyan, 2021). For instance, exact
discretization is only feasible for linear systems, leading to an inherent discrepancy when using
standard discretization techniques for nonlinear systems. Additionally, discretization obscures
the inter-sample behavior of the system, changes stability properties, may result in uncontrollable
systems, or requires an excessively high sampling rate. Multi-time-scale systems are particularly
vulnerable to these issues (Engquist et al., 2007). In many practical scenarios, the constraints imposed
by discrete-time modeling are undesirable. Discrete-time models do not allow for the independent
adjustment of measurement and control frequencies, which is crucial for real-world systems that
operate in different regimes. For example, in autonomous driving, low-frequency sensor sampling
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

