Thin and Deep Gaussian Processes

Daniel Augusto de Souza∗
University College London

Alexander Nikitin
Aalto University

ST John
Aalto University

Magnus Ross
University of Manchester

Mauricio A. Álvarez
University of Manchester

Marc Peter Deisenroth
University College London

João P. P. Gomes
Federal University of Ceará

Diego Mesquita
Getulio Vargas Foundation

César Lincoln C. Mattos
Federal University of Ceará

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GPs) can provide a principled approach to uncertainty quantification with easy-to-interpret kernel hyperparameters, such as the lengthscale,
which controls the correlation distance of function values. However, selecting an
appropriate kernel can be challenging. Deep GPs avoid manual kernel engineering by successively parameterizing kernels with GP layers, allowing them to learn
low-dimensional embeddings of the inputs that explain the output data. Following the architecture of deep neural networks, the most common deep GPs warp
the input space layer-by-layer but lose all the interpretability of shallow GPs. An
alternative construction is to successively parameterize the lengthscale of a kernel, improving the interpretability but ultimately giving away the notion of learning lower-dimensional embeddings. Unfortunately, both methods are susceptible
to particular pathologies which may hinder fitting and limit their interpretability.
This work proposes a novel synthesis of both previous approaches: Thin and Deep
GP (TDGP). Each TDGP layer defines locally linear transformations of the original input data maintaining the concept of latent embeddings while also retaining
the interpretation of lengthscales of a kernel. Moreover, unlike the prior methods,
TDGP induces non-pathological manifolds that admit learning lower-dimensional
representations. We show with theoretical and experimental results that i) TDGP
is, unlike previous models, tailored to specifically discover lower-dimensional
manifolds in the input data, ii) TDGP behaves well when increasing the number
of layers, and iii) TDGP performs well in standard benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) are probabilistic models whose nonparametric nature and interpretable
hyperparameters make them appealing in many applications where uncertainty quantification and
data efficiency matter, such as Bayesian optimization [11], spatiotemporal modeling [6], robotics
and control [5]. The key modeling choice for a GP prior is its covariance or kernel function, which
determines the class of functions it represents. However, due to finite data and a fixed-form kernel
function, the GP may not inter- or extrapolate as desired. Stationary kernels, such as the commonly
used squared exponential kernel and the Matérn family, assume the existence of a constant characteristic lengthscale, which makes them unsuitable for modeling non-stationary data.
To construct more expressive kernels, we can consider hierarchical GP models (deep GPs or DGP).
The most common deep GP construction is a functional composition of GP layers with standard
∗

Contact: daniel.souza.21@ucl.ac.uk.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

