GlucoSynth: Generating Differentially-Private
Synthetic Glucose Traces

Josephine Lamp1,2 Mark Derdzinski2 Christopher Hannemann2
Joost van der Linden2 Lu Feng1 Tianhao Wang1 David Evans1
1
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; 2 Dexcom, USA
jl4rj@virginia.edu; {mark.derdzinski; christopher.hannemann;
joost.vanderlinden}@dexcom.com; {lu.feng; tianhao; evans}@virginia.edu

Abstract
We focus on the problem of generating high-quality, private synthetic glucose
traces, a task generalizable to many other time series sources. Existing methods for
time series data synthesis, such as those using Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs), are not able to capture the innate characteristics of glucose data and cannot
provide any formal privacy guarantees without severely degrading the utility of the
synthetic data. In this paper we present GlucoSynth, a novel privacy-preserving
GAN framework to generate synthetic glucose traces. The core intuition behind our
approach is to conserve relationships amongst motifs (glucose events) within the
traces, in addition to temporal dynamics. Our framework incorporates differential
privacy mechanisms to provide strong formal privacy guarantees. We provide a
comprehensive evaluation on the real-world utility of the data using 1.2 million
glucose traces; GlucoSynth outperforms all previous methods in its ability to
generate high-quality synthetic glucose traces with strong privacy guarantees.

1

Introduction

The sharing of medical time series data can facilitate therapy development. As a motivating example,
sharing glucose traces can contribute to the understanding of diabetes disease mechanisms and the
development of artificial insulin delivery systems that improve people with diabetes’ quality of life.
Unsurprisingly, there are serious legal and privacy concerns (e.g., HIPAA, GDPR) with the sharing of
such granular, longitudinal time series data in a medical context [1]. One solution is to generate a set
of synthetic traces from the original traces. In this way, the synthetic data may be shared publicly in
place of the real ones with significantly reduced privacy and legal concerns.
This paper focuses on the problem of generating high-quality, privacy-preserving synthetic glucose
traces, a task which generalizes to other time series sources and application domains, including
activity sequences, inpatient events, hormone traces and cyber-physical systems. Specifically, we
focus on long (over 200 timesteps), bounded, univariate time series glucose traces. We assume
that available data does not have any labels or extra information including features or metadata,
which is quite common, especially in diabetes. Continuous Glucose Monitors (CGMs) easily and
automatically send glucose measurements taken subcutaneously at fixed intervals (e.g., every 5
minutes) to data storage facilities, but tracking other sources of diabetes-related data is challenging
[2]. We characterize the quality of the generated traces based on three criteria— synthetic traces
should (1) conserve characteristics of the real data, i.e., glucose dynamics and control-related metrics
(fidelity); (2) contain representation of diverse types of realistic traces, without the introduction of
anomalous patterns that do not occur in real traces (breadth); and (3) be usable in place of the original
data for real-world use cases (utility).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

