ProteinNPT: Improving Protein Property Prediction
and Design with Non-Parametric Transformers

Pascal Notin†∗
Computer Science,
University of Oxford

Ruben Weitzman†
Computer Science,
University of Oxford

Debora S. Marks
Harvard Medical School
Broad Institute

Yarin Gal
Computer Science,
University of Oxford

Abstract
Protein design holds immense potential for optimizing naturally occurring proteins,
with broad applications in drug discovery, material design, and sustainability. However, computational methods for protein engineering are confronted with significant
challenges, such as an expansive design space, sparse functional regions, and a
scarcity of available labels. These issues are further exacerbated in practice by the
fact most real-life design scenarios necessitate the simultaneous optimization of
multiple properties. In this work, we introduce ProteinNPT, a non-parametric transformer variant tailored to protein sequences and particularly suited to label-scarce
and multi-task learning settings. We first focus on the supervised fitness prediction
setting and develop several cross-validation schemes which support robust performance assessment. We subsequently reimplement prior top-performing baselines,
introduce several extensions of these baselines by integrating diverse branches of
the protein engineering literature, and demonstrate that ProteinNPT consistently
outperforms all of them across a diverse set of protein property prediction tasks.
Finally, we demonstrate the value of our approach for iterative protein design across
extensive in silico Bayesian optimization and conditional sampling experiments.

1

Introduction

Proteins, vital to most biological processes, have evolved over billions of years, shaping their
structure through countless evolutionary experiments. The vastness of the protein sequence space
offers immense opportunities for enhancing the properties of existing proteins, paving the way for
advancements in healthcare, sustainability, and the development of novel materials [Arnold, 2018,
Huang et al., 2016]. Recent progress in sequencing technologies and machine learning methods
bear the promise to explore this space more efficiently and design functional proteins with the
desired properties. A key step toward that goal is the ability to predict the fitness of novel protein
sequences – i.e., learning a mapping between structure and fitness of proteins, commonly referred
to as a ‘fitness landscape’ [Romero et al., 2013]. However, the protein space is sparsely functional
and experimentally-collected labels about properties of interest are scarce relative to the size of
protein space [Biswas et al., 2021a]. Additionally, real-life protein design scenario often seek to
optimize multiple properties of the protein simultaneously, which further aggravates the label scarcity
issues. Historically, learning fitness landscapes has been tackled by two different lines of research
in the computational biology literature. Firstly, supervised methods are trained to approximate the
∗

Correspondence: pascal.notin@cs.ox.ac.uk, ruben.weitzman@cs.ox.ac.uk; † Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

