Balance, Imbalance, and Rebalance: Understanding
Robust Overfitting from a Minimax Game Perspective

Yifei Wang1∗
yifei wang@pku.edu.cn

Liangchen Li2∗
ll673@cam.ac.uk

Jiansheng Yang1
Zhouchen Lin3, 4, 5 †
Yisen Wang3, 4†
yjs@math.pku.edu.cn
zlin@pku.edu.cn
yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge
3
National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
Adversarial Training (AT) has become arguably the state-of-the-art algorithm for
extracting robust features. However, researchers recently notice that AT suffers
from severe robust overfitting problems, particularly after learning rate (LR) decay.
In this paper, we explain this phenomenon by viewing adversarial training as a
dynamic minimax game between the model trainer and the attacker. Specifically,
we analyze how LR decay breaks the balance between the minimax game by
empowering the trainer with a stronger memorization ability, and show such
imbalance induces robust overfitting as a result of memorizing non-robust features.
We validate this understanding with extensive experiments, and provide a holistic
view of robust overfitting from the dynamics of both the two game players. This
understanding further inspires us to alleviate robust overfitting by rebalancing
the two players by either regularizing the trainer’s capacity or improving the
attack strength. Experiments show that the proposed ReBalanced Adversarial
Training (ReBAT) can attain good robustness and does not suffer from robust
overfitting even after very long training. Code is available at https://github.
com/PKU-ML/ReBAT.

1

Introduction

Overfitting seems to have become a history in the deep learning era. Contrary to the traditional belief
in statistical learning theory that large hypothesis class will lead to overfitting, Zhang et al. [58]
note that DNNs have good generalization ability on test data even if they are capable of memorizing
random training labels. Nowadays, large-scale training often does not require early stopping, and it is
observed that longer training simply brings better generalization [19]. However, researchers recently
notice that in Adversarial Training (AT), overfitting is still a severe issue on both small and large
scale data and models [38]. As the most effective defence against adversarial perturbation [2], AT
solves a minimax optimization problem with training data Dtrain and model fθ [15, 30, 49]:
min Ex̄,y∼Dtrain max ℓCE (fθ (x), y),
(1)
θ

x∈Ep (x̄)

where ℓCE denotes the cross entropy (CE) loss function, Ep (x̄) = {x | ∥x − x̄∥p ≤ ε} denotes the
ℓp -norm ball with radius ε. However, contrary to standard training (ST), AT suffers severely from
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Authors: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn) and Zhouchen Lin (zlin@pku.edu.cn)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

