A Deep Instance Generative Framework for
MILP Solvers Under Limited Data Availability

Zijie Geng1 , Xijun Li1,2 , Jie Wang1,3∗, Xiao Li1 , Yongdong Zhang1 , Feng Wu1
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{ustcgzj,lixijun,xiao_li}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{jiewangx,zhyd73,fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In the past few years, there has been an explosive surge in the use of machine
learning (ML) techniques to address combinatorial optimization (CO) problems,
especially mixed-integer linear programs (MILPs). Despite the achievements,
the limited availability of real-world instances often leads to sub-optimal decisions and biased solver assessments, which motivates a suite of synthetic MILP
instance generation techniques. However, existing methods either rely heavily on
expert-designed formulations or struggle to capture the rich features of real-world
instances. To tackle this problem, we propose G2MILP, the first deep generative
framework for MILP instances. Specifically, G2MILP represents MILP instances
as bipartite graphs, and applies a masked variational autoencoder to iteratively
corrupt and replace parts of the original graphs to generate new ones. The appealing feature of G2MILP is that it can learn to generate novel and realistic MILP
instances without prior expert-designed formulations, while preserving the structures and computational hardness of real-world datasets, simultaneously. Thus the
generated instances can facilitate downstream tasks for enhancing MILP solvers
under limited data availability. We design a suite of benchmarks to evaluate
the quality of the generated MILP instances. Experiments demonstrate that our
method can produce instances that closely resemble real-world datasets in terms
of both structures and computational hardness. The deliverables are released at
https://miralab-ustc.github.io/L2O-G2MILP.

1

Introduction

Mixed-integer linear programming (MILP)—a powerful and versatile modeling technique for many
real-world problems—lies at the core of combinatorial optimization (CO) research and is widely
adopted in various industrial optimization scenarios, such as scheduling [1], planning [2], and
portfolio [3]. While MILPs are N P-hard problems [4], machine learning (ML) techniques have
recently emerged as a powerful approach for either solving them directly or assisting the solving
process [5, 6]. Notable successes include [7] for node selection, [8] for branching decision, and [9]
for cut selection, etc.
Despite the achievements, the limited availability of real-world instances, due to labor-intensive data
collection and proprietary issues, remains a critical challenge to the research community [5, 10, 11].
Developing practical MILP solvers usually requires as many instances as possible to identify issues
through white-box testing [12]. Moreover, machine learning methods for improving MILP solvers
often suffer from sub-optimal decisions and biased assessments under limited data availability, thus
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

