SoTTA: Robust Test-Time Adaptation on Noisy Data
Streams
Taesik Gong†∗ Yewon Kim‡∗ Taeckyung Lee‡∗ Sorn Chottananurak‡ Sung-Ju Lee‡
†
Nokia Bell Labs ‡ KAIST
taesik.gong@nokia-bell-labs.com
{yewon.e.kim,taeckyung,sorn111930,profsj}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) aims to address distributional shifts between training and testing data using only unlabeled test data streams for continual model
adaptation. However, most TTA methods assume benign test streams, while test
samples could be unexpectedly diverse in the wild. For instance, an unseen object
or noise could appear in autonomous driving. This leads to a new threat to existing
TTA algorithms; we found that prior TTA algorithms suffer from those noisy test
samples as they blindly adapt to incoming samples. To address this problem, we
present Screening-out Test-Time Adaptation (SoTTA), a novel TTA algorithm
that is robust to noisy samples. The key enabler of SoTTA is two-fold: (i) inputwise robustness via high-confidence uniform-class sampling that effectively filters
out the impact of noisy samples and (ii) parameter-wise robustness via entropysharpness minimization that improves the robustness of model parameters against
large gradients from noisy samples. Our evaluation with standard TTA benchmarks
with various noisy scenarios shows that our method outperforms state-of-the-art
TTA methods under the presence of noisy samples and achieves comparable accuracy to those methods without noisy samples. The source code is available at
https://github.com/taeckyung/SoTTA.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved remarkable performance in various domains [6, 8, 33], but its effectiveness
is often limited when the test and training data distributions are misaligned. This phenomenon, known
as domain shift [31], is prevalent in real-world scenarios where unexpected environmental changes
and noises result in poor model performance. For instance, in autonomous driving, weather conditions
can change rapidly. To address this challenge, Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) [1, 5, 29, 38, 39, 44] has
emerged as a promising paradigm that aims to improve the generalization ability of deep learning
models by adapting them to test samples, without requiring further data collection or labeling costs.
While TTA has been acknowledged as a promising method for enhancing the robustness of machine
learning models against domain shifts, the evaluation of TTA frequently relies on the assumption that
the test stream contains only benign test samples of interest. However, test data can be unexpectedly
diverse in real-world settings, containing not only relevant data but also extraneous elements that
are outside the model’s scope, which we refer to noisy samples (Figure 1). For instance, unexpected
noises can be introduced in autonomous driving scenarios, such as dust on the camera or adversarial
samples by malicious users. As shown in Figure 2, we found that most of the prior TTA algorithms
showed significantly degraded accuracy with the presence of noisy samples (e.g., 81.0% → 52.1% in
TENT [38] and 82.2% → 54.8% in CoTTA [39]).
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

