Differentiable Blocks World:
Qualitative 3D Decomposition by Rendering Primitives

Tom Monnier1
1

Jake Austin2

Angjoo Kanazawa2

Alexei A. Efros2

LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel

2

Mathieu Aubry1

UC Berkeley

Abstract
Given a set of calibrated images of a scene, we present an approach that produces
a simple, compact, and actionable 3D world representation by means of 3D
primitives. While many approaches focus on recovering high-fidelity 3D scenes,
we focus on parsing a scene into mid-level 3D representations made of a small set
of textured primitives. Such representations are interpretable, easy to manipulate
and suited for physics-based simulations. Moreover, unlike existing primitive
decomposition methods that rely on 3D input data, our approach operates directly
on images through differentiable rendering. Specifically, we model primitives as
textured superquadric meshes and optimize their parameters from scratch with an
image rendering loss. We highlight the importance of modeling transparency for
each primitive, which is critical for optimization and also enables handling varying
numbers of primitives. We show that the resulting textured primitives faithfully
reconstruct the input images and accurately model the visible 3D points, while
providing amodal shape completions of unseen object regions. We compare our
approach to the state of the art on diverse scenes from DTU, and demonstrate its
robustness on real-life captures from BlendedMVS and Nerfstudio. We also showcase how our results can be used to effortlessly edit a scene or perform physical
simulations. Code and video results are available at www.tmonnier.com/DBW.

1

Introduction

Recent multi-view modeling approaches, building on Neural Radiance Fields [45], capture scenes
with astonishing accuracy by optimizing a dense occupancy and color model. However, they do not
incorporate any notion of objects, they are not easily interpretable for a human user or a standard
3D modeling software, and they are not useful for physical understanding of the scene. In fact,
even though these approaches can achieve a high-quality 3D reconstruction, the recovered content is
nothing but a soup of colorful particles! In contrast, we propose an approach that recovers textured
primitives, which are compact, actionable, and interpretable.
More concretely, our method takes as input a collection of calibrated images of a scene, and optimizes
a set of primitive meshes parametrized by superquadrics [1] and their UV textures to minimize a
rendering loss. The approach we present is robust enough to work directly from a random initialization.
One of its key components is the optimization of a transparency parameter for each primitive, which
helps in dealing with occlusions as well as handling varying number of primitives. This notably
requires adapting standard differentiable renderers to deal with transparency. We also show the
benefits of using a perceptual loss, a total variation regularization on the textures and a parsimony
loss favoring the use of a minimal number of primitives.
Our scene representation harks back to the classical Blocks World ideas [59]. An important difference
is that the Blocks World-inspired approaches are typically bottom-up, leveraging low-level image
features, such as edges [59], super-pixels [21], or more recently learned features [72, 32], to infer
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

