Abide by the Law and Follow the Flow:
Conservation Laws for Gradient Flows
Sibylle Marcotte
ENS - PSL Univ.
sibylle.marcotte@ens.fr

Rémi Gribonval
Univ Lyon, EnsL, UCBL,
CNRS, Inria, LIP,
remi.gribonval@inria.fr

Gabriel Peyré
CNRS, ENS - PSL Univ.
gabriel.peyre@ens.fr

Abstract
Understanding the geometric properties of gradient descent dynamics is a key
ingredient in deciphering the recent success of very large machine learning models. A striking observation is that trained over-parameterized models retain some
properties of the optimization initialization. This “implicit bias” is believed to be
responsible for some favorable properties of the trained models and could explain
their good generalization properties. The purpose of this article is threefold. First,
we rigorously expose the definition and basic properties of “conservation laws”,
that define quantities conserved during gradient flows of a given model (e.g. of a
ReLU network with a given architecture) with any training data and any loss. Then
we explain how to find the maximal number of independent conservation laws by
performing finite-dimensional algebraic manipulations on the Lie algebra generated
by the Jacobian of the model. Finally, we provide algorithms to: a) compute a
family of polynomial laws; b) compute the maximal number of (not necessarily
polynomial) independent conservation laws. We provide showcase examples that
we fully work out theoretically. Besides, applying the two algorithms confirms for
a number of ReLU network architectures that all known laws are recovered by the
algorithm, and that there are no other independent laws. Such computational tools
pave the way to understanding desirable properties of optimization initialization in
large machine learning models.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art approaches in machine learning rely on the conjunction of gradient-based optimization
with vastly “over-parameterized” architectures. A large body of empirical [30] and theoretical [5]
works suggest that, despite the ability of these models to almost interpolate the input data, they are
still able to generalize well. Analyzing the training dynamics of these models is thus crucial to gain a
better understanding of this phenomenon. Of particular interest is to understand what properties of
the initialization are preserved during the dynamics, which is often loosely referred to as being an
“implicit bias” of the training algorithm. The goal of this article is to make this statement precise, by
properly defining maximal sets of such “conservation laws”, by linking these quantities to algebraic
computations (namely a Lie algebra) associated with the model parameterization (in our framework,
this parameterization is embodied by a re-parameterization mapping ), and finally by exhibiting
algorithms to implement these computations in SageMath [29].
Over-parameterized model Modern machine learning practitioners and researchers have found
that over-parameterized neural networks (with more parameters than training data points), which
are often trained until perfect interpolation, have impressive generalization properties [30, 5]. This
performance seemingly contradicts classical learning theory [25], and a large part of the theoretical
deep learning literature aims at explaining this puzzle. The choice of the optimization algorithm is
crucial to the model generalization performance [10, 21, 14], thus inducing an implicit bias.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

