Where Did I Come From? Origin Attribution of
AI-Generated Images

Zhenting Wang∗
Rutgers University
zhenting.wang@rutgers.edu
Lingjuan Lyu†
Sony AI
Lingjuan.Lv@sony.com

Chen Chen
Sony AI
ChenA.Chen@sony.com

Yi Zeng
Virginia Tech
yizeng@vt.edu

Shiqing Ma
University of Massachusetts Amherst
shiqingma@umass.edu

Abstract
Image generation techniques have been gaining increasing attention recently, but
concerns have been raised about the potential misuse and intellectual property (IP)
infringement associated with image generation models. It is, therefore, necessary
to analyze the origin of images by inferring if a specific image was generated by a
particular model, i.e., origin attribution. Existing methods only focus on specific
types of generative models and require additional procedures during the training
phase or generation phase. This makes them unsuitable for pre-trained models that
lack these specific operations and may impair generation quality. To address this
problem, we first develop an alteration-free and model-agnostic origin attribution
method via reverse-engineering on image generation models, i.e., inverting the
input of a particular model for a specific image. Given a particular model, we first
analyze the differences in the hardness of reverse-engineering tasks for generated
samples of the given model and other images. Based on our analysis, we then
propose a method that utilizes the reconstruction loss of reverse-engineering to
infer the origin. Our proposed method effectively distinguishes between generated
images of a specific generative model and other images, i.e., images generated by
other models and real images.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been a rapid evolution in image generation techniques. With the advances
in visual generative models, images can now be easily created with high quality and diversity [1–
4]. There are three important milestones in the field of image generation and manipulation, i.e.,
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [5], Variational AutoEncoders (VAE) [6], and diffusion
models [7]. Various image generation models are built based on these three models [8–13] to make
the AI-generated images more realistic.
With its wide adoption, the security and privacy of image generation models becomes critical [14–19].
One severe and important issue is the potential misuse and intellectual property (IP) infringement of
image generation models [16, 18]. Users may generate malicious images containing inappropriate or
biased content using these models and distribute them online. Furthermore, trained models may be
used without authorization, violating the model owner’s intellectual property. For example, malicious
users may steal the model’s parameters file and use it for commercial purposes. Others may create
AI-generated images and falsely claim them as their own artwork (e.g., photos and paintings) to
∗
†

Work partially done during Zhenting Wang’s internship at Sony AI.
Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

