Compositional Policy Learning in Stochastic Control
Systems with Formal Guarantees

Ðord̄e Žikelić∗
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
Klosterneuburg, Austria
djordje.zikelic@ist.ac.at
Abhinav Verma
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
verma@psu.edu

Mathias Lechner∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, USA
mlechner@mit.edu

Krishnendu Chatterjee
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
Klosterneuburg, Austria
krishnendu.chatterjee@ist.ac.at

Thomas A. Henzinger
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
Klosterneuburg, Austria
tah@ist.ac.at

Abstract
Reinforcement learning has shown promising results in learning neural network
policies for complicated control tasks. However, the lack of formal guarantees
about the behavior of such policies remains an impediment to their deployment.
We propose a novel method for learning a composition of neural network policies
in stochastic environments, along with a formal certificate which guarantees that
a specification over the policy’s behavior is satisfied with the desired probability.
Unlike prior work on verifiable RL, our approach leverages the compositional
nature of logical specifications provided in S PECT RL, to learn over graphs of probabilistic reach-avoid specifications. The formal guarantees are provided by learning
neural network policies together with reach-avoid supermartingales (RASM) for
the graph’s sub-tasks and then composing them into a global policy. We also
derive a tighter lower bound compared to previous work on the probability of
reach-avoidance implied by a RASM, which is required to find a compositional
policy with an acceptable probabilistic threshold for complex tasks with multiple
edge policies. We implement a prototype of our approach and evaluate it on a
Stochastic Nine Rooms environment.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved promising results in a variety of control tasks. However,
the main objective of RL is to maximize expected reward [56] which does not provide guarantees
of the system’s safety. A more recent paradigm in safe RL considers constrained Markov decision
processes (cMDPs) [5, 26, 3, 21], that in addition to a reward function are also equipped with a cost
function. The goal in solving cMDPs is to maximize expected reward while keeping expected cost
below some tolerable threshold. Recently, keeping cost below the threshold almost-surely and not only
in expectation was considered in [52]. While these methods do enhance safety, they only empirically
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

