Language models are weak learners

Hariharan Manikandan1 Yiding Jiang1 J Zico Kolter1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Bosch Center for AI
{hmanikan, yidingji, zkolter}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
A central notion in practical and theoretical machine learning is that of a weak
learner, classifiers that achieve better-than-random performance (on any given
distribution over data), even by a small margin. Such weak learners form the
practical basis for canonical machine learning methods such as boosting. In this
work, we illustrate that prompt-based large language models can operate effectively
as said weak learners. Specifically, we illustrate the use of a large language model
(LLM) as a weak learner in a boosting algorithm applied to tabular data. We show
that by providing (properly sampled according to the distribution of interest) text
descriptions of tabular data samples, LLMs can produce a summary of the samples
that serves as a template for classification and achieves the aim of acting as a
weak learner on this task. We incorporate these models into a boosting approach,
which in some settings can leverage the knowledge within the LLM to outperform
traditional tree-based boosting. The model outperforms both few-shot learning
and occasionally even more involved fine-tuning procedures, particularly for tasks
involving small numbers of data points. The results illustrate the potential for
prompt-based LLMs to function not just as few-shot learners themselves, but as
components of larger machine learning pipelines.

1

Introduction

Weak learners refer to classifiers that are able to attain better performance than random chance, by
some given margin, on any specified distribution over training data. One of the early breakthroughs in
machine learning established that this weak learning was sufficient for arbitrarily strong classification,
via an ensembling procedure [Schapire, 1990]. This approach in turn led to the development of
boosting algorithms [Freund and Schapire, 1997], a class of approaches that continue to perform
extremely well, particularly on tabular datasets that lack the input space regularity of vision or
language tasks.
In a seemingly separate thread of research, large language models (LLMs) based on transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017] in recent years have come to dominate many natural language domains.
These models are often finetuned on the data of new downstream tasks [Devlin et al., 2018, Liu
et al., 2019], but in recent years have also been shown to exhibit strong performance as zero-shot or
few-shot learning solely via prompting the model [Brown et al., 2020] with a piece of context string.
In this paper, we align these two threads of research and ask a simple question: can LLMs also serve
as weak learners in a boosting framework, specifically on tabular data (where boosting methods
are most commonly applied)? We answer this question largely in the affirmative. Specifically, we
show that by appropriately converting tabular data to text form, and asking LLMs to summarize a
carefully chosen set of examples from the data, we produce a summary of the examples that can serve
as a template (i.e., a prompt) for a tabular data classifier, and one which typically achieves this weak
learning aim. This enables us to correspondingly integrate this collection of LLM-generated weak
learners into a boosting framework.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

