Should We Learn
Most Likely Functions or Parameters?

Shikai Qiu∗

Tim G. J. Rudner∗

Sanyam Kapoor∗

Andrew Gordon Wilson

New York University

Abstract
Standard regularized training procedures correspond to maximizing a posterior
distribution over parameters, known as maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation.
However, model parameters are of interest only insomuch as they combine with the
functional form of a model to provide a function that can make good predictions.
Moreover, the most likely parameters under the parameter posterior do not generally
correspond to the most likely function induced by the parameter posterior. In fact,
we can re-parametrize a model such that any setting of parameters can maximize the
parameter posterior. As an alternative, we investigate the benefits and drawbacks
of directly estimating the most likely function implied by the model and the data.
We show that this procedure leads to pathological solutions when using neural
networks and prove conditions under which the procedure is well-behaved, as well
as a scalable approximation. Under these conditions, we find that function-space
MAP estimation can lead to flatter minima, better generalization, and improved
robustness to overfitting.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has matured to the point where we often take key design decisions for granted. One
of the most fundamental such decisions is the loss function we use to train our models. Minimizing
standard regularized loss functions, including cross-entropy for classification and mean-squared or
mean-absolute error for regression, with ℓ1 or ℓ2 regularization, exactly corresponds to maximizing a
posterior distribution over model parameters [2, 19]. This standard procedure is known in probabilistic
modeling as maximum a posteriori (MAP) parameter estimation. However, parameters have no
meaning independent of the functional form of the models they parameterize. In particular, our
models fθ (x) are functions given parameters θ, which map inputs x (e.g., images, spatial locations,
etc.) to targets (e.g., softmax probabilities, regression outputs, etc.). We are typically only directly
interested in the function and its properties, such as smoothness, which we use to make predictions.
Alarmingly, the function corresponding to the most likely parameters under the parameter posterior
does not generally correspond to the most likely function under the function posterior. For example,
in Figure 1a, we visualize the posterior over a mixture coefficient θR in a Gaussian mixture regression
model in both parameter and function space, using the same Gaussian prior for the mixture coefficients
(corresponding to ℓ2 regularization in parameter space). We see that each distribution is maximized
by a different parameter θR , leading to very different learned functions in Figure 1b. Moreover, we
can re-parametrize the functional form of any model such that any arbitrary setting of parameters
maximizes the parameter posterior (we provide further discussion and an example in Appendix A).
Should we then be learning the most likely functions or parameters? As we will see, the nuanced
pros and cons of each approach are fascinating and often unexpected.
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

