Convergence Analysis of Sequential Federated
Learning on Heterogeneous Data

Yipeng Li and Xinchen Lyu ∗
National Engineering Research Center for Mobile Network Technologies
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing, 100876, China
{liyipeng, lvxinchen}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
There are two categories of methods in Federated Learning (FL) for joint training
across multiple clients: i) parallel FL (PFL), where clients train models in a parallel manner; and ii) sequential FL (SFL), where clients train models in a sequential
manner. In contrast to that of PFL, the convergence theory of SFL on heterogeneous data is still lacking. In this paper, we establish the convergence guarantees
of SFL for strongly/general/non-convex objectives on heterogeneous data. The
convergence guarantees of SFL are better than that of PFL on heterogeneous data
with both full and partial client participation. Experimental results validate the
counterintuitive analysis result that SFL outperforms PFL on extremely heterogeneous data in cross-device settings.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) is a popular distributed machine learning paradigm,
where multiple clients collaborate to train a global model. To preserve data privacy and security, data
must be kept in clients locally cannot be shared with others, causing one severe and persistent issue,
namely “data heterogeneity”. In cross-device FL, where data is generated and kept in massively distributed resource-constrained devices (e.g., IoT devices), the negative impact of data heterogeneity
would be further exacerbated (Jhunjhunwala et al., 2023).
There are two categories of methods in FL to enable distributed training across multiple clients (Qu
et al., 2022): i) parallel FL (PFL), where models are trained in a parallel manner across clients with
synchronization at intervals, e.g., Federated Averaging (FedAvg) (McMahan et al., 2017); and ii)
sequential FL (SFL), where models are trained in a sequential manner across clients, e.g., Cyclic
Weight Transfer (CWT) (Chang et al., 2018). However, both categories of methods suffer from the
“client drift” (Karimireddy et al., 2020), i.e., the local updates on heterogeneous clients would drift
away from the right direction, resulting in performance degradation.
Motivation. Recently, SFL (more generally, the sequential training manner, see Algorithm 1) has
attracted much attention in the FL community (Lee et al., 2020). Specifically, SFL demonstrates
advantages on training speed (in terms of training rounds) (Zaccone et al., 2022) and small datasets
(Kamp et al., 2023), and both are crucial for cross-device FL. Furthermore, the sequential manner
has played a great role in Split learning (SL) (Gupta and Raskar, 2018; Thapa et al., 2022), an
emerging distributed learning technology at the edge side (Zhou et al., 2019), where the full model
is split into client-side and server-side portions to alleviate the excessive computation overhead for
resource-constrained devices. Appendix A will show that the convergence theory in this work is also
applicable to SL.
∗

Xinchen Lyu is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

