Into the Single Cell Multiverse:
an End-to-End Dataset for Procedural Knowledge
Extraction in Biomedical Texts
Ruth Dannenfelser1
Jeffrey Zhong1
Ran Zhang2
Vicky Yao1∗
1
Department of Computer Science, Rice University
2
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington

Abstract
Many of the most commonly explored natural language processing (NLP) information extraction tasks can be thought of as evaluations of declarative knowledge, or
fact-based information extraction. Procedural knowledge extraction, i.e., breaking
down a described process into a series of steps, has received much less attention,
perhaps in part due to the lack of structured datasets that capture the knowledge extraction process from end-to-end. To address this unmet need, we present FlaMBé
(Flow annotations for Multiverse Biological entities), a collection of expert-curated
datasets across a series of complementary tasks that capture procedural knowledge
in biomedical texts. This dataset is inspired by the observation that one ubiquitous
source of procedural knowledge that is described as unstructured text is within academic papers describing their methodology. The workflows annotated in FlaMBé
are from texts in the burgeoning field of single cell research, a research area that has
become notorious for the number of software tools and complexity of workflows
used. Additionally, FlaMBé provides, to our knowledge, the largest manually
curated named entity recognition (NER) and disambiguation (NED) datasets for
tissue/cell type, a fundamental biological entity that is critical for knowledge extraction in the biomedical research domain. Beyond providing a valuable dataset to
enable further development of NLP models for procedural knowledge extraction,
automating the process of workflow mining also has important implications for
advancing reproducibility in biomedical research.

1

Introduction

The recent onslaught of pre-trained language models has spurred on tremendous advances in a range
of natural language processing (NLP) applications, including named entity recognition (NER), named
entity disambiguation (NED), sentiment analysis, and relation extraction [1–5]. These applications
mostly fall under the umbrella of tasks that aim to extract declarative knowledge, sometimes also
referred to as “knowing that,” since these tasks focus on matters of factual knowledge (e.g., knowing
that “neuron” is a cell type) [6, 7]. Declarative knowledge is often contrasted with procedural
knowledge, or “knowing how,” (e.g., knowing how to conduct an experiment) [6, 7]. Early AI
researchers raised the importance of developing representations of procedural knowledge, given
that performing plans or procedures is a fundamental way in which humans navigate the world
[8]. However, compared with declarative knowledge extraction, there remains a vast gap in the
development and application of machine learning methods towards procedural knowledge tasks [9].
Recently, there has begun to be a renewed interest in using machine learning to model procedural
knowledge, especially knowledge extraction from text using NLP. These efforts have mostly focused
∗

Address correspondence to: vy@rice.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

