NAVI: Category-Agnostic Image Collections with
High-Quality 3D Shape and Pose Annotations

Varun Jampani∗
Kevis-Kokitsi Maninis∗
Andreas Engelhardt
Arjun Karpur
Karen Truong
Kyle Sargent
Stefan Popov
André Araujo
Ricardo Martin-Brualla
Kaushal Patel
Daniel Vlasic
Vittorio Ferrari
Ameesh Makadia
Ce Liu†
Yuanzhen Li
Howard Zhou
Google

Abstract
Recent advances in neural reconstruction enable high-quality 3D object reconstruction from casually captured image collections. Current techniques mostly
analyze their progress on relatively simple image collections where Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) techniques can provide ground-truth (GT) camera poses. We
note that SfM techniques tend to fail on in-the-wild image collections such as
image search results with varying backgrounds and illuminations. To enable systematic research progress on 3D reconstruction from casual image captures, we
propose ‘NAVI’: a new dataset of category-agnostic image collections of objects
with high-quality 3D scans along with per-image 2D-3D alignments providing
near-perfect GT camera parameters. These 2D-3D alignments allow us to extract
accurate derivative annotations such as dense pixel correspondences, depth and
segmentation maps. We demonstrate the use of NAVI image collections on different
problem settings and show that NAVI enables more thorough evaluations that were
not possible with existing datasets. We believe NAVI is beneficial for systematic
research progress on 3D reconstruction and correspondence estimation. Project
page: https://navidataset.github.io

1

Introduction

The field of 3D object reconstruction from images or videos has been dramatically transformed in the
recent years with the advent of techniques such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [43]. With recent
techniques, we can reconstruct highly detailed and realistic 3D object models from multiview image
captures, which can be used in several downstream applications such as gaming, AR/VR, movies, etc.
Despite such tremendous progress, current object reconstruction techniques make several inherent
assumptions to obtain high-quality 3D models. A key assumption is that the near-perfect camera poses
and intrinsics are given or readily available via traditional Structure-from-Motion (SfM) pipelines
such as COLMAP [52]. This assumption imposes several restrictions on the input image collections.
The input images have to be of sufficiently high-quality (e.g. non-blurry) and the number of input
images should also be high (typically > 30-50) for SfM to estimate sufficient correspondences across
images. In addition, SfM techniques typically fail on internet image sets that are captured with
varying backgrounds, illuminations, and cameras. Such internet image collections do not require
active capturing and are widely and readily available, such as product review photos or image search
results (e.g., internet images of Statue-of-Liberty, Tesla Model-3 car, etc.). It is highly beneficial to
develop 3D object reconstruction techniques that can automatically produce high-quality 3D models
from such image collections in the wild.
*
†

Equal contribution
C. Liu’s current affiliation is Microsoft

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

