Intensity Profile Projection: A Framework for
Continuous-Time Representation Learning for
Dynamic Networks

Alexander Modell1

Ian Gallagher2 Emma Ceccherini2 Nick Whiteley2
Patrick Rubin-Delanchy2
1
Imperial College London, U.K. 2 University of Bristol, U.K.
a.modell@imperial.ac.uk, {ian.gallagher,emma.ceccherini,
nick.whiteley,patrick.rubin-delanchy}@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a new representation learning framework, Intensity Profile Projection,
for continuous-time dynamic network data. Given triples (i, j, t), each representing
a time-stamped (t) interaction between two entities (i, j), our procedure returns a
continuous-time trajectory for each node, representing its behaviour over time. The
framework consists of three stages: estimating pairwise intensity functions, e.g.
via kernel smoothing; learning a projection which minimises a notion of intensity
reconstruction error; and constructing evolving node representations via the learned
projection. The trajectories satisfy two properties, known as structural and temporal
coherence, which we see as fundamental for reliable inference. Moreoever, we
develop estimation theory providing tight control on the error of any estimated
trajectory, indicating that the representations could even be used in quite noisesensitive follow-on analyses. The theory also elucidates the role of smoothing as a
bias-variance trade-off, and shows how we can reduce the level of smoothing as
the signal-to-noise ratio increases on account of the algorithm ‘borrowing strength’
across the network.

1

Introduction

Making sense of patterns of connections occurring over time is a common theme of modern data
analysis and is often approached in one of two ways. On the one hand, we may see dynamic network
data as a graph, in which connections between the same entities over time are somehow treated as
one, e.g. through weighting. This view evokes methodological ideas such as community detection
[1, 2], topological data analysis [3], or manifold learning [4, 5]. On the other, we may see the data as
a set of point processes [6], each modelling the event times of connections between two entities. This
view evokes temporal notions such as trend, changepoints and periodicity.
In this paper, we develop a representation learning framework for continuous-time dynamic network
data in which ideas from both the graph and temporal domains can be combined. The framework
obtains a continuously evolving trajectory for each node which represents its continuously evolving
behaviour in the network. These trajectories can be used for data exploration, inference and prediction tasks such as spatio-temporal clustering, behavioural analytics, detecting network trends and
periodicities, and forecasting. Our framework provides two basic guarantees which could reasonably
be viewed as minimum requirements for these tasks:
1. structural coherence: when two nodes exhibit similar behaviour at a point in time, their
representations at that time are close;
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

