Leveraging the two-timescale regime
to demonstrate convergence of neural networks

Pierre Marion
Sorbonne Université, CNRS,
Laboratoire de Probabilités, Statistique et Modélisation, LPSM,
F-75005 Paris, France
pierre.marion@sorbonne-universite.fr
Raphaël Berthier
EPFL, Switzerland
raphael.berthier@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study the training dynamics of shallow neural networks, in a two-timescale
regime in which the stepsizes for the inner layer are much smaller than those for the
outer layer. In this regime, we prove convergence of the gradient flow to a global
optimum of the non-convex optimization problem in a simple univariate setting.
The number of neurons need not be asymptotically large for our result to hold,
distinguishing our result from popular recent approaches such as the neural tangent
kernel or mean-field regimes. Experimental illustration is provided, showing that
the stochastic gradient descent behaves according to our description of the gradient
flow and thus converges to a global optimum in the two-timescale regime, but can
fail outside of this regime.

1

Introduction

Artificial neural networks are among the most successful modern machine learning methods, in
particular because their non-linear parametrization provides a flexible way to implement feature
learning (see, e.g., Goodfellow et al., 2016, chapter 15). Following this empirical success, a large
body of work has been dedicated to understanding their theoretical properties, and in particular to
analyzing the optimization algorithm used to tune their parameters. It usually consists in minimizing
a loss function through stochastic gradient descent (SGD) or a variant (Bottou et al., 2018). However,
the non-linearity of the parametrization implies that the loss function is non-convex, breaking the
standard convexity assumption that ensures global convergence of gradient descent algorithms.
In this paper, we study the training dynamics of shallow neural networks, i.e., of the form
f (x; a, u) = a0 +

m
X

aj g(x; uj ) ,

j=1

where m denotes the number of hidden neurons, a = (a0 , . . . , am ) and u = (u1 , . . . , um ) denote
respectively the outer and inner layer parameters, and g(x; u) denotes a non-linear function of x
and u. The novelty of this work lies in the use of a so-called two-timescale regime (Borkar, 1997) to
train the neural network: we set stepsizes for the inner layer u to be an order of magnitude smaller
than the stepsizes of the outer layer a. This ratio is controlled by a parameter ε. In the regime
ε ≪ 1, the neural network can be thought of as a fitted linear regression with slowly evolving features
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

