Zeroth-Order Methods for Nondifferentiable,
Nonconvex, and Hierarchical Federated Optimization

Yuyang Qiu
Dept. of Industrial and Systems Engg.
Rutgers University
yuyang.qiu@rutgers.edu

Uday V. Shanbhag
Dept. of Industrial and Manufacturing Engg.
Pennsylvania State University
udaybag@psu.edu

Farzad Yousefian
Dept. of Industrial and Systems Engg.
Rutgers University
farzad.yousefian@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as an enabling framework for communicationefficient decentralized training. We study three broadly applicable problem classes
in FL: (i) Nondifferentiable nonconvex federated optimization; (ii) Federated
bilevel optimization; (iii) Federated minimax problems. Notably, in an implicit
sense, both (ii) and (iii) are instances of (i). However, the hierarchical problems
in (ii) and (iii) are often complicated by the absence of a closed-form expression
for the implicit objective function. Unfortunately, research on these problems
has been limited and afflicted by reliance on strong assumptions, including the
need for differentiability and L-smoothness of the implicit function. We address
this shortcoming by making the following contributions. In (i), by leveraging
convolution-based smoothing and Clarke’s subdifferential calculus, we devise a
randomized smoothing-enabled zeroth-order FL method and derive communication and iteration complexity guarantees for computing an approximate Clarke
stationary point. To contend with (ii) and (iii), we devise a unified randomized
implicit zeroth-order FL framework, equipped with explicit communication and
iteration complexities. Importantly, our method utilizes delays during local steps to
skip making calls to the inexact lower-level FL oracle. This results in significant
reduction in communication overhead when addressing hierarchical problems. We
empirically validate the theory on nonsmooth and hierarchical ML problems.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) has recently emerged as a promising enabling framework for learning
predictive models from a multitude of distributed, privacy-sensitive, and possibly, heterogeneous
datasets. This is accomplished through the use of efficiently devised periodic communications
between a central server and a collection of clients. The FL algorithmic framework allows for
addressing several key obstacles in the development and implementation of standard machine learning
methods in a distributed and parallel manner. For instance, the conventional parallel stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) method requires the exchange of information among the computing nodes
at every single time step, resulting in excessive communication overhead. In contrast, FL methods
including FedAvg [34] and Local SGD [46] overcome this onerous communication bottleneck by
provably attaining the linear speedup of parallel SGD by using a significantly fewer communication
rounds [18, 54, 24, 7]. These guarantees have been further complemented by recent efforts [26,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

