Differentially Private Decoupled Graph Convolutions
for Multigranular Topology Protection

Eli Chien∗
UIUC & GaTech
ichien3@illinois.edu
ichien6@gatech.edu
Pan Li
GaTech
panli@gatech.edu

Wei-Ning Chen∗
Stanford University
wnchen@stanford.edu

Ayfer Özgür
Stanford University
aozgur@stanford.edu

Chao Pan∗
UIUC
chaopan2@illinois.edu

Olgica Milenkovic
UIUC
milenkov@illinois.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have proven to be highly effective in solving
real-world learning problems that involve graph-structured data. However, GNNs
can also inadvertently expose sensitive user information and interactions through
their model predictions. To address these privacy concerns, Differential Privacy
(DP) protocols are employed to control the trade-off between provable privacy
protection and model utility. Applying standard DP approaches to GNNs directly
is not advisable due to two main reasons. First, the prediction of node labels,
which relies on neighboring node attributes through graph convolutions, can lead
to privacy leakage. Second, in practical applications, the privacy requirements
for node attributes and graph topology may differ. In the latter setting, existing
DP-GNN models fail to provide multigranular trade-offs between graph topology
privacy, node attribute privacy, and GNN utility. To address both limitations, we
propose a new framework termed Graph Differential Privacy (GDP), specifically
tailored to graph learning. GDP ensures both provably private model parameters
as well as private predictions. Additionally, we describe a novel unified notion of
graph dataset adjacency to analyze the properties of GDP for different levels of
graph topology privacy. Our findings reveal that DP-GNNs, which rely on graph
convolutions, not only fail to meet the requirements for multigranular graph topology privacy but also necessitate the injection of DP noise that scales at least linearly
with the maximum node degree. In contrast, our proposed Differentially Private
Decoupled Graph Convolutions (DPDGCs) represent a more flexible and efficient
alternative to graph convolutions that still provides the necessary guarantees of
GDP. To validate our approach, we conducted extensive experiments on seven
node classification benchmarking and illustrative synthetic datasets. The results
demonstrate that DPDGCs significantly outperform existing DP-GNNs in terms of
privacy-utility trade-offs. Our code is publicly available2 .

1

Introduction

Graph learning methods, such as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [1–5], are indispensable learning
tools due to the ubiquity of graph-structured data and their importance in solving real-world problems
∗
2

Equal contribution.
https://github.com/thupchnsky/dp-gnn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

