A Neural Collapse Perspective on Feature Evolution in
Graph Neural Networks

Vignesh Kothapalli ∗
New York University

Tom Tirer
Bar-Ilan University

Joan Bruna
New York University

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have become increasingly popular for classification
tasks on graph-structured data. Yet, the interplay between graph topology and
feature evolution in GNNs is not well understood. In this paper, we focus on nodewise classification, illustrated with community detection on stochastic block model
graphs, and explore the feature evolution through the lens of the “Neural Collapse”
(NC) phenomenon. When training instance-wise deep classifiers (e.g. for image
classification) beyond the zero training error point, NC demonstrates a reduction in
the deepest features’ within-class variability and an increased alignment of their
class means to certain symmetric structures. We start with an empirical study that
shows that a decrease in within-class variability is also prevalent in the node-wise
classification setting, however, not to the extent observed in the instance-wise case.
Then, we theoretically study this distinction. Specifically, we show that even an
“optimistic” mathematical model requires that the graphs obey a strict structural
condition in order to possess a minimizer with exact collapse. Interestingly, this
condition is viable also for heterophilic graphs and relates to recent empirical
studies on settings with improved GNNs’ generalization. Furthermore, by studying
the gradient dynamics of the theoretical model, we provide reasoning for the partial
collapse observed empirically. Finally, we present a study on the evolution of
within- and between-class feature variability across layers of a well-trained GNN
and contrast the behavior with spectral methods.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks [52] employ message-passing mechanisms to capture intricate topological
relationships in data and have become de-facto standard architectures to handle data with nonEuclidean geometric structure [11, 12, 22, 24, 33, 60, 63, 66, 70]. However, the influence of
topological information on feature learning in GNNs is yet to be fully understood [40, 64, 69, 72].
In this paper, we study the feature evolution in GNNs in a node-wise supervised classification setting.
In order to gain insights into the role of topology, we focus on the controlled environment of the
prominent stochastic block model (SBM) [1–3, 29, 45]. The SBM provides an effective framework
to control the level of sparsity, homophily, and heterophily in the random graphs and facilitates
analysis of GNN which relies solely on structural information [8, 16, 32, 40, 42, 49]. While inductive
supervised learning on graphs is a relatively more difficult problem than transductive learning, it
aligns with practical scenarios where nodes need to be classified in unseen graphs [24], and is also
amenable to training GNNs that are deeper than conventional shallow Graph Convolution Network
(GCN) models [14, 16, 32, 35, 47, 62, 62, 70].
The empirical and theoretical study of GNNs’ feature evolution in this paper employs a “Neural
Collapse” perspective [48]. When training Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) for classification, it
∗

Correspondence to: Vignesh Kothapalli (vk2115@nyu.edu)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

