D ECODING T RUST: A Comprehensive Assessment of
Trustworthiness in GPT Models

Boxin Wang1∗, Weixin Chen1∗ , Hengzhi Pei1∗ , Chulin Xie1∗ , Mintong Kang1∗ , Chenhui Zhang1∗ ,
Chejian Xu1 , Zidi Xiong1 , Ritik Dutta1 , Rylan Schaeffer2 , Sang T. Truong2 ,
Simran Arora2 , Mantas Mazeika1 , Dan Hendrycks3,4 , Zinan Lin5 ,
Yu Cheng6†, Sanmi Koyejo2 , Dawn Song3 , Bo Li1∗
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Stanford University
3
University of California, Berkeley
4
Center for AI Safety
5
Microsoft Corporation
6
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

WARNING: This paper contains model outputs which are offensive in nature

Abstract
Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) models have exhibited exciting progress
in their capabilities, capturing the interest of practitioners and the public alike.
Yet, while the literature on the trustworthiness of GPT models remains limited,
practitioners have proposed employing capable GPT models for sensitive applications such as healthcare and finance – where mistakes can be costly. To this end,
this work proposes a comprehensive trustworthiness evaluation for large language
models with a focus on GPT-4 and GPT-3.5, considering diverse perspectives –
including toxicity, stereotype bias, adversarial robustness, out-of-distribution robustness, robustness on adversarial demonstrations, privacy, machine ethics, and
fairness. Based on our evaluations, we discover previously unpublished vulnerabilities to trustworthiness threats. For instance, we find that GPT models can be easily
misled to generate toxic and biased outputs and leak private information in both
training data and conversation history. We also find that although GPT-4 is usually
more trustworthy than GPT-3.5 on standard benchmarks, GPT-4 is more vulnerable
given jailbreaking system or user prompts, potentially because GPT-4 follows (misleading) instructions more precisely. Our work illustrates a comprehensive trustworthiness evaluation of GPT models and sheds light on the trustworthiness gaps.
Our benchmark is publicly available at https://decodingtrust.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Recent breakthroughs in machine learning, especially large language models (LLMs), have enabled a wide range of applications, ranging from chatbots [126] to medical diagnoses [182] to
robotics [48]. In order to evaluate language models and better understand their capabilities and
limitations, different benchmarks have been proposed. For instance, benchmarks such as GLUE [172]
and SuperGLUE [171] have been introduced to evaluate general-purpose language understanding.
With advances in the capabilities of LLMs, benchmarks have been proposed to evaluate more difficult
∗
†

Lead authors. Correspondence to: Boxin Wang boxinw2@illinois.edu , Bo Li lbo@illinois.edu
Part of the work was done When Yu Cheng was at Microsoft Research

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

