Beyond Unimodal: Generalising Neural Processes for
Multimodal Uncertainty Estimation

Myong Chol Jung
Monash University
david.jung@monash.edu

He Zhao
CSIRO’s Data61
he.zhao@ieee.org

Joanna Dipnall
Monash University
jo.dipnall@monash.edu

Lan Du∗
Monash University
lan.du@monash.edu

Abstract
Uncertainty estimation is an important research area to make deep neural networks
(DNNs) more trustworthy. While extensive research on uncertainty estimation
has been conducted with unimodal data, uncertainty estimation for multimodal
data remains a challenge. Neural processes (NPs) have been demonstrated to be
an effective uncertainty estimation method for unimodal data by providing the
reliability of Gaussian processes with efficient and powerful DNNs. While NPs
hold significant potential for multimodal uncertainty estimation, the adaptation of
NPs for multimodal data has not been carefully studied. To bridge this gap, we
propose Multimodal Neural Processes (MNPs) by generalising NPs for multimodal
uncertainty estimation. Based on the framework of NPs, MNPs consist of several
novel and principled mechanisms tailored to the characteristics of multimodal data.
In extensive empirical evaluation, our method achieves state-of-the-art multimodal
uncertainty estimation performance, showing its appealing robustness against noisy
samples and reliability in out-of-distribution detection with faster computation
time compared to the current state-of-the-art multimodal uncertainty estimation
method.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty estimation of deep neural networks (DNNs) is an essential research area in the development of reliable and well-calibrated models for safety-critical domains [49, 45]. Despite the
remarkable success achieved by DNNs, a common issue with these model is their tendency to
make overconfident predictions for both in-distribution (ID) and out-of-distribution (OOD) samples
[16, 43, 35]. Extensive research has been conducted to mitigate this problem, but most of these efforts
are limited to unimodal data, neglecting the consideration of multimodal data [57, 11, 50, 63, 38, 34].
In many practical scenarios, safety-critical domains typically involve the processing of multimodal
data. For example, medical diagnosis classification that uses X-ray, radiology text reports and
the patient’s medical record history data can be considered as a form of multimodal learning that
requires trustworthy predictions [8]. Despite the prevalence of such multimodal data, the problem of
uncertainty estimation for multimodal data has not been comprehensively studied. Furthermore, it
has been demonstrated that using existing unimodal uncertainty estimation techniques directly for
multimodal data is ineffective, emphasising the need for a meticulous investigation of multimodal
uncertainty estimation techniques [24, 17].
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

