Towards Symmetry-Aware Generation of Periodic
Materials
Youzhi Luo, Chengkai Liu, Shuiwang Ji
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
{yzluo,liuchengkai,sji}@tamu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of generating periodic materials with deep models. While
symmetry-aware molecule generation has been studied extensively, periodic materials possess different symmetries, which have not been completely captured by
existing methods. In this work, we propose SyMat, a novel material generation approach that can capture physical symmetries of periodic material structures. SyMat
generates atom types and lattices of materials through generating atom type sets,
lattice lengths and lattice angles with a variational auto-encoder model. In addition,
SyMat employs a score-based diffusion model to generate atom coordinates of materials, in which a novel symmetry-aware probabilistic model is used in the coordinate
diffusion process. We show that SyMat is theoretically invariant to all symmetry transformations on materials and demonstrate that SyMat achieves promising
performance on random generation and property optimization tasks. Our code is
publicly available as part of the AIRS library (https://github.com/divelab/AIRS).

1

Introduction

Designing or synthesizing novel periodic materials with target properties is a fundamental problem in
many real-world applications, such as designing new periodic materials for solar cells and batteries [1].
For a long time, this challenging task heavily relies on either manually designing material structures
based on the experience of chemical experts, or running very expensive and time-consuming density
functional theory (DFT) based simulation. Recently, thanks to the progress of deep learning techniques, many studies have applied advanced deep generative models [22, 13] to generate or discover
novel chemical compounds, such as molecules [10, 39, 50] and proteins [48, 16]. However, while
deep learning has been widely used in periodic material representation learning [51, 5, 40, 4, 57, 25],
generating novel periodic materials with deep generative models remains largely under-explored.
The major challenge of employing deep generative models to the generation of periodic materials is
capturing physical symmetries of periodic material structures. Ideally, deep generative models for
periodic materials should maintain invariance to symmetry transformations of periodic materials,
including permutation, rotation, translation, and periodic transformations [59, 9, 60]. To achieve this
target, we propose SyMat, a novel symmetry-aware periodic material generation method. SyMat
transforms the atom types and lattices of materials to symmetry-aware generation targets, which are
generated by a variational auto-encoder model [22]. Besides, SyMat adopts novel symmetry-aware
probabilistic diffusion process to generate atom coordinates with a score-based diffusion model [44].
Experiments show that SyMat can achieve promising performance on random generation and property
optimization tasks.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

