Universal Gradient Descent Ascent Method for
Nonconvex-Nonconcave Minimax Optimization

Taoli Zheng
CUHK
tlzheng@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Linglingzhi Zhu
CUHK
llzzhu@se.cuhk.edu.hk

José Blanchet
Stanford University
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu

Anthony Man-Cho So
CUHK
manchoso@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Jiajin Li∗
Stanford University
jiajinli@stanford.edu

Abstract
Nonconvex-nonconcave minimax optimization has received intense attention over
the last decade due to its broad applications in machine learning. Most existing
algorithms rely on one-sided information, such as the convexity (resp. concavity) of the primal (resp. dual) functions, or other specific structures, such as
the Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PŁ) and Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz (KŁ) conditions. However, verifying these regularity conditions is challenging in practice. To meet
this challenge, we propose a novel universally applicable single-loop algorithm,
the doubly smoothed gradient descent ascent method (DS-GDA), which naturally
balances the primal and dual updates. That is, DS-GDA with the same hyperparameters is able to uniformly solve nonconvex-concave, convex-nonconcave,
and nonconvex-nonconcave problems with one-sided KŁ properties, achieving
convergence with O(ϵ−4 ) complexity. Sharper (even optimal) iteration complexity
can be obtained when the KŁ exponent is known. Specifically, under the one-sided
KŁ condition with exponent θ ∈ (0, 1), DS-GDA converges with an iteration
complexity of O(ϵ−2 max{2θ,1} ). They all match the corresponding best results
in the literature. Moreover, we show that DS-GDA is practically applicable to
general nonconvex-nonconcave problems even without any regularity conditions,
such as the PŁ condition, KŁ condition, or weak Minty variational inequalities
condition. For various challenging nonconvex-nonconcave examples in the literature, including “Forsaken”, “Bilinearly-coupled minimax”, “Sixth-order
polynomial”, and “PolarGame”, the proposed DS-GDA can all get rid of limit
cycles. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first first-order algorithm to achieve
convergence on all of these formidable problems.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we are interested in studying nonconvex-nonconcave minimax problems of the form
min max f (x, y),

x∈X y∈Y

(P)

where f : Rn × Rd → R is nonconvex in x and nonconcave in y, and X ⊆ Rn , Y ⊆ Rd are convex
compact sets. Such problems have found significant applications in machine learning and operation
research, including generative adversarial networks [27, 2], adversarial training [44, 53], multi-agent
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

