Iterative Reachability Estimation for
Safe Reinforcement Learning

Milan Ganai
UC San Diego
mganai@ucsd.edu

Zheng Gong
UC San Diego
zhgong@ucsd.edu

Sylvia Herbert
UC San Diego
sherbert@ucsd.edu

Chenning Yu
UC San Diego
chy010@ucsd.edu
Sicun Gao
UC San Diego
sicung@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Ensuring safety is important for the practical deployment of reinforcement learning
(RL). Various challenges must be addressed, such as handling stochasticity in the
environments, providing rigorous guarantees of persistent state-wise safety satisfaction, and avoiding overly conservative behaviors that sacrifice performance. We
propose a new framework, Reachability Estimation for Safe Policy Optimization
(RESPO), for safety-constrained RL in general stochastic settings. In the feasible
set where there exist violation-free policies, we optimize for rewards while maintaining persistent safety. Outside this feasible set, our optimization produces the
safest behavior by guaranteeing entrance into the feasible set whenever possible
with the least cumulative discounted violations. We introduce a class of algorithms using our novel reachability estimation function to optimize in our proposed
framework and in similar frameworks such as those concurrently handling multiple
hard and soft constraints. We theoretically establish that our algorithms almost
surely converge to locally optimal policies of our safe optimization framework.
We evaluate the proposed methods on a diverse suite of safe RL environments
from Safety Gym, PyBullet, and MuJoCo, and show the benefits in improving both
reward performance and safety compared with state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Safety-Constrained Reinforcement Learning is important for a multitude of real-world safety-critical
applications [1, 2]. These situations require guaranteeing persistent safety and achieving high performance while handling environment uncertainty. Traditionally, methods have been proposed to obtain
optimal control by solving within the Constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP) framework,
which constrains expected cumulative violation of the constraints along trajectories to be under
some threshold. Trust-region approaches [3, 4, 5] follow from the Constrained Policy Optimization
algorithm [6] which tries to guarantee monotonic performance improvement while satisfying the
cumulative constraint requirement. However, these approaches are generally very computationally
expensive, and their first or second order Taylor approximations may have repercussions on performance [2]. Several primal-dual approaches [7, 8, 9] have been proposed with better computational
efficiency and use multi-timescale frameworks [10] for asymptotic convergence to a local optimum.
Nonetheless, these approaches inherit CMDP’s lack of crucial rigorous safety guarantees that ensure
persistent safety. Particularly, maintaining a cost budget for hard constraints like collision avoidance is
insufficient. Rather, it’s crucial to prioritize obtaining safe, minimal-violation policies when possible.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

