Flow Factorized Representation Learning
Yue Song1,2 , T. Anderson Keller2, 3 , Nicu Sebe1 , and Max Welling2,3
1

Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
2
Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands
3
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands
yue.song@unitn.it

Abstract
A prominent goal of representation learning research is to achieve representations
which are factorized in a useful manner with respect to the ground truth factors of
variation. The fields of disentangled and equivariant representation learning have
approached this ideal from a range of complimentary perspectives; however, to
date, most approaches have proven to either be ill-specified or insufficiently flexible
to effectively separate all realistic factors of interest in a learned latent space. In
this work, we propose an alternative viewpoint on such structured representation
learning which we call Flow Factorized Representation Learning, and demonstrate
it to learn both more efficient and more usefully structured representations than
existing frameworks. Specifically, we introduce a generative model which specifies
a distinct set of latent probability paths that define different input transformations.
Each latent flow is generated by the gradient field of a learned potential following
dynamic optimal transport. Our novel setup brings new understandings to both
disentanglement and equivariance. We show that our model achieves higher
likelihoods on standard representation learning benchmarks while simultaneously
being closer to approximately equivariant models. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that the transformations learned by our model are flexibly composable and can
also extrapolate to new data, implying a degree of robustness and generalizability
approaching the ultimate goal of usefully factorized representation learning.

1

Introduction

Developing models which learn useful representations of data has become an increasingly important
focus in the machine learning community [5, 55]. For example, Large Language Models such as
GPT [9] rely on an extensive pre-training phase to learn valuable representations, enabling quick
finetuning on a diversity of tasks. However, a precise definition of what makes an ideal representation
is still debated. One line of work has focused on ‘disentanglement’ of the underlying ground
truth generative factors [5, 35, 13]. In general, the definition of ‘disentanglement’ often refers
to learning and controlling statistically independent factors of variation [5, 36]. Over the years,
many disentanglement methods have been proposed, including axis-aligned single-dimensional
manipulation [35, 13], linear multi-dimensional traversals [78, 77, 90, 66], and, more recently,
dynamic non-linear vector-based traversals [84, 79]. Although these methods have been met with
significant success (and even linked to single-neuron brain activity [37, 91]), there are known
theoretical limitations which make them ill-specified, including the presence of topological defects [7].
This has limited their deployment beyond toy settings.
Another line of work has focused on developing representations which respect symmetries of the
underlying data in their output space [15, 36]. Specifically, equivariant representations are those
for which the output transforms in a known predictable way for a given input transformation.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

