An Efficient Dataset Condensation Plugin and
Its Application to Continual Learning

Enneng Yang1 , Li Shen2 * , Zhenyi Wang3 * , Tongliang Liu4 , Guibing Guo1∗
1
Northeastern University, China 2 JD Explore Academy, China
3
University of Maryland, College Park, USA 4 The University of Sydney, Australia
ennengyang@stumail.neu.edu.cn; mathshenli@gmail.com; zwang169@umd.edu
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au; guogb@swc.neu.edu.cn

Abstract
Dataset condensation (DC) distills a large real-world dataset into a small synthetic
dataset, with the goal of training a network from scratch on the latter that performs similarly to the former. State-of-the-art (SOTA) DC methods have achieved
satisfactory results through techniques such as accuracy, gradient, training trajectory, or distribution matching. However, these works all perform matching in
the high-dimension pixel space, ignoring that natural images are usually locally
connected and have lower intrinsic dimensions, resulting in low condensation
efficiency. In this work, we propose a simple-yet-efficient dataset condensation
plugin that matches the raw and synthetic datasets in a low-dimensional manifold.
Specifically, our plugin condenses raw images into two low-rank matrices instead
of parameterized image matrices. Our plugin can be easily incorporated into existing DC methods, thereby containing richer raw dataset information at limited
storage costs to improve the downstream applications’ performance. We verify on
multiple public datasets that when the proposed plugin is combined with SOTA DC
methods, the performance of the network trained on synthetic data is significantly
improved compared to traditional DC methods. Moreover, when applying the DC
methods as a plugin to continual learning tasks, we observed that our approach
effectively mitigates catastrophic forgetting of old tasks under limited memory
buffer constraints and avoids the problem of raw data privacy leakage.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning techniques utilize large-scale real-world datasets and advanced deep neural
networks (DNNs) to achieve amazing success in various fields, such as models like SAM [24]
and GPT [6, 38] in the fields of computer vision and natural language processing, both of which
have surpassed classical models [51, 42, 43] trained on small datasets. However, training a wellperforming model in the machine learning community requires repeated tuning of various aspects of
the model [14], such as the number of layers, learning rate, and other important hyper-parameters.
When the dataset is large, the cost of data management and repeated model training becomes
unacceptable. As stated in [65], NAS-Bench-101 [63] spent 100 TPU-years of computing time on the
CIFAR10 dataset [26] for an exhaustive neural architecture search. In contrast, it only takes dozens
of TPU minutes to train the best model from scratch using the optimal configuration discovered [65].
Additionally, in continual learning [41, 2, 60, 61], to prevent forgetting old tasks while learning new
tasks, a certain amount of old task data is typically stored for replay [58, 57, 2, 41]. Nevertheless,
storing large old task datasets is unrealistic due to strict memory and privacy constraints. Therefore,
reducing the data size becomes a valuable and emerging research direction.
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

