Large Language Models for Automated Data Science:
Introducing CAAFE for Context-Aware Automated
Feature Engineering

Noah Hollmann
University of Freiburg
Charité Hospital Berlin
Prior Labs
noah.homa@gmail.com

Samuel Müller

Frank Hutter

University of Freiburg
Prior Labs
muellesa@cs.uni-freiburg.de

University of Freiburg
Prior Labs
fh@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
As the field of automated machine learning (AutoML) advances, it becomes increasingly important to incorporate domain knowledge into these systems. We
present an approach for doing so by harnessing the power of large language models
(LLMs). Specifically, we introduce Context-Aware Automated Feature Engineering
(CAAFE), a feature engineering method for tabular datasets that utilizes an LLM to
iteratively generate additional semantically meaningful features for tabular datasets
based on the description of the dataset. The method produces both Python code for
creating new features and explanations for the utility of the generated features.
Despite being methodologically simple, CAAFE improves performance on 11 out
of 14 datasets - boosting mean ROC AUC performance from 0.798 to 0.822 across
all dataset - similar to the improvement achieved by using a random forest instead
of logistic regression on our datasets.
Furthermore, CAAFE is interpretable by providing a textual explanation for each
generated feature. CAAFE paves the way for more extensive semi-automation in
data science tasks and emphasizes the significance of context-aware solutions that
can extend the scope of AutoML systems to semantic AutoML. We release our
code, a simple demo and a python package.

Evaluate Performance.
Keep change if performance is improved.

User: Specifies
problem context
and dataset

LLM: Generates
Code for feature
engineering

Interpreter:
Executes
generated code

CAAFE

Tabular Prediction Model:
Performs
cross-validation.

Figure 1: CAAFE accepts a dataset as well as user-specified context information and operates by
iteratively proposing and evaluating feature engineering operations.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

