Domain Re-Modulation for Few-Shot Generative
Domain Adaptation

Yi Wu∗, Ziqiang Li∗ †
University of Science and Technology of China
Chaoyue Wang,‡

Heliang Zheng, Shanshan Zhao
JD Explore Academy

Bin Li‡
University of Science and Technology of China

Dacheng Tao
JD Explore Academy

Abstract
In this study, we delve into the task of few-shot Generative Domain Adaptation
(GDA), which involves transferring a pre-trained generator from one domain to
a new domain using only a few reference images. Inspired by the way human
brains acquire knowledge in new domains, we present an innovative generator
structure called Domain Re-Modulation (DoRM). DoRM not only meets the
criteria of high quality, large synthesis diversity, and cross-domain consistency,
which were achieved by previous research in GDA, but also incorporates memory
and domain association, akin to how human brains operate. Specifically, DoRM
freezes the source generator and introduces new mapping and affine modules (M&A
modules) to capture the attributes of the target domain during GDA. This process
resembles the formation of new synapses in human brains. Consequently, a linearly
combinable domain shift occurs in the style space. By incorporating multiple
new M&A modules, the generator gains the capability to perform high-fidelity
multi-domain and hybrid-domain generation. Moreover, to maintain cross-domain
consistency more effectively, we introduce a similarity-based structure loss. This
loss aligns the auto-correlation map of the target image with its corresponding
auto-correlation map of the source image during training. Through extensive
experiments, we demonstrate the superior performance of our DoRM and similaritybased structure loss in few-shot GDA, both quantitatively and qualitatively. Code
will be available at https://github.com/wuyi2020/DoRM.

1

Introduction

Domain adaptation aims to bridge the domain gap and transfer knowledge to mitigate the limitations
imposed by a lack of extensive labeled data [8; 40; 51]. Recent research has explored the field
of few-shot Generative Domain Adaptation (GDA), which aims to achieve realistic and diverse
generation with only a few training images [29; 32; 34; 43; 47; 59; 31; 42; 23; 62]. Particularly, the
∗

Equal Contribution.
This work was performed when Ziqiang Li was visiting JD Explore Academy as a research intern.
‡
Corresponding Author.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

