Unsupervised Video Domain Adaptation for Action
Recognition: A Disentanglement Perspective

Pengfei Wei
AI Lab, ByteDance
pengfei.wei@bytedance.com
Xinghua Qu
AI Lab, ByteDance
quxinghua17@gmail.com

Lingdong Kong
National University of Singapore
lingdong@comp.nus.edu.sg

Yi Ren
AI Lab, ByteDance
ren.yi@bytedance.com

Jing Jiang
University of Technology Sydney
Jing.Jiang@uts.edu.au

Zhiqiang Xu
MBZUAI
zhiqiang.xu@mbzuai.ac.ae

Xiang Yin
AI Lab, ByteDance
yinxiang.stephen@bytedance.com

Abstract
Unsupervised video domain adaptation is a practical yet challenging task. In this
work, for the first time, we tackle it from a disentanglement view. Our key idea
is to handle the spatial and temporal domain divergence separately through disentanglement. Specifically, we consider the generation of cross-domain videos from
two sets of latent factors, one encoding the static information and another encoding
the dynamic information. A Transfer Sequential VAE (TranSVAE) framework
is then developed to model such generation. To better serve for adaptation, we
propose several objectives to constrain the latent factors. With these constraints,
the spatial divergence can be readily removed by disentangling the static domainspecific information out, and the temporal divergence is further reduced from both
frame- and video-levels through adversarial learning. Extensive experiments on
the UCF-HMDB, Jester, and Epic-Kitchens datasets verify the effectiveness and
superiority of TranSVAE compared with several state-of-the-art approaches.1

1

Introduction

Over the past decades, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has attracted extensive research
attention [41]. Numerous UDA methods have been proposed and successfully applied to various
real-world applications, e.g., object recognition [38, 42, 47], semantic segmentation [51, 19, 33, 24],
and object detection [3, 15, 45]. However, most of these methods and their applications are limited to
the image domain, while much less attention has been devoted to video-based UDA, where the latter
is undoubtedly more challenging.
Compared with image-based UDA, the source and target domains also differ temporally in videobased UDA. Images are spatially well-structured data, while videos are sequences of images with both
spatial and temporal relations. Existing image-based UDA methods can hardly achieve satisfactory
performance on video-based UDA tasks as they fail to consider the temporal dependency of video
frames in handling the domain gaps. For instance, in video-based cross-domain action recognition
tasks, domain gaps are presented by not only the actions of different persons in different scenarios
but also the actions that appear at different timestamps or last at different time lengths.
1

Code is publicly available at: https://github.com/ldkong1205/TranSVAE

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

