Full-Atom Protein Pocket Design via
Iterative Refinement
Zaixi Zhang1,2,4 , Zepu Lu1,2 , Zhongkai Hao3 , Marinka Zitnik4 , Qi Liu1,2∗
1
Anhui Province Key Lab of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, Hefei, Anhui, China
3
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, THBI Lab, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua, 4 Harvard University
{zaixi, zplu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, hzj21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
marinka@hms.harvard.edu, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The design and optimization of functional proteins that bind specific ligand
molecules is paramount in therapeutics and bio-engineering. A critical yet
formidable task in this endeavor is the design of the protein pocket, which is the
cavity region of the protein where the ligand binds. Current methods are plagued
by inefficient generation, inadequate context modeling of the ligand molecule, and
the inability to generate side-chain atoms. Here, we present the Full-Atom Iterative
Refinement (FAIR) method, designed to address these challenges by facilitating
the co-design of protein pocket sequences, specifically residue types, and their
corresponding 3D structures. FAIR operates in two steps, proceeding in a coarse-tofine manner (transitioning from protein backbone to atoms, including side chains)
for a full-atom generation. In each iteration, all residue types and structures are
simultaneously updated, a process termed full-shot refinement. In the initial stage,
the residue types and backbone coordinates are refined using a hierarchical context
encoder, complemented by two structure refinement modules that capture both
inter-residue and pocket-ligand interactions. The subsequent stage delves deeper,
modeling the side-chain atoms of the pockets and updating residue types to ensure
sequence-structure congruence. Concurrently, the structure of the binding ligand is
refined across iterations to accommodate its inherent flexibility. Comprehensive
experiments show that FAIR surpasses existing methods in designing superior
pocket sequences and structures, producing average improvement exceeding 10%
in AAR and RMSD metrics.

1

Introduction

Proteins are macromolecules that perform fundamental functions in living organisms. An essential
and challenging step in functional protein design, such as enzymes [52, 27] and biosensors [5, 18], is
to design protein pockets that bind specific ligand molecules. Protein pockets usually refer to residues
binding with the ligands in the protein-ligand complexes. Nevertheless, such a problem is very
challenging due to the tremendous search space of both sequence and structure and the small solution
space that satisfies the constraints of binding affinity, geometric complementarity, and biochemical
stability. Traditional approaches for pocket design use hand-crafted energy functions [42, 11] and
template-matching methods [67, 8, 48], which can be less accurate and lack efficiency.
∗

Qi Liu is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

