(Almost) Provable Error Bounds Under
Distribution Shift via Disagreement Discrepancy

Elan Rosenfeld
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
elan@cmu.edu

Saurabh Garg
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We derive a new, (almost) guaranteed upper bound on the error of deep neural
networks under distribution shift using unlabeled test data. Prior methods are either
vacuous in practice or accurate on average but heavily underestimate error for a
sizeable fraction of shifts. In particular, the latter only give guarantees based on
complex continuous measures such as test calibration, which cannot be identified
without labels, and are therefore unreliable. Instead, our bound requires a simple,
intuitive condition which is well justified by prior empirical works and holds in
practice effectively 100% of the time. The bound is inspired by H∆H-divergence
but is easier to evaluate and substantially tighter, consistently providing nonvacuous test error upper bounds. Estimating the bound requires optimizing one
multiclass classifier to disagree with another, for which some prior works have used
sub-optimal proxy losses; we devise a “disagreement loss” which is theoretically
justified and performs better in practice. We expect this loss can serve as a drop-in
replacement for future methods which require maximizing multiclass disagreement.
Across a wide range of natural and synthetic distribution shift benchmarks, our
method gives valid error bounds while achieving average accuracy comparable to—
though not better than—competitive estimation baselines.

1

Introduction

When deploying a model, it is important to be confident in how it will perform under inevitable
distribution shift. Standard methods for achieving this include data dependent uniform convergence
bounds [41, 6] (typically vacuous in practice) or assuming a precise model of how the distribution can
shift [57, 10]. Unfortunately, it is difficult or impossible to determine how severely these assumptions
are violated by real data [62], so practitioners usually cannot trust such bounds with confidence.
To better estimate test performance in the wild, some recent work instead tries to directly predict
accuracy of neural networks using unlabeled data from the test distribution of interest [21, 3, 40].
While these methods predict the test performance surprisingly well, they lack pointwise trustworthiness and verifiability: their estimates are good on average over all distribution shifts, but they provide
no signal of the quality of any individual prediction (here, each point is a single test distribution, for
which a method predicts a classifier’s average accuracy). Because of the opaque conditions under
which these methods work, it is also difficult to anticipate their failure cases—indeed, it is reasonably
common for them to substantially overestimate test accuracy for a particular shift, which is problematic when optimistic deployment would be very costly. Worse yet, we find that this gap grows
with test error (Figure 1), making these predictions least reliable precisely when their reliability is
most important. Although it is clearly impossible to guarantee upper bounds on test error for all
shifts, there is still potential for error bounds that are intuitive and reasonably trustworthy.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

