The Memory Perturbation Equation:
Understanding Model’s Sensitivity to Data

Peter Nickl†
peter.nickl@riken.jp

Lu Xu∗†
lu.xu.sw@riken.jp

Thomas Möllenhoff†
thomas.moellenhoff@riken.jp

Dharmesh Tailor∗‡
d.v.tailor@uva.nl

Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan†§
emtiyaz.khan@riken.jp

Abstract
Understanding model’s sensitivity to its training data is crucial but can also be
challenging and costly, especially during training. To simplify such issues, we
present the Memory-Perturbation Equation (MPE) which relates model’s sensitivity to perturbation in its training data. Derived using Bayesian principles, the MPE
unifies existing sensitivity measures, generalizes them to a wide-variety of models
and algorithms, and unravels useful properties regarding sensitivities. Our empirical results show that sensitivity estimates obtained during training can be used
to faithfully predict generalization on unseen test data. The proposed equation is
expected to be useful for future research on robust and adaptive learning.

1

Introduction

Understanding model’s sensitivity to training data is important to handle issues related to quality, privacy, and security. For example, we can use it to understand (i) the effect of errors and biases in the
data; (ii) model’s dependence on private information to avoid data leakage; (iii) model’s weakness to
malicious manipulations. Despite their importance, sensitivity properties of machine learning (ML)
models are not well understood in general. Sensitivity is often studied through empirical investigations, but conclusions drawn this way do not always generalize across models or algorithms. Such
studies are also costly, sometimes requiring thousands of GPUs [38], which can quickly become
infeasible if we need to repeat them every time the model is updated.
A cheaper solution is to use local perturbation methods [21], for instance, influence measures that
study sensitivity of trained model to data removal (Fig. 1(a)) [8, 7]. Such methods too fall short of
providing a clear understanding of sensitivity properties for generic cases. For instance, influence
measures are useful to study trained models but are not suited to analyze training trajectories [14,
54]. Another challenge is in handling non-differentiable loss functions or discrete parameter spaces
where a natural choice of perturbation mechanisms may not always be clear [32]. The measures also
do not directly reveal the causes of sensitivities for generic ML models and algorithms.
In this paper, we simplify these issues by proposing a new method to unify, generalize, and understand perturbation methods for sensitivity analysis. We present the Memory-Perturbation Equation
(MPE) as a unifying equation to understand sensitivity properties of generic ML algorithms. The
equation builds upon the Bayesian learning rule (BLR) [28] which unifies many popular algorithms
∗

Equal contribution. Part of this work was carried out when Dharmesh Tailor was at RIKEN AIP.
RIKEN Center for AI Project, Tokyo, Japan.
‡
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
§
Corresponding author.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

