Memory-Constrained Algorithms for Convex
Optimization

Moïse Blanchard
Operations Research Center
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
moiseb@mit.edu

Junhui Zhang
Operations Research Center
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
junhuiz@mit.edu

Patrick Jaillet
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
jaillet@mit.edu

Abstract
We propose a family of recursive cutting-plane algorithms to solve feasibility
problems with constrained memory, which can also be used for first-order convex
optimization. Precisely, in order to find a point within a ball of radius ϵ with a
separation oracle in dimension d—or to minimize 1-Lipschitz convex functions to
2
accuracy ϵ over the unit ball—our algorithms use O( dp ln 1ϵ ) bits of memory, and
make O((C dp ln 1ϵ )p ) oracle calls, for some universal constant C ≥ 1. The family
is parametrized by p ∈ [d] and provides an oracle-complexity/memory trade-off in
the sub-polynomial regime ln 1ϵ ≫ ln d. While several works gave lower-bound
trade-offs (impossibility results) [31, 5]—we explicit here their dependence with
ln 1ϵ , showing that these also hold in any sub-polynomial regime—to the best of
our knowledge this is the first class of algorithms that provides a positive trade-off
√
between gradient descent and cutting-plane methods in any regime with ϵ ≤ 1/ d.
The algorithms divide the d variables into p blocks and optimize over blocks
sequentially, with approximate separation vectors constructed using a variant of
Vaidya’s method. In the regime ϵ ≤ d−Ω(d) , our algorithm with p = d achieves the
information-theoretic optimal memory usage and improves the oracle-complexity
of gradient descent.

1

Introduction

Optimization algorithms are ubiquitous in machine learning, from solving simple regressions to
training neural networks. Their essential roles have motivated numerous studies on their efficiencies,
which are usually analyzed through the lens of oracle-complexity: given an oracle (such as function
value, or subgradient oracle), how many calls to the oracle are needed for an algorithm to output an
approximate optimal solution? [34]. However, ever-growing problem sizes have shown an inadequacy
in considering only the oracle-complexity, and have motivated the study of the trade-off between
oracle-complexity and other resources such as memory [52, 31, 5] and communication[25, 40, 42, 45,
33, 53, 51, 50].
In this work, we study the oracle-complexity/memory trade-off for first-order non-smooth convex
optimization, and the closely related feasibility problem, with a focus on developing memory efficient
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

