Learning Trajectories are Generalization Indicators

Jingwen Fu1∗, Zhizheng Zhang2†, Dacheng Yin3∗, Yan Lu2 , Nanning Zheng1†
fu1371252069@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
{zhizzhang,yanlu}@microsoft.com
ydc@mail.ustc.edu.cn
nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
2
Microsoft Research Asia, 3 University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
This paper explores the connection between learning trajectories of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) and their generalization capabilities when optimized using
(stochastic) gradient descent algorithms. Instead of concentrating solely on the
generalization error of the DNN post-training, we present a novel perspective for
analyzing generalization error by investigating the contribution of each update step
to the change in generalization error. This perspective enable a more direct comprehension of how the learning trajectory influences generalization error. Building
upon this analysis, we propose a new generalization bound that incorporates more
extensive trajectory information. Our proposed generalization bound depends on
the complexity of learning trajectory and the ratio between the bias and diversity of
training set. Experimental observations reveal that our method effectively captures
the generalization error throughout the training process. Furthermore, our approach
can also track changes in generalization error when adjustments are made to learning rates and label noise levels. These results demonstrate that learning trajectory
information is a valuable indicator of a model’s generalization capabilities.

1

Introduction

The generalizability of a Deep Neural Network (DNN) is a crucial research topic in the field of
machine learning. Deep neural networks are commonly trained with a limited number of training
samples while being tested on unseen samples. Depite the commonly used independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) assumption between the training and testing sets, there often exists a varying
degree of discrepancy between them in real-world applications. Generalization theories study the
generalization of DNNs by modeling the gap between the empirical risk [37] and the popular risk
[37]. Classical uniform convergence based methods [20] adopt the complexity of the function space
to analyze this generalization error. These theories discover that more complex function space results
in a larger generalization error [38]. However, they are not well applicable for DNNs [33, 22]. In deep
learning, the double descent phenomenon [6] exists, which tells that larger complexity of function
space may lead to smaller generalization error. This violates the aforementioned property in uniform
convergence methods and imposes demands in studying the generalization of DNNs.
Although the function space of DNNs is vast, not all functions within that space can be discovered by
learning algorithms. Therefore, some representative works bound the generalization of DNNs based
∗
†

Work done during internships at Microsoft Research Asia.
Corresponding Authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

