Emergence of Shape Bias in Convolutional Neural
Networks through Activation Sparsity

Tianqin Li
Carnegie Mellon University
tianqinl@cs.cmu.edu

Ziqi Wen
Carnegie Mellon University
ziqiwen@cs.cmu.edu

Yangfan Li
Nortwestern University
yangfanli2024@u.northwestern.edu

Tai Sing Lee
Carnegie Mellon University
tai@cnbc.cmu.edu

Abstract
Current deep-learning models for object recognition are known to be heavily biased
toward texture. In contrast, human visual systems are known to be biased toward
shape and structure. What could be the design principles in human visual systems
that led to this difference? How could we introduce more shape bias into the deep
learning models? In this paper, we report that sparse coding, a ubiquitous principle
in the brain, can in itself introduce shape bias into the network. We found that
enforcing the sparse coding constraint using a non-differential Top-K operation
can lead to the emergence of structural encoding in neurons in convolutional neural
networks, resulting in a smooth decomposition of objects into parts and subparts
and endowing the networks with shape bias. We demonstrated this emergence of
shape bias and its functional benefits for different network structures with various
datasets. For object recognition convolutional neural networks, the shape bias
leads to greater robustness against style and pattern change distraction. For the
image synthesis generative adversary networks, the emerged shape bias leads to
more coherent and decomposable structures in the synthesized images. Ablation
studies suggest that sparse codes tend to encode structures, whereas the more
distributed codes tend to favor texture. Our code is host at the github repository:
https://topk-shape-bias.github.io/

1

Introduction

Sparse and efficient coding is a well-known design principle in the sensory systems of the brain [3, 31].
Recent neurophysiological findings based on calcium imaging found that neurons in the superficial
layer of the macaque primary visual cortex (V1) exhibit even a higher degree of lifetime sparsity
and population sparsity in their responses than previously expected. Only 4–6 out of roughly 1000
neurons would respond strongly to any given natural image [37]. Conversely, a neuron typically
responded strongly to only 0.4% of the randomly selected natural scene images. This high degree of
response sparsity is commensurated with the observation that many V1 neurons are strongly tuned
to more complex local patterns in a global context rather than just oriented bars and gratings [36].
On the other hand, over 90% of these neurons did exhibit statistically significant orientation tuning,
though mostly with much weaker responses. This finding is reminiscent of an earlier study that
found similarly sparse encoding of multi-modal concepts in the hippocampus [32]. This leads to the
hypothesis that neurons can potentially serve both as a super-sparse specialist code with their strong
responses, encoding specific prototypes and concepts, and as a more distributed code, serving as the
classical sparse basis functions for encoding images with much weaker responses. The specialist
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

