Lossy Image Compression
with Conditional Diffusion Models
Stephan Mandt
Department of Computer Science
University of California Irvine
mandt@uci.edu

Ruihan Yang
Department of Computer Science
University of California Irvine
ruihan.yang@uci.edu

Abstract
This paper outlines an end-to-end optimized lossy image compression framework
using diffusion generative models. The approach relies on the transform coding
paradigm, where an image is mapped into a latent space for entropy coding and,
from there, mapped back to the data space for reconstruction. In contrast to VAEbased neural compression, where the (mean) decoder is a deterministic neural
network, our decoder is a conditional diffusion model. Our approach thus introduces an additional “content” latent variable on which the reverse diffusion process
is conditioned and uses this variable to store information about the image. The
remaining “texture” variables characterizing the diffusion process are synthesized
at decoding time. We show that the model’s performance can be tuned toward perceptual metrics of interest. Our extensive experiments involving multiple datasets
and image quality assessment metrics show that our approach yields stronger reported FID scores than the GAN-based model, while also yielding competitive
performance with VAE-based models in several distortion metrics. Furthermore,
training the diffusion with X -parameterization enables high-quality reconstructions
in only a handful of decoding steps, greatly affecting the model’s practicality. Our
code is available at: https://github.com/buggyyang/CDC_compression

1

Introduction

With visual media vastly dominating consumer
internet traffic, developing new efficient codecs
for images and videos has become evermore
crucial (Cisco, 2017). The past few years have
shown considerable progress in deep learningbased image codecs that have outperformed classical codecs in terms of the inherent tradeoff
between rate (expected file size) and distortion
(quality loss) (Ballé et al., 2018; Minnen et al., Figure 1: Overview of our proposed compression
2018; Minnen & Singh, 2020; Zhu et al., 2021; architecture. A discrete “content” latent variable
Yang et al., 2020; Cheng et al., 2020; Yang et al., ẑ contains information about the image. Upon de2023). Recent research promises even more coding, this variable is used for conditioning a decompression gains upon optimizing for percep- noising diffusion process. The involved "texture"
tual quality, i.e., increasing the tolerance for variables x̄1:N are synthesized on the fly.
imperceivable distortion for the benefit of lower
rates (Blau & Michaeli, 2019). For example, adding adversarial losses (Agustsson et al., 2019;
Mentzer et al., 2020) showed good perceptual quality at low bitrates.
Most state-of-the-art learned codecs currently rely on transform coding and involve hierarchical
“compressive” variational autoencoders (Ballé et al., 2018; Minnen et al., 2018; Cheng et al., 2020).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

