Improved Best-of-Both-Worlds Guarantees for
Multi-Armed Bandits: FTRL with General
Regularizers and Multiple Optimal Arms

Tiancheng Jin ∗
University of Southern California
tiancheng.jin@usc.edu

Junyan Liu ∗
University of California, San Diego
jul037@ucsd.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of designing adaptive multi-armed bandit algorithms that
perform optimally in both the stochastic setting and the adversarial setting simultaneously (often known as a best-of-both-world guarantee). A line of recent works
shows that when configured and analyzed properly, the Follow-the-RegularizedLeader (FTRL) algorithm, originally designed for the adversarial setting, can in
fact optimally adapt to the stochastic setting as well. Such results, however, critically rely on an assumption that there exists one unique optimal arm. Recently, Ito
[2021] took the first step to remove such an undesirable uniqueness assumption
for one particular FTRL algorithm with the 1/2-Tsallis entropy regularizer. In this
work, we significantly improve and generalize this result, showing that uniqueness
is unnecessary for FTRL with a broad family of regularizers and a new learning
rate schedule. For some regularizers, our regret bounds also improve upon prior
results even when uniqueness holds. We further provide an application of our
results to the decoupled exploration and exploitation problem, demonstrating that
our techniques are broadly applicable.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of multi-armed bandits (MAB) where a learner sequentially interacts with an
environment for T rounds. In each round, the learner selects one of the K arms and observes its loss.
The goal of the learner is to minimize her regret, which measures the difference between her total loss
and that of the best fixed arm in hindsight. Depending on how the losses are generated, two settings
have been heavily studied in the literature: the stochastic setting, where the loss of each arm at each
round is an i.i.d. sample of a fixed and unknown distribution, and the adversarial setting, where
the losses can be arbitrarily decided by an adversary. In the stochastic setting, the UCB
P algorithm
T
[Lai and Robbins, 1985, Auer et al., 2002a] attains the instance-optimal regret O( i:∆i >0 log
∆i ),
where the sub-optimality gap ∆i is the difference between the expected loss of arm i and that of the
optimal arm.√On the other hand, in the adversarial setting, the minimax-optimal regret is known to be
of order Θ( KT ) [Auer et al., 2002b, Audibert and Bubeck, 2009], achieved via the well-known
Follow-the-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) framework.
∗

Equal contribution, in alphabetical order.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

