Regret-Optimal Model-Free Reinforcement Learning
for Discounted MDPs with Short Burn-In Time
Xiang Ji ∗
Princeton

Gen Li †
CUHK

Abstract
A crucial problem in reinforcement learning is learning the optimal policy. We
study this in tabular infinite-horizon discounted Markov decision processes under
the online setting. The existing algorithms either fail to achieve regret optimality or
have to incur a high memory and computational cost. In addition, existing optimal
algorithms all require a long burn-in time in order to achieve optimal sample
efficiency, i.e., their optimality is not guaranteed unless sample size surpasses
a high threshold. We address both open problems by introducing a model-free
algorithm that employs variance reduction and a novel technique that switches the
execution policy in a slow-yet-adaptive manner. This is the first regret-optimal
model-free algorithm in the discounted setting, with the additional benefit of a low
burn-in time.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), a crucial task is to find the optimal policy that maximizes its expected
cumulative reward in any given environment with unknown dynamics. An immense body of literature
is dedicated to finding algorithms that solve this task with as few samples as possible, which is
the prime goal under this task. Ideally, one hopes to find an algorithm with a theoretical guarantee
of optimal sample efficiency. At the same time, this task might be accompanied with additional
requirements such as low space complexity and computational cost, as it is common that the state
and action spaces exhibit high dimensions in modern applications. The combination of these various
goals and requirements presents an important yet challenging problem in algorithm design.
The task of searching for optimal policy has been well-studied by existing work in the generative
setting [33; 34; 21; 1]. This fundamental setting allows the freedom of querying samples at any
state-action pair. In contrast, it is more realistic but difficult to consider the same task in the online
setting, in which samples can only be collected along trajectories generated from executing a policy
in the unknown Markov decision process (MDP). Solving this task with optimal sample efficiency
requires a careful balance between exploration and exploitation, especially when coupled with other
goals such as memory and computational efficiency.
MDPs can be divided into two types: the episodic finite-horizon MDPs and the infinite-horizon MDPs.
Although these two types of MDPs can be approached in similar ways under the generative setting,
there is a clear dichotomy between them in the online setting. In an episodic MDP, sample trajectories
are only defined in fixed-length episodes, so samples are collected in episodes, and a reset to an
arbitrary initial state occurs at the end of every online episode. Its transition kernel is usually assumed
to be non-stationary over time. In contrast, the transition kernel of an infinite-horizon MDP stays
stationary over time, and the online sample collection process amounts to drawing a single infinitely
long sample trajectory with no reset. These differences render most optimal algorithms for episodic
∗
†

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.
Department of Statistics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

