Language Semantic Graph Guided
Data-Efficient Learning

Wenxuan Ma

Shuang LiB

Beijing Institute of Technology
wenxuanma@bit.edu.cn

Beijing Institute of Technology
shuangli@bit.edu.cn

Lincan Cai

Jingxuan Kang

Beijing Institute of Technology
lincancai@bit.edu.cn

University of Liverpool
sgjkang3@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract
Developing generalizable models that can effectively learn from limited data and
with minimal reliance on human supervision is a significant objective within the
machine learning community, particularly in the era of deep neural networks.
Therefore, to achieve data-efficient learning, researchers typically explore approaches that can leverage more related or unlabeled data without necessitating
additional manual labeling efforts, such as Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL), Transfer Learning (TL), and Data Augmentation (DA). SSL leverages unlabeled data in
the training process, while TL enables the transfer of expertise from related data
distributions. DA broadens the dataset by synthesizing new data from existing
examples. However, the significance of additional knowledge contained within
labels has been largely overlooked in research. In this paper, we propose a novel
perspective on data efficiency that involves exploiting the semantic information
contained in the labels of the available data. Specifically, we introduce a Language
Semantic Graph (LSG) which is constructed from labels manifest as natural language descriptions. Upon this graph, an auxiliary graph neural network is trained
to extract high-level semantic relations and then used to guide the training of the
primary model, enabling more adequate utilization of label knowledge. Across
image, video, and audio modalities, we utilize the LSG method in both TL and
SSL scenarios and illustrate its versatility in significantly enhancing performance
compared to other data-efficient learning approaches. Additionally, our in-depth
analysis shows that the LSG method also expedites the training process.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved remarkable breakthroughs in various domains, including speech recognition, visual object recognition, object detection, drug discovery, genomics, and many others [33].
However, the increasing size of deep neural networks has led to a growing demand for large volumes
of data. Unfortunately, not all application domains have access to extensive datasets due to the high
costs associated with data collection and human annotation [38, 8, 16]. Consequently, substantial
efforts have been dedicated to studying methods that enable data-efficient learning [1, 49], aiming to
alleviate the requirement of extensive training data and, in particular, human supervision.
The current primary approaches to achieving data-efficient learning encompass semi-supervised
learning (SSL) [62], transfer learning (TL) [49, 86], and other techniques such as data augmentation
B

Corresponding author. Code available at: https://github.com/BIT-DA/LSG

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

