NVFi: Neural Velocity Fields for 3D Physics Learning
from Dynamic Videos

Jinxi Li

Ziyang Song

Bo Yang

vLAR Group, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
jinxi.li@connect.polyu.hk

ziyang.song@connect.polyu.hk

bo.yang@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to model 3D scene dynamics from multi-view videos. Unlike
the majority of existing works which usually focus on the common task of novel
view synthesis within the training time period, we propose to simultaneously learn
the geometry, appearance, and physical velocity of 3D scenes only from video
frames, such that multiple desirable applications can be supported, including future
frame extrapolation, unsupervised 3D semantic scene decomposition, and dynamic
motion transfer. Our method consists of three major components, 1) the keyframe
dynamic radiance field, 2) the interframe velocity field, and 3) a joint keyframe and
interframe optimization module which is the core of our framework to effectively
train both networks. To validate our method, we further introduce two dynamic 3D
datasets: 1) Dynamic Object dataset, and 2) Dynamic Indoor Scene dataset. We
conduct extensive experiments on multiple datasets, demonstrating the superior
performance of our method over all baselines, particularly in the critical tasks of
future frame extrapolation and unsupervised 3D semantic scene decomposition.
Our code and data are available at https://github.com/vLAR-group/NVFi

1

Introduction

The 3D world around us is constantly changing over time, where objects are falling, vehicles moving,
and clocks ticking. Humans can effortlessly learn the geometry and physical properties of such
dynamic 3D scenes, and further predict their future motions following the learned physics rules, just
by watching the things for a few seconds. Giving machines such ability to automatically infer the
geometry and physics of complex dynamic 3D scenes is essential for many cutting-edge applications
in augmented reality, games, and the movie industry. Recent advances in the emerging area of
neural radiance field [37] and its succeeding variants [46, 4, 6, 19, 75, 40] have shown excellent
results in modeling dynamic 3D scenes such as deformable things [4, 58] and articulated objects
[39, 55]. While showing superior performance in interpolating novel views within the observed time
period, almost all these methods tend to fit training image sequences, without explicitly learning
the physical properties such as object velocities, thus being unable to extrapolate and predict future
motion patterns of 3D scenes.
More recently, a few studies [47, 14, 8, 32, 2] start to integrate physics priors into implicit neural
representations to model dynamic 3D scenes such as floating smoke or simple moving objects.
By introducing the governing PDEs, a.k.a., PINN [48], these methods demonstrate promising
reconstruction of 3D scene geometry, appearance, velocity and/or viscosity fields. However, the
learned physical properties are either tightly coupled with the target objects [14] in the scene or
require additional foreground segmentation masks in the loop [32]. This means that the estimated
physics knowledge from dynamic video frames is not clearly disentangled, thereby not transferable
from one scene to another.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

