Bandit Social Learning under Myopic Behavior

Kiarash Banihashem
University of Maryland, College Park
kiarash@umd.edu

MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi
University of Maryland, College Park
hajiagha@umd.edu

Suho Shin
University of Maryland, College Park
suhoshin@umd.edu

Aleksandrs Slivkins
Microsoft Research NYC
slivkins@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study social learning dynamics motivated by reviews on online platforms. The
agents collectively follow a simple multi-armed bandit protocol, but each agent
acts myopically, without regards to exploration. We allow a wide range of myopic
behaviors that are consistent with (parameterized) confidence intervals for the arms’
expected rewards. We derive stark exploration failures for any such behavior, and
provide matching positive results. As a special case, we obtain the first general
results on failure of the greedy algorithm in bandits, thus providing a theoretical
foundation for why bandit algorithms should explore.1

1

Introduction

Reviews and ratings are pervasive in many online platforms. A customer consults reviews/ratings, then
chooses a product and then (often) leaves feedback, which is aggregated by the platform and served
to future customers. Collectively, customers face a tradeoff between exploration and exploitation,
i.e., between acquiring new information while making potentially suboptimal decisions and making
optimal decisions using information currently available. However, individual customers tend to act
myopically and favor exploitation, without regards to exploration for the sake of the others. On a
high level, we ask whether/how the myopic behavior interferes with efficient exploration. We are
particularly interested in learning failures when only a few agents choose an optimal action.
We distill this issue down to its purest form. We posit that the customers make one decision each and
do not observe any personalized payoff-relevant information prior to their decision, whether public
or private. In particular, the customers believe they are similar to one another. They have only two
alternative products/experiences to choose from, a.k.a., arms, and no way to infer anything about one
arm from the other. The platform provides each customer with full history on the previous agents.2
Concretely, we posit Bandit Social Learning (BSL): a variant of social learning in which the customers
(henceforth, agents) arrive sequentially and follow a simple multi-armed bandit protocol. Each agent
observes full history, chooses an arm, and receives a reward: a Bernoulli random draw whose mean
is arm-specific and unknown. Initial knowledge (a dataset with some samples of each arm) may be
available to all agents. When all agents are governed by a centralized algorithm, this setting is known
as stochastic bandits, a standard and well-understood variant of multi-armed bandits.
1
Early versions of our results on the greedy algorithm (Corollary 3.6 and Theorem 6.1) have been available
in a book chapter by A. Slivkins [54, Ch. 11]. The authors acknowledge Mark Sellke for proving Theorem 6.1
and suggesting a proof plan for a version of Corollary 3.6. The authors are grateful to Mark Sellke and Chara
Podimata for brief collaborations (with A. Slivkins) in the initial stages of this project.
2
In practice, online platforms provide summaries such as the average score and the number of samples.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

