Generalizing Importance Weighting to A Universal
Solver for Distribution Shift Problems

1

Tongtong Fang1 Nan Lu2,3 Gang Niu3∗ Masashi Sugiyama3,1
2
3
The University of Tokyo, Japan
University of Tübingen, Germany
RIKEN, Japan

Abstract
Distribution shift (DS) may have two levels: the distribution itself changes, and
the support (i.e., the set where the probability density is non-zero) also changes.
When considering the support change between the training and test distributions,
there can be four cases: (i) they exactly match; (ii) the training support is wider
(and thus covers the test support); (iii) the test support is wider; (iv) they partially
overlap. Existing methods are good at cases (i) and (ii), while cases (iii) and (iv)
are more common nowadays but still under-explored. In this paper, we generalize
importance weighting (IW), a golden solver for cases (i) and (ii), to a universal
solver for all cases. Specifically, we first investigate why IW might fail in cases
(iii) and (iv); based on the findings, we propose generalized IW (GIW) that could
handle cases (iii) and (iv) and would reduce to IW in cases (i) and (ii). In GIW,
the test support is split into an in-training (IT) part and an out-of-training (OOT)
part, and the expected risk is decomposed into a weighted classification term over
the IT part and a standard classification term over the OOT part, which guarantees
the risk consistency of GIW. Then, the implementation of GIW consists of three
components: (a) the split of validation data is carried out by the one-class support
vector machine, (b) the first term of the empirical risk can be handled by any IW
algorithm given training data and IT validation data, and (c) the second term just
involves OOT validation data. Experiments demonstrate that GIW is a universal
solver for DS problems, outperforming IW methods in cases (iii) and (iv).

1

Introduction

Deep supervised classification has been successful where the training and test data should come from
the same distribution (Goodfellow et al., 2016). When this assumption does not hold in practice, we
suffer from distribution shift (DS) problems and the learned classifier may often generalize poorly
(Quionero-Candela et al., 2009; Pan and Yang, 2009; Sugiyama and Kawanabe, 2012). Let x and y
be the instance (i.e., input) and class-label (i.e., output) random variables. Then, DS means that the
underlying joint density of the training data ptr (x, y) differs from that of the test data pte (x, y).
There are two levels in the DS research. At the first level, only the change of the data distribution is
considered. With additional assumptions, DS can be reduced into covariate shift ptr (x) ̸= pte (x),
class-prior shift ptr (y) ̸= pte (y), class-posterior shift ptr (y | x) ̸= pte (y | x), and class-conditional
shift ptr (x | y) ̸= pte (x | y) (Quionero-Candela et al., 2009). We focus on joint shift ptr (x, y) ̸=
pte (x, y), as it is the most general and difficult case of DS. At the second level, the change of the
support of the data distribution is also considered, where given any joint density p(x, y), its support
is defined as the set {(x, y) : p(x, y) > 0}. More specifically, denote by Str and Ste the support of
ptr (x, y) and pte (x, y), respectively. When considering the relationship between Str and Ste , there
can be four cases:
(i) Str and Ste exactly match, i.e., Str = Ste ;
∗

Correspondence to: GN <gang.niu.ml@gmail.com>, TF <fang@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

