Individual Arbitrariness and Group Fairness

Carol Xuan Long‡ , Hsiang Hsu∗† , Wael Alghamdi∗‡ , Flavio P. Calmon‡

Abstract
Machine learning tasks may admit multiple competing models that achieve similar
performance yet produce arbitrary outputs for individual samples—a phenomenon
known as predictive multiplicity. We demonstrate that fairness interventions in
machine learning optimized solely for group fairness and accuracy can exacerbate
predictive multiplicity. Consequently, state-of-the-art fairness interventions can
mask high predictive multiplicity behind favorable group fairness and accuracy
metrics. We argue that a third axis of “arbitrariness” should be considered when
deploying models to aid decision-making in applications of individual-level impact.
To address this challenge, we propose an ensemble algorithm applicable to any
fairness intervention that provably ensures more consistent predictions.

1

Introduction

Non-arbitrariness is an important facet of non-discriminatory decision-making. Substantial arbitrariness exists in the training and selection of machine learning (ML) models. By simply varying
hyperparameters of the training process (e.g., random seeds in model training), we can produce
models with arbitrary outputs on individual input samples [9, 13, 26, 35]. The phenomenon where
distinct models exhibit similar accuracy but arbitrary individual predictions is called predictive
multiplicity1 [35]. The arbitrary variation of outputs due to unjustified choices made during training
can disparately impact individual samples, i.e., predictive multiplicity is not equally distributed
across inputs of a model. When deployed in high-stakes domains (e.g., medicine, education, resume
screening), the arbitrariness in the ML pipeline may target and cause systemic harm to specific
individuals by excluding them from favorable outcomes [7, 15, 40].
Popular fairness metrics in the ML literature do not explicitly capture non-arbitrariness. A widely
recognized notion of non-discrimination is group fairness. Group fairness is quantified in terms of,
for example, statistical parity [18], equal opportunity, equalized odds [23], and variations such as
multi-accuracy [30] and multi-calibration [24]. Broadly speaking, methods that control for group
fairness aim to guarantee comparable performance of a model across population groups in the data.
The pursuit of group fairness has led to hundreds of fairness interventions that seek to control for
performance disparities while preserving accuracy [25].
The central question we tackle in this paper is: Do models corrected for group fairness exhibit less
arbitrariness in their outputs? We answer this question in the negative. We demonstrate that stateof-the-art fairness interventions may improve group fairness metrics at the expense of exacerbating
arbitrariness. The harm is silent: the increase in arbitrariness is masked by favorable group fairness
and accuracy metrics. Our results show that arbitrariness lies beyond the fairness-accuracy frontier:
∗

equal contributions.
Prepared prior to employment at JPMorgan Chase & Co.. Email: hsiang.hsu@jpmchase.com.
‡
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Boston, MA 02134.
Emails: carol_long@g.harvard.edu, alghamdi@g.harvard.edu, flavio@seas.harvard.edu.
1
In the rest of the paper, we informally use the terms “arbitrariness” and “predictive multiplicity” exchangeably to refer to the phenomenon of inconsistent predictions caused by the randomness in model training.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

