Learning DAGs from Data with Few Root Causes

Panagiotis Misiakos, Chris Wendler and Markus Püschel
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
{pmisiakos, wendlerc, markusp}@ethz.ch

Abstract
We present a novel perspective and algorithm for learning directed acyclic graphs
(DAGs) from data generated by a linear structural equation model (SEM). First,
we show that a linear SEM can be viewed as a linear transform that, in prior work,
computes the data from a dense input vector of random valued root causes (as
we will call them) associated with the nodes. Instead, we consider the case of
(approximately) few root causes and also introduce noise in the measurement of the
data. Intuitively, this means that the DAG data is produced by few data generating
events whose effect percolates through the DAG. We prove identifiability in this
new setting and show that the true DAG is the global minimizer of the L0 -norm of
the vector of root causes. For data satisfying the few root causes assumption, we
show superior performance compared to prior DAG learning methods.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of learning the edges of an unknown directed acyclic graph (DAG) given
data indexed by its nodes. DAGs can represent causal dependencies (edges) between events (nodes)
in the sense that an event only depends on its predecessors. Thus, DAG learning has applications
in causal discovery, which, however, is a more demanding problem that we do not consider here,
since it requires further concepts of causality analysis, in particular interventions [Peters et al., 2017].
However, DAG learning is still NP-hard in general [Chickering et al., 2004]. Hence, in practice, one
has to make assumptions on the data generating process, to infer information about the underlying
DAG in polynomial time. Recent work on DAG learning has focused on identifiable classes of
causal data generating processes. A frequent assumption is that the data follow a structural equation
model (SEM) [Shimizu et al., 2006, Zheng et al., 2018, Gao et al., 2021], meaning that the value
of every node is computed as a function of the values of its direct parents plus noise. Zheng et al.
[2018] introduced NOTEARS, a prominent example of DAG learning, which considers the class of
linear SEMs and translates the acyclicity constraint into a continuous form for easier optimization. It
inspired subsequent works to use continuous optimization schemes for both linear [Ng et al., 2020]
and nonlinear SEMs [Lachapelle et al., 2019, Zheng et al., 2020]. A more expansive discussion of
related work is provided in Section 4.
In this paper we also focus on linear SEMs but change the data generation process. We first translate
the common representation of a linear SEM as recurrence into an equivalent closed form. In this form,
prior data generation can be viewed as linearly transforming an i.i.d. random, dense vector of root
causes (as we will call them) associated with the DAG nodes as input, into the actual data on the DAG
nodes as output. Then we impose sparsity in the input (few root causes) and introduce measurement
noise in the output. Intuitively, this assumption captures the reasonable situation that DAG data may
be mainly determined by few data generation events of predecessor nodes that percolate through the
DAG as defined by the linear SEM. Note that our use of the term root causes is related to but different
from the one in the root cause analysis by Ikram et al. [2022].
Contributions. We provide a novel DAG learning method designed for DAG data generated by linear
SEMs with the novel assumption of few root causes. Our specific contributions include the following:
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

