On the Power of SVD in the Stochastic Block Model
Xinyu Mao
University of Southern California
xinyumao@usc.edu

Jiapeng Zhang
University of Southern California
jiapengz@usc.edu

Abstract
A popular heuristic method for improving clustering results is to apply dimensionality reduction before running clustering algorithms. It has been observed that
spectral-based dimensionality reduction tools, such as PCA or SVD, improve the
performance of clustering algorithms in many applications. This phenomenon
indicates that spectral method not only serves as a dimensionality reduction tool,
but also contributes to the clustering procedure in some sense. It is an interesting
question to understand the behavior of spectral steps in clustering problems.
As an initial step in this direction, this paper studies the power of vanilla-SVD
algorithm in the stochastic block model (SBM). We show that, in the symmetric
setting, vanilla-SVD algorithm recovers all clusters correctly. This result answers
an open question posed by Van Vu (Combinatorics Probability and Computing,
2018) in the symmetric setting.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental task in machine learning, with applications in many fields, such as
biology, data mining, and statistical physics. Given a set of objects, the goal is to partition them into
clusters according to their similarities. Objects and known relations can be represented in various
ways. In most cases, objects are represented as vectors in Rd , forming a data set D ⊂ Rd ; each
coordinate is called a feature, whose value is directly derived from raw data.
In many applications, the number of features is very large. It has been observed that the performance
of classical clustering algorithms such as K-means may be worse on high-dimensional datasets.
Some people call this phenomenon curse of dimensionality in machine learning [SEK04]. A popular
heuristic method to address this issue is to apply dimensionality reduction before clustering. Among
tools for dimensionality reduction, it is noted in practice that spectral methods such as principal
component analysis (PCA) and singular value decomposition (SVD) significantly improve clustering
results, e.g., [SEK04, KAH19].
A natural question arises: why do spectral methods help to cluster high-dimensional datasets?
Some practitioners believe one reason is that the spectral method filters some noise from the highdimensional data [ARS+ 04, SEK04, ZLWZ09, KAH19]. Simultaneously, many theory works also
(partially) support this explanation [AFWZ20, EBW18, LZK22, MZ22a]. With this explanation in
mind, people analyzed the behavior of spectral-based algorithms with noise perturbation. Based on
these analyses, many algorithms were proposed to recover clusters in probabilistic generative models.
Among them, a well-studied model is the signal-plus-noise model.
Signal-Plus-Noise model In this model, we assume that each observed sample vbi has the form
vbi = vi + ei , where vi is a ground-truth vector and ei is a random noise vector. For any two sample
vectors vbi , vbj , if they are from the same cluster, their corresponding ground-truth vectors are identical,
i.e., vi = vj . Signal-plus-noise model is very general; it has plentiful variants with different types of
ground-truth vectors and noise distribution. In this paper, we focus on an important instance known as
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

