Extending the Design Space of Graph Neural
Networks by Rethinking Folklore Weisfeiler-Lehman

Jiarui Feng1 Lecheng Kong1 Hao Liu1 Dacheng Tao2 Fuhai Li1
Muhan Zhang3∗ Yixin Chen1
{feng.jiarui, jerry.kong, liuhao, fuhai.li, ychen25}@wustl.edu,
dacheng.tao@gmail.com, muhan@pku.edu.cn
1
Washington University in St. Louis 2 JD Explore Academy 3 Peking University

Abstract
Message passing neural networks (MPNNs) have emerged as the most popular
framework of graph neural networks (GNNs) in recent years. However, their expressive power is limited by the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) test.
Some works are inspired by k-WL/FWL (Folklore WL) and design the corresponding neural versions. Despite the high expressive power, there are serious limitations
in this line of research. In particular, (1) k-WL/FWL requires at least O(nk ) space
complexity, which is impractical for large graphs even when k = 3; (2) The design
space of k-WL/FWL is rigid, with the only adjustable hyper-parameter being k.
To tackle the first limitation, we propose an extension, (k, t)-FWL. We theoretically prove that even if we fix the space complexity to O(nk ) (for any k ≥ 2)
in (k, t)-FWL, we can construct an expressiveness hierarchy up to solving the
graph isomorphism problem. To tackle the second problem, we propose k-FWL+,
which considers any equivariant set as neighbors instead of all nodes, thereby
greatly expanding the design space of k-FWL. Combining these two modifications
results in a flexible and powerful framework (k, t)-FWL+. We demonstrate (k, t)FWL+ can implement most existing models with matching expressiveness. We
then introduce an instance of (k, t)-FWL+ called Neighborhood2 -FWL (N2 -FWL),
which is practically and theoretically sound. We prove that N2 -FWL is no less
powerful than 3-WL, and can encode many substructures while only requiring
O(n2 ) space. Finally, we design its neural version named N2 -GNN and evaluate
its performance on various tasks. N2 -GNN achieves record-breaking results on
ZINC-Subset (0.059) outperforming previous SOTA results by 10.6%. Moreover,
N2 -GNN achieves new SOTA results on the BREC dataset (71.8%) among all
existing high-expressive GNN methods.

1

Introduction

In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have become one of the most popular and powerful
methods for graph representation learning, following a message passing framework [1–4]. However,
the expressive power of message passing GNNs is bounded by the one-dimensional WeisfeilerLehman (1-WL) test [5, 6]. As a result, numerous efforts have been made to design GNNs with
higher expressive power. We provide a more detailed discussion in Section 5.
Several works have drawn inspiration from the k-dimensional Weisfeiler-Lehman (k-WL) or Folklore Weisfeiler-Lehman (k-FWL) test [7] and developed corresponding neural versions [6, 8–10].
However, k-WL/FWL has two inherent limitations. First, while the expressive power increases
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

