Low-shot Object Learning with Mutual Exclusivity
Bias
Anh Thai1

Ahmad Humayun2∗ Stefan Stojanov1∗ Zixuan Huang3
Bikram Boote1 James M. Rehg1,3
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Google Deepmind,
3
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
This paper introduces Low-shot Object Learning with Mutual Exclusivity Bias
(LSME), the first computational framing of mutual exclusivity bias, a phenomenon
commonly observed in infants during word learning. We provide a novel dataset,
comprehensive baselines, and a state-of-the-art method to enable the ML community to tackle this challenging learning task. The goal of LSME is to analyze
an RGB image of a scene containing multiple objects and correctly associate a
previously-unknown object instance with a provided category label. This association is then used to perform low-shot learning to test category generalization. We
provide a data generation pipeline for the LSME problem and conduct a thorough
analysis of the factors that contribute to its difficulty. Additionally, we evaluate the
performance of multiple baselines, including state-of-the-art foundation models.
Finally, we present a baseline approach that outperforms state-of-the-art models in
terms of low-shot accuracy. Code and data are available at https://github.com/rehglab/LSME.
Standard Low-shot Learning
sandwich

car

Low-shot Learning with Mutual Exclusivity Bias
lion

sandwich

car

lion

Training

Input: Single object image
Task: Learn to classify object

Training

Input: Scene image with seen and novel objects
Task: Identify novel object

Testing

Input: Single object image
Task: Classify object

Testing

Input: Scene image with known and novel objects
Task: Localize and classify novel objects

Figure 1: We propose Low-Shot Object Learning with Mutual Exclusivity Bias (LSME), a novel
setting that is more realistic and significantly challenging than the standard low-shot object learning
setting. Given a scene with multiple objects including seen and novel objects, the goal of LSME is to
use mutual exclusivity bias to correctly identify the unfamiliar object and generalize this association
to other instances of the novel category at testing time.
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

