Moral Responsibility for AI Systems

Sander Beckers
University of Amsterdam
sanderbeckers.com
srekcebrednas@gmail.com

Abstract
As more and more decisions that have a significant ethical dimension are being
outsourced to AI systems, it is important to have a definition of moral responsibility
that can be applied to AI systems. Moral responsibility for an outcome of an
agent who performs some action is commonly taken to involve both a causal
condition and an epistemic condition: the action should cause the outcome, and
the agent should have been aware – in some form or other – of the possible moral
consequences of their action. This paper presents a formal definition of both
conditions within the framework of causal models. I compare my approach to the
existing approaches of Braham and van Hees (BvH) and of Halpern and KleimanWeiner (HK). I then generalize my definition into a degree of responsibility.

1

Introduction

As more and more decisions that have a significant ethical dimension are being outsourced to AI
systems, it is important to have a definition of responsibility that can be applied to the decisions of
AI systems, and that can be used by AI systems in the process of its decision-making [8]. To meet the
first condition, such a definition should require only a minimal notion of agency and instead focus on
those aspects of responsibility that are readily applicable to (current) AI systems. To meet the second
condition, such a definition should be formulated in a language that can be implemented into an AI
system, so that it can integrate judgments of responsibility into its decision-making. This paper sets
out to propose such a definition using the well-established framework of causal models [22, 23].
There exist different notions of moral responsibility that one might be interested in, and here we restrict
attention to just one of them, namely responsibility for consequences, meaning the responsibility
one has for a particular outcome that is the result of performing a particular action. This can be
expressed more clearly by saying that the action caused the outcome, and therefore the first condition
of concern here is the causal condition on responsibility [12, 26, 21, 5]. The past two decades have
seen immense progress on offering formal definitions of actual causation by way of using causal
models, and the definition here developed takes maximal advantage of this progress by comparing
some recent proposals and choosing the one that correctly handles several complicated cases to be
considered [33, 16, 2].
Our actions can cause all kinds of outcomes for which we are clearly not morally responsible: if a
train crashes into a car that illegally crosses the railroad then the train conductor is not responsible for
the car driver’s death, if you turn on a light switch in a hotel room then you are not responsible if a
short-circuit follows, etc.. The standard intuition that we have in such cases is that the agent “could
not have known” that their action would cause the outcome. This is why definitions of responsibility
also invoke an epistemic condition, stating roughly that the agent should have been able to foresee
that they are performing an action which could result in them being responsible for the outcome
[5, 27, 25].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

