DoWG Unleashed: An Efficient Universal
Parameter-Free Gradient Descent Method
Ahmed Khaled
Princeton University

Konstantin Mishchenko
Samsung AI Center

Chi Jin
Princeton University

Abstract
This paper proposes a new easy-to-implement parameter-free gradient-based optimizer: DoWG (Distance over Weighted Gradients). We prove that DoWG is
efficient—matching the convergence rate of optimally tuned gradient descent in
convex optimization up to a logarithmic factor without tuning any parameters,
and universal—automatically adapting to both smooth and nonsmooth problems.
While popular algorithms following the AdaGrad framework compute a running
average of the squared gradients to use for normalization, DoWG maintains a new
distance-based weighted version of the running average, which is crucial to achieve
the desired properties. To complement our theory, we also show empirically that
DoWG trains at the edge of stability, and validate its effectiveness on practical
machine learning tasks.

1

Introduction

We study the fundamental optimization problem
min f (x),

x∈X

(OPT)

where f is a convex function, and X is a convex, closed, and bounded subset of Rd . We assume
f has at least one minimizer x∗ ∈ X . We focus on gradient descent and its variants, as they are
widely adopted and scale well when the model dimensionality d is large (Bottou et al., 2018). The
optimization problem (OPT) finds many applications: in solving linear systems, logistic regression,
support vector machines, and other areas of machine learning (Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004).
Equally important, methods designed for (stochastic) convex optimization also influence the intuition
for and design of methods for nonconvex optimization– for example, momentum (Polyak, 1964),
AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2010), and Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) were all first analyzed in the convex
optimization framework.
As models become larger and more complex, the cost and environmental impact of training have
rapidly grown as well (Sharir et al., 2020; Patterson et al., 2021). Therefore, it is vital that we develop
more efficient and effective methods of solving machine learning optimization tasks. One of the
chief challenges in applying gradient-based methods is that they often require tuning one or more
stepsize parameters (Goodfellow et al., 2016), and the choice of stepsize can significantly influence
a method’s convergence speed as well as the quality of the obtained solutions, especially in deep
learning (Wilson et al., 2017).
The cost and impact of hyperparameter tuning on the optimization process have led to significant
research activity in designing parameter-free and adaptive optimization methods in recent years, see
e.g. (Orabona and Cutkosky, 2020; Carmon and Hinder, 2022) and the references therein.
We say an algorithm is universal if it adapts to many different problem geometries or regularity
conditions on the function f (Nesterov, 2014; Levy et al., 2018; Grimmer, 2022). In this work,
we focus on two regularity conditions: (a) f Lipschitz and (b) f smooth. Lipschitz functions
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

