Federated Spectral Clustering via Secure Similarity
Reconstruction
Dong Qiao1,2
Chris Ding1
Jicong Fan 1,2∗
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
dongqiao@link.cuhk.edu.cn
{chrisding,fanjicong}@cuhk.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Federated learning has a significant advantage in protecting data and information privacy. Many scholars proposed various secure learning methods within the
framework of federated learning but the study on secure federated unsupervised
learning especially clustering is limited. We in this work propose a secure kernelized factorization method for federated spectral clustering on distributed data. The
method is non-trivial because the kernel or similarity matrix for spectral clustering
is computed by data pairs, which violates the principle of privacy protection. Our
method implicitly constructs an approximation for the kernel matrix on distributed
data such that we can perform spectral clustering under the constraint of privacy
protection. We provide a convergence guarantee of the optimization algorithm,
reconstruction error bounds of the Gaussian kernel matrix, and the sufficient condition of correct clustering of our method. We also present guarantees of differential
privacy. Numerical results on synthetic and real datasets demonstrate that the
proposed method is efficient and accurate in comparison to baselines.

1

Introduction

In the era of big data, human beings can analyze massive data in various fields due to the improvement
of storage and computational capabilities of computing devices [Li et al., 2020b]. Some popular
fields such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, internet of things (IoT), and cloud computing
have seen explosive development over the past few years. Nevertheless, a side effect of this trend is
that individuals and organizations have more and more concerns about potential violation of privacy
[Kairouz et al., 2021]. As a result, it has become a challenge to mine valuable information from user
data but not to directly access it.
Federated learning [Kairouz et al., 2021; McMahan et al., 2017] can train a global model without
retrieving dispersed data [Yang et al., 2018]. This advantage has made it so popular that many scholars
have put much effort into the study of federated learning. For example, Yang et al. [2019] presented
the definitions of horizontal federated learning, vertical federated learning, and federated transfer
learning. Some privacy-preserving machine learning models were also presented. For instance, He
et al. [2020] developed a federated group knowledge transfer algorithm to train small CNNs on
edge devices. Chen et al. [2018] proposed a protocol to conduct privacy-preserving ridge regression
over high-dimensional data. Besides, Kim et al. [2018] proposed a block-chained federated learning
architecture that enables on-device learning without any central coordination.
Regardless of the great progress of federated learning, it can be found that most of the existing studies
are for supervised learning [Li et al., 2020a; Ghosh et al., 2020]. Note that collecting labeled data may
deserve very high cost in real situations [Li et al., 2020b] while unlabeled data are abundant. Thus, it
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

