Learning Re-sampling Methods with Parameter
Attribution for Image Super-resolution

Xiaotong Luo1 , Yuan Xie2 , Yanyun Qu1∗
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University, Chongqing, China
1

xiaotluo@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Single image super-resolution (SISR) has made a significant breakthrough benefiting from the prevalent rise of deep neural networks and large-scale training samples.
The mainstream deep SR models primarily focus on network architecture design as
well as optimization schemes, while few pay attention to the training data. In fact,
most of the existing SR methods train the model on uniformly sampled patch pairs
from the whole image. However, the uneven image content makes the training data
present an unbalanced distribution, i.e., the easily reconstructed region (smooth)
occupies the majority of the data, while the hard reconstructed region (edge or
texture) has rarely few samples. Based on this phenomenon, we consider rethinking
the current paradigm of merely using uniform data sampling way for training SR
models. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective Bi-Sampling Parameter
Attribution (BSPA) method for accurate image SR. Specifically, the bi-sampling
consists of uniform sampling and inverse sampling, which is introduced to reconcile the unbalanced inherent data bias. The former aims to keep the intrinsic
data distribution, and the latter is designed to enhance the feature extraction ability
of the model on the hard samples. Moreover, integrated gradient is introduced to
attribute the contribution of each parameter in the alternate models trained by both
sampling data so as to filter the trivial parameters for further dynamic refinement.
By progressively decoupling the allocation of parameters, the SR model can learn a
more compact representation. Extensive experiments on publicly available datasets
demonstrate that our proposal can effectively boost the performance of baseline
methods from the data re-sampling view.

1

Introduction

Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to reconstruct a high-resolution (HR) image from its
downsampled low-resolution (LR) counterpart. As a classical ill-posed problem, multiple HR images
can be recovered from the same LR image. With the boom of neural networks, numerous excellent
deep SR methods [9, 23, 25, 5] have been proposed to chase for a more accurate solution. It is
well-known that the success of deep learning primarily attributes to three significant factors, including
large-scale data [1], network structures [10, 52, 23], and optimization strategies [16, 31, 26]. Most
of the existing SR models mainly focus on the delicate structure design or complex regularization
constraints, while neglecting the in-depth analysis of the intrinsic training data.
Due to resource constraints, the mainstream deep SR methods mostly train the models with uniformly sampled LR-HR patch pairs rather than the whole images. However, they ignore the
* Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

