RL-ViGen: A Reinforcement Learning Benchmark for
Visual Generalization
Zhecheng Yuan1,3,4∗ , Sizhe Yang2,3∗, Pu Hua1,3 ,
Kaizhe Hu1,3,4 , Huazhe Xu1,3,4

Can Chang1,3,4 ,

1

Tsinghua University, 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
3
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, 4 Shanghai AI Lab
yuanzc23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, huazhe_xu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual Reinforcement Learning (Visual RL), coupled with high-dimensional observations, has consistently confronted the long-standing challenge of out-ofdistribution generalization. Despite the focus on algorithms aimed at resolving
visual generalization problems, we argue that the devil is in the existing benchmarks
as they are restricted to isolated tasks and generalization categories, undermining a
comprehensive evaluation of agents’ visual generalization capabilities. To bridge
this gap, we introduce RL-ViGen: a novel Reinforcement Learning Benchmark
for Visual Generalization, which contains diverse tasks and a wide spectrum of
generalization types, thereby facilitating the derivation of more reliable conclusions. Furthermore, RL-ViGen incorporates the latest generalization visual RL
algorithms into a unified framework, under which the experiment results indicate
that no single existing algorithm has prevailed universally across tasks. Our aspiration is that RL-ViGen will serve as a catalyst in this area, and lay a foundation
for the future creation of universal visual generalization RL agents suitable for
real-world scenarios. Access to our code and implemented algorithms is provided
at https://gemcollector.github.io/RL-ViGen/.

1

Introduction

Visual Reinforcement Learning (RL) has attained remarkable success across a plethora of domains [39, 43, 14]. A diverse range of techniques has been implemented to tackle not only the
trial-and-error learning process but also the complexity arising from high-dimensional input data.
Notwithstanding these successes, a fundamental challenge confronting visual RL agents persists —
achieving generalization.
To overcome this obstacle, several visual RL generalization benchmarks have emerged, including
Procgen [6], Distracting Control Suite [47], and DMC-GB [21]. While these benchmarks have been
indispensable to visual RL generalization progress, they are not exempt from inherent limitations
that pose challenges to further development. Procgen offers a diverse distribution of environment
configurations and visual appearances. However, it is limited to video games with non-realistic images
and low-dimensional discrete action spaces, resulting in a significant gap between its environments
and real-world scenarios. Another instance, DMC-GB, is sometimes treated as a golden standard for
many state-of-the-art visual generalization algorithms.
∗

equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

