Near-Optimal k-Clustering in the Sliding Window
Model
David P. Woodruff
CMU
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Peilin Zhong
Google Research
peilinz@google.com

Samson Zhou
Texas A&M University
samsonzhou@gmail.com

Abstract
Clustering is an important technique for identifying structural information in largescale data analysis, where the underlying dataset may be too large to store. In many
applications, recent data can provide more accurate information and thus older data
past a certain time is expired. The sliding window model captures these desired
properties and thus there has been substantial interest in clustering in the sliding
window model.
In this paper, we give the first algorithm that achieves near-optimal (1 +
ε)-approximation to (k, z)-clustering in the sliding window model, where z
is the exponent of the distance function in the cost. Our algorithm uses
k
n∆
d
min(ε4 ,ε2+z ) polylog ε words of space when the points are from [∆] , thus significantly improving on works by Braverman et. al. (SODA 2016), Borassi et. al.
(NeurIPS 2021), and Epasto et. al. (SODA 2022).
Along the way, we develop a data structure for clustering called an online coreset,
which outputs a coreset not only for the end of a stream, but also for all prefixes
of the stream. Our online coreset samples min(ε4k,ε2+z ) polylog n∆
from
ε points

k
the stream. We then show that any online coreset requires Ω ε2 log n samples,
which shows a separation from the problem of constructing an offline coreset, i.e.,
constructing online coresets is strictly harder. Our results also
 extend to general
k
metrics on [∆]d and are near-optimal in light of a Ω ε2+z
lower bound for the
size of an offline coreset.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental procedure frequently used to help extract important structural information
from large datasets. Informally, the goal of clustering is to partition the data into k clusters so that the
elements within each cluster have similar properties. Classic formulations of clustering include the
k-median and k-means problems, which have been studied since the 1950’s [60, 50]. More generally,
for a set X of n points in Rd , along with a metric dist, a cluster parameter k > 0, and an exponent
z > 0 that is a positive integer, the clustering objective can be defined by
min

C⊂Rd ,|C|=k

n
X
i=1

min dist(xi , c)z .
c∈C

When dist is the Euclidean distance, the problem is known as (k, z)-clustering and more specifically,
k-median clustering and k-means clustering, when z is additionally set to 1 and 2, respectively.
As modern datasets have significantly increased in size, attention has shifted to large-scale computational models, such as the streaming model of computation, that do not require multiple passes
over the data. In the (insertion-only) streaming model, the points x1 , . . . , xn of X arrive sequentially,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

