Test-Time Amendment with a Coarse Classifier for
Fine-Grained Classification
Kanishk Jain1 , Shyamgopal Karthik2 , Vineet Gandhi1
1
IIIT Hyderabad 2 University of Tübingen

Abstract
We investigate the problem of reducing mistake severity for fine-grained classification. Fine-grained classification can be challenging, mainly due to the requirement
of domain expertise for accurate annotation. However, humans are particularly
adept at performing coarse classification as it requires relatively low levels of
expertise. To this end, we present a novel approach for Post-Hoc Correction
called Hierarchical Ensembles (HiE) that utilizes label hierarchy to improve the
performance of fine-grained classification at test-time using the coarse-grained
predictions. By only requiring the parents of leaf nodes, our method significantly
reduces avg. mistake severity while improving top-1 accuracy on the iNaturalist-19
and tieredImageNet-H datasets, achieving a new state-of-the-art on both benchmarks. We also investigate the efficacy of our approach in the semi-supervised
setting. Our approach brings notable gains in top-1 accuracy while significantly
decreasing the severity of mistakes as training data decreases for the fine-grained
classes. The simplicity and post-hoc nature of HiE renders it practical to be used
with any off-the-shelf trained model to improve its predictions further. The code is
available at: https://github.com/kanji95/Hierarchical-Ensembles

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, large-scale datasets have been instrumental in driving the rapid progress of
computer vision/image recognition. However, in settings that require experts to annotate samples,
collecting large amounts of labeled data can be prohibitively expensive. Fine-Grained Visual Classification (FGVC) is one such example, where one would need a domain expert to be able to identify
the category for a particular sample. However, it can be cheaper to obtain coarse labels for the same
samples in these settings. For instance, in Figure 1 while it is evident to spot and identify a butterfly or
a bird, one would need a Lepidopterist or an Ornithologists to categorize them as Junonia Genoveva
or Water Ouzel.
Therefore, one popular research direction in recent times has been to utilize the availability of a
larger set of images with coarse labels to improve the performance (i.e top-1 accuracies) of the neural
network models on various fine-grained classification benchmarks [1, 2]. Using coarse labels in a
classification setting introduces the concept of a label hierarchy, where all the labels in a dataset
are connected through some taxonomy. This taxonomy could either be defined from the biological
taxonomy, as with many species recognition datasets or could be derived from language-based
ontologies such as WordNet [3]. Another mainstream usage of label hierarchies in recent times is to
use them to reduce the severity of mistakes committed by various classification models [4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
For instance, mistaking a car for a bus is a better mistake than mistaking a car for a lamppost. This
originated from the extensive work on cost-sensitive classification [9, 10]. However, defining pairwise
costs can be a tedious process and scales quadratically with the number of classes. Therefore, the
recent works have all focused on using the label hierarchy and defining costs automatically based on
graph distances (e.g. using the height of the least common ancestor between the predicted and the
ground truth class as a proxy for cost). The research in this direction aims to invent methods that at
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

