MMD-FUSE: Learning and Combining Kernels for
Two-Sample Testing Without Data Splitting

Felix Biggs∗
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
Department of Computer Science
University College London & Inria London
contact@felixbiggs.com

Antonin Schrab∗
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London & Inria London
a.schrab@ucl.ac.uk

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose novel statistics which maximise the power of a two-sample test based
on the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD), by adapting over the set of kernels
used in defining it. For finite sets, this reduces to combining (normalised) MMD
values under each of these kernels via a weighted soft maximum. Exponential
concentration bounds are proved for our proposed statistics under the null and
alternative. We further show how these kernels can be chosen in a data-dependent
but permutation-independent way, in a well-calibrated test, avoiding data splitting.
This technique applies more broadly to general permutation-based MMD testing,
and includes the use of deep kernels with features learnt using unsupervised models
such as auto-encoders. We highlight the applicability of our MMD-FUSE test on
both synthetic low-dimensional and real-world high-dimensional data, and compare
its performance in terms of power against current state-of-the-art kernel tests.

1

Introduction

The fundamental problem of non-parametric two-sample testing consists in detecting the difference
between any two distributions having access only to samples from these. Kernel-based tests relying
on the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD; Gretton et al., 2012a) as a measure of distance on
distributions are well-suited for this framework as they can identify complex non-linear features
in the data, and benefit from both strong theoretical guarantees and ease of implementation. This
explains their popularity among practitioners and justifies their wide use for real-world applications.
However, the performance of these tests is crucially impacted by the choice of kernel. This is
commonly tackled by either: choosing the kernel by some weakly data-dependent heuristic (Gretton
et al., 2012a); or splitting off a hold-out set of data for kernel selection, with the other half used for
the actual test (Gretton et al., 2012b; Sutherland et al., 2017). This latter method includes training
feature extractors such as deep kernels on the first selection half. Both of these methods can incur
a significant loss in test power, since heuristics may lead to poor kernel choices, and data splitting
reduces the number of data points for the actual test.
Our contribution is to present MMD-based tests which can strongly adapt to the data without data
splitting. This comes in two parallel parts: firstly we show how the kernel can be chosen in an
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

