How hard are computer vision datasets?
Calibrating dataset difficulty to viewing time

David Mayo∗
CSAIL & CBMM
MIT

Jesse Cummings∗
CSAIL & CBMM
MIT

Xinyu Lin∗
CSAIL & CBMM
MIT

Boris Katz
CSAIL & CBMM
MIT

Dan Gutfreund
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM

Andrei Barbu
CSAIL & CBMM
MIT

Abstract
Humans outperform object recognizers despite the fact that models perform well
on current datasets, including those explicitly designed to challenge machines
with debiased images or distribution shift. This problem persists, in part, because
we have no guidance on the absolute difficulty of an image or dataset making it
hard to objectively assess progress toward human-level performance, to cover the
range of human abilities, and to increase the challenge posed by a dataset. We
develop a dataset difficulty metric MVT, Minimum Viewing Time, that addresses
these three problems. Subjects view an image that flashes on screen and then
classify the object in the image. Images that require brief flashes to recognize
are easy, those which require seconds of viewing are hard. We compute the
ImageNet and ObjectNet image difficulty distribution, which we find significantly
undersamples hard images. Nearly 90% of current benchmark performance is
derived from images that are easy for humans. Rather than hoping that we will
make harder datasets, we can for the first time objectively guide dataset difficulty
during development. We can also subset recognition performance as a function
of difficulty: model performance drops precipitously while human performance
remains stable. Difficulty provides a new lens through which to view model
performance, one which uncovers new scaling laws: vision-language models stand
out as being the most robust and human-like while all other techniques scale poorly.
We release tools to automatically compute MVT, along with image sets which are
tagged by difficulty. Objective image difficulty has practical applications – one
can measure how hard a test set is before deploying a real-world system – and
scientific applications such as discovering the neural correlates of image difficulty
and enabling new object recognition techniques that eliminate the benchmark-vsreal-world performance gap.

1

Introduction

Numerous efforts exist to build better evaluations for object recognizers. Broadly, these fall into
four categories. Those that probe distribution shift, like ImageNetV2 [1]. Those that add scale
like OpenImages [2]. Those that explicitly attempt to make images more difficult for models by
adversarially selecting them, like ImageNet-A [3] or adding artificial corruptions, like ImageNet-C
[4]. And those that attempt to explicitly control for biases like ObjectNet [5]. These are responses to
the fact that performance on standard benchmarks does not translate well to real-world conditions;
∗

Equal contribution. Website https://objectnet.dev/mvt Corresponding author dmayo2@mit.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

