Streaming Factor Trajectory Learning for Temporal
Tensor Decomposition

Shikai Fang
Kahlert School of Computing
The University of Utah
shikai.fang@utah.edu

Xin Yu
Kahlert School of Computing
The University of Utah
yuxwind@gmail.com

Shibo Li
Kahlert School of Computing
The University of Utah
shiboli.cs@gmail.com

Zheng Wang
Kahlert School of Computing
The University of Utah
u1208847@utah.edu

Robert M. Kirby
Kahlert School of Computing
The University of Utah
kirby@cs.utah.edu

Shandian Zhe∗
Kahlert School of Computing
The University of Utah
zhe@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Practical tensor data is often along with time information. Most existing temporal decomposition approaches estimate a set of fixed factors for the objects in
each tensor mode, and hence cannot capture the temporal evolution of the objects’
representation. More important, we lack an effective approach to capture such
evolution from streaming data, which is common in real-world applications. To
address these issues, we propose Streaming Factor Trajectory Learning (SFTL) for
temporal tensor decomposition. We use Gaussian processes (GPs) to model the
trajectory of factors so as to flexibly estimate their temporal evolution. To address
the computational challenges in handling streaming data, we convert the GPs into
a state-space prior by constructing an equivalent stochastic differential equation
(SDE). We develop an efficient online filtering algorithm to estimate a decoupled
running posterior of the involved factor states upon receiving new data. The decoupled estimation enables us to conduct standard Rauch-Tung-Striebel smoothing to
compute the full posterior of all the trajectories in parallel, without the need for revisiting any previous data. We have shown the advantage of SFTL in both synthetic
tasks and real-world applications. The code is available at https://github.
com/xuangu-fang/Streaming-Factor-Trajectory-Learning.

1

Introduction

Tensor data is common in real-world applications. For example, one can extract a three-mode tensor
(patient, drug, clinic) from medical service records and a four-mode tensor (customer, commodity,
seller, web-page) from the database of an online shopping platform. Tensor decomposition is a
fundamental tool for tensor data analysis. It introduces a set of factors to represent the objects in
each mode, and estimate these factors by reconstructing the observed entry values. These factors
can be viewed as the underlying properties of the objects. We can use them to search for interesting
structures within the objects (e.g., communities and outliers) or as discriminate features for predictive
tasks, such as personalized treatment or recommendation.
Real-world tensor data is often accompanied with time information, namely the timestamps at which
the objects of different modes interact to produce the entry values. Underlying the timestamps can
be rich, valuable temporal patterns. While many temporal decomposition methods are available,
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

