Scale-teaching: Robust Multi-scale Training for Time
Series Classification with Noisy Labels

Zhen Liu
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, China
cszhenliu@mail.scut.edu.cn

Peitian Ma
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, China
ma_scuter@163.com

Dongliang Chen
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, China
ytucdl@foxmail.com

Wenbin Pei
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, China
peiwenbin@dlut.edu.cn

Qianli Ma∗
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, China
qianlima@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been criticized because they easily overfit
noisy (incorrect) labels. To improve the robustness of DNNs, existing methods
for image data regard samples with small training losses as correctly labeled data
(small-loss criterion). Nevertheless, time series’ discriminative patterns are easily
distorted by external noises (i.e., frequency perturbations) during the recording
process. This results in training losses of some time series samples that do not meet
the small-loss criterion. Therefore, this paper proposes a deep learning paradigm
called Scale-teaching to cope with time series noisy labels. Specifically, we design
a fine-to-coarse cross-scale fusion mechanism for learning discriminative patterns
by utilizing time series at different scales to train multiple DNNs simultaneously.
Meanwhile, each network is trained in a cross-teaching manner by using complementary information from different scales to select small-loss samples as clean
labels. For unselected large-loss samples, we introduce multi-scale embedding
graph learning via label propagation to correct their labels by using selected clean
samples. Experiments on multiple benchmark time series datasets demonstrate the
superiority of the proposed Scale-teaching paradigm over state-of-the-art methods
in terms of effectiveness and robustness.

1

Introduction

Time series classification has recently received much attention in deep learning [1, 2]. Essentially, the
success of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) is driven by a large amount of well-labeled data. However,
human errors [3] and sensor failures [4] produce noisy (incorrect) labels in time series datasets. For
example, in electrocardiogram diagnosis [5], physicians with different experiences tend to make
inconsistent category judgments. In recent studies [6, 7], DNNs have shown their powerful learning
ability, which, however, makes it relatively easier to overfit noisy labels and inevitably degenerate
∗

Qianli Ma is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

