Inner Product-based Neural Network Similarity

Wei Chen† , Zichen Miao† , Qiang Qiu
Department of ECE
Purdue University
{chen2732, miaoz, qqiu}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Analyzing representational similarity among neural networks (NNs) is essential
for interpreting or transferring deep models. In application scenarios where numerous NN models are learned, it becomes crucial to assess model similarities
in computationally efficient ways. In this paper, we propose a new paradigm for
reducing NN representational similarity to filter subspace distance. Specifically,
when convolutional filters are decomposed as a linear combination of a set of
filter subspace elements, denoted as filter atoms, and have those decomposed atom
coefficients shared across networks, NN representational similarity can be significantly simplified as calculating the cosine distance among respective filter atoms,
to achieve millions of times computation reduction over popular probing-based
methods. We provide both theoretical and empirical evidence that such simplified
filter subspace-based similarity preserves a strong linear correlation with other
popular probing-based metrics, while being significantly more efficient to obtain
and robust to probing data. We further validate the effectiveness of the proposed
method in various application scenarios where numerous models exist, such as
federated and continual learning as well as analyzing training dynamics. We hope
our findings can help further explorations of real-time large-scale representational
similarity analysis in neural networks.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (NNs) have shown unprecedented performance in a large variety of tasks [24,
46]. In many scenarios, numerous models are learned and their relations can be beneficial to exploit.
For example, as illustrated in Figure 1(a), to aggregate knowledge across space, federated learning
(FL) trains models over a large number of clients while keeping data localized. To preserve knowledge
across time while learning new ones, continual learning (CL) can be addressed by training a large
group of models, one for each timestep. Finding the relations among models is the cornerstone to
boosting performance in these scenarios, such as improving personalization for FL [53] or providing
knowledge retrieval for CL [40]. Considering the large number of NNs potentially allowed in those
scenarios, e.g., to model growing spatial/temporal coverage, it becomes crucial to have a highly
computationally efficient way to assess NN model similarity.
We are inspired by one recent state-of-the-art CL framework in [35], where each convolutional
filter is represented as a linear combination of a set of filter subspace elements, denoted as filter
atoms. It is easy to notice that each convolutional layer now becomes two convolutional layers, a
filter atom layer followed by an atom coefficient layer with 1 × 1 filters. Then, motivated by the
literature on task subspace modeling [10, 25, 33, 45, 64] that tasks can be modeled as a set of latent
basis tasks and their linear combinations, a group of tasks are sequentially modeled using NNs by
learning for each task a different set of filter atoms, while sharing common atom coefficients across
†

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

