Lookup Table meets Local Laplacian Filter:
Pyramid Reconstruction Network for Tone Mapping

Feng Zhang 1
Ming Tian 1
Zhiqiang Li 2
Bin Xu 2
2
1,3∗
Qingbo Lu
Changxin Gao
Nong Sang 1
1

National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
2
DJI Technology Co., Ltd, 3 Hubei Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Systems
{fengzhangaia, tianming, cgao, nsang}@hust.edu.cn,
{mila.xu, cristopher.li, qingbo.lu}@dji.com

Abstract
Tone mapping aims to convert high dynamic range (HDR) images to low dynamic
range (LDR) representations, a critical task in the camera imaging pipeline. In
recent years, 3-Dimensional Look-Up Table (3D LUT) based methods have gained
attention due to their ability to strike a favorable balance between enhancement
performance and computational efficiency. However, these methods often fail to
deliver satisfactory results in local areas since the look-up table is a global operator
for tone mapping, which works based on pixel values and fails to incorporate crucial
local information. To this end, this paper aims to address this issue by exploring a
novel strategy that integrates global and local operators by utilizing closed-form
Laplacian pyramid decomposition and reconstruction. Specifically, we employ
image-adaptive 3D LUTs to manipulate the tone in the low-frequency image by
leveraging the specific characteristics of the frequency information. Furthermore,
we utilize local Laplacian filters to refine the edge details in the high-frequency
components in an adaptive manner. Local Laplacian filters are widely used to
preserve edge details in photographs, but their conventional usage involves manual
tuning and fixed implementation within camera imaging pipelines or photo editing
tools. We propose to learn parameter value maps progressively for local Laplacian
filters from annotated data using a lightweight network. Our model achieves
simultaneous global tone manipulation and local edge detail preservation in an
end-to-end manner. Extensive experimental results on two benchmark datasets
demonstrate that the proposed method performs favorably against state-of-the-art
methods.

1

Introduction

Modern cameras, despite their advanced and sophisticated sensors, are limited in their ability to
capture the same level of detail as the human eye in a given scene. In order to capture more detail,
high dynamic range (HDR) imaging techniques [25, 2] have been developed to convey a wider
range of contrasts and luminance values than conventional low dynamic range (LDR) imaging.
However, most modern graphics display devices have a limited dynamic range that is inadequate
to reproduce the full range of light intensities present in natural scenes. To tackle this issue, tone
mapping techniques [28, 34, 9] have been proposed to render high-contrast scene radiance to the
∗

Changxin Gao is the corresponding author, email: cgao@hust.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

