FedL2P: Federated Learning to Personalize

Royson Lee1,2∗, Minyoung Kim2 , Da Li2
Xinchi Qiu , Timothy Hospedales2,3 , Ferenc Huszár1 , Nicholas D. Lane1,4
1

1

University of Cambridge, UK 2 Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK
3
University of Edinburgh, UK 4 Flower Labs

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) research has made progress in developing algorithms for
distributed learning of global models, as well as algorithms for local personalization
of those common models to the specifics of each client’s local data distribution.
However, different FL problems may require different personalization strategies,
and it may not even be possible to define an effective one-size-fits-all personalization strategy for all clients: depending on how similar each client’s optimal
predictor is to that of the global model, different personalization strategies may
be preferred. In this paper, we consider the federated meta-learning problem
of learning personalization strategies. Specifically, we consider meta-nets that
induce the batch-norm and learning rate parameters for each client given local
data statistics. By learning these meta-nets through FL, we allow the whole FL
network to collaborate in learning a customized personalization strategy for each
client. Empirical results show that this framework improves on a range of standard
hand-crafted personalization baselines in both label and feature shift situations.0

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is an emerging approach to enable privacy-preserving collaborative learning
among clients who hold their own data. A major challenge of FL is to learn from differing degrees of
statistical data heterogeneity among clients. This makes it hard to reliably learn a global model and
also that the global model may perform sub-optimally for each local client. These two issues are often
dealt with respectively by developing robust algorithms for learning the global model [33, 32, 39]
and then offering each client the opportunity to personalize the global model to its own unique local
statistics via fine-tuning. In this paper, we focus on improving the fine-tuning process by learning a
personalization strategy for each client.
A variety of approaches have been proposed for client personalization. Some algorithms directly learn
the personalized models [62, 43], but the majority obtain the personalized model after global model
learning by fine-tuning techniques such as basic fine-tuning [46, 48], regularised fine-tuning [34,
59], and selective parameter fine-tuning [17, 11, 2, 37]. Recent benchmarks [45, 9] showed that
different personalized FL methods suffer from lack of comparable evaluation setups. In particular,
dataset- and experiment-specific personalization strategies are often required to achieve state-of-theart performance. Intuitively, different datasets and FL scenarios require different personalization
strategies. For example, scenarios with greater or lesser heterogeneity among clients, would imply
different strengths of personalization are optimal. Furthermore, exactly how that personalization
should be conducted might depend on whether the heterogeneity is primarily in marginal label shift,
marginal feature shift, or conditional shift. None of these facets can be well addressed by a one size
fits all personalization algorithm. Furthermore, we identify a previously understudied issue: even
∗
0

Corresponding Author: dsrl2@cam.ac.uk
Code is available at https://github.com/royson/fedl2p

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

