An Optimal Structured Zeroth-order Algorithm for
Non-smooth Optimization

Marco Rando∗

Cesare Molinari†

Silvia Villa†

Lorenzo Rosasco∗‡

Abstract
Finite-difference methods are a class of algorithms designed to solve black-box
optimization problems by approximating a gradient of the target function on a set
of directions. In black-box optimization, the non-smooth setting is particularly
relevant since, in practice, differentiability and smoothness assumptions cannot be
verified. To cope with nonsmoothness, several authors use a smooth approximation
of the target function and show that finite difference methods approximate its
gradient. Recently, it has been proved that imposing a structure in the directions
allows improving performance. However, only the smooth setting was considered.
To close this gap, we introduce and analyze O-ZD, the first structured finitedifference algorithm for non-smooth black-box optimization. Our method exploits
a smooth approximation of the target function and we prove that it approximates its
gradient on a subset of random orthogonal directions. We analyze the convergence
of O-ZD under different assumptions. For non-smooth convex functions, we obtain
the optimal complexity. In the non-smooth non-convex setting, we characterize
the number of iterations needed to bound the expected norm of the smoothed
gradient. For smooth functions, our analysis recovers existing results for structured
zeroth-order methods for the convex case and extends them to the non-convex
setting. We conclude with numerical simulations where assumptions are satisfied,
observing that our algorithm has very good practical performances.

1

Introduction

Black-box optimization problems are a class of problems for which only values of the target function
are available and no first-order information is provided. Typically, these problems arise when the
evaluation of the objective function is based on a simulation and no analytical form of the gradient is
accessible or its explicit calculation is too expensive [14, 45, 36, 35].
To face these problems, different methods that do not require first-order information have been
proposed - see for instance [39, 47, 19, 26, 20, 30, 33] and references therein. These techniques are
called derivative-free methods and a wide class of these is the class of finite-difference algorithms
[31, 39, 17]. These iterative procedures mimic first-order optimization strategies by replacing the
gradient of the objective function with an approximation built through finite differences in random
directions.
Two types of finite-difference methods can be identified: unstructured and structured ones, depending
on the way in which the random directions are generated. In the former, directions are sampled i.i.d.
from some distribution [39, 17, 10, 46] while in the latter, directions have to satisfy some structural
constraints, e.g. orthogonality [32, 42]. Several authors [32, 42, 5, 12] theoretically and empirically
∗

MaLGa-DIBRIS,
University
of
Genova,
IT
(marco.rando@edu.unige.it,
lorenzo.rosasco@unige.it).
†
MaLGa - DIMA, University of Genova, Italy (molinari@dima.unige.it, silvia.villa@unige.it).
‡
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy and CBMM - MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

