Credal Marginal MAP

Radu Marinescu
IBM Research, Ireland
radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com
Junkyu Lee
IBM Research, USA
junkyu.lee@ibm.com

Debarun Bhattacharjya
IBM Research, USA
debarunb@us.ibm.com
Alexander Gray
IBM Research, USA
alexander.gray@ibm.com

Fabio Cozman
Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil
fgcozman@usp.br

Abstract
Credal networks extend Bayesian networks to allow for imprecision in probability
values. Marginal MAP is a widely applicable mixed inference task that identifies the most likely assignment for a subset of variables (called MAP variables).
However, the task is extremely difficult to solve in credal networks particularly
because the evaluation of each complete MAP assignment involves exact likelihood
computations (combinatorial sums) over the vertices of a complex joint credal set
representing the space of all possible marginal distributions of the MAP variables.
In this paper, we explore Credal Marginal MAP inference and develop new exact
methods based on variable elimination and depth-first search as well as several
approximation schemes based on the mini-bucket partitioning and stochastic local
search. An extensive empirical evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness of our
new methods on random as well as real-world benchmark problems.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic graphical models such as Bayesian networks [1] provide a powerful framework for
reasoning about conditional (in)dependency structures over many variables. Marginal MAP (MMAP)
is the task that identifies the most likely instantiation for a subset of variables given some evidence in
a Bayesian network. Since MMAP inference distinguishes between maximization variables (called
MAP variables) and summation variables, it is computationally more difficult than either max- or suminference tasks alone, primarily because summation and maximization operations do not commute;
this forces processing along constrained variable orderings that may have significantly higher induced
widths [2, 3, 4]. MMAP is NPPP -complete, but despite its complexity, it is often the appropriate task
for problems that involve hidden variables such as conformant planning [5], image segmentation with
hidden fields [6], or probabilistic diagnosis in healthcare [7].
In many practical situations it may not always be possible to provide the precise specification of a
Bayesian network’s parameters (i.e., probability values). Credal networks [8] provide an elegant
extension to Bayesian networks that retain the graphical appeal of the latter while allowing for a more
flexible quantification of the probability values via credal sets. This ability to represent and reason
with imprecision in probability values allows credal networks to often reach more conservative and
robust conclusions than Bayesian networks. Over the past three decades, the bulk of research has
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

