Extensible Prompts for Language Models on
Zero-shot Language Style Customization

Tao Ge

Jing Hu

Li Dong Shaoguang Mao Yan Xia Xun Wang
Si-Qing Chen
Furu Wei
Microsoft
{tage,v-hjing,lidong1,shamao,yanxia,xunwang}@microsoft.com
{sqchen,fuwei}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose eXtensible Prompt (X-Prompt) for prompting a large language model
(LLM) beyond natural language (NL). X-Prompt instructs an LLM with not only NL
but also an extensible vocabulary of imaginary words. Registering new imaginary
words allows us to instruct the LLM to comprehend concepts that are difficult to
describe with NL words, thereby making a prompt more descriptive. Also, these
imaginary words are designed to be out-of-distribution (OOD) robust so that they
can be (re)used like NL words in various prompts, distinguishing X-Prompt from
soft prompt that is for fitting in-distribution data. We propose context-augmented
learning (CAL) to learn imaginary words for general usability, enabling them to
work properly in OOD (unseen) prompts. We experiment X-Prompt for zero-shot
language style customization as a case study. The promising results of X-Prompt
demonstrate its potential to facilitate advanced interaction beyond the natural
language interface, bridging the communication gap between humans and LLMs.
Table 1: X-Prompt introduces an extensible vocabulary of imaginary words to represent what NL
words hardly describe. For example, the imaginary words wg
satya and w g
sheldon are learned from Satya
Nadella’s tweets and Sheldon Cooper’s lines to denote their language style respectively. They can be
used like NL words in various contexts to prompt an LLM to generate specified content in Satya’s
and Sheldon’s styles, even if the specified content (e.g., criticize/praise the C++ language) has never
been talked about by them before, achieving zero-shot style customization.
Prompt Type
NL

X-Prompt

Prompt (shortened1 )

Text Generated by Prompting a Frozen LLM

Criticize the C++ language:

The C++ language is a mess. It is a mess because it is a
language that is designed to be used by people who are
not programmers ...

Criticize the C++ language in
wg
satya style:

C++ is a great language, but it’s not the right tool for
every job. We’re working on a new language for the next
generation of Microsoft products ...
Well, I’m not going to waste my time with C++, or any
C-derived programming language. They’re all too hard.
I’m sticking with my Python ...

Criticize the C++ language in
wg
Sheldon style:
NL
X-Prompt

Praise the C++ language:

C++ is a language that is easy to learn, easy to use, and
easy to program. It is a language that is easy to ...

Praise the C++ language in
wg
satya style:

C++ is a language that has been around for decades,
and it’s still the most widely used programming language
in the world ...
Yeah, that’s good. It’s actually very close to the way I
think about programming.

Praise the C++ language in
wg
sheldon style:
1

Due to space limit, prompt texts in Table are shortened. Original prompt texts are presented in Appendix A.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

