Revisiting Visual Model Robustness: A Frequency
Long-Tailed Distribution View

Zhiyu Lin1 , Yifei Gao1 , Yunfan Yang1 , Jitao Sang1,2∗
1
Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen 518066, China
{zyllin, yf-gao, yfyang, jtsang}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
A widely discussed hypothesis regarding the cause of visual models’ lack of robustness is that they can exploit human-imperceptible high-frequency components
(HFC) in images, which in turn leads to model vulnerabilities, such as the adversarial examples. However, (1) inconsistent findings regarding the validation of this
hypothesis reflect in a limited understanding of HFC, and (2) solutions inspired
by the hypothesis tend to involve a robustness-accuracy trade-off and leaning towards suppressing the model’s learning on HFC. In this paper, inspired by the
long-tailed characteristic observed in frequency spectrum, we first formally define
the HFC from long-tailed perspective and then revisit the relationship between
HFC and model robustness. In the frequency long-tailed scenario, experimental
results on common datasets and various network structures consistently indicate
that models in standard training exhibit high sensitivity to HFC. We investigate the
reason of the sensitivity, which reflects in model’s under-fitting behavior on HFC.
Furthermore, the cause of the model’s under-fitting behavior is attributed to the
limited information content in HFC. Based on these findings, we propose a Balance
Spectrum Sampling (BaSS) strategy, which effectively counteracts the long-tailed
effect and enhances the model’s learning on HFC. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that our method achieves a substantially better robustness-accuracy
trade-off when combined with existing defense methods, while also indicating the
potential of encouraging HFC learning in improving model performance.

1

Introduction

The disparity between deep visual models and the human visual system (HVS) in image signal
processing enables the models to outperform the HVS on vision benchmarks [16, 33]. However, it is
worth noting that most visual models lack the robustness exhibited by HVS [36, 17]. Specifically, the
generalization advancement of visual models can be partially explained by the utilization of humanimperceptible information, such as high frequency components (HFC) [4, 39, 29]. Additionally,
the adversarial vulnerability is also closely related to this information, as observed in adversarial
examples phenomena [36]. The coexistence of both conditions gives rise to a widely discussed
hypothesis: the vulnerability of the model stems from the utilization of imperceptible high-frequency
information in images.
Based on this hypothesis, a line of research has been conducted to explain and enhance the robustness
of the model [43, 1, 7, 9, 8, 35, 13]. However, these works share a common limitation: most of them
solely rely on qualitative analysis of frequency components observed by humans, without further
delving into the statistical properties. This limitation gives rise to the following issues in existing
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

