BasisFormer: Attention-based Time Series Forecasting
with Learnable and Interpretable Basis

Zelin Ni∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
nzl5116190@sjtu.edu.cn
Shizhan Liu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
shanluzuode@sjtu.edu.cn

Hang Yu∗
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China
hyu.hugo@antgroup.com

Jianguo Li†
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China
lijg.zero@antgroup.com

Weiyao Lin†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
wylin@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Bases have become an integral part of modern deep learning-based models for
time series forecasting due to their ability to act as feature extractors or future
references. To be effective, a basis must be tailored to the specific set of time series
data and exhibit distinct correlation with each time series within the set. However,
current state-of-the-art methods are limited in their ability to satisfy both of these
requirements simultaneously. To address this challenge, we propose BasisFormer,
an end-to-end time series forecasting architecture that leverages learnable and
interpretable bases. This architecture comprises three components: First, we
acquire bases through adaptive self-supervised learning, which treats the historical
and future sections of the time series as two distinct views and employs contrastive
learning. Next, we design a Coef module that calculates the similarity coefficients
between the time series and bases in the historical view via bidirectional crossattention. Finally, we present a Forecast module that selects and consolidates the
bases in the future view based on the similarity coefficients, resulting in accurate
future predictions. Through extensive experiments on six datasets, we demonstrate
that BasisFormer outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods by 11.04% and
15.78% respectively for univariate and multivariate forecasting tasks. Code is
available at: https://github.com/nzl5116190/Basisformer.

1

Introduction

Bases, such as trends and seasonalities, are indispensable for time series modeling and forecasting,
since they capture the underlying temporal patterns and serve as the key factors driving changes in
the data over time. For example, seasonalities can capture the regular fluctuations in demand for a
product or a service, while trends can reflect the long-term growth or decline of a market or industry.
Incorporating these bases into time series models can improve the understanding and prediction of
future behaviors. Indeed, all commonly used deep learning models for time series forecasting can be
reimagined as basis-driving models. N-BEATS [1], N-HiTS [2], and FiLM [3] all resort to explicit
bases, such as Fourier and Legendre basis. More generally, the linear (or convolution) layers in
MLPs [4] (or CNNs [5]) can be regarded as implicit bases, as they act as filter banks to decompose the
time series. In addition, the covariate embedding (a.k.a. global timestamp embedding) in RNNs [6]
∗
†

Equal contribution. This work was done when Zelin Ni was a research intern at Ant Group.
Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

