Triangulation Residual Loss for Data-efficient 3D Pose
Estimation
Jiachen Zhao
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
zhao_jiachen@163.com

Tao Yu†
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
ytrock@126.com

Yipeng Huang
Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing, China 100081
huangyipeng@bit.edu.cn

Liang An
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
al17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Fang Deng
Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing, China 100081
dengfang@bit.edu.com

Qionghai Dai†
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
qhdai@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents Triangulation Residual loss (TR loss) for multiview 3D pose
estimation in a data-efficient manner. Existing 3D supervised models usually
require large-scale 3D annotated datasets, but the amount of existing data is still
insufficient to train supervised models to achieve ideal performance, especially for
animal pose estimation. To employ unlabeled multiview data for training, previous
epipolar-based consistency provides a self-supervised loss that considers only the
local consistency in pairwise views, resulting in limited performance and heavy
calculations. In contrast, TR loss enables self-supervision with global multiview
geometric consistency. Starting from initial 2D keypoint estimates, the TR loss
can fine-tune the corresponding 2D detector without 3D supervision by simply
minimizing the smallest singular value of the triangulation matrix in an end-to-end
fashion. Our method achieves the state-of-the-art 25.8mm MPJPE and competitive
28.7mm MPJPE with only 5% 2D labeled training data on the Human3.6M dataset.
Experiments on animals such as mice demonstrate our TR loss’s data-efficient
training ability.

1

Introduction

Multiview 3D human/animal pose estimation is a crucial and challenging task with wide application
in mixed reality telepresence, animation, and neuroscience. Most existing animal pose estimation
(APE) methods are transferred from the highly developed human pose estimation (HPE) methods
[1, 2]. The success of HPE depends on large-scale datasets [3–5] and high-quality 3D modelS [6].
However, these conditions are not met in APE tasks. On the one hand, labeling large-scale datasets
for each species requires significant user effort but cannot obtain the same commercial benefits as
HPE. On the other hand, obtaining 3D ground truth via sticky marks is not feasible since the animal’s
body could be tiny and animals tend to destroy the markers.
Triangulation is a crucial approach for multiview pose estimation due to its efficiency and effectiveness.
However, traditional triangulation involves a non-differentiable argmax and RANSAC process
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

