Empowering Convolutional Neural Networks with
MetaSin Activation
Farnood Salehi1

Tunç Ozan Aydın1,3

Guglielmo Camporese1,2∗
1

Disney Research | Studios

2

André Gaillard3
Yuxuan Wang3

University of Padova

3

ETH Zürich

Abstract
R ELU networks have remained the default choice for models in the area of image
prediction despite their well-established spectral bias towards learning low frequencies faster, and consequently their difficulty of reproducing high frequency
visual details. As an alternative, sin networks showed promising results in learning
implicit representations of visual data. However training these networks in practically relevant settings proved to be difficult, requiring careful initialization, dealing
with issues due to inconsistent gradients, and a degeneracy in local minima. In
this work, we instead propose replacing a baseline network’s existing activations
with a novel ensemble function with trainable parameters. The proposed M ETA S IN
activation can be trained reliably without requiring intricate initialization schemes,
and results in consistently lower test loss compared to alternatives. We demonstrate
our method in the areas of Monte-Carlo denoising and image resampling where we
set new state-of-the-art through a knowledge distillation based training procedure.
We present ablations on hyper-parameter settings, comparisons with alternative activation function formulations, and discuss the use of our method in other domains,
such as image classification.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural networks are highly proficient in a wide array of tasks including image
prediction applications. While there is no scarcity of inventive methods when it comes to designing
convolutional blocks (e.g. [25]), another crucial design element, namely the activation function,
has seen little change over the years. The R ELU activation, despite (and arguably because of) its
simplicity has remained the default choice for majority of the models in the area of image prediction.
It is often desirable for models that produce visual results to produce sharp imagery with abundant
high frequency details. The widespread use of R ELU networks for image prediction applications
is somewhat surprising given their spectral bias towards learning low frequencies first [33], and
consequently their difficulty in reproducing high frequency visual details. While sin activations have
been shown to be superior in simple overfitting experiments on image reconstruction [39], empirical
evidence showed that training sin networks in practically relevant settings is challenging even when
employing meticulous initialization schemes. While some exploration on using sin activations with
convolutional networks exists [8], their use has been mostly limited to fully connected architectures.
In this work we make the following contributions:
∗

This work was done while the author was an intern at Disney Research | Studios

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

