Non-stationary Experimental Design
under Linear Trends
David Simchi-Levi ‡§ , Chonghuan Wang § , Zeyu Zheng †
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Operations Research Center, MIT
§
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, MIT
†
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, University of California, Berkeley
dslevi@mit.edu, chwang9@mit.edu, zyzheng@berkeley.edu
‡

Abstract
Experimentation has been critical and increasingly popular across various domains,
such as clinical trials and online platforms, due to its widely recognized benefits.
One of the primary objectives of classical experiments is to estimate the average
treatment effect (ATE) to inform future decision-making. However, in healthcare
and many other settings, treatment effects may be non-stationary, meaning that they
can change over time, rendering the traditional experimental design inadequate and
the classical static ATE uninformative. In this work, we address the problem of nonstationary experimental design under linear trends by considering two objectives:
estimating the dynamic treatment effect and minimizing welfare loss within the
experiment. We propose an efficient design that can be customized for optimal
estimation error rate, optimal regret rate, or the Pareto optimal trade-off between the
two objectives. We establish information-theoretical lower bounds that highlight
the inherent challenge in estimating dynamic treatment effects and minimizing
welfare loss, and also statistically reveal the fundamental trade-off between them.

1

Introduction

Experimental design plays a critical role in conducting research across various fields including clinical
trials (see, e.g., [75], [14], [69]) and online platforms (see, e.g., [52], [1], [44], [21]). It enables the
evaluation of the effectiveness of treatments, interventions, or policies in a rigorous and systematic
manner, protecting the safety and well-being of participants and the wider population. Typically,
one of the primary objectives of conducting experiments is to estimate the average treatment effect
(ATE), which represents the difference in outcomes between different treatments or controls. The
outcomes of each treatment are assumed to be stationary by default (see, e.g., [48]), ensuring that the
information collected and conclusions drawn from in-experiment periods are informative for future
decision-making. However, in some situations, ATE may be non-stationary, meaning that it evolves
over time. Here, we present one illustrative example from clinical trials to highlight the importance
of considering non-stationarity in ATE estimation.
Malaria has been one of the world’s deadliest diseases, with approximately 247 million cases and 618
thousand deaths reported in 2021 according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Antimalarial
drug resistance in Africa has been highlighted by the world malaria report (see, [86]) as one the
global key events of malaria control and elimination efforts in 2021-2022. P. falciparum, the deadliest
species of Plasmodium that causes malaria in humans, has shown resistance to first-line treatments
such as artemether-lumefantrine (AL), artesunate-amodiaquine (AS-AQ), artesunate-pyronaridine
(AS-PY), and dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DHA-PPQ) in Africa recently. Alarmingly, at least
four recent studies have reported treatment failure rates greater than 10% after treatment with AL
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

