When is Agnostic Reinforcement Learning
Statistically Tractable?∗

Zeyu Jia1

Gene Li2

Alexander Rakhlin1
1

Ayush Sekhari1

Nathan Srebro2

MIT, 2 TTIC

Abstract
We study the problem of agnostic PAC reinforcement learning (RL): given a policy
class Π, how many rounds of interaction with an unknown MDP (with a potentially
large state and action space) are required to learn an ε-suboptimal policy with
respect to Π? Towards that end, we introduce a new complexity measure, called
the spanning capacity, that depends solely on the set Π and is independent of the
MDP dynamics. With a generative model, we show that for any policy class Π,
bounded spanning capacity characterizes PAC learnability. However, for online RL,
the situation is more subtle. We show there exists a policy class Π with a bounded
spanning capacity that requires a superpolynomial number of samples to learn. This
reveals a surprising separation for agnostic learnability between generative access
and online access models (as well as between deterministic/stochastic MDPs under
online access). On the positive side, we identify an additional sunflower structure,
which in conjunction with bounded spanning capacity enables statistically efficient
online RL via a new algorithm called POPLER, which takes inspiration from
classical importance sampling methods as well as techniques for reachable-state
identification and policy evaluation in reward-free exploration.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful paradigm for solving complex decisionmaking problems, demonstrating impressive empirical successes in a wide array of challenging tasks,
from achieving superhuman performance in the game of Go (Silver et al., 2017) to solving intricate
robotic manipulation tasks (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Akkaya et al., 2019; Ji et al., 2023). Many practical
domains in RL often involve rich observations such as images, text, or audio (Mnih et al., 2015;
Li et al., 2016; Ouyang et al., 2022). Since these state spaces can be vast and complex, traditional
tabular RL approaches (Kearns and Singh, 2002; Brafman and Tennenholtz, 2002; Azar et al., 2017;
Jin et al., 2018) cannot scale. This has led to a need to develop provable and efficient approaches for
RL that utilize function approximation to generalize observational data to unknown states/actions.
The goal of this paper is to study the sample complexity of policy-based RL, which is arguably
the simplest setting for RL with function approximation (Kearns et al., 1999; Kakade, 2003). In
policy-based RL, an abstract function class Π of policies (mappings from states to actions) is given
to the learner. For example, Π can be the set of all the policies represented by a certain deep neural
network architecture. The objective of the learner is to interact with an unknown MDP to find a policy
π
b that competes with the best policy in Π, i.e., for some prespecified ε, the policy π
b satisfies
V πb ≥ max V π − ε,
π∈Π

(1)

where V π denotes the value of policy π on the underlying MDP. We henceforth call Eq. (1) the
“agnostic PAC reinforcement learning” objective. Our paper addresses the following question:
∗

Authors are listed in alphabetical order of their last names.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

