Molecule Joint Auto-Encoding:
Trajectory Pretraining with 2D and 3D Diffusion

Weitao Du1,3 ∗

2

Jiujiu Chen2,3

Xuecang Zhang3

Zhiming Ma1

Shengchao Liu4 †

1
Department of Mathematics, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Huawei Technologies Ltd
4
Department of Computer Science and Operations Research, Université de Montréal

Abstract
Recently, artificial intelligence for drug discovery has raised increasing interest in
both machine learning and chemistry domains. The fundamental building block
for drug discovery is molecule geometry and thus, the molecule’s geometrical
representation is the main bottleneck to better utilize machine learning techniques
for drug discovery. In this work, we propose a pretraining method for molecule joint
auto-encoding (MoleculeJAE). MoleculeJAE can learn both the 2D bond (topology)
and 3D conformation (geometry) information, and a diffusion process model is
applied to mimic the augmented trajectories of such two modalities, based on which,
MoleculeJAE will learn the inherent chemical structure in a self-supervised manner.
Thus, the pretrained geometrical representation in MoleculeJAE is expected to
benefit downstream geometry-related tasks. Empirically, MoleculeJAE proves its
effectiveness by reaching state-of-the-art performance on 15 out of 20 tasks by
comparing it with 12 competitive baselines. The code is available on this website.

1

Introduction

The remarkable progress in self-supervised learning has revolutionized the fields of molecule property
prediction and molecule generation through the learning of expressive representations from largescale unlabeled datasets [1–9]. Unsupervised representation learning can generally be categorized
into two types [7, 10–13]: generative-based methods, encouraging the model to encode information
for recovering the data distribution; and contrastive-based methods, encouraging the model to learn
invariant features from multiple views of the same data. However, despite the success of large
language models like GPT-3 [14, 15] trained using an autoregressive generation approach , learning
robust representations from molecular data remains a significant challenge due to their complex graph
structures. Compared to natural language and computer vision data [16, 17], molecular representations
exhibit more complex graph structures and symmetries [18]. As molecular dynamics follows the
principle of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics [19], diffusion models, as a generative method
inspired by non-equilibrium statistical mechanics [20, 21], are a natural fit for 3D conformation
generation. Previous researches have demonstrated the effectiveness of diffusion models, specifically
2D molecular graphs [22, 23] or 3D molecular conformers [24–27], for molecular structure generation
tasks. However, a crucial question remains: Can diffusion models be effectively utilized for jointly
learning 2D and 3D latent molecular representations?
∗
†

duweitao@mass.ac.cn
shengchao.liu@umontreal.ca

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

