3D molecule generation by denoising voxel grids

Pedro O. Pinheiro, Joshua Rackers, Joseph Kleinhenz, Michael Maser, Omar Mahmood,
Andrew Martin Watkins, Stephen Ra, Vishnu Sresht, Saeed Saremi
Prescient Design, Genentech

Abstract
We propose a new score-based approach to generate 3D molecules represented as
atomic densities on regular grids. First, we train a denoising neural network that
learns to map from a smooth distribution of noisy molecules to the distribution of real
molecules. Then, we follow the neural empirical Bayes framework [1] and generate
molecules in two steps: (i) sample noisy density grids from a smooth distribution
via underdamped Langevin Markov chain Monte Carlo, and (ii) recover the “clean”
molecule by denoising the noisy grid with a single step. Our method, VoxMol, generates molecules in a fundamentally different way than the current state of the art (i.e.,
diffusion models applied to atom point clouds). It differs in terms of the data representation, the noise model, the network architecture and the generative modeling
algorithm. Our experiments show that VoxMol captures the distribution of drug-like
molecules better than state of the art, while being faster to generate samples.

1

Introduction

Finding novel molecules with desired properties is an important problem in chemistry with applications
to many scientific domains. In drug discovery in particular, standard computational approaches
perform some sort of local search—by scoring and ranking molecules—around a region of the
molecular space (chosen based on some prior domain knowledge). The space of possible drug-like
molecules is prohibitively large (it scales exponentially with the molecular size [2, 3], estimated to
be around 1060 [4]), therefore search in this space is very hard. Search-based approaches achieve some
successes in practice, but have some severe limitations: we can only explore very small portions of the
molecular space (on the order of billions to trillions molecules) and these approaches cannot propose
new molecules conditioned on some desiderata.
Generative models for molecules have been proposed to overcome these limitations and explore the
molecular space more efficiently [5]. These approaches often consider one of the following types
of molecule representations: (i) one-dimensional sequences such as SMILES [6] or SELFIES [7]
(e.g., [8, 9, 10]), (ii) two-dimensional molecular graphs, where nodes represent atoms or molecular
substructures and edges represent bonds between them (e.g., [11, 12, 13, 14]), or (iii) atoms as
three-dimensional points in space. Molecules are entities laying on three-dimensional space, therefore
3D representations are arguably the most complete ones—they contain information about atom types,
their bonds and the molecular conformation.
Recent generative models consider molecules as a set of points in 3D Euclidean space and apply
diffusion models on them [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. Point-cloud representations allow us to use
equivariant graph neural networks [21, 22, 23, 24, 25]—known to be very effective in molecular
discriminative tasks—as the diffusion model’s denoising network. However, point-based diffusion
approaches have some limitations when it comes to generative modeling. First, the number of atoms in
the molecule (i.e., nodes on the 3D graph) to be diffused need to be known beforehand. Second, atom
types and their coordinates have very different distributions (categorical and continuous variables,
respectively) and are treated separately. Because a score function is undefined on discrete distributions,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

