Better Private Linear Regression Through
Better Private Feature Selection
Travis Dick∗

Jennifer Gillenwater†

Matthew Joseph‡

Abstract
Existing work on differentially private linear regression typically assumes that end
users can precisely set data bounds or algorithmic hyperparameters. End users
often struggle to meet these requirements without directly examining the data (and
violating privacy). Recent work has attempted to develop solutions that shift these
burdens from users to algorithms, but they struggle to provide utility as the feature
dimension grows. This work extends these algorithms to higher-dimensional
problems by introducing a differentially private feature selection method based on
Kendall rank correlation. We prove a utility guarantee for the setting where features
are normally distributed and conduct experiments across 25 datasets. We find that
adding this private feature selection step before regression significantly broadens
the applicability of “plug-and-play” private linear regression algorithms at little
additional cost to privacy, computation, or decision-making by the end user.

1

Introduction

Differentially private [10] algorithms employ carefully calibrated randomness to obscure the effect
of any single data point. Doing so typically requires an end user to provide bounds on input data to
ensure the correct scale of noise. However, end users often struggle to provide such bounds without
looking at the data itself [27], thus nullifying the intended privacy guarantee. This has motivated the
development of differentially private algorithms that do not require these choices from users.
To the best of our knowledge, two existing differentially private linear regression algorithms satisfy
this “plug-and-play” requirement: 1) the Tukey mechanism [2], which combines propose-test-release
with an exponential mechanism based on Tukey depth, and 2) Boosted AdaSSP [30], which applies
gradient boosting to the AdaSSP algorithm introduced by Wang [34]. We refer to these methods as,
respectively, Tukey and BAS. Neither algorithm requires data bounds, and both feature essentially one
chosen parameter (the number of models m for Tukey, and the number of boosting rounds T for BAS)
which admits simple heuristics without tuning. In contrast, AdaSSP requires a user to provide bounds
on the data’s feature and label norms, and DPSGD requires a user to configure hyperparameters
including learning rate, clipping norms, batch size, and number of epochs. Both algorithms produce
much weaker utility when these parameters are even moderately misconfigured [2].
Tukey obtains strong empirical results when the number of data points n greatly exceeds the feature
dimension d [2], while BAS obtains somewhat weaker utility on a larger class of datasets [30].
Nonetheless, neither algorithm provides generally strong performance on its own. Evaluated over
a collection of 25 linear regression datasets taken from Tang et al. [30], Tukey and BAS obtain
coefficient of determination R2 > 0 on only four (see Section 4); for context, a baseline of R2 = 0 is
achieved by the trivial constant predictor, which simply outputs the mean label. These results suggest
room for improvement for practical private linear regression.
∗

tdick@google.com, Google Research
jgillenw@gmail.com, work done while at Google Research
‡
mtjoseph@google.com, Google Research
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

