Anchor Data Augmentation
Nora Schneider1
1

Shirin Goshtasbpour1,2

Fernando Perez-Cruz 1,2

Computer Science Department, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
2
Swiss Data Science Center, Zurich, Switzerland
nschneide@student.ethz.ch
shirin.goshtasbpour@inf.ethz.ch
fernando.perezcruz@sdsc.ethz.ch

Abstract
We propose a novel algorithm for data augmentation in nonlinear over-parametrized
regression. Our data augmentation algorithm borrows from the literature on causality and extends the recently proposed Anchor regression (AR) method for data
augmentation, which is in contrast to the current state-of-the-art domain-agnostic
solutions that rely on the Mixup literature. Our Anchor Data Augmentation (ADA)
uses several replicas of the modified samples in AR to provide more training examples, leading to more robust regression predictions. We apply ADA to linear and
nonlinear regression problems using neural networks. ADA is competitive with
state-of-the-art C-Mixup solutions. 1

1

Introduction

Data augmentation is one of the key ingredients of any successful application of a machine learning
classifier. The first example that typically comes to mind is the in-depth description of the data
augmentation in the now-famous Alexnet paper [26]. Data augmentation algorithms come in different
flavors, and they mostly rely on the expectation that small perturbations, invariances, or symmetries
applied to the input will not change the class label. That way, we can present ‘fresh new’ samples as
alterations of the available examples for training. These transformations modify the input distribution
to make the algorithm more robust for cases where the distribution of the test set may differ from that
of the training set. We refer the reader to the related work section (Section 2.1) for an overview and
description of different data augmentation strategies.
The literature for data augmentation in regression is slim. The paper on Mixup augmentation [51]
proposes a simple and general scheme for data augmentation using convex combinations of samples.
The authors only apply their data augmentation proposal to classification problems. They conjecture
in the discussion that the application to regression is straightforward, however, this is not the case in
practice. Mixup is theoretically analyzed in [5, 52] as a regularization technique for classification and
regression problems. However, it is only illustrated in classification problems.
The Mixup algorithm has been extended to regression problems in [18, 49], in which the authors
explain that Mixup cannot be blindly applied to regression problems. To our knowledge, these are
the only two papers in which data augmentation for regression is proposed. RegMix [18] relies on
a hard-to-train prior neural network controller before augmenting the data using a Mixup strategy.
C-Mixup [49], a method proposed more recently, solves some of the issues limiting the standard
Mixup algorithm for regression problems. The authors propose to mix only closeby samples in the
1
Our Python implementation of ADA is available at:
anchordataaugmentation/

https://github.com/noraschneider/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

