Doubly Robust Augmented Transfer for
Meta-Reinforcement Learning

Yuankun Jiang1 , Nuowen Kan1 , Chenglin Li2 , Wenrui Dai1 , Junni Zou1 , Hongkai Xiong2
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 2 Department of Electronic Engineering∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Meta-reinforcement learning (Meta-RL), though enabling a fast adaptation to learn
new skills by exploiting the common structure shared among different tasks, suffers
performance degradation in the sparse-reward setting. Current hindsight-based sample transfer approaches can alleviate this issue by transferring relabeled trajectories
from other tasks to a new task so as to provide informative experience for the target
reward function, but are unfortunately constrained with the unrealistic assumption
that tasks differ only in reward functions. In this paper, we propose a doubly robust
augmented transfer (DRaT) approach, aiming at addressing the more general sparse
reward meta-RL scenario with both dynamics mismatches and varying reward functions across tasks. Specifically, we design a doubly robust augmented estimator
for efficient value-function evaluation, which tackles dynamics mismatches with
the optimal importance weight of transition distributions achieved by minimizing
the theoretically derived upper bound of mean squared error (MSE) between the
estimated values of transferred samples and their true values in the target task. Due
to its intractability, we then propose an interval-based approximation to this optimal
importance weight, which is guaranteed to cover the optimum with a constrained
and sample-independent upper bound on the MSE approximation error. Based
on our theoretical findings, we finally develop a DRaT algorithm for transferring
informative samples across tasks during the training of meta-RL. We implement
DRaT on an off-policy meta-RL baseline, and empirically show that it significantly
outperforms other hindsight-based approaches on various sparse-reward MuJoCo
locomotion tasks with varying dynamics and reward functions.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved a remarkable success in a variety of sequential decision
making tasks, such as intelligent gaming [1] and robotic control [2]. Agents trained by conventional
RL methods aim at learning a single task, thus fail to adapt quickly to a new task with prior experience.
In contrast, meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) focuses on learning to learn, i.e., learning how to
adapt [3, 4]. In essence, it learns the underlying common structure from experience collected across a
set of tasks, and then exploits this structure to fast adapt to similar new tasks with only a few trials.
Currently, one of the main challenges in meta-RL is the sparse-reward setting, which exists widely in
real-world environments. When rewards become sparse, the agent receives only scarce information
related to the task, bringing extreme difficulty to the meta-training and adaptation processes. To
collect more useful experience, sample transfer approaches have been proposed. The key idea behind
is to learn a new task by selectively leveraging samples generated from other tasks. Ideally, samples
transferred from an original task to the new target task are required to be informative trajectories.
∗

Correspondence to: Chenglin Li <LCL1985@sjtu.edu.cn>, Wenrui Dai <daiwenrui@sjtu.edu.cn>, and
Junni Zou <zoujunni@sjtu.edu.cn>.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

