Stability and Generalization of the Decentralized
Stochastic Gradient Descent Ascent Algorithm

1

Miaoxi Zhu1 Li Shen2 * Bo Du1∗ Dacheng Tao3
School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia
and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
JD Explore Academy, China 3 The University of Sydney, Australia
{zhumx,dubo}@whu.edu.cn, {mathshenli,dacheng.tao}@gmail.com

Abstract
The growing size of available data has attracted increasing interest in solving
minimax problems in a decentralized manner for various machine learning tasks.
Previous theoretical research has primarily focused on the convergence rate and
communication complexity of decentralized minimax algorithms, with little attention given to their generalization. In this paper, we investigate the primal-dual generalization bound of the decentralized stochastic gradient descent ascent (D-SGDA)
algorithm using the approach of algorithmic stability under both convex-concave
and nonconvex-nonconcave settings. Our theory refines the algorithmic stability in
a decentralized manner and demonstrates that the decentralized structure does not
destroy the stability and generalization of D-SGDA, implying that it can generalize
as well as the vanilla SGDA in certain situations. Our results analyze the impact of
different topologies on the generalization bound of the D-SGDA algorithm beyond
trivial factors such as sample sizes, learning rates, and iterations. We also evaluate
the optimization error and balance it with the generalization gap to obtain the
optimal population risk of D-SGDA in the convex-concave setting. Additionally,
we perform several numerical experiments which validate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Minimax problems have shown extensive applications in machine learning, such as adversarial
robustness [26, 16], GAN [11], the zero-sum game [27], multi-agent reinforcement learning [33],
AUC maximization [41]. Alongside this, as the use of large-scale models has become widespread,
distributed learning algorithms have emerged as a noteworthy approach for handling massive amounts
of data and model parameters [5, 1]. Without a parameter server [20] aggregating all data from each
local agent, decentralized algorithms that do not rely on the central structure can be advantageous
when network bandwidth is low or latency is high, and they can also protect data privacy[21]. In this
work, we consider the following decentralized minimax stochastic optimization problems:
min max F (x, y) :=

x∈X y∈Y

m
m
1 X
1 X
Fi (x, y) :=
Eξ ∼D [fi (x, y; ξi )]
m i=1
m i=1 i i

(1)

where m denotes the number of agents, Fi is the local loss function, ξi represents local data stored on
agent i, and X ⊆ Rdx , Y ⊆ Rdy . Note that the data distributions Di may differ across the agents.
The most straightforward algorithm for solving the above stochastic minimax optimization problem
is to apply Stochastic Gradient Descent Ascent (SGDA) [14, 22] in a decentralized manner, named
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

