Selective Sampling and Imitation Learning
via Online Regression

Ayush Sekhari1∗

Karthik Sridharan2
1

Wen Sun2

Runzhe Wu2†

MIT, 2 Cornell University

Abstract
We consider the problem of Imitation Learning (IL) by actively querying noisy
expert for feedback. While imitation learning has been empirically successful,
much of prior work assumes access to noiseless expert feedback which is not
practical in many applications. In fact, when one only has access to noisy expert
feedback, algorithms that rely on purely offline data (non-interactive IL) can be
shown to need a prohibitively large number of samples to be successful. In contrast,
in this work, we provide an interactive algorithm for IL that uses selective sampling
to actively query the noisy expert for feedback. Our contributions are twofold: First,
we provide a new selective sampling algorithm that works with general function
classes and multiple actions, and obtains the best-known bounds for the regret and
the number of queries. Next, we extend this analysis to the problem of IL with
noisy expert feedback and provide a new IL algorithm that makes limited queries.
Our algorithm for selective sampling leverages function approximation, and relies
on an online regression oracle w.r.t. the given model class to predict actions, and to
decide whether to query the expert for its label. On the theoretical side, the regret
bound of our algorithm is upper bounded by the regret of the online regression
oracle, while the query complexity additionally depends on the eluder dimension of
the model class. We complement this with a lower bound that demonstrates that our
results are tight. We extend our selective sampling algorithm for IL with general
function approximation and provide bounds on both the regret and the number of
queries made to the noisy expert. A key novelty here is that our regret and query
complexity bounds only depend on the number of times the optimal policy (and
not the noisy expert, or the learner) go to states that have a small margin.

1

Introduction

From the classic supervised learning setting to the more complex problems like interactive Imitation
Learning (IL) [Ross et al., 2011], high-quality labels or supervision is often expensive and hard to
obtain. Thus, one wishes to develop algorithms that do not require a label for every data sample
presented during the learning process. Active learning or selective sampling is a learning paradigm
that is designed to reduce query complexity by only querying for labels at selected data points, and
has been extensively studied in both theory and practice [Agarwal, 2013, Dekel et al., 2012, Hanneke
and Yang, 2021, Zhu and Nowak, 2022, Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2005, Hanneke and Yang, 2015].
In this work, we study selective sampling and its application to interactive Imitation Learning [Ross
et al., 2011]. Our goal is to design algorithms that can leverage general function approximation
and online regression oracles to achieve small regret on predicting the correct labels, and at the
∗
†

Authors are listed in alphabetical order of their last names.
Emails: sekhari@mit.edu, {ks999, ws455, rw646}@cornell.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

