Deep Non-line-of-sight Imaging
from Under-scanning Measurements

Yue Li

Yueyi Zhang∗ Juntian Ye Feihu Xu Zhiwei Xiong
University of Science and Technology of China
{yueli65,jt141884}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{zhyuey,feihuxu,zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Active confocal non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging has successfully enabled seeing
around corners relying on high-quality transient measurements. However, acquiring spatial-dense transient measurement is time-consuming, raising the question of
how to reconstruct satisfactory results from under-scanning measurements (USM).
The existing solutions, involving the traditional algorithms, however, are hindered
by unsatisfactory results or long computing times. To this end, we propose the first
deep-learning-based approach to NLOS imaging from USM. Our proposed end-toend network is composed of two main components: the transient recovery network
(TRN) and the volume reconstruction network (VRN). Specifically, TRN takes the
under-scanning measurements as input, utilizes a multiple kernel feature extraction
module and a multiple feature fusion module, and outputs sufficient-scanning
measurements at the high-spatial resolution. Afterward, VRN incorporates the
linear physics prior of the light-path transport model and reconstructs the hidden
volume representation. Besides, we introduce regularized constraints that enhance
the perception of more local details while suppressing smoothing effects. The
proposed method achieves superior performance on both synthetic data and public
real-world data, as demonstrated by extensive experimental results with different
under-scanning grids. Moreover, the proposed method delivers impressive robustness at an extremely low scanning grid (i.e., 8×8) and offers high-speed inference
(i.e., 50 times faster than the existing iterative solution). The code is available at
https://github.com/Depth2World/Under-scanning_NLOS.

1

Introduction

Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging technology permits the detection of objects located behind
occluders, and has numerous real-world applications, such as autonomous driving, remote sensing,
and disaster rescue [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. The widely-known time-of-flight confocal imaging
system, composed of a pulse laser, a Single Photon Avalanche Diode (SPAD), and a Time-Correlated
Single Photon Counting sensor (TCSPC), is favored for its ability to capture high-quality transient
measurements [10]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the picosecond pulse laser illuminates the relay wall
at a certain location. The light scatters at the target object behind the wall and then re-scatters to
the relay wall, from which the photons are captured by the SPAD along with TCSPC, forming a
histogram. The transient measurement records the histograms of all raster-scanned locations and
can be used to derive the hidden object volume by the well-studied reconstruction algorithms such
as those developed in [5, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. However, the total acquisition time, which is directly
proportional to the number of scanning points and the exposure time of each scanning point, hinders
the real-time NLOS imaging process.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

