Learning Domain-Aware Detection Head with Prompt
Tuning
Haochen Li1, 4 Rui Zhang2∗ Hantao Yao3
Xinkai Song2 Yifan Hao2 Yongwei Zhao2 Ling Li1, 4∗ Yunji Chen2, 4
1
Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing, China
2
State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, CAS,
Beijing, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
haochen2021@iscas.ac.cn, zhangrui@ict.ac.cn, haotao.yao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {songxinkai,
haoyifan, zhaoyongwei}@ict.ac.cn, liling@iscas.ac.cn, cyj@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Domain adaptive object detection (DAOD) aims to generalize detectors trained
on an annotated source domain to an unlabelled target domain. However, existing
methods focus on reducing the domain bias of the detection backbone by inferring a
discriminative visual encoder, while ignoring the domain bias in the detection head.
Inspired by the high generalization of vision-language models (VLMs), applying a
VLM as the robust detection backbone following a domain-aware detection head
is a reasonable way to learn the discriminative detector for each domain, rather
than reducing the domain bias in traditional methods. To achieve the above issue,
we thus propose a novel DAOD framework named Domain-Aware detection head
with Prompt tuning (DA-Pro), which applies the learnable domain-adaptive prompt
to generate the dynamic detection head for each domain. Formally, the domainadaptive prompt consists of the domain-invariant tokens, domain-specific tokens,
and the domain-related textual description along with the class label. Furthermore,
two constraints between the source and target domains are applied to ensure that
the domain-adaptive prompt can capture the domains-shared and domain-specific
knowledge. A prompt ensemble strategy is also proposed to reduce the effect
of prompt disturbance. Comprehensive experiments over multiple cross-domain
adaptation tasks demonstrate that using the domain-adaptive prompt can produce
an effectively domain-related detection head for boosting domain-adaptive object
detection. Our code is available at https://github.com/Therock90421/DA-Pro.

1

Introduction

The essence of object detection lies in training a detection backbone to extract visual features
from images and a detection head to recognize and locate objects based on the visual features.
Object detectors whose backbone are based on Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and VisualTransformer (ViT) have achieved encouraging performance with annotated data [31, 30, 25, 5].
However, it may suffer intolerable performance degradation when applied to an unlabelled domain
due to domain bias. In this respect, domain adaptive object detection (DAOD) is explored to generalize
detectors trained on an annotated source domain to an unlabelled target domain.
Current research on DAOD focuses on inferring a discriminative visual encoder as the detection
backbone. They encourage the visual encoder to generate domain-invariant features by aligning
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

