Bayesian Optimisation of Functions on Graphs

Xingchen Wan∗ , Pierre Osselin∗, Henry Kenlay
Binxin Ru, Michael A. Osborne, Xiaowen Dong
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{xwan,osselinp,kenlay,robin,mosb,xdong}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The increasing availability of graph-structured data motivates the task of optimising
over functions defined on the node set of graphs. Traditional graph search algorithms can be applied in this case, but they may be sample-inefficient and do not
make use of information about the function values; on the other hand, Bayesian optimisation is a class of promising black-box solvers with superior sample efficiency,
but it has scarcely been applied to such novel setups. To fill this gap, we propose
a novel Bayesian optimisation framework that optimises over functions defined
on generic, large-scale and potentially unknown graphs. Through the learning of
suitable kernels on graphs, our framework has the advantage of adapting to the behaviour of the target function. The local modelling approach further guarantees the
efficiency of our method. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world
graphs demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed optimisation framework.

1

Introduction

Data collected in a network environment, such as transportation, financial, social, and biological
networks, have become pervasive in modern data analysis and processing tasks. Mathematically, such
data can be modelled as functions defined on the node set of graphs that represent the networks. This
then poses a new type of optimisation problem over functions on graphs, i.e. searching for the node
that possesses the most extreme value of the function. Real-world examples of such optimisation
tasks are abundant. For instance, if the function measures the amount of delay at different locations
in an infrastructure network, one may think about identifying network bottlenecks; if it measures
the amount of influencing power users have in a social network platform, one may be interested
in finding the most influential users; if it measures the time when individuals were infected in an
epidemiological contact network, an important task would be to identify “patient zero” of the disease.
Optimisation of functions on graphs is challenging. Graphs are an example of discrete domains, and
conventional algorithms, which are mainly designed for continuous spaces, do not apply straightforwardly. Real-world graphs are often extremely large and sometimes may not even be fully observable.
Finally, the target function, such as in the examples given above, is often a black-box function that is
expensive to evaluate at the node level and may exhibit complex behaviour on the graph.
Traditional methods to traverse the graph, such as breadth-first search (BFS) or depth-first search
(DFS) [14], are heuristics that may be adopted in this setting for small-scale graphs, but inefficient to
deal with large-scale real-world graphs and complex functions. Furthermore, these search methods
only rely on the graph topology and ignore the function on the graph, which can be exploited to make
the search more efficient. On the other hand, Bayesian optimisation (BO) [16] is a sample-efficient
sequential optimisation technique with proven successes in various domains and is suitable for solving
black-box, expensive-to-evaluate optimisation problems. However, while BO has been combined
with graph-related settings, e.g. optimising for graph structures (i.e. the individual configurations
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

