CityRefer: Geography-aware 3D Visual Grounding
Dataset on City-scale Point Cloud Data
Taiki Miyanishi1,3⇤ , Fumiya Kitamori2⇤ , Shuhei Kurita3 ,
Jungdae Lee2 , Motoaki Kawanabe1 , Nakamasa Inoue2
1

ATR,

2

Tokyo Institute of Technology,

3

RIKEN AIP

Abstract
City-scale 3D point cloud is a promising way to express detailed and complicated
outdoor structures. It encompasses both the appearance and geometry features of
segmented city components, including cars, streets, and buildings, that can be utilized for attractive applications such as user-interactive navigation of autonomous
vehicles and drones. However, compared to the extensive text annotations available for images and indoor scenes, the scarcity of text annotations for outdoor
scenes poses a significant challenge for achieving these applications. To tackle this
problem, we introduce the CityRefer dataset1 for city-level visual grounding. The
dataset consists of 35k natural language descriptions of 3D objects appearing in
SensatUrban [19] city scenes and 5k landmarks labels synchronizing with OpenStreetMap. To ensure the quality and accuracy of the dataset, all descriptions and
labels in the CityRefer dataset are manually verified. We also have developed a
baseline system that can learn encoded language descriptions, 3D object instances,
and geographical information about the city’s landmarks to perform visual grounding on the CityRefer dataset. To the best of our knowledge, the CityRefer dataset
is the largest city-level visual grounding dataset for localizing specific 3D objects.

1

Introduction

Advancements in urban 3D scanning technologies, such as unmanned aerial vehicle photogrammetry
and mobile laser scanning, enable the creation of accurate and photorealistic large-scale 3D scene
datasets. Examples of such datasets include street-level datasets acquired by automobiles [6, 17,
37, 39, 42, 43] and city-level datasets acquired by aerial vehicles [19, 25, 36, 44, 52, 60]. However,
while city-level photorealistic 3D scans have become practical and applicable in various fields like
autonomous driving and unmanned vehicle delivery, the technology to comprehend city scenes
through human-interactive linguistic representations is still in its early stages of development. The
ability to ground linguistic expressions to urban components is highly desired for interactive and
interpretable applications, such as language-guided autonomous driving and aerial drone navigation.
Achieving this requires the development of a 3D visual grounding dataset based on the city-scale
point clouds, which presents a significant challenge.
3D Visual grounding is a 3D and language task that involves localizing objects in 3D scenes based
on textual referred expressions. Compared to its 2D visual grounding counterparts [23, 29, 31, 53],
3D visual grounding poses additional challenges. The expressions used in 3D visual grounding
often require more information to localize object instances due to the rich context of 3D scenes,
making the problem further complex. Recent studies have made remarkable progress in 3D visual
⇤

1

equal contribution
https://github.com/ATR-DBI/CityRefer

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

