Tree-Based Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge
with Applications to Wasserstein Barycenters

Maxence Noble∗
CMAP, CNRS, École polytechnique,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris,
91120 Palaiseau, France
Arnaud Doucet
Department of Statistics,
University of Oxford, UK

Valentin De Bortoli
Computer Science Department,
ENS, CNRS, PSL University

Alain Oliviero Durmus
CMAP, CNRS, École polytechnique,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris,
91120 Palaiseau, France

Abstract
Multi-marginal Optimal Transport (mOT), a generalization of OT, aims at minimizing the integral of a cost function with respect to a distribution with some
prescribed marginals. In this paper, we consider an entropic version of mOT with
a tree-structured quadratic cost, i.e., a function that can be written as a sum of
pairwise cost functions between the nodes of a tree. To address this problem, we
develop Tree-based Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge (TreeDSB), an extension of
the Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge (DSB) algorithm. TreeDSB corresponds to a
dynamic and continuous state-space counterpart of the multi-marginal Sinkhorn
algorithm. A notable use case of our methodology is to compute Wasserstein
barycenters which can be recast as the solution of a mOT problem on a star-shaped
tree. We demonstrate that our methodology can be applied in high-dimensional
settings such as image interpolation and Bayesian fusion.

1

Introduction

In the last decade, computational Optimal Transport (OT) has shown great success with applications
in various fields such as biology (Schiebinger et al., 2019; Bunne et al., 2022), shape correspondence
(Su et al., 2015; Feydy et al., 2017; Eisenberger et al., 2020), control theory (Bayraktar et al., 2018;
Acciaio et al., 2019) and computer vision (Schmitz et al., 2018; Carion et al., 2020). While OT
commonly seeks at computing the transport plan that minimizes the cost of moving between two
distributions, it can naturally be extended to the multi-marginal setting (mOT) when considering
several distributions. This extension of OT has notably been studied in quantum chemistry (Cotar
et al., 2013), clustering (Cuturi & Doucet, 2014) and statistical inference (Srivastava et al., 2018). In
particular, a popular application in unsupervised learning of mOT with Euclidean cost consists in
computing the Wasserstein barycenter of a set of probability distributions (Agueh & Carlier, 2011;
Benamou et al., 2015; Álvarez-Esteban et al., 2016; Peyré et al., 2019).
Interior point methods can be used to solve OT and mOT problems but they come with computational
challenges (Pele & Werman, 2009). In order to mitigate these limitations, one often considers an
entropic regularization of OT, known as Entropic OT (EOT). This regularized formulation can be
efficiently solved in discrete state-spaces using the celebrated Sinkhorn algorithm (Cuturi, 2013;
Knight, 2008; Sinkhorn & Knopp, 1967), which admits a continuous state-space counterpart referred
∗

Corresponding author. Contact at: maxence.noble-bourillot@polytechnique.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

