All Points Matter: Entropy-Regularized Distribution
Alignment for Weakly-supervised 3D Segmentation
Liyao Tang1 , Zhe Chen2 , Shanshan Zhao1 , Chaoyue Wang1 , Dacheng Tao1
1
The University of Sydney, Australia 2 La Trobe University, Australia
ltan9687@uni.sydney.edu.au, zhe.chen@latrobe.edu.au
chaoyue.wang@outlook.com, {sshan.zhao00, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com

Abstract
Pseudo-labels are widely employed in weakly supervised 3D segmentation tasks
where only sparse ground-truth labels are available for learning. Existing methods
often rely on empirical label selection strategies, such as confidence thresholding, to generate beneficial pseudo-labels for model training. This approach may,
however, hinder the comprehensive exploitation of unlabeled data points. We
hypothesize that this selective usage arises from the noise in pseudo-labels generated on unlabeled data. The noise in pseudo-labels may result in significant
discrepancies between pseudo-labels and model predictions, thus confusing and
affecting the model training greatly. To address this issue, we propose a novel
learning strategy to regularize the generated pseudo-labels and effectively narrow
the gaps between pseudo-labels and model predictions. More specifically, our
method introduces an Entropy Regularization loss and a Distribution Alignment
loss for weakly supervised learning in 3D segmentation tasks, resulting in an ERDA
learning strategy. Interestingly, by using KL distance to formulate the distribution
alignment loss, it reduces to a deceptively simple cross-entropy-based loss which
optimizes both the pseudo-label generation network and the 3D segmentation network simultaneously. Despite the simplicity, our method promisingly improves
the performance. We validate the effectiveness through extensive experiments on
various baselines and large-scale datasets. Results show that ERDA effectively
enables the effective usage of all unlabeled data points for learning and achieves
state-of-the-art performance under different settings. Remarkably, our method can
outperform fully-supervised baselines using only 1% of true annotations. Code and
model will be made publicly available at https://github.com/LiyaoTang/ERDA.

1

Introduction

Point cloud semantic segmentation is a crucial task for 3D scene understanding and has various
applications [27, 83], such as autonomous driving, unmanned aerial vehicles, and augmented reality.
Current state-of-the-art approaches heavily rely on large-scale and densely annotated 3D datasets,
which are costly to obtain [21, 33]. To avoid demanding exhaustive annotation, weakly-supervised
point cloud segmentation has emerged as a promising alternative. It aims to leverage a small set of
annotated points while leaving the majority of points unlabeled in a large point cloud dataset for
learning. Although current weakly supervised methods can offer a practical and cost-effective way to
perform point cloud segmentation, their performance is still sub-optimal compared to fully-supervised
approaches.
During the exploration of weak supervision [85], a significant challenge is the insufficient training
signals provided by the highly sparse labels. To tackle this issue, pseudo-labeling methods [85, 94, 32]
have been proposed, which leverage predictions on unlabeled points as labels to facilitate the learning
of the segmentation network. Despite some promising results, these pseudo-label methods have been
outperformed by some recent methods based on consistency regularization [47, 87]. We tend to
attribute this to the use of label selection on pseudo-labels, such as confidence thresholding, which
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

