Mitigating the Popularity Bias of Graph Collaborative
Filtering: A Dimensional Collapse Perspective

Yifei Zhang† , Hao Zhu‡,§ , Yankai Chen† , Zixing Song† , Piotr Koniusz∗,§,‡ , Irwin King†
†
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
‡
Australian National University, § Data61 CSIRO
{yfzhang, ykchen, zxsong, king}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
allenhaozhu@gmail.com, piotr.koniusz@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Graph Collaborative Filtering (GCF) is widely used in personalized recommendation systems. However, GCF suffers from a fundamental problem where features tend to occupy the embedding space inefficiently (by spanning only a lowdimensional subspace). Such an effect is characterized in GCF by the embedding
space being dominated by a few of popular items with the user embeddings highly
concentrated around them. This enhances the so-called Matthew effect of the popularity bias where popular items are highly recommend whereas remaining items
are ignored. In this paper, we analyze the above effect in GCF and reveal that the
simplified graph convolution operation (typically used in GCF) shrinks the singular
space of the feature matrix. As typical approaches (i.e., optimizing the uniformity
term) fail to prevent the embedding space degradation, we propose a decorrelationenhanced GCF objective that promotes feature diversity by leveraging the so-called
principle of redundancy reduction in embeddings. However, unlike conventional
methods that use the Euclidean geometry to relax hard constraints for decorrelation,
we exploit non-Euclidean geometry. Such a choice helps maintain the range space
of the matrix and obtain small condition number, which prevents the embedding
space degradation. Our method outperforms contrastive-based GCF models on
several benchmark datasets and improves the performance for unpopular items.

1

Introduction

Collaborative Filtering (CF) has emerged as an effective technique for personalized recommendations [9, 6, 44, 8, 7]. By leveraging embedding and optimizing with a suitable loss function, CF
can effectively capture complex patterns in user-item interactions [32, 16]. However, user-item
interactions usually neglect the potential of the higher-hop connections. To this end, Graph Neural
Networks (GNN) [36, 20, 14, 34, 50, 26] have been used to model high-hop connections in CF. Graph
Collaborative Filtering (GCF) has also been proposed based on CF [15, 41].
Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL), a powerful tool for unsupervised learning, has recently been
applied on a variety of different tasks [5, 47, 30, 49, 50]. Many methods also demonstrate that GCL
improves the performance of GCF. The basic idea of GCL in GCF is to enhance training data with
various graph augmentations and maximize the alignment between different data views [46, 43, 53].
However, the above methods ignore the disadvantages of GCL (e.g., dimensional collapse) and the
negative impact on user and item embeddings (e.g., the Matthew effect) [4]. Dimensional Collapse
(DC) [28] can be characterized by high similarity of features which are confined to a low-dimensional
subspace or are contrated on curtain region of latent space( Figure 1b). DC limits the representational
power of high-dimensional spaces by restricting the diversity of information that can be learned [28].
∗

The corresponding author.

Code: https://github.com/yifeiacc/LogDet4Rec/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

