Computing a human-like reaction time metric from
stable recurrent vision models
Lore Goetschalckx∗1,2 , Lakshmi N. Govindarajan∗3 , Alekh K. Ashok1,2 , Aarit Ahuja4 ,
David L. Sheinberg4 , and Thomas Serre1,2
1

Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, & Psychological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912
2
Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912
{lore_goetschalckx,alekh_karkada_ashok,thomas_serre}@brown.edu
3
Integrative Computational Neuroscience (ICoN) Center, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02319
lakshmin@mit.edu
4
Neuroscience Department, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912
{aarit_ahuja,david_sheinberg}@brown.edu

Abstract
The meteoric rise in the adoption of deep neural networks as computational models
of vision has inspired efforts to “align” these models with humans. One dimension of interest for alignment includes behavioral choices, but moving beyond
characterizing choice patterns to capturing temporal aspects of visual decisionmaking has been challenging. Here, we sketch a general-purpose methodology to
construct computational accounts of reaction times from a stimulus-computable,
task-optimized model. Specifically, we introduce a novel metric leveraging insights
from subjective logic theory summarizing evidence accumulation in recurrent vision models. We demonstrate that our metric aligns with patterns of human reaction
times for stimulus manipulations across four disparate visual decision-making tasks
spanning perceptual grouping, mental simulation, and scene categorization. This
work paves the way for exploring the temporal alignment of model and human
visual strategies in the context of various other cognitive tasks toward generating
testable hypotheses for neuroscience. Links to the code and data can be found on
the project page: https://serre-lab.github.io/rnn_rts_site/.

1

Introduction

The symbiosis between visual neuroscience and machine learning has created a distinctive and
unprecedented phase in the field of vision. On the one hand, formidable advances in machine
learning have supported the development of computational models of visual cognition that rival,
and in some cases surpass, human-level performance on naturalistic tasks [1–5]. On the other hand,
incorporating computational and neurophysiological constraints from biological visual systems has
yielded significant benefits for AI models in terms of their performance [6, 7], efficiency [8], and
robustness [9–11]. Additionally, performant computational vision models that operate directly on
high-dimensional sensory inputs have shown great promise for scientific discovery through the
generation of testable hypotheses for neuroscience [12, 13]. At the core of this synergistic loop lies
the need for reliably quantifying the degree of “alignment” between models and the primate visual
system, which can subsequently serve as a control knob for closed-loop hypothesis testing.
The notion of “alignment” is subjective and can be operationalized at varying levels of analysis [14].
One of the most prominent alignment techniques is to quantify the degree to which model feature
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

