HubRouter: Learning Global Routing via Hub
Generation and Pin-hub Connection
Xingbo Du, Chonghua Wang, Ruizhe Zhong, Junchi Yan∗
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{duxingbo, philipwang, zerzerzerz271828, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Global Routing (GR) is a core yet time-consuming task in VLSI systems. It recently attracted efforts from the machine learning community, especially generative
models, but they suffer from the non-connectivity of generated routes. We argue
that the inherent non-connectivity can harm the advantage of its one-shot generation and has to be post-processed by traditional approaches. Thus, we propose a
novel definition, called hub, which represents the key point in the route. Equipped
with hubs, global routing is transferred from a pin-pin connection problem to a
hub-pin connection problem. Specifically, to generate definitely-connected routes,
this paper proposes a two-phase learning scheme named HubRouter, which includes 1) hub-generation phase: A condition-guided hub generator using deep
generative models; 2) pin-hub-connection phase: An RSMT construction module
that connects the hubs and pins using an actor-critic model. In the first phase,
we incorporate typical generative models into a multi-task learning framework to
perform hub generation and address the impact of sensitive noise points with stripe
mask learning. During the second phase, HubRouter employs an actor-critic model
to finish the routing, which is efficient and has very slight errors. Experiments
on simulated and real-world global routing benchmarks are performed to show
our approach’s efficiency, particularly HubRouter outperforms the state-of-theart generative global routing methods in wirelength, overflow, and running time.
Moreover, HubRouter also shows strength in other applications, such as RSMT
construction and interactive path replanning.

1

Introduction

As the scale of integrated circuits (ICs) increases rapidly, the quality and efficiency of current
Electronic Design Automation (EDA) technologies are being ceaselessly challenged. Among the
various tasks from logic synthesis [50] to placement and routing [7], global routing (GR) [8, 24, 36,
43, 31, 35, 6, 48] is one of the complex and time-consuming combinatorial problems in modern Very
Large Scale Integration (VLSI) design. As a posterior step of component placement, it generates
routing paths to interconnect pins of IC components from a netlist, which are already placed on the
physical layout [6]. The objective of global routing is basically to minimize total wirelength while
avoiding congestion in the final layout2 . However, even its simplified ‘two-pin’ case (see Fig. 8 in
Appendix C for illustration) that routes every net with only two pins under design constraints turns
out to be an NP-complete problem [27].
∗
Correspondence author. This work was partly supported by China Key Research and Development Program
(2020AAA0107600), NSFC (62222607) and SJTU Scientific and Technological Innovation Funds.
2
Another routing task called detailed routing [3] is orthogonal to this work. To our knowledge, there is so far
no learning-related work on problems whose scale is even much larger than global routing (see example in [6]).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

