ReHLine: Regularized Composite ReLU-ReHU Loss
Minimization with Linear Computation and Linear
Convergence

Ben Dai∗
Department of Statistics
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
bendai@cuhk.edu.hk

Yixuan Qiu∗,†
School of Statistics and Management
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
qiuyixuan@sufe.edu.cn

Abstract
Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is a crucial framework that offers a general
approach to handling a broad range of machine learning tasks. In this paper,
we propose a novel algorithm, called ReHLine, for minimizing a set of regularized ERMs with convex piecewise linear-quadratic loss functions and optional
linear constraints. The proposed algorithm can effectively handle diverse combinations of loss functions, regularization, and constraints, making it particularly
well-suited for complex domain-specific problems. Examples of such problems
include FairSVM, elastic net regularized quantile regression, Huber minimization,
etc. In addition, ReHLine enjoys a provable linear convergence rate and exhibits a
per-iteration computational complexity that scales linearly with the sample size.
The algorithm is implemented with both Python and R interfaces, and its performance is benchmarked on various tasks and datasets. Our experimental results
demonstrate that ReHLine significantly surpasses generic optimization solvers
in terms of computational efficiency on large-scale datasets. Moreover, it also
outperforms specialized solvers such as LIBLINEAR in SVMs, HQREG in Huber
minimization and LIGHTNING (SAGA, SAG, SDCA, SVRG) in smoothed SVMs,
exhibiting exceptional flexibility and efficiency. The source code, project page,
accompanying software, and the Python/R interface can be accessed through the
link: https://github.com/softmin/ReHLine.

1

Introduction

Empirical risk minimization (ERM) with different losses is a fundamental framework in statistical
machine learning [43], which has demonstrated a significant impact on many application areas, such as
artificial intelligence, computational biology, computer vision, natural language processing, electronic
engineering, and finance. In fact, many common practical ERMs are associated with a piecewise
linear-quadratic (PLQ; [34]) loss function, including support vector machines (SVMs; [7]), the least
absolute deviation regression, quantile regression [26], Huber regression [22], borrowing cost function
in portfolio selection [28], and pricing/planning problems in electricity and operational research
[16, 1], among many others. In addition, ERMs are frequently blended with linear constraints, for
instance, the fairness constraints in fair classification [48], monotonicity constraints in classification
or regression, etc. More linear constraints according to the prior domain knowledge, such as the
sum-to-one constraints in the portfolio variance minimization problem [24], negative or positive
constraints in non-performing loan [36], are considered in various real applications. Therefore, it has
become of utmost importance to develop fast and scalable numerical algorithms to solve ERMs with
PLQ losses based on large-scale datasets and flexible linear constraints.
∗

Co-first authorship, and the order is determined by coin toss. † Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

