A Unified Approach to Count-Based
Weakly-Supervised Learning

Vinay Shukla
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
vshukla@g.ucla.edu

Zhe Zeng∗
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
zhezeng@cs.ucla.edu

Kareem Ahmed∗
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
ahmedk@cs.ucla.edu

Guy Van den Broeck
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
High-quality labels are often very scarce, whereas unlabeled data with inferred
weak labels occurs more naturally. In many cases, these weak labels dictate the
frequency of each respective class over a set of instances. In this paper, we develop
a unified approach to learning from such weakly-labeled data, which we call countbased weakly-supervised learning. At the heart of our approach is the ability
to compute the probability of exactly k out of n outputs being set to true. This
computation is differentiable, exact, and efficient. Building upon the previous
computation, we derive a count loss penalizing the model for deviations in its
distribution from an arithmetic constraint defined over label counts. We evaluate
our approach on three common weakly-supervised learning paradigms and observe
that our proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art or highly competitive results
across all three of the paradigms.

1

Introduction

Weakly supervised learning [56] enables a model to learn from data with restricted, partial or
inaccurate labels, often known as weakly-labeled data. Weakly supervised learning fulfills a need
arising in many real-world settings that are subject to privacy or budget constraints, such as privacy
sensitive data [45], medical image analysis [12], clinical practice [39], personalized advertisement [9]
and knowledge base completion [21, 59], to name a few. In some settings, instance-level labels are
unavailable. Instead, instances are grouped into bags with corresponding bag-level labels that are
a function of the instance labels, e.g., the proportion of positive labels in a bag. A key insight that
we bring forth is that such weak supervision can very often be construed as enforcing constraints on
label counts of data.
More concretely, we consider three prominent weakly supervised learning paradigms. The first
paradigm is known as learning from label proportions [38]. Here the weak supervision consists in
the proportion of positive labels in a given bag, which can be interpreted as the count of positive
instances in such a bag. The second paradigm, whose supervision is strictly weaker than the former,
is multiple instance learning [35, 17]. Here the bag labels only indicate the existence of at least one
positive instance in a bag, which can be recast as to whether the count of positive instances is greater
than zero. The third paradigm, learning from positive and unlabeled data [16, 31], grants access to
*

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

