Learning Human Action Recognition Representations
Without Real Humans
Howard Zhong1,2 , Samarth Mishra2,3 , Donghyun Kim2,6 , SouYoung Jin4 ,
Rameswar Panda2 , Hilde Kuehne2,5 , Leonid Karlinsky2 ,
Venkatesh Saligrama3 , Aude Oliva1,2 , Rogerio Feris2
4

1
MIT, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 3 Boston University,
Dartmouth College, 5 Goethe University, 6 Korea University

Abstract
Pre-training on massive video datasets has become essential to achieve high action
recognition performance on smaller downstream datasets. However, most largescale video datasets contain images of people and hence are accompanied with
issues related to privacy, ethics, and data protection, often preventing them from
being publicly shared for reproducible research. Existing work has attempted
to alleviate these problems by blurring faces, downsampling videos, or training
on synthetic data. On the other hand, analysis on the transferability of privacypreserving pre-trained models to downstream tasks has been limited. In this work,
we study this problem by first asking the question: can we pre-train models for
human action recognition with data that does not include real humans? To this end,
we present, for the first time, a benchmark that leverages real-world videos with
humans removed and synthetic data containing virtual humans to pre-train a model.
We then evaluate the transferability of the representation learned on this data to a
diverse set of downstream action recognition benchmarks. Furthermore, we propose
a novel pre-training strategy, called Privacy-Preserving MAE-Align, to effectively
combine synthetic data and human-removed real data. Our approach outperforms
previous baselines by up to 5% and closes the performance gap between human
and no-human action recognition representations on downstream tasks, for both
linear probing and fine-tuning. Our benchmark, code, and models are available at
https://github.com/howardzh01/PPMA.

1

Introduction

Action recognition is the task of classifying human actions from video sequences [9, 8, 42, 54, 70].
Pre-training action recognition models on large-scale datasets significantly improve the accuracy
of these models, especially when generalizing to downstream tasks with limited data [1, 29, 15].
Furthermore, with the advent of transformers in vision [25, 69], pre-training on large-scale datasets
has become increasingly important for high performance [36].
While the use of large-scale datasets can yield significant accuracy improvements, it poses several
problems. First, it is costly and time-consuming to curate and annotate these large-scale real-world
datasets. Unsupervised [50] and semi-supervised pre-training [2] can leverage large datasets without
the cost of labeling, but it does not address the privacy and ethical concerns related to pre-training
with large datasets. Visual characteristics such as skin tone and gender can lead to cognitive biases in
models trained from large-scale datasets. It is difficult to control for these biases [10, 74]. Furthermore,
many large-scale datasets contain videos including humans, who may be identifiable based on their
face, clothing, or other sensitive attributes. In particular, most existing video datasets contain images
of people that were collected without consent. This is a legal issue, as personal data is protected by
legislation such as GDPR [3]. Moreover, it is difficult to control undesirable biases related to gender
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

