Passive learning of active causal strategies in agents
and language models

Andrew K. Lampinen
Google DeepMind
London, UK
lampinen@deepmind.com

Stephanie C. Y. Chan
Google DeepMind
London, UK
scychan@deepmind.com

Andrew J. Nam
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
ajhnam@stanford.edu

Ishita Dasgupta
Google DeepMind
London, UK
idg@deepmind.com

Jane X. Wang
Google DeepMind
London, UK
wangjane@deepmind.com

Abstract
What can be learned about causality and experimentation from passive data? This
question is salient given recent successes of passively-trained language models
in interactive domains such as tool use. Passive learning is inherently limited.
However, we show that purely passive learning can in fact allow an agent to learn
generalizable strategies for determining and using causal structures, as long as
the agent can intervene at test time. We formally illustrate that, under certain
assumptions, learning a strategy of first experimenting, then seeking goals, can
allow generalization from passive learning in principle. We then show empirically
that agents trained via imitation on expert data can indeed generalize at test time to
infer and use causal links which are never present in the training data; these agents
can also generalize experimentation strategies to novel variable sets never observed
in training. We then show that strategies for causal intervention and exploitation
can be generalized from passive data even in a more complex environment with
high-dimensional observations, with the support of natural language explanations.
Explanations can even allow passive learners to generalize out-of-distribution from
otherwise perfectly-confounded training data. Finally, we show that language
models, trained only on passive next-word prediction, can generalize causal intervention strategies from a few-shot prompt containing examples of experimentation,
together with explanations and reasoning. These results highlight the surprising
power of passive learning of active causal strategies, and may help to understand
the behaviors and capabilities of language models.

1

Introduction

Learning from passive observational data only allows learning correlational, not causal, structure.
This observation is sometimes cited as a fundamental limitation of current machine learning research
[60, 61, 39]. However, reinforcement learning (RL) agents can intervene on their environment, and
are therefore not entirely limited. Indeed, various works have shown that RL agents can (meta-)learn
to intervene on the environment to discover and exploit its causal structure [50, 14, 41, 16, 30].
However, these prior works leave open the possibility that an agent could passively learn a generalizable strategy for discovering and exploiting causal structure. While it is certainly necessary for an
agent to intervene on the world at test time to discover causal structure, it may be possible for the
agent to learn such a strategy from purely passive, offline data. Metaphorically, we ask “could an
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

