Active Learning-Based Species Range Estimation

Christian Lange1
1

Elijah Cole2, 3

University of Edinburgh

2

Grant Van Horn4

Altos Labs

3

Caltech

Oisin Mac Aodha1
4

UMass Amherst

Abstract
We propose a new active learning approach for efficiently estimating the geographic
range of a species from a limited number of on the ground observations. We
model the range of an unmapped species of interest as the weighted combination of
estimated ranges obtained from a set of different species. We show that it is possible
to generate this candidate set of ranges by using models that have been trained
on large weakly supervised community collected observation data. From this,
we develop a new active querying approach that sequentially selects geographic
locations to visit that best reduce our uncertainty over an unmapped species’ range.
We conduct a detailed evaluation of our approach and compare it to existing active
learning methods using an evaluation dataset containing expert-derived ranges
for one thousand species. Our results demonstrate that our method outperforms
alternative active learning methods and approaches the performance of end-to-end
trained models, even when only using a fraction of the data. This highlights the
utility of active learning via transfer learned spatial representations for species
range estimation. It also emphasizes the value of leveraging emerging large-scale
crowdsourced datasets, not only for modeling a species’ range, but also for actively
discovering them.

1

Introduction

Understanding the geographic range that a biological species occupies is a fundamental piece of
information that drives models for ascertaining how vulnerable a species is to extinction threats [2], for
quantifying how they respond to climate induced habitat change [29], in addition to being important
for assessing biodiversity loss. Estimated range maps are typically generated from statistical or
machine learning-based models that are parameterized from sparsely collected in situ observations [7].
Such in situ observations can be obtained through various means, e.g., via experts conducting detailed
field surveys to record the presence or absence of a particular species in a defined geographic area [27],
from community scientists that record incidental observations in a less structured manner [44], or
from autonomous monitoring solutions such as camera traps [46]. One of the major limiting factors in
scaling up the generation of reliable range maps to hundreds of thousands of species is the underlying
collection of data.
Recently, community science-based platforms such as iNaturalist [4], eBird [44], and PlantNet [3]
have proven to be an appealing and scalable way to collect species observation data by distributing
the effort across potentially millions of participants around the world. However, due to the incidental
nature of the observations collected on these platforms (i.e., users are not directed towards a specific
geographic location and asked to survey it exhaustively for the presence of a species of interest), there
can be strong biases with respect to the places people go and the types of species they report [11].
Additionally, a conflict exists in that the ranges of rare species are the hardest to characterize
owing to the lack of data, but estimating their ranges would actually provide the most useful data
for conservation purposes [30]. In this work, we explore an alternative collection paradigm for
efficiently estimating geographic ranges of previously unmapped species inspired by ideas from
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

