Neural Relation Graph: A Unified Framework for
Identifying Label Noise and Outlier Data

Jang-Hyun Kim
Seoul National University
janghyun@mllab.snu.ac.kr

Sangdoo Yun
NAVER AI Lab
sangdoo.yun@navercorp.com

Hyun Oh Song∗
Seoul National University
hyunoh@mllab.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Diagnosing and cleaning data is a crucial step for building robust machine learning
systems. However, identifying problems within large-scale datasets with real-world
distributions is challenging due to the presence of complex issues such as label
errors, under-representation, and outliers. In this paper, we propose a unified
approach for identifying the problematic data by utilizing a largely ignored source
of information: a relational structure of data in the feature-embedded space. To
this end, we present scalable and effective algorithms for detecting label errors and
outlier data based on the relational graph structure of data. We further introduce a
visualization tool that provides contextual information of a data point in the featureembedded space, serving as an effective tool for interactively diagnosing data.
We evaluate the label error and outlier/out-of-distribution (OOD) detection performances of our approach on the large-scale image, speech, and language domain
tasks, including ImageNet, ESC-50, and SST2. Our approach achieves state-of-theart detection performance on all tasks considered and demonstrates its effectiveness
in debugging large-scale real-world datasets across various domains. We release
codes at https://github.com/snu-mllab/Neural-Relation-Graph.

1

Introduction

Identifying problems within datasets is crucial for improving the robustness of machine learning
systems and analyzing the model failures [45]. For instance, identifying mislabeled or uninformative
data helps construct concise and effective training datasets [33], while identifying whether test data is
OOD or corrupted allows for more accurate model evaluation and analysis [54].
In recent years, efforts have been made to identify problematic data by utilizing unary scores on
individual data from trained models, such as estimating data influence [22], monitoring prediction
variability throughout training [52], and calculating prediction error margins [34]. However, identifying such data can be challenging, particularly when dealing with large-scale datasets from real-world
distributions. In real-world settings, datasets may have complex problems, including label errors,
under-representation, and outliers, each of which can lead to the model error and prediction sensitivity
[23]. For example, Figure 1 shows that a neural network exhibits low negative prediction margins
and high loss values for both a sample with label error and outlier data. This observation indicates
that previous unary scoring methods may have limitations in discerning whether the problem lies
with the label or the data itself.
In this work, we propose a unified framework for identifying label errors and outliers by leveraging
the feature-embedded structure of a dataset that provides richer information than individual data alone
[47, 36]. We measure the relationship among data in the feature embedding space while comparing
the assigned labels independently. By comparing input data and labels separately, we are able to
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

