Double and Single Descent in Causal Inference with an
Application to High-Dimensional Synthetic Control

Jann Spiess

Guido Imbens
Amar Venugopal
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
jspiess,imbens,amarvenu@stanford.edu

Abstract
Motivated by a recent literature on the double-descent phenomenon in machine
learning, we consider highly over-parameterized models in causal inference, including synthetic control with many control units. In such models, there may be so
many free parameters that the model fits the training data perfectly. We first investigate high-dimensional linear regression for imputing wage data and estimating
average treatment effects, where we find that models with many more covariates
than sample size can outperform simple ones. We then document the performance
of high-dimensional synthetic control estimators with many control units. We find
that adding control units can help improve imputation performance even beyond
the point where the pre-treatment fit is perfect. We provide a unified theoretical
perspective on the performance of these high-dimensional models. Specifically, we
show that more complex models can be interpreted as model-averaging estimators
over simpler ones, which we link to an improvement in average performance. This
perspective yields concrete insights into the use of synthetic control when control
units are many relative to the number of pre-treatment periods.

1

Introduction

Motivated by a recent literature on the double-decent phenomenon in machine learning, we investigate
the properties of common econometric estimators when we increase their complexity. For highdimensional linear regression and for synthetic control with many control units, we document
empirical applications where extremely over-parameterized models impute missing out-of-sample
and out-of-time outcomes well. We then provide a common explanation for the returns to complexity
in high-dimensional linear regression and synthetic control in terms of a simple model-averaging
property, which we link to an improvement in imputation performance.
We often conceptualize the effect of complexity on econometric models in terms of a bias–variance
trade-off: Adding complexity makes models more expressive and reduces bias, while increased
overfitting leads to additional variance. In this view, an overly complex model fits overly well in the
training sample, but fails to recover true parameters or generalize to new data. For example, linear
regression with too many variables or synthetic control with many control units may perform poorly
because of overfitting and excess variance. Consistency results for high-dimensional econometric
models therefore usually assume that the expressiveness of models is limited relative to the available
sample size, and practical advice often highlights choosing simple models or regularizing complex
ones, in a way that balances bias and variance optimally to achieve good estimation and prediction
performance.
Replication code is available at github.com/amarvenu/causal-descent.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

