Integration-free Training for Spatio-temporal
Multimodal Covariate Deep Kernel Point Processes

Yixuan Zhang
China-Austria Belt and Road Joint Laboratory on
Artificial Intelligence and Advanced Manufacturing
Hangzhou Dianzi University
yixuan.zhang@hdu.edu.cn

Quyu Kong
Alibaba Group
kongquyu.kqy@alibaba-inc.com

Feng Zhou ∗
Center for Applied Statistics and School of Statistics
Renmin University of China
feng.zhou@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this study, we propose a novel deep spatio-temporal point process model, Deep
Kernel Mixture Point Processes (DKMPP), that incorporates multimodal covariate
information. DKMPP is an enhanced version of Deep Mixture Point Processes
(DMPP), which uses a more flexible deep kernel to model complex relationships
between events and covariate data, improving the model’s expressiveness. To
address the intractable training procedure of DKMPP due to the non-integrable deep
kernel, we utilize an integration-free method based on score matching, and further
improve efficiency by adopting a scalable denoising score matching method. Our
experiments demonstrate that DKMPP and its corresponding score-based estimators
outperform baseline models, showcasing the advantages of incorporating covariate
information, utilizing a deep kernel, and employing score-based estimators.

1

Introduction

Point processes are widely used statistical tools for modeling event occurrence patterns within continuous spatio-temporal domains. They have garnered extensive attention across various fields, such as
criminology [17; 38], neuroscience [24; 40], financial engineering [11; 2], and epidemiology [20; 25].
The core task of point processes is to derive an intensity function from event sequences, which
represents the rate of event occurrences at any given time or location within the observation domain.
There are two common approaches for modeling intensity functions: traditional and covariatebased methods. The traditional approach [13; 10; 18] considers only event information, such
as time and position, while ignoring the effects of contextual factors. Conversely, the covariatebased method [31; 33; 3] incorporates covariates from the observation domain, providing insights
into factors that may cause event occurrences. In real applications, event occurrence rates are
often correlated with contextual factors, making covariate-based methods more effective for event
prediction [21]. For example, in crime data analysis, the covariate-based method considers factors
like income level, education status, and public security to estimate crime intensity. Thus, utilizing
a covariate-based point process model is significant for leveraging rich contextual information to
predict events and explore various factors influencing event occurrence.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

