Intriguing Properties of Quantization at Scale

Arash Ahmadian ∗†
Cohere For AI
arash@cohere.com

Saurabh Dash ∗
Cohere
saurabh@cohere.com

Bharat Venkitesh
Cohere
bharat@cohere.com
email

Hongyu Chen ∗
Cohere
charlie@cohere.com

Stephen Gou
Cohere
stephen@cohere.com

Ahmet Üstün
Cohere For AI
ahmet@cohere.com

Phil Blunsom
Cohere
phil@cohere.com

Sara Hooker
Cohere For AI
sarahooker@cohere.com

Abstract
Emergent properties have been widely adopted as a term to describe behavior
not present in smaller models but observed in larger models (Wei et al., 2022a).
Recent work suggests that the trade-off incurred by quantization is also an emergent
property, with sharp drops in performance in models over 6B parameters. In this
work, we ask are quantization cliffs in performance solely a factor of scale?
Against a backdrop of increased research focus on why certain emergent properties
surface at scale, this work provides a useful counter-example. We posit that it is
possible to optimize for a quantization friendly training recipe that suppresses large
activation magnitude outliers. Here, we find that outlier dimensions are not an
inherent product of scale, but rather sensitive to the optimization conditions present
during pre-training. This both opens up directions for more efficient quantization,
and poses the question of whether other emergent properties are inherent or can
be altered and conditioned by optimization and architecture design choices. We
successfully quantize models ranging in size from 410M to 52B with minimal
degradation in performance.

1

Introduction

The push for ever larger language models (LLMs) has been driven by a strong correlation between
performance and the number of parameters (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Kaplan
et al., 2020). This has led to new breakthroughs in downstream performance, but has also posed
new challenges in making these models accessible. Larger models incur higher memory and latency
because of the requirement to store many more model weights and the optimizer in fixed memory
(Dehghani et al., 2021; Treviso et al., 2022). Due to the massive size of state-of-art LLMs, inference
often requires hosting across multiple machines which limits the practical usability of such models.
To address this, much research has focused on compression techniques such as quantization, which
reduces the number of bits needed to represent each learned parameter in a model (Gholami et al.,
2021). Quantization techniques are widely used in smaller model regimes – quantizing weights
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Also affiliated with the University of Toronto & the Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

