CRoSS: Diffusion Model Makes
Controllable, Robust and Secure Image Steganography

1

Jiwen Yu1
Xuanyu Zhang1
Youmin Xu1,2
Jian Zhang1†
2
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School
Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
Current image steganography techniques are mainly focused on cover-based methods, which commonly have the risk of leaking secret images and poor robustness
against degraded container images. Inspired by recent developments in diffusion models, we discovered that two properties of diffusion models, the ability to
achieve translation between two images without training, and robustness to noisy
data, can be used to improve security and natural robustness in image steganography tasks. For the choice of diffusion model, we selected Stable Diffusion, a type
of conditional diffusion model, and fully utilized the latest tools from open-source
communities, such as LoRAs and ControlNets, to improve the controllability and
diversity of container images. In summary, we propose a novel image steganography framework, named Controllable, Robust and Secure Image Steganography
(CRoSS), which has significant advantages in controllability, robustness, and security compared to cover-based image steganography methods. These benefits are
obtained without additional training. To our knowledge, this is the first work to
introduce diffusion models to the field of image steganography. In the experimental
section, we conducted detailed experiments to demonstrate the advantages of our
proposed CRoSS framework in controllability, robustness, and security. Code is
available at https://github.com/vvictoryuki/CRoSS.

1

Introduction

With the explosive development of digital communication and AIGC (AI-generated content), the
privacy, security, and protection of data have aroused significant concerns. As a widely studied
technique, steganography [10] aims to hide messages like audio, image, and text into the container
image in an undetected manner. In its reveal process, it is only possible for the receivers with predefined revealing operations to reconstruct secret information from the container image. It has a wide
range of applications, such as copyright protection [4], digital watermarking [15], e-commerce [11],
anti-visual detection [34], spoken language understanding [12, 13] and cloud computing [76].
For image steganography, traditional methods tend to transform the secret messages in the spatial
or adaptive domains [27], such as fewer significant bits [9] or indistinguishable parts. With the
development of deep neural networks, researchers begin to use auto-encoder networks [5, 6] or
invertible neural networks (INN) [35, 26]to hide data, namely deep steganography.
The essential targets of image steganography are security, reconstruction quality, and robustness [9,
45, 77]. Since most previous methods use cover images to hide secret images, they tend to explicitly
retain some secret information as artifacts or local details in the container image, which poses a risk
of information leakage and reduces the security of transmission. Meanwhile, although previous
works can maintain well reconstruction fidelity of the revealed images, they tend to train models in a
noise-free simulation environment and can not withstand noise, compression artifacts, and non-linear
transformations in practice, which severely hampers their practical values and robustness [30, 44, 25].
†

Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 62372016.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

