Communication-Efficient Federated Bilevel
Optimization with Global and Local Lower Level
Problems
Junyi Li
Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
junyili.ai@gmail.com

Feihu Huang
ECE
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15261
huangfeihu2018@gmail.com

Heng Huang ∗
Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
henghuanghh@gmail.com

Abstract
Bilevel Optimization has witnessed notable progress recently with new emerging
efficient algorithms. However, its application in the Federated Learning setting
remains relatively underexplored, and the impact of Federated Learning’s inherent
challenges on the convergence of bilevel algorithms remain obscure. In this
work, we investigate Federated Bilevel Optimization problems and propose a
communication-efficient algorithm, named FedBiOAcc. The algorithm leverages
an efficient estimation of the hyper-gradient in the distributed setting and utilizes
the momentum-based variance-reduction acceleration. Remarkably, FedBiOAcc
achieves a communication complexity O(ϵ−1 ), a sample complexity O(ϵ−1.5 ) and
the linear speed up with respect to the number of clients. We also analyze a special
case of the Federated Bilevel Optimization problems, where lower level problems
are locally managed by clients. We prove that FedBiOAcc-Local, a modified
version of FedBiOAcc, converges at the same rate for this type of problems. Finally,
we validate the proposed algorithms through two real-world tasks: Federated Datacleaning and Federated Hyper-representation Learning. Empirical results show
superior performance of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization [51, 48] has increasingly drawn attention due to its wide-ranging applications in
numerous machine learning tasks, including hyper-parameter optimization [42], meta-learning [61]
and neural architecture search [36]. A bilevel optimization problem involves an upper problem
and a lower problem, wherein the upper problem is a function of the minimizer of the lower problem. Recently, great progress has been made to solve this type of problems, particularly through
the development of efficient single-loop algorithms that rely on diverse gradient approximation
techniques [23]. However, the majority of existing bilevel optimization research concentrates on standard, non-distributed settings, and how to solve the bilevel optimization problems under distributed
settings have received much less attention. Federated learning (FL) [40] is a recently promising
distributed learning paradigm. In FL, a set of clients jointly solve a machine learning task under
the coordination of a central server. To protect user privacy and mitigate communication overhead,
clients perform multiple steps of local update before communicating with the server. A variety of
algorithms [50, 59, 16, 26, 1] have been proposed to accelerate this training process. However, most
of these algorithms primarily address standard single-level optimization problems. In this work,
we study the bilevel optimization problems in the Federated Learning setting and investigate the
∗
This work was partially supported by NSF IIS 1838627, 1837956, 1956002, 2211492, CNS 2213701, CCF
2217003, DBI 2225775.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

