Swap Agnostic Learning,
or Characterizing Omniprediction via Multicalibration

Parikshit Gopalan
Apple, Inc.

Michael P. Kim
UC Berkeley

Omer Reingold
Stanford University

Abstract
We introduce and study Swap Agnostic Learning. The problem can be phrased
as a game between a predictor and an adversary: first, the predictor selects a
hypothesis h; then, the adversary plays in response, and for each level set of the
predictor {x ∈ X : h(x) = v} selects a loss-minimizing hypothesis cv ∈ C;
the predictor wins if p competes with the adaptive adversary’s loss. Despite
the strength of the adversary, our main result demonstrates the feasibility Swap
Agnostic Learning for any convex loss. Somewhat surprisingly, the result follows
by proving an equivalence between Swap Agnostic Learning and swap variants
of the recent notions Omniprediction [15] and Multicalibration [20]. Beyond
this equivalence, we establish further connections to the literature on Outcome
Indistinguishability [6, 14], revealing a unified notion of OI that captures all existing
notions of omniprediction and multicalibration.

1

Introduction

Since its inception as an extension to Valiant’s PAC framework [30, 19, 23], Agnostic Learning
has been the central problem of supervised learning theory. Agnostic learning frames the task of
supervised learning through loss minimization: given a loss function ℓ, a hypothesis class C, and
ε ≥ 0, a predictor h is an agnostic learner if it achieves loss that competes with the minimal achievable
within the hypothesis class.
E[ℓ(y, h(x))] ≤ min E[ℓ(y, c(x))] + ε
c∈C

(1)

While the agnostic learning paradigm has been remarkably successful, in recent years, researchers
have investigated alternative learning paradigms to address concerns of the modern prediction pipeline,
including fairness and robustness. The work of [20] introduced multicalibration as a new paradigm
for learning fair predictors. Multicalibration asserts fairness as a first-order goal, requiring that
predictions appear calibrated even conditioned on membership in one of a potentially-huge collection
of subgroups C of the domain.1 As a solution concept, multicalibration can be achieved efficiently
using a weak learner for C to identify subgroups where predictions are miscalibrated. In contrast to
agnostic learning, multicalibration does not make reference to minimizing any loss.
Yet, it turns out that there are surprising connections between multicalibration and agnostic learning.
This connection was first discovered in the work of [15], who introduced the notion of omniprediction
as a new solution concept in supervised learning. Intuitively, an omnipredictor is a single predictor
that provides the agnostic learning guarantee for many losses simultaneously. More formally, for a
collection of loss functions L and a hypothesis class C, a predictor is an omnipredictor if for any
loss in the collection ℓ ∈ L, the predictions achieve loss that competes with the minimal achievable
1

This collection of subgroups is suggestively denoted by C, indicating that (in correspondence with a
hypothesis class) subgroup membership can be computed using models of bounded capacity, such as small
decision trees, halfspaces, or neural networks.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

