Additive Decoders for Latent Variables Identification
and Cartesian-Product Extrapolation

Sébastien Lachapelle∗,1

Divyat Mahajan∗

Ioannis Mitliagkas†

Simon Lacoste-Julien†,1

Mila & DIRO, Université de Montréal
1
Samsung - SAIT AI Lab, Montreal

Abstract
We tackle the problems of latent variables identification and “out-of-support” image generation in representation learning. We show that both are possible for a
class of decoders that we call additive, which are reminiscent of decoders used for
object-centric representation learning (OCRL) and well suited for images that can
be decomposed as a sum of object-specific images. We provide conditions under
which exactly solving the reconstruction problem using an additive decoder is guaranteed to identify the blocks of latent variables up to permutation and block-wise
invertible transformations. This guarantee relies only on very weak assumptions
about the distribution of the latent factors, which might present statistical dependencies and have an almost arbitrarily shaped support. Our result provides a new
setting where nonlinear independent component analysis (ICA) is possible and
adds to our theoretical understanding of OCRL methods. We also show theoretically that additive decoders can generate novel images by recombining observed
factors of variations in novel ways, an ability we refer to as Cartesian-product
extrapolation. We show empirically that additivity is crucial for both identifiability
and extrapolation on simulated data.

1

Introduction

The integration of connectionist and symbolic approaches to artificial intelligence has been proposed
as a solution to the lack of robustness, transferability, systematic generalization and interpretability of
current deep learning algorithms [53, 4, 13, 25, 21] with justifications rooted in cognitive sciences
[20, 28, 43] and causality [57, 63]. However, the problem of extracting meaningful symbols grounded
in low-level observations, e.g. images, is still open. This problem is sometime referred to as
disentanglement [4, 48] or causal representation learning [63]. The question of identifiability in
representation learning, which originated in works on nonlinear independent component analysis
(ICA) [65, 31, 33, 36], has been the focus of many recent efforts [49, 66, 26, 47, 3, 9, 41]. The
mathematical results of these works provide rigorous explanations for when and why symbolic
representations can be extracted from low-level observations. In a similar spirit, Object-centric
representation learning (OCRL) aims to learn a representation in which the information about
different objects are encoded separately [19, 22, 11, 24, 18, 51, 14]. These approaches have shown
impressive results empirically, but the exact reason why they can perform this form of segmentation
without any supervision is poorly understood.
∗
Equal contribution. † Canada CIFAR AI Chair.
Correspondence to: {lachaseb, divyat.mahajan}@mila.quebec

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

