Convergence of Adam Under Relaxed Assumptions

Haochuan Li
MIT
haochuan@mit.edu

Alexander Rakhlin
MIT
rakhlin@mit.edu

Ali Jadbabaie
MIT
jadbabai@mit.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we provide a rigorous proof of convergence of the Adaptive Moment
Estimate (Adam) algorithm for a wide class of optimization objectives. Despite the
popularity and efficiency of the Adam algorithm in training deep neural networks,
its theoretical properties are not yet fully understood, and existing convergence
proofs require unrealistically strong assumptions, such as globally bounded gradients, to show the convergence to stationary points. In this paper, we show that
Adam provably converges to ϵ-stationary points with O(ϵ−4 ) gradient complexity
under far more realistic conditions. The key to our analysis is a new proof of boundedness of gradients along the optimization trajectory of Adam, under a generalized
smoothness assumption according to which the local smoothness (i.e., Hessian
norm when it exists) is bounded by a sub-quadratic function of the gradient norm.
Moreover, we propose a variance-reduced version of Adam with an accelerated
gradient complexity of O(ϵ−3 ).

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the non-convex unconstrained stochastic optimization problem
min {f (x) = Eξ [f (x, ξ)]} .
x

(1)

The Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam) algorithm [23] has become one of the most popular
optimizers for solving (1) when f is the loss for training deep neural networks. Owing to its efficiency
and robustness to hyper-parameters, it is widely applied or even sometimes the default choice in many
machine learning application domains such as natural language processing [44; 4; 13], generative
adversarial networks [35; 21; 55], computer vision [14], and reinforcement learning [28; 33; 40]. It
is also well known that Adam significantly outperforms stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for certain
models like transformer [50; 24; 1].
Despite its success in practice, theoretical analyses of Adam are still limited. The original proof
of convergence in [23] was later shown by [37] to contain gaps. The authors in [37] also showed
that for a range of momentum parameters chosen independently with the problem instance, Adam
does not necessarily converge even for convex objectives. However, in deep learning practice, the
hyper-parameters are in fact problem-dependent as they are usually tuned after given the problem and
weight initialization. Recently, there have been many works proving the convergence of Adam for
non-convex functions with various assumptions and problem-dependent hyper-parameter choices.
However, these results leave significant room for improvement. For example, [12; 19] prove the
convergence to stationary points assuming the gradients are bounded by a constant, either explicitly
or implicitly. On the other hand, [51; 45] consider weak assumptions, but their convergence results
are still limited. See Section 2 for more detailed discussions of related works.
To address the above-mentioned gap between theory and practice, we provide a new convergence
analysis of Adam without assuming bounded gradients, or equivalently, Lipschitzness of the objective
function. In addition, we also relax the standard global smoothness assumption, i.e., the Lipschitzness
of the gradient function, as it is far from being satisfied in deep neural network training. Instead, we
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

