Complex Query Answering on Eventuality Knowledge
Graph with Implicit Logical Constraints

Jiaxin Bai
Department of CSE
HKUST
jbai@connect.ust.hk

Xin Liu
Department of CSE
HKUST
xliucr@cse.ust.hk

Weiqi Wang
Department of CSE
HKUST
wwangbw@cse.ust.hk

Yangqiu Song∗
Department of CSE
HKUST
yqsong@cse.ust.hk

Chen Luo
Amazon.com Inc
cheluo@amazon.com

Abstract
Querying knowledge graphs (KGs) using deep learning approaches can naturally
leverage the reasoning and generalization ability to learn to infer better answers.
Traditional neural complex query answering (CQA) approaches mostly work on
entity-centric KGs. However, in the real world, we also need to make logical
inferences about events, states, and activities (i.e., eventualities or situations) to
push learning systems from System I to System II, as proposed by Yoshua Bengio.
Querying logically from an EVentuality-centric KG (EVKG) can naturally provide
references to such kind of intuitive and logical inference. Thus, in this paper, we
propose a new framework to leverage neural methods to answer complex logical
queries based on an EVKG, which can satisfy not only traditional first-order logic
constraints but also implicit logical constraints over eventualities concerning their
occurrences and orders. For instance, if we know that Food is bad happens before
PersonX adds soy sauce, then PersonX adds soy sauce is unlikely to be the cause of
Food is bad due to implicit temporal constraint. To facilitate consistent reasoning
on EVKGs, we propose Complex Eventuality Query Answering (CEQA), a more
rigorous definition of CQA that considers the implicit logical constraints governing
the temporal order and occurrence of eventualities. In this manner, we propose
to leverage theorem provers for constructing benchmark datasets to ensure the
answers satisfy implicit logical constraints. We also propose a Memory-Enhanced
Query Encoding (MEQE) approach to significantly improve the performance of
state-of-the-art neural query encoders on the CEQA task.

1

Introduction

Querying knowledge graphs (KGs) can support many real applications, such as fact-checking and
question-answering. Using deep learning methods to answer logical queries over KGs can naturally
leverage the inductive reasoning and generalization ability of learning methods to overcome the
sparsity and incompleteness of existing KGs, and thus has attracted much attention recently, which
are usually referred to as Complex Query Answering (CQA) [37, 26, 38]. As the computational
complexity of answering complex logical queries increases exponentially with the length of the
query [37, 26], brute force search and sub-graph matching algorithms [29, 30, 28] are unsuitable
∗

Prof. Yangqiu Song is a visiting academic scholar at Amazon.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

