RaLEs: a Benchmark for Radiology Language
Evaluations
Juan M Zambrano Chaves
Stanford University
jmz@stanford.edu
Jean-Benoit Delbrouck
Stanford University

Nandita Bhaskhar
Stanford University

Daniel L. Rubin
Stanford University

Maayane Attias
Stanford University

Andreas Loening
Stanford University

Curtis Langlotz
Stanford University

Akshay S. Chaudhari
Stanford University
akshaysc@stanford.edu

Abstract
The radiology report is the main form of communication between radiologists and
other clinicians. Prior work in natural language processing in radiology reports
has shown the value of developing methods tailored for individual tasks such as
identifying reports with critical results or disease detection. Meanwhile, English
and biomedical natural language understanding benchmarks such as the General
Language Understanding and Evaluation as well as Biomedical Language Understanding and Reasoning Benchmark have motivated the development of models
that can be easily adapted to address many tasks in those domains. Here, we characterize the radiology report as a distinct domain and introduce RaLEs, the Radiology
Language Evaluations, as a benchmark for natural language understanding and generation in radiology. RaLEs is comprised of six natural language understanding and
generation evaluations including the extraction of anatomical and disease entities
and their relations, procedure selection, and report summarization. We characterize the performance of models designed for the general, biomedical, clinical and
radiology domains across these tasks. We find that advances in the general and
biomedical domains do not necessarily translate to radiology, and that certain more
advanced models from the general domain can perform comparably to smaller
clinical-specific models. The limited performance of existing pre-trained models on
RaLEs highlights the opportunity to improve domain-specific self-supervised models for natural language processing in radiology. We propose RaLEs as a benchmark
to promote and track the development of such domain-specific radiology language
models. RaLEs is available at https://github.com/StanfordMIMI/RaLEs.

1

Introduction

Radiology reports convey a radiologist’s interpretation of a medical image. The reports have characteristic content and structure that differentiate them from other types of text. Natural language
processing of radiology reports can aid research efforts and ultimately lead to improved quality
of care. However, many recent approaches focus on solving single radiology tasks, often report
performance only on private datasets, fail to compare proposed methods with relevant baselines, and
do not publish code or models [5]. Further, reports are typically not publicly available due to patient
privacy concerns. The development of private, single-task models limits the measurement of progress
in NLP for radiology broadly.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

