Text Promptable Surgical Instrument Segmentation
with Vision-Language Models

Zijian Zhou1

Oluwatosin Alabi2 Meng Wei2 Tom Vercauteren2 Miaojing Shi3B
1
Department of Informatics, King’s College London
2
School of Biomedical Engineering & Imaging Sciences, King’s College London
3
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University
{first_name}.{last_name}@kcl.ac.uk; mshi@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel text promptable surgical instrument segmentation
approach to overcome challenges associated with diversity and differentiation of
surgical instruments in minimally invasive surgeries. We redefine the task as text
promptable, thereby enabling a more nuanced comprehension of surgical instruments and adaptability to new instrument types. Inspired by recent advancements
in vision-language models, we leverage pretrained image and text encoders as
our model backbone and design a text promptable mask decoder consisting of
attention- and convolution-based prompting schemes for surgical instrument segmentation prediction. Our model leverages multiple text prompts for each surgical
instrument through a new mixture of prompts mechanism, resulting in enhanced
segmentation performance. Additionally, we introduce a hard instrument area
reinforcement module to improve image feature comprehension and segmentation
precision. Extensive experiments on several surgical instrument segmentation
datasets demonstrate our model’s superior performance and promising generalization capability. To our knowledge, this is the first implementation of a promptable
approach to surgical instrument segmentation, offering significant potential for
practical application in the field of robotic-assisted surgery. Code is available at
https://github.com/franciszzj/TP-SIS.

1

Introduction

Minimally invasive surgeries (MIS) have gained widespread attention in various surgical disciplines [16, 48] due to their benefits over traditional open surgery, such as reduced patient discomfort
and faster recovery times. Nonetheless, the restricted field of view and indirect vision through endoscopic cameras for existing MIS procedures presents considerable obstacles, making the development
of robot-assisted MIS increasingly crucial. Current robot-assisted surgery has to operate under direct
control of the surgeon. Enhancing the automatic comprehension of the surgical process through
precise instrument segmentation is seen as an essential building block to introduce automation and
facilitate robot-surgeon interaction. Despite this recognised importance, existing automatic surgical
instrument segmentation faces significant challenges.
First, with fast-paced advances in MIS, there is a surge in the variety of surgical instruments from
different vendors. This is however compounded with the lack of a comprehensive and large-scale
dataset dedicated to the learning of surgical instrument segmentation. Current methods [43, 20,
12, 55, 5] do not adequately adapt to the ever-changing set of surgical instruments, necessitating
re-labelling and re-training of models with the introduction of each new instrument. This has notably
hampered the practical application of surgical instrument segmentation within the MIS field.
B

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

