A Performance-Driven Benchmark for Feature
Selection in Tabular Deep Learning

Valeriia Cherepanova
University of Maryland

Roman Levin∗
University of Washington

Jonas Geiping
University of Maryland

C. Bayan Bruss
Capital One

Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland

Gowthami Somepalli
University of Maryland
Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University

Micah Goldblum
New York University

Abstract
Academic tabular benchmarks often contain small sets of curated features. In
contrast, data scientists typically collect as many features as possible into their
datasets, and even engineer new features from existing ones. To prevent overfitting in subsequent downstream modeling, practitioners commonly use automated
feature selection methods that identify a reduced subset of informative features.
Existing benchmarks for tabular feature selection consider classical downstream
models, toy synthetic datasets, or do not evaluate feature selectors on the basis
of downstream performance. Motivated by the increasing popularity of tabular
deep learning, we construct a challenging feature selection benchmark evaluated
on downstream neural networks including transformers, using real datasets and
multiple methods for generating extraneous features. We also propose Deep Lasso
– an input-gradient-based analogue of Lasso for neural networks that outperforms
classical feature selection methods on challenging problems such as selecting from
corrupted or second-order features.

1

Introduction

Tabular data is ubiquitous across scientific and industrial applications of machine learning. Practitioners often curate tabular datasets by including exhaustive sets of available features or by handengineering additional features. Under such a procedure, real-world tabular datasets can quickly
accumulate a large volume of features, many of which are not useful for downstream models. Training
on such a large number of features, including noisy or uninformative ones, can cause overfitting.
To avoid overfitting, practitioners filter out and remove features using automated feature selection
methods [Guyon and Elisseeff, 2003, Liu and Yu, 2005].
The literature contains a wide body of work proposing or evaluating feature selection approaches
that use classical machine learning algorithms in their selection criteria or which select features for
training classical machine learning algorithms downstream [Tibshirani, 1996, Kohavi and John, 1997].
Over the past few years, deep learning for tabular data has become competitive and is increasingly
adopted by practitioners [Arık and Pfister, 2021, Gorishniy et al., 2021, Somepalli et al., 2021]. While
the community has identified that neural networks are especially prone to overfitting on noisy features
∗
The substantive contributions of the author to the work described in the paper were done prior to the author
joining Amazon.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

