Multi-Agent Learning with Heterogeneous Linear
Contextual Bandits
Anh Do
Johns Hopkins University
ado8@jhu.edu

Thanh Nguyen-Tang
Johns Hopkins University
nguyent@cs.jhu.edu

Raman Arora
Johns Hopkins University
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
As trained intelligent systems become increasingly pervasive, multi-agent learning
has emerged as a popular framework for studying complex interactions between
autonomous agents. Yet, a formal understanding of how and when learners in
heterogeneous environments benefit from sharing their respective experiences is
still in its infancy. In this paper, we seek answers to these questions in the context of
linear contextual bandits. We present a novel distributed learning algorithm based
on the upper confidence bound (UCB) algorithm, which we refer to as H-L IN UCB,
wherein agents cooperatively minimize the group regret under the coordination of a
central server. In the setting where the level of heterogeneity or dissimilarity across
the environments is known to the agents, we show that H-L IN UCB is provably
optimal in regimes where the tasks are highly similar or highly dissimilar.

1

Introduction

Heterogeneous multi-agent systems enable agents to work together and coordinate their actions
to solve complex problems. These systems are inherently scalable, as they can distribute the
computational load across multiple agents. This scalability allows the system to handle large and
sophisticated tasks beyond the capabilities of a single agent. Despite the potential of multi-agent
systems, it poses the following fundamental challenges.
• Statistical challenge. Each agent’s reward distribution may vary, meaning that different agents receive different rewards for the same action. This heterogeneity in reward
distributions introduces complexity and makes coordination among agents more difficult.
Furthermore, Wang et al. [2021] point out that an ineffective use of shared data could lead to
a significant negative impact on the overall performance. In particular, sharing experiences
amongst agents may hinder the system’s performance if the tasks are too dissimilar [Rosenstein, 2005, Brunskill and Li, 2013].
• Computational complexity. Coordinating the decisions of numerous agents and performing
complex computations pose challenges in terms of computational resources, time constraints,
and algorithmic scalability.
• Communication cost. Efficient communication is also a fundamental challenge for a largescale multi-agent system. As the number of agents in a system increases, the complexity of
interactions between agents grows exponentially. Managing the interaction of numerous
agents and making decisions in a timely manner becomes increasingly difficult.
Several works address these challenges for heterogeneous multi-agent systems, including federated
linear bandits [Huang et al., 2021, Li and Wang, 2022], clustering bandits [Gentile et al., 2014, Ghosh
et al., 2023], multi-task linear bandits [Hu et al., 2021, Yang et al., 2021]. However, these works either
rely on some special structure of the parameter [Li and Wang, 2022], e.g., a low-rank structure [Hu
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

