Sensitivity in Translation Averaging

Venu Madhav Govindu
Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru, India - 560012
venug@iisc.ac.in

Lalit Manam
Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru, India - 560012
lalitmanam@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
In 3D computer vision, translation averaging solves for absolute translations given
a set of pairwise relative translation directions. While there has been much work
on robustness to outliers and studies on the uniqueness of the solution, this paper
deals with a distinctly different problem of sensitivity in translation averaging
under uncertainty. We first analyze sensitivity in estimating scales corresponding
to relative directions under small perturbations of the relative directions. Then,
we formally define the conditioning of the translation averaging problem, which
assesses the reliability of estimated translations based solely on the input directions.
We give a sufficient criterion to ensure that the problem is well-conditioned. Subsequently, we provide an efficient algorithm to identify and remove combinations of
directions which make the problem ill-conditioned while ensuring uniqueness of
the solution. We demonstrate the utility of such analysis in global structure-frommotion pipelines for obtaining 3D reconstructions, which reveals the benefits of
filtering the ill-conditioned set of directions in translation averaging in terms of
reduced translation errors, a higher number of 3D points triangulated and faster
convergence of bundle adjustment.

1

Introduction

The goal of the translation averaging problem is to recover absolute translations given a redundant set
of pairwise relative translation directions. This problem has been relatively less studied compared
to the case when pairwise displacements are available [31, 12, 6, 51]. These methods belong to the
category of averaging or map synchronization [43, 46], which can be modelled as a network with
known pairwise relations between nodes and unknown node values to be estimated. For our specific
problem of translation averaging, G = (V, E) represents a network, with N nodes, V, denoting the
absolute translations Ti ∈ R3 , i ∈ V, and M edges, E, denoting the pairwise relative direction
measurements between the nodes vij ∈ S2 , (i, j) ∈ E. Here, all the relative directions vij ’s are
in the same coordinate frame. Ideally, vij should be the unit vector in the direction of Tj − Ti .
Since the measurements made are directions, these networks are also called bearing-based networks.
This problem finds a place in global methods [23, 24, 18, 52] for solving Structure-from-Motion
(SfM) [28] in 3D computer vision, where a network of cameras is present with relative translation
directions measured between the cameras.
Solving translation averaging is a challenging problem since it requires estimating translation scales
in a context of dissimilarity in the input (directions) and output (absolute translations). Due to
this dissimilarity, the solutions are defined upto a global scale and a choice of origin. The wellposedness of the bearing-based network problems has been studied under the lens of parallel rigidity
theory [45, 19, 36, 42, 56, 2]. This theory determines whether a given set of input directions will
have a unique solution (upto a global scale and an origin) for absolute translations.
Distinction from parallel rigidity and outlier detection: This paper takes the first step to deal with
sensitivity in translation averaging under uncertainty, i.e. determining under what configuration of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

