TempME: Towards the Explainability of Temporal
Graph Neural Networks via Motif Discovery

Jialin Chen
Yale University
jialin.chen@yale.edu

Rex Ying
Yale University
rex.ying@yale.edu

Abstract
Temporal graphs are widely used to model dynamic systems with time-varying
interactions. In real-world scenarios, the underlying mechanisms of generating
future interactions in dynamic systems are typically governed by a set of recurring
substructures within the graph, known as temporal motifs. Despite the success and
prevalence of current temporal graph neural networks (TGNN), it remains uncertain
which temporal motifs are recognized as the significant indications that trigger a
certain prediction from the model, which is a critical challenge for advancing the
explainability and trustworthiness of current TGNNs. To address this challenge,
we propose a novel approach, called Temporal Motifs Explainer (TempME),
which uncovers the most pivotal temporal motifs guiding the prediction of TGNNs.
Derived from the information bottleneck principle, TempME extracts the most
interaction-related motifs while minimizing the amount of contained information to
preserve the sparsity and succinctness of the explanation. Events in the explanations
generated by TempME are verified to be more spatiotemporally correlated than
those of existing approaches, providing more understandable insights. Extensive
experiments validate the superiority of TempME, with up to 8.21% increase in
terms of explanation accuracy across six real-world datasets and up to 22.96%
increase in boosting the prediction Average Precision of current TGNNs.1

1

Introduction

Temporal Graph Neural Networks (TGNN) are attracting a surge of interest in real-world applications,
such as social networks, financial prediction, etc. These models exhibit the ability to capture
both the topological properties of graphs and the evolving dependencies between interactions over
time [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Despite their widespread success, these models often lack transparency,
functioning as black boxes. The provision of human-intelligible explanations for these models
becomes imperative, enabling a better understanding of their decision-making logic and justifying the
rationality behind their predictions. Therefore, improving explainability is fundamental in enhancing
the trustworthiness of current TGNNs, making them reliable for deployment in real-world scenarios,
particularly in high-stakes tasks like fraud detection and healthcare forecasting [9, 10, 11, 12].
The goal of explainability is to discover what patterns in data have been recognized that trigger certain
predictions from the model. Explanation approaches on static graph neural networks have been wellstudied recently [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. These methods identify a small subset of important edges
or nodes that contribute the most to the model’s prediction. However, the success of these methods
on static graphs cannot be easily generalized to the field of temporal graphs, due to the complex
and volatile nature of dynamic networks [8, 4, 3]. Firstly, there can be duplicate events occurring
at the same timestamp and the same position in temporal graphs. The complicated dependencies
1

The code is available at https://github.com/Graph-and-Geometric-Learning/TempME

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

