Greedy Poisson Rejection Sampling

Gergely Flamich
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
gf332@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
One-shot channel simulation is a fundamental data compression problem concerned
with encoding a single sample from a target distribution Q using a coding distribution P using as few bits as possible on average. Algorithms that solve this problem
find applications in neural data compression and differential privacy and can serve
as a more efficient alternative to quantization-based methods. Sadly, existing solutions are too slow or have limited applicability, preventing widespread adoption. In
this paper, we conclusively solve one-shot channel simulation for one-dimensional
problems where the target-proposal density ratio is unimodal by describing an algorithm with optimal runtime. We achieve this by constructing a rejection sampling
procedure equivalent to greedily searching over the points of a Poisson process.
Hence, we call our algorithm greedy Poisson rejection sampling (GPRS) and analyze the correctness and time complexity of several of its variants. Finally, we empirically verify our theorems, demonstrating that GPRS significantly outperforms
the current state-of-the-art method, A* coding. Our code is available at https://
github.com/gergely-flamich/greedy-poisson-rejection-sampling.

1

Introduction

It is a common misconception that quantization is essential to lossy data compression; in fact, it is
merely a way to discard information deterministically. In this paper, we consider the alternative, that
is, to discard information stochastically using one-shot channel simulation. To illustrate the main
idea, take lossy image compression as an example. Assume we have a generative model given by a
joint distribution Px,y over images y and latent variables x, e.g. we might have trained a variational
autoencoder (VAE; Kingma & Welling, 2014) on a dataset of images. To compress a new image
y, we encode a single sample from its posterior x ∼ Px|y as its stochastic lossy representation.
The decoder can obtain a lossy reconstruction of y by decoding x and drawing a sample ŷ ∼ Py|x
(though in practice, for a VAE we normally just take the mean predicted by the generative network).
Abstracting away from our example, in this paper we will be entirely focused on channel simulation
for a pair of correlated random variables x, y ∼ Px,y : given a source symbol y ∼ Py we wish to
encode a single sample x ∼ Px|y . A simple way to achieve this is to encode x with entropy coding
using the marginal Px , whose average coding cost is approximately the entropy H[x]. Surprisingly,
however, we can do much better by using a channel simulation protocol, whose average coding cost
is approximately the mutual information I[x; y] (Li & El Gamal, 2018). This is remarkable, since not
only I[x; y] ≤ H[x], but in many cases I[x; y] might be finite even though H[x] is infinite, such as
when x is continuous. Sadly, most existing protocols place heavy restrictions on Px,y or their runtime
scales much worse than O(I[x; y]), limiting their practical applicability (Agustsson & Theis, 2020).
In this paper, we propose a family of channel simulation protocols based on a new rejection sampling
algorithm, which we can apply to simulate samples from a target distribution Q using a proposal
distribution P over an arbitrary probability space. The inspiration for our construction comes from an
exciting recent line of work which recasts random variate simulation as a search problem over a set
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

