CoDA: Collaborative Novel Box Discovery and
Cross-modal Alignment for Open-vocabulary 3D
Object Detection

Yang Cao1 Yihan Zeng2 Hang Xu2 Dan Xu1∗
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab2

Abstract
Open-vocabulary 3D Object Detection (OV-3DDet) aims to detect objects from an
arbitrary list of categories within a 3D scene, which remains seldom explored in
the literature. There are primarily two fundamental problems in OV-3DDet, i.e.,
localizing and classifying novel objects. This paper aims at addressing the two
problems simultaneously via a unified framework, under the condition of limited
base categories. To localize novel 3D objects, we propose an effective 3D Novel
Object Discovery strategy, which utilizes both the 3D box geometry priors and
2D semantic open-vocabulary priors to generate pseudo box labels of the novel
objects. To classify novel object boxes, we further develop a cross-modal alignment
module based on discovered novel boxes, to align feature spaces between 3D point
cloud and image/text modalities. Specifically, the alignment process contains a
class-agnostic and a class-discriminative alignment, incorporating not only the
base objects with annotations but also the increasingly discovered novel objects,
resulting in an iteratively enhanced alignment. The novel box discovery and crossmodal alignment are jointly learned to collaboratively benefit each other. The
novel object discovery can directly impact the cross-modal alignment, while a
better feature alignment can, in turn, boost the localization capability, leading
to a unified OV-3DDet framework, named CoDA, for simultaneous novel object
localization and classification. Extensive experiments on two challenging datasets
(i.e., SUN-RGBD and ScanNet) demonstrate the effectiveness of our method and
also show a significant mAP improvement upon the best-performing alternative
method by 80%. Codes and pre-trained models are released on the project page1 .

1

Introduction

3D object detection (3D-Det) [19, 21, 20] is a fundamental task in computer vision, with wide
applications in self-driving, industrial manufacturing, and robotics. Given point cloud scenes, 3D-Det
aims to localize and classify objects in the 3D scenes. However, most existing works heavily rely
on datasets with fixed and known categories, which greatly limits their potential applications in
the real world due to the various and unbounded categories. Open-vocabulary 3D object detection
(OV-3DDet) is on the verge of appearing to detect novel objects. In OV-3DDet, the model is typically
trained on datasets with limited base categories while evaluated on scenes full of novel objects, which
brings additional challenges. In the problem of OV-3DDet, the key challenge is how to localize and
classify novel objects using only annotations of very limited base categories. There are only very few
works in the literature targeting this challenging problem so far.
∗
1

Corresponding author
https://yangcaoai.github.io/publications/CoDA.html

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

