Addressing the speed-accuracy simulation trade-off
for adaptive spiking neurons

Luke Taylor
Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
luke.taylor@hertford.ox.ac.uk
Andrew J King
Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
andrew.king@dpag.ox.ac.uk
Nicol S Harper
Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
nicol.harper@dpag.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The adaptive leaky integrate-and-fire (ALIF) model is fundamental within computational neuroscience and has been instrumental in studying our brains in silico. Due
to the sequential nature of simulating these neural models, a commonly faced issue
is the speed-accuracy trade-off: either accurately simulate a neuron using a small
discretisation time-step (DT), which is slow, or more quickly simulate a neuron using a larger DT and incur a loss in simulation accuracy. Here we provide a solution
to this dilemma, by algorithmically reinterpreting the ALIF model, reducing the
sequential simulation complexity and permitting a more efficient parallelisation
on GPUs. We computationally validate our implementation to obtain over a 50×
training speedup using small DTs on synthetic benchmarks. We also obtained a
comparable performance to the standard ALIF implementation on different supervised classification tasks - yet in a fraction of the training time. Lastly, we
showcase how our model makes it possible to quickly and accurately fit real electrophysiological recordings of cortical neurons, where very fine sub-millisecond
DTs are crucial for capturing exact spike timing.

1

Introduction

The surge of progress in artificial neural networks (ANNs) over the last decade has advanced
our understanding of the potential computational principles underlying the processing of sensory
information [1–9]. Although these networks architecturally bear a resemblance to the brain [10], they
tend to omit a key physiological constraint: the spike. With their increased biological realism, spiking
neural networks (SNNs) have shown great promise in bridging the gap between experimental data
and computational models. SNNs can be fitted to real neural data [11–15], or used to simulate the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

