Unsupervised Anomaly Detection with Rejection

Lorenzo Perini
DTAI lab & Leuven.AI,
KU Leuven, Belgium
lorenzo.perini@kuleuven.be

Jesse Davis,
DTAI lab & Leuven.AI,
KU Leuven, Belgium
jesse.davis@kuleuven.be

Abstract
Anomaly detection goal is to detect unexpected behaviours in the data. Because
anomaly detection is usually an unsupervised task, traditional anomaly detectors
learn a decision boundary by employing heuristics based on intuitions, which are
hard to verify in practice. This introduces some uncertainty, especially close to the
decision boundary, which may reduce the user trust in the detector’s predictions.
A way to combat this is by allowing the detector to reject examples with high
uncertainty (Learning to Reject). This requires employing a confidence metric that
captures the distance to the decision boundary and setting a rejection threshold to
reject low-confidence predictions. However, selecting a proper metric and setting
the rejection threshold without labels are challenging tasks. In this paper, we solve
these challenges by setting a constant rejection threshold on the stability metric
computed by E X C EE D. Our insight relies on a theoretical analysis of this metric.
Moreover, setting a constant threshold results in strong guarantees: we estimate
the test rejection rate, and derive a theoretical upper bound for both the rejection
rate and the expected prediction cost. Experimentally, we show that our method
outperforms some metric-based methods.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection is the task of detecting unexpected behaviors in the data [6]. Often, these anomalies
are critical adverse events such as the destruction or alteration of proprietary user data [29], water leaks
in stores [50], breakdowns in gas [65] and wind [64] turbines, or failures in petroleum extraction [45].
Usually, anomalies are associated with a cost such as a monetary cost (e.g., maintenance, paying for
fraudulent purchases) or a societal cost such as environmental damages (e.g., dispersion of petroleum
or gas). Hence, detecting anomalies in a timely manner is an important problem.
When using an anomaly detector for decision-making, it is crucial that the user trusts the system.
However, it is often hard or impossible to acquire labels for anomalies. Moreover, anomalies may
not follow a pattern. Therefore anomaly detection is typically treated as an unsupervised learning
problem where traditional algorithms learn a decision boundary by employing heuristics based on
intuitions [22, 55, 61, 41], such as that anomalies are far away from normal examples [3]. Because
these intuitions are hard to verify and may not hold in some cases, some predictions may have high
uncertainty, especially for examples close to the decision boundary [32, 28]. As a result, the detector’s
predictions should be treated with some circumspection.
One way to increase user trust is to consider Learning to Reject [12]. In this setting, the model
does not always make a prediction. Instead, it can abstain when it is at a heightened risk of making
a mistake thereby improving its performance when it does offer a prediction. Abstention has the
drawback that no prediction is made, which means that a person must intervene to make a decision.
In the literature, two types of rejection have been identified [25]: novelty rejection allows the model
to abstain when given an out-of-distribution (OOD) example, while ambiguity rejection enables
abstention for a test example that is too close to the model’s decision boundary. Because anomalies
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

