XES3G5M: A Knowledge Tracing Benchmark Dataset
with Auxiliary Information

Zitao Liu
Guangdong Institute of Smart
Education, Jinan University
Guangzhou, China
liuzitao@jnu.edu.cn
Jiahao Chen
TAL Education Group
Beijing, China
chenjiahao@tal.com

Qiongqiong Liu
TAL Education Group
Beijing, China
liuqiongqiong1@tal.com

Shuyan Huang
TAL Education Group
Beijing, China
huangshuyan@tal.com

Jiliang Tang
Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Michigan
State University MI, USA
tangjili@msu.edu

Teng Guo∗
Guangdong Institute of Smart
Education, Jinan University
Guangzhou, China
teng.guo@outlook.com
Xiangyu Zhao
School of Data Science
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, China
xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk

Weiqi Luo
Guangdong Institute of Smart
Education, Jinan University
Guangzhou, China
lwq@jnu.edu.cn

Jian Weng
College of Cyber Security
Jinan University
Guangzhou, China
cryptjweng@gmail.com

Abstract
Knowledge tracing (KT) is a task that predicts students’ future performance based
on their historical learning interactions. With the rapid development of deep learning techniques, existing KT approaches follow a data-driven paradigm that uses
massive problem-solving records to model students’ learning processes. However,
although the educational contexts contain various factors that may have an influence on student learning outcomes, existing public KT datasets mainly consist of
anonymized ID-like features, which may hinder the research advances towards this
field. Therefore, in this work, we present, XES3G5M, a large-scale dataset with rich
auxiliary information about questions and their associated knowledge components
(KCs)2 . The XES3G5M dataset is collected from a real-world online math learning
platform, which contains 7,652 questions, and 865 KCs with 5,549,635 interactions
from 18,066 students. To the best of our knowledge, the XES3G5M dataset not
only has the largest number of KCs in math domain but contains the richest contextual information including tree structured KC relations, question types, textual
contents and analysis and student response timestamps. Furthermore, we build a
comprehensive benchmark on 19 state-of-the-art deep learning based knowledge
tracing (DLKT) models. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
leveraging the auxiliary information in our XES3G5M with DLKT models. We
hope the proposed dataset can effectively facilitate the KT research work.

∗
2

The corresponding authors: Teng Guo, Qiongqiong Liu.
A KC is a generalization of everyday terms like concept, principle, fact, or skill.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

