Efficient Bayesian Learning Curve Extrapolation
using Prior-Data Fitted Networks

Steven Adriaensen∗
Machine Learning Lab
University of Freiburg
adriaens@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Herilalaina Rakotoarison∗
Machine Learning Lab
University of Freiburg
rakotoah@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Samuel Müller
Machine Learning Lab
University of Freiburg
muellesa@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Frank Hutter
Machine Learning Lab
University of Freiburg
fh@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Learning curve extrapolation aims to predict model performance in later epochs
of training, based on the performance in earlier epochs. In this work, we argue that, while the inherent uncertainty in the extrapolation of learning curves
warrants a Bayesian approach, existing methods are (i) overly restrictive, and/or
(ii) computationally expensive. We describe the first application of prior-data
fitted neural networks (PFNs) in this context. A PFN is a transformer, pre-trained
on data generated from a prior, to perform approximate Bayesian inference in a
single forward pass. We propose LC-PFN, a PFN trained to extrapolate artificial
right-censored learning curves generated from a parametric prior proposed in prior
art using MCMC. We demonstrate that LC-PFN can approximate the posterior
predictive distribution over learning curves more accurately than MCMC, while
being over 10 000 times faster. We also show that the same LC-PFN achieves
competitive performance extrapolating a total of 20 000 real learning curves from
four learning curve benchmarks (LCBench, NAS-Bench-201, Taskset, and
PD1) that stem from training a wide range of model architectures (MLPs, CNNs,
RNNs, and Transformers) on 53 different datasets with varying input modalities
(tabular, image, text, and protein data). Finally, we investigate its potential in the
context of model selection and find that a simple LC-PFN based predictive early
stopping criterion obtains 2 - 6× speed-ups on 45 of these datasets, at virtually no
overhead.

1

Introduction

Learning curve extrapolation [Mohr and van Rijn, 2022] aims to predict how much a machine
learning model will improve with more training, e.g., to determine how much more training data
to collect [Cortes et al., 1993, Frey and Fisher, 1999, Leite and Brazdil, 2004, Kolachina et al.,
2012], or to define an early stopping criterion in online learning [Yao et al., 2007]. Learning curve
extrapolation has recently been widely studied to speed up automated machine learning (AutoML)
and hyperparameter optimization (HPO) of deep neural networks, by discarding non-promising
configurations early [Swersky et al., 2014, Domhan et al., 2015, Klein et al., 2017, Baker et al., 2017,
Chandrashekaran and Lane, 2017, Gargiani et al., 2019, Wistuba et al., 2022].
∗

Equal Contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

