Adversarial Learning for
Feature Shift Detection and Correction
Míriam Barrabés 1,2,∗ Daniel Mas Montserrat 1,∗ Margarita Geleta 3
Xavier Giró-i-Nieto 4,† Alexander G. Ioannidis 1‡
1
Stanford University 2 Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
3
University of California, Berkeley 4 Amazon

Abstract
Data shift is a phenomenon present in many real-world applications, and while there
are multiple methods attempting to detect shifts, the task of localizing and correcting the features originating such shifts has not been studied in depth. Feature shifts
can occur in many datasets, including in multi-sensor data, where some sensors
are malfunctioning, or in tabular and structured data, including biomedical, financial, and survey data, where faulty standardization and data processing pipelines
can lead to erroneous features. In this work, we explore using the principles of
adversarial learning, where the information from several discriminators trained to
distinguish between two distributions is used to both detect the corrupted features
and fix them in order to remove the distribution shift between datasets. We show
that mainstream supervised classifiers, such as random forest or gradient boosting
trees, combined with simple iterative heuristics, can localize and correct feature
shifts, outperforming current statistical and neural network-based techniques. The
code is available at https://github.com/AI-sandbox/DataFix.

1

Introduction

Distribution shifts in multi-dimensional data, caused by one or more “corrupted” dimensions, are
common in various real-world applications. Data streams from multi-sensor environments in fields
like medicine, industry, finance, and defense, can experience shifts due to faulty sensors [1]. Tabular
and structured data used in domains such as economics, biology, genomics, and social sciences, can
encounter distribution shifts caused by improper standardization, erroneous data processing, data
collection procedures, or human entry errors [2, 3]. Combining databases from diverse sources is
common in many fields: various hospitals collect different phenotypic characteristics from patients,
and governmental institutions often capture different socio-economic indicators of citizens. However,
proper standardization of data is seldom applied across data sources, and merging these poses
challenges that often require data-dependent and domain-specific techniques [4]. For example,
efficient computational techniques are used to process high-dimensional genomic sequences [5],
and domain knowledge is incorporated in processing data from social sciences [6]. This process
typically involves changing, imputing, merging, and removing both features and samples, potentially
leading to complex pipelines that can originate distribution shifts between datasets. These shifts
can create erroneous scientific results if present in datasets used for medical or social studies, or
indicate infrastructure failure if present in sensory data in industrial applications. Therefore, detecting,
localizing, and correcting such shifts is an important task that remains a relatively unsolved problem.
The “localization” of feature shifts is the task of finding which features (i.e., dimensions) of the dataset
are causing the shift within multiple sets of data. This step can be critical in order to address the error
∗

Equal contribution.
Work done prior to joining Amazon.
‡
Correspondence to A.G.I. [ioannidis@stanford.edu].
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

