A Unified Discretization Framework for Differential
Equation Approach with Lyapunov Arguments for
Convex Optimization

Kansei Ushiyama
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
ushiyama-kansei074@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Shun Sato
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
shun@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Takayasu Matsuo
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
matsuo@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The differential equation (DE) approach for convex optimization, which relates
optimization methods to specific continuous DEs with rate-revealing Lyapunov
functionals, has gained increasing interest since the seminal paper by Su–Boyd–
Candès (2014). However, the approach still lacks a crucial component to make
it truly useful: there is no general, consistent way to transition back to discrete
optimization methods. Consequently, even if we derive insights from continuous
DEs, we still need to perform individualized and tedious calculations for the
analysis of each method. This paper aims to bridge this gap by introducing a new
concept called “weak discrete gradient” (wDG), which consolidates the conditions
required for discrete versions of gradients in the DE approach arguments. We then
define abstract optimization methods using wDG and provide abstract convergence
theories that parallel those in continuous DEs. We demonstrate that many typical
optimization methods and their convergence rates can be derived as special cases
of this abstract theory. The proposed unified discretization framework for the
differential equation approach to convex optimization provides an easy environment
for developing new optimization methods and achieving competitive convergence
rates with state-of-the-art methods, such as Nesterov’s accelerated gradient.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider unconstrained convex optimization problems:
min f (x).

x∈Rd

(1)

Various optimization methods, such as standard gradient descent and Nesterov’s accelerated gradient
methods (Nesterov, 1983), are known for these problems. The convergence rates of these methods
have been intensively investigated based on the classes of objective functions
 (L-smooth and/or µstrongly convex). We focus on the convergence rate of function values f x(k) −f ⋆ , while the rates for

∥∇f x(k) ∥ or ∥x(k) −x⋆ ∥ have also been discussed. Topics particularly relevant to this study include
the lower bound of convergence rates for first-order methods (see Remark 4.3 for the relationship
between our framework and first-order methods) for convex and strongly convex functions:
O 1/k 2

p
for L-smooth and convex functions (cf. Nesterov (2018)) and O (1 − µ/L)2k for L-smooth and
µ-strongly convex functions (Drori and Taylor, 2022). These lower bounds are tight, as they are
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

