Directional diffusion models for graph representation
learning

Run Yang
SUFE and Baidu
luckyyangrun@163.sufe.edu.cn
Fan Zhou∗
SUFE
zhoufan@mail.shufe.edu.cn

Yuling Yang
SUFE
sibyllayang@163.sufe.edu.cn
Qiang Sun∗
University of Toronto
qiang.sun@utoronto.ca

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in diverse domains such as
image synthesis, super-resolution, and 3D molecule generation. Surprisingly, the
application of diffusion models in graph learning has garnered little attention. In
this paper, we aim to bridge this gap by exploring the use of diffusion models for
unsupervised graph representation learning. Our investigation commences with
the identification of anisotropic structures within graphs and the recognition of
a crucial limitation in the vanilla forward diffusion process when dealing with
these anisotropic structures. The original forward diffusion process continually
adds isotropic Gaussian noise to the data, which may excessively dilute anisotropic
signals, leading to rapid signal-to-noise conversion. This rapid conversion poses
challenges for training denoising neural networks and obstructs the acquisition of
semantically meaningful representations during the reverse process. To overcome
this challenge, we introduce a novel class of models termed directional diffusion
models. These models adopt data-dependent, anisotropic, and directional noises
in the forward diffusion process. In order to assess the effectiveness of our proposed models, we conduct extensive experiments on 12 publicly available datasets,
with a particular focus on two distinct graph representation learning tasks. The
experimental results unequivocally establish the superiority of our models over
state-of-the-art baselines, underscoring their effectiveness in capturing meaningful
graph representations. Our research not only sheds light on the intricacies of the
forward process in diffusion models but also underscores the vast potential of these
models in addressing a wide spectrum of graph-related tasks. Our code is available
at https://github.com/statsle/DDM.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised representation learning through diffusion models has emerged as a prominent area
of research in computer vision. Several methods that leverage diffusion models, such as those
proposed by Zhang et al. (2022); Preechakul et al. (2022); Abstreiter et al. (2021); Baranchuk
et al. (2021), have been put forth for representation learning. Notably, Baranchuk et al. (2021)
showed that the intermediate actiations obtained from denoising networks contain valuable semantic
information. Their findings emphasize the effectiveness of diffusion models in learning meaningful
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

