Ensemble-based Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Vehicle Routing Problems under Distribution Shift

Yuan Jiang
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
yuan005@e.ntu.edu.sg

Zhiguang Cao
School of Computing and Information Systems
Singapore Management University
zgcao@smu.edu.sg

Yaoxin Wu
Department of Industrial Engineering & Innovation Sciences
Eindhoven University of Technology
y.wu2@tue.nl

Wen Song∗
Marine Science and Technology
Shandong University
wensong@email.sdu.edu.cn

Jie Zhang
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
zhangj@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
While performing favourably on the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
instances, most of the existing neural methods for vehicle routing problems (VRPs)
struggle to generalize in the presence of a distribution shift. To tackle this issue,
we propose an ensemble-based deep reinforcement learning method for VRPs,
which learns a group of diverse sub-policies to cope with various instance distributions. In particular, to prevent convergence of the parameters to the same
one, we enforce diversity across sub-policies by leveraging Bootstrap with random
initialization. Moreover, we also explicitly pursue inequality between sub-policies
by exploiting regularization terms during training to further enhance diversity.
Experimental results show that our method is able to outperform the state-of-the-art
neural baselines on randomly generated instances of various distributions, and also
generalizes favourably on the benchmark instances from TSPLib and CVRPLib,
which confirmed the effectiveness of the whole method and the respective designs.

1

Introduction

The vehicle routing problem (VRP) is a type of combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) with
significant real-world applications, especially in the field of logistics [1]. The goal is to optimally
route a fleet of vehicles, originating at a depot, to serve a set of clients. Given the NP-hard nature,
heuristic methods are usually preferred to solve VRPs in practice. However, traditional heuristics
always treat each VRP instance independently, resulting in limited computational efficiency or
solution quality [2]. Hence, there is growing interest in developing neural heuristics based on deep
(reinforcement) learning to exploit the underlying patterns across VRP instances and then generalize
to unseen ones [3].
Early neural heuristics for VRPs were primarily supervised [4, 5], whose performance depends
heavily on the ground-truth labels, making them less desirable due to the expensive computation for
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

