Temporal Causal Mediation through a Point Process:
Direct and Indirect Effects of Healthcare Interventions
Çağlar Hızlı∗
Dept. of Computer Science
Aalto University

ST John
Dept. of Computer Science
Aalto University

Anne Juuti
Helsinki University Hospital
and University of Helsinki

Tuure Saarinen
Helsinki University Hospital
and University of Helsinki

Kirsi Pietiläinen
Helsinki University Hospital
and University of Helsinki

Pekka Marttinen
Dept. of Computer Science
Aalto University

Abstract
Deciding on an appropriate intervention requires a causal model of a treatment, the
outcome, and potential mediators. Causal mediation analysis lets us distinguish between direct and indirect effects of the intervention, but has mostly been studied in a
static setting. In healthcare, data come in the form of complex, irregularly sampled
time-series, with dynamic interdependencies between a treatment, outcomes, and
mediators across time. Existing approaches to dynamic causal mediation analysis
are limited to regular measurement intervals, simple parametric models, and disregard long-range mediator–outcome interactions. To address these limitations, we
propose a non-parametric mediator–outcome model where the mediator is assumed
to be a temporal point process that interacts with the outcome process. With this
model, we estimate the direct and indirect effects of an external intervention on
the outcome, showing how each of these affects the whole future trajectory. We
demonstrate on semi-synthetic data that our method can accurately estimate direct
and indirect effects. On real-world healthcare data, our model infers clinically
meaningful direct and indirect effect trajectories for blood glucose after a surgery.

1

Introduction

In healthcare, a key challenge is to design interventions that effectively control a target outcome
[Vamathevan et al., 2019, Ghassemi et al., 2020]. To design an efficient intervention, decision-makers
need not only to estimate the total effect of the intervention, but also understand the underlying causal
mechanisms driving this effect. To this end, causal mediation analysis decomposes the total effect into:
(i) an indirect effect flowing through an intermediate variable (mediator), and (ii) a direct effect representing the rest of the effect. The statistical question is then to estimate the direct and indirect effects.
As a running example, we consider the effect of bariatric surgery (treatment) on meal–blood glucose
(mediator–outcome) dynamics. In Fig. 1, we show how blood glucose changes after the surgery. This
change is partly mediated by the changes in diet before and after the surgery (alterations in meal size
and frequency). However, the surgery can also directly impact blood glucose levels (via metabolic
processes, regardless of meal size). To efficiently control glucose, we need to estimate to what extent
the effect of surgery is due to the post-surgery diet (indirect) or other metabolic processes (direct).
Causal mediation has been studied extensively in a static setting with three variables: a treatment A,
a mediator M , and an outcome Y [Robins and Greenland, 1992, Pearl, 2001, Robins, 2003, VanderWeele, 2009, Imai et al., 2010a,b, Tchetgen and Shpitser, 2012]. However, as the running example
∗

Correspondence: caglar.hizli@aalto.fi

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

