Fast and Regret Optimal Best Arm Identification:
Fundamental Limits and Low-Complexity Algorithms

Qining Zhang
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
qiningz@umich.edu

Lei Ying
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
leiying@umich.edu

Abstract
This paper considers a stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem with dual
objectives: (i) quick identification and commitment to the optimal arm, and (ii)
reward maximization throughout a sequence of T consecutive rounds. Though
each objective has been individually well-studied, i.e., best arm identification for
(i) and regret minimization for (ii), the simultaneous realization of both objectives
remains an open problem, despite its practical importance. This paper introduces
Regret Optimal Best Arm Identification (ROBAI) which aims to achieve these dual
objectives. To solve ROBAI with both pre-determined stopping time and adaptive
stopping time requirements, we present an algorithm called EOCP and its variants
respectively, which not only achieve asymptotic optimal regret in both Gaussian and
general bandits, but also commit to the optimal arm in Oplog T q rounds with predetermined stopping time and Oplog2 T q rounds with adaptive stopping time. We
further characterize lower bounds on the commitment time (equivalent to the sample
complexity) of ROBAI, showing that EOCP and its variants are sample optimal with
pre-determined stopping time, and almost sample optimal with adaptive stopping
time. Numerical results confirm our theoretical analysis and reveal an interesting
“over-exploration” phenomenon carried by classic UCB algorithms, such that
EOCP has smaller regret even though it stops exploration much earlier than UCB,
i.e., Oplog T q versus OpT q, which suggests over-exploration is unnecessary and
potentially harmful to system performance.

1

Introduction

The stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem [1], which models a wide range of applications
including online recommendations [2, 3, 4], job assignments [5, 6, 7], clinical trials [8, 9], and etc,
is a sequential decision-making process between an agent and an environment which consists of
a number of arms (actions). In this paper, we will use “arm” and “action” interchangeably. Most
existing studies, say [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15], formulate a regret minimization problem to study
the bandit model, where the agent aims to maximize the cumulative reward through interacting
with the environment for a number of consecutive rounds. The well-known UCB algorithm [10]
and its variants [12] are among the most popular bandit algorithms for regret minimization, which
exhibit outstanding performances both theoretically and empirically in bandit models. Moreover,
state-of-the-art reinforcement learning algorithms, e.g., [16, 17], are also motivated by the essence of
UCB which sets up confidence intervals to encourage exploration. However, the UCB algorithms
do not commit to a single arm. Instead, they continue to switch among all arms based on reward
signals received. Since one of the ultimate goals of the MAB model is to learn the optimal arm, it
would be ideal if the algorithm would commit to an arm quickly without sacrificing the regret. In fact
and in practice, a number of applications such as occupational decisions [18], medicine release and
pandemic control [19, 20], and long-term investments [21], require or prefer quick commitment to an
action instead of continuous exploration. This motivated us to consider an MAB problem with dual
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

