VCC: Scaling Transformers to 128K Tokens or More
by Prioritizing Important Tokens

Zhanpeng Zeng
University of Wisconsin, Madison
zzeng38@wisc.edu

Cole Hawkins
AWS AI
colehawk@amazon.com

Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis & AWS AI
mhong@umn.edu
Nikolaos Pappas
AWS AI
nppappa@amazon.com

Aston Zhang
AWS AI
astonz@amazon.com

Vikas Singh
University of Wisconsin, Madison
vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

Shuai Zheng
AWS AI
shzheng@amazon.com

Abstract
Transformers are central in modern natural language processing and computer
vision applications. Despite recent works devoted to reducing the quadratic cost
of such models with respect to sequence length, dealing with ultra long sequences
(e.g., >16K tokens) remains challenging. Applications such as answering questions
based on a book or summarizing a scientific article are inefficient or infeasible.
Here, we propose to significantly improve the efficiency of Transformers for ultra
long sequences, by compressing the sequence into a much smaller representation
at each layer. Specifically, by exploiting the fact that in many tasks, only a small
subset of special tokens, which we call VIP-tokens, are most relevant to the final
prediction, we propose a VIP-token centric compression (VCC) scheme which
selectively compresses the sequence based on their impact on approximating
the representation of the VIP-tokens. Compared with competitive baselines, our
algorithm is not only efficient (achieving more than 3× compute efficiency gain
compared to baselines on 4K and 16K lengths), but also offers competitive/better
performance on a large number of tasks. Further, we show that our algorithm scales
to 128K tokens (or more) while consistently offering accuracy improvement. Code
is available at https://github.com/mlpen/VCC.

1

Introduction

The Transformer [32] is a fundamental/foundational architecture for natural language processing
(NLP) and computer vision. It has shown remarkable performance across NLP applications including
machine translation [32], language inference [10], and summarization [14]. Transformers have also
been successfully applied to various visual recognition tasks and achieve impressive results [11, 4, 41].
Unfortunately, the runtime/memory needs of Transformers involve an unfavorable dependence on the
input sequence length, making the use of Transformers for ultra-long sequence applications difficult.
Therefore, many studies on Transformers make use of strategies such as truncation to ensure that the
input sentence length is at most 512, e.g., BERT, T5, and other Transformer-based language models
[36, 22, 27]. Unfortunately, such a truncation, and other related strategies, inevitably results in loss of
accuracy, the extent of which can vary from one task/dataset to another. Consequently, improving the
efficiency for longer input sequence length is a key focus of many proposals. These developments are
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

