Rigorous Runtime Analysis of MOEA/D for Solving
Multi-Objective Minimum Weight Base Problems

Anh Viet Do
Optimisation and Logistics
The University of Adelaide, Australia

Aneta Neumann
Optimisation and Logistics
The University of Adelaide, Australia

Frank Neumann
Optimisation and Logistics
The University of Adelaide, Australia

Andrew M. Sutton
Department of Computer Science
University of Minnesota Duluth, USA

Abstract
We study the multi-objective minimum weight base problem, an abstraction of
classical NP-hard combinatorial problems such as the multi-objective minimum
spanning tree problem. We prove some important properties of the convex hull of
the non-dominated front, such as its approximation quality and an upper bound on
the number of extreme points. Using these properties, we give the first run-time
analysis of the MOEA/D algorithm for this problem, an evolutionary algorithm
that effectively optimizes by decomposing the objectives into single-objective
components. We show that the MOEA/D, given an appropriate decomposition
setting, finds all extreme points within expected fixed-parameter polynomial time,
in the oracle model. Experiments are conducted on random bi-objective minimum
spanning tree instances, and the results agree with our theoretical findings. Furthermore, compared with a previously studied evolutionary algorithm for the problem
GSEMO, MOEA/D finds all extreme points much faster across all instances.

1

Introduction

Evolutionary algorithms have been widely used to tackle multi-objective optimization problems
in many areas such as robotics, pattern recognition, data mining, bioinformatics, scheduling and
planning, and neural network training [35]. Their population-based search operators make them a
natural choice for simultaneously handling several possibly conflicting objectives. Many generic
evolutionary multi-objective frameworks have been developed to supply basic implementations for
any problem, and to provide templates that can be fine-tuned for specific applications (we refer
to [30] for an overview of common approaches). Such features, along with their strong empirical
performances in challenging applications, have led them to becoming one of the most attractive topics
to researchers and practitioners alike.
Among evolutionary multi-objective algorithms (EMOs), arguably the most exemplary are dominancebased approaches such as GSEMO and NSGA variants, with the former often being considered a
baseline. Another popular technique for multi-objective optimization is to decompose the multiple
objectives into a single-objective subproblem. The MOEA/D algorithm is a state-of-the-art application
of this technique in evolutionary computation [29, 31].
Despite the prevalence of EMOs on practical applications, rigorous analyses of their runtime behavior
on meaningful problems are scarce. Nevertheless, these kinds of analyses are critical for (1) providing
performance guarantees and guidelines to practitioners who use and develop these techniques in
the field, and (2) promoting the explainability of heuristic search and optimization techniques by
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

