Neural Multi-Objective Combinatorial Optimization
with Diversity Enhancement

Jinbiao Chen1 , Zizhen Zhang1 , Zhiguang Cao2 , Yaoxin Wu3 , Yining Ma4 ,
Te Ye1 , and Jiahai Wang1,5,6,∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, P.R. China
2
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
Department of Industrial Engineering & Innovation Sciences,
Eindhoven University of Technology, Netherlands
4
Department of Industrial Systems Engineering & Management,
National University of Singapore, Singapore
5
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education,
Sun Yat-sen University, P.R. China
6
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, P.R. China
chenjb69@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhangzzh7@mail.sysu.edu.cn
zgcao@smu.edu.sg, y.wu2@tue.nl, yiningma@u.nus.edu
yete@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wangjiah@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Most of existing neural methods for multi-objective combinatorial optimization
(MOCO) problems solely rely on decomposition, which often leads to repetitive
solutions for the respective subproblems, thus a limited Pareto set. Beyond decomposition, we propose a novel neural heuristic with diversity enhancement (NHDE)
to produce more Pareto solutions from two perspectives. On the one hand, to
hinder duplicated solutions for different subproblems, we propose an indicatorenhanced deep reinforcement learning method to guide the model, and design a
heterogeneous graph attention mechanism to capture the relations between the
instance graph and the Pareto front graph. On the other hand, to excavate more
solutions in the neighborhood of each subproblem, we present a multiple Pareto
optima strategy to sample and preserve desirable solutions. Experimental results
on classic MOCO problems show that our NHDE is able to generate a Pareto front
with higher diversity, thereby achieving superior overall performance. Moreover,
our NHDE is generic and can be applied to different neural methods for MOCO.

1

Introduction

Multi-objective combinatorial optimization (MOCO) has been extensively studied in the communities
of computer science and operations research [1, 2]. It also commonly exists in many industries, such
as transportation [3], manufacturing [4], energy [5], and telecommunication [6]. MOCO features
multiple conflicting objectives based on NP-hard combinatorial optimization (CO), practical yet more
complex. Rather than finding an optimal solution like in the single-objective optimization, MOCO
pursues a set of Pareto-optimal solutions, called Pareto set, to trade-off the multiple objectives. In
general, a decent Pareto set is captured by both desirable convergence (optimality) and diversity.
Since exactly solving MOCO may require exponentially increasing computational time [7], the
heuristic methods [8] have been favored in practice over the past few decades, which aim to yield an
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

