Recommender Systems with Generative Retrieval

Shashank Rajput?
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Raghunandan Keshavan
Google
Yi Tay
Google DeepMind

Nikhil Mehta?
Google DeepMind

Trung Vu
Google
Vinh Q. Tran
Google

Ed H. Chi
Google DeepMind

Anima Singh
Google DeepMind

Lukasz Heldt
Google

Lichan Hong
Google DeepMind

Jonah Samost
Google

Maciej Kula
Google DeepMind

Maheswaran Sathiamoorthy
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Modern recommender systems perform large-scale retrieval by embedding queries
and item candidates in the same unified space, followed by approximate nearest
neighbor search to select top candidates given a query embedding. In this paper,
we propose a novel generative retrieval approach, where the retrieval model autoregressively decodes the identifiers of the target candidates. To that end, we
create semantically meaningful tuple of codewords to serve as a Semantic ID for
each item. Given Semantic IDs for items in a user session, a Transformer-based
sequence-to-sequence model is trained to predict the Semantic ID of the next
item that the user will interact with. We show that recommender systems trained
with the proposed paradigm significantly outperform the current SOTA models on
various datasets. In addition, we show that incorporating Semantic IDs into the
sequence-to-sequence model enhances its ability to generalize, as evidenced by
the improved retrieval performance observed for items with no prior interaction
history.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems help users discover
content of interest and are ubiquitous in
various recommendation domains such as
videos [4, 43, 9], apps [3], products [6, 8],
and music [18, 19]. Modern recommender
systems adopt a retrieve-and-rank strategy,
where a set of viable candidates are selected in the retrieval stage, which are then
ranked using a ranker model. Since the
ranker model works only on the candidates
it receives, it is desired that the retrieval
stage emits highly relevant candidates.

User History

Next item

Orange shoes, Brand X Red shoes, Brand Y
Atomic Item ID: 233 Atomic Item ID: 515

Orange shoes, Brand Y
Atomic Item ID: 64

Semantic ID
Generator
(5, 23, 55)

Item
Lookup
(5, 25, 78)

Generative
Retrieval

(5, 25, 55)

Figure 1: Overview of the Transformer Index for GEnerative
Recommenders (TIGER) framework. With TIGER, sequential
recommendation is expressed as a generative retrieval task by
representing each item as a tuple of discrete semantic tokens.

?

Equal contribution. Work done when SR was at Google.
Neurips Version
Correspondence to rajput.shashank11@gmail.com, nikhilmehta@google.com, nlogn@google.com.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

