Diff-Instruct: A Universal Approach for Transferring
Knowledge From Pre-trained Diffusion Models

Weijian Luo1∗, Tianyang Hu2†, Shifeng Zhang2 , Jiacheng Sun2 , Zhenguo Li2 , Zhihua Zhang1
1

Peking University, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Due to the ease of training, ability to scale, and high sample quality, diffusion models
(DMs) have become the preferred option for generative modeling, with numerous
pre-trained models available for a wide variety of datasets. Containing intricate information about data distributions, pre-trained DMs are valuable assets for downstream
applications. In this work, we consider learning from pre-trained DMs and transferring their knowledge to other generative models in a data-free fashion. Specifically,
we propose a general framework called Diff-Instruct to instruct the training of
arbitrary generative models as long as the generated samples are differentiable with
respect to the model parameters. Our proposed Diff-Instruct is built on a rigorous
mathematical foundation where the instruction process directly corresponds to
minimizing a novel divergence we call Integral Kullback-Leibler (IKL) divergence.
IKL is tailored for DMs by calculating the integral of the KL divergence along a
diffusion process, which we show to be more robust in comparing distributions with
misaligned supports. We also reveal non-trivial connections of our method to existing
works such as DreamFusion [54], and generative adversarial training. To demonstrate the effectiveness and universality of Diff-Instruct, we consider two scenarios:
distilling pre-trained diffusion models and refining existing GAN models. The
experiments on distilling pre-trained diffusion models show that Diff-Instruct results
in state-of-the-art single-step diffusion-based models. The experiments on refining
GAN models show that the Diff-Instruct can consistently improve the pre-trained
generators of GAN models across various settings. Our official code is released
through https://github.com/pkulwj1994/diff_instruct.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, the field of deep generative models has made significant strides across
various domains such as data generation [30, 32, 51, 53, 24, 54, 25, 34], density estimation [35, 7],
image-editing [46, 8] and others. Notably, recent advancements in text-driven high-resolution image
generation [60, 59, 58] have pushed the limits of using generative models for Artificial Intelligence
Generated Content (AIGC). Behind the empirical success are fruitful developments of a wide variety
of deep generative models, among which, diffusion models (DMs) are the most prominent. DMs
leverage the diffusion processes and model the data across a wide spectrum of noise levels. Their ease
of training, ability to scale, and high sample quality have made DMs the preferred option for generative
modeling, with numerous pre-trained models available for a wide variety of datasets and applications.
The trained DMs contain intricate information about the data distribution, making them valuable assets
for downstream applications.
∗
†

Email: luoweijian@stu.pku.edu.cn.
Corresponding to: Tianyang Hu (hutianyang1@huawei.com)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

