Joint Attribute and Model Generalization Learning for
Privacy-Preserving Action Recognition

Duo Peng
SUTD
Singapore
duo_peng@mymail.sutd.edu.sg
Qiuhong Ke
Monash University
Australia
Qiuhong.Ke@monash.edu

Li Xu
SUTD
Singapore
li_xu@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

Ping Hu
UESTC
China
chinahuping@gmail.com

Jun Liu∗
SUTD
Singapore
jun_liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Privacy-Preserving Action Recognition (PPAR) aims to transform raw videos into
anonymous ones to prevent privacy leakage while maintaining action clues, which is
an increasingly important problem in intelligent vision applications. Despite recent
efforts in this task, it is still challenging to deal with novel privacy attributes and
novel privacy attack models that are unavailable during the training phase. In this
paper, from the perspective of meta-learning (learning to learn), we propose a novel
Meta Privacy-Preserving Action Recognition (MPPAR) framework to improve
both generalization abilities above (i.e., generalize to novel privacy attributes and
novel privacy attack models) in a unified manner. Concretely, we simulate train/test
task shifts by constructing disjoint support/query sets w.r.t. privacy attributes or
attack models. Then, a virtual training and testing scheme is applied based on
support/query sets to provide feedback to optimize the model’s learning towards
better generalization. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and
generalization of the proposed framework compared to state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Recently, smart home cameras such as Amazon Echo and Google Nest Cam, have been widely used
in millions of families to provide intelligent monitoring services to enhance security (e.g., detecting
unusual behaviors and alerting householders remotely) [1, 2]. However, the widespread use of such
cameras has raised privacy concerns and even pressured changes in the regulations/laws in Europe
and US [13], as it generally requires uploading device-captured visual data that often contains rich
privacy information (such as face, gender and skin color, etc) to the intelligent system deployed on
cloud or public servers for analysis, which leads to the risk of privacy leakage [3, 4]. While traditional
cryptographic solutions can provide video encryption during transmission between the local camera
and the intelligent system, they would struggle with preventing authorized agents (e.g., the system
administrator) from misusing the privacy information [13, 14].
Therefore, there is an urgent need to find an appropriate anonymization transformation to erase
privacy information from the captured raw visual data at the local camera end (before the upload),
while still enabling certain target tasks required by the intelligent system [5, 6, 7]. Meanwhile,
since action recognition is a fundamental video understanding task with wide applications (such as
the above-mentioned smart home cameras), there is a growing interest in studying anonymization
transformation for privacy preservation in video action recognition, i.e., Privacy-Preserving Action
∗

CorrespondingAuthor

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

