Emergent Correspondence from Image Diffusion

Luming Tang∗
Menglin Jia∗
Qianqian Wang∗
Cheng Perng Phoo
Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University

Abstract
Finding correspondences between images is a fundamental problem in computer
vision. In this paper, we show that correspondence emerges in image diffusion
models without any explicit supervision. We propose a simple strategy to extract this
implicit knowledge out of diffusion networks as image features, namely DIffusion
FeaTures (DIFT), and use them to establish correspondences between real images.
Without any additional fine-tuning or supervision on the task-specific data or
annotations, DIFT is able to outperform both weakly-supervised methods and
competitive off-the-shelf features in identifying semantic, geometric, and temporal
correspondences. Particularly for semantic correspondence, DIFT from Stable
Diffusion is able to outperform DINO and OpenCLIP by 19 and 14 accuracy points
respectively on the challenging SPair-71k benchmark. It even outperforms the
state-of-the-art supervised methods on 9 out of 18 categories while remaining on
par for the overall performance. Project page: https://diffusionfeatures.
github.io.

1

Introduction

Drawing correspondences between images is a critical primitive in 3D reconstruction [73], object
tracking [22, 90], video segmentation [92], image and video editing [102, 58, 98]. This problem of
drawing correspondence is easy for humans: we can match object parts not only across different
viewpoints, articulations and lighting changes, but even across drastically different categories (e.g.,
between cats and horses) or different modalities (e.g., between photos and cartoons). Yet, we rarely if
ever get explicit correspondence labels for training. The question is, can computer vision systems
similarly learn accurate correspondences without any labeled data at all?
There is indeed some evidence that contrastive self-supervised learning techniques produce good
correspondences as a side product of learning on unlabeled data [10, 28]. However, in this paper,
we look to a new class of self-supervised models that has been attracting attention: diffusion-based
generative models [32, 79]. While diffusion models are primarily models for image synthesis, a
key observation is that these models produce good results for image-to-image translation [53, 85]
and image editing [8, 80]. For instance, they can convert a dog to a cat without changing its pose
or context [61]. It would appear that to perform such editing, the model must implicitly reason
about correspondence between the two categories (e.g., the model needs to know where the dog’s
eye is in order to replace it with the cat’s eye). We therefore ask, do image diffusion models learn
correspondences?
We answer the question in the affirmative by construction: we provide a simple way of extracting
correspondences on real images using pre-trained diffusion models. These diffusion models [41] have
at the core a U-Net [71, 17, 70] that takes noisy images as input and produces clean images as output.
As such they already extract features from the input image that can be used for correspondence.
Unfortunately, the U-Net is trained to de-noise, and so has been trained on noisy images. Our strategy
*

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

