Dis-inhibitory neuronal circuits can control the sign of
synaptic plasticity

Julian Rossbroich1,2

1

Friedemann Zenke1,2

{firstname.lastname}@fmi.ch
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland
2
Faculty of Science, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland

Abstract
How neuronal circuits achieve credit assignment remains a central unsolved question in systems neuroscience. Various studies have suggested plausible solutions
for back-propagating error signals through multi-layer networks. These purely
functionally motivated models assume distinct neuronal compartments to represent local error signals that determine the sign of synaptic plasticity. However,
this explicit error modulation is inconsistent with phenomenological plasticity
models in which the sign depends primarily on postsynaptic activity. Here we
show how a plausible microcircuit model and Hebbian learning rule derived within
an adaptive control theory framework can resolve this discrepancy. Assuming
errors are encoded in top-down dis-inhibitory synaptic afferents, we show that
error-modulated learning emerges naturally at the circuit level when recurrent
inhibition explicitly influences Hebbian plasticity. The same learning rule accounts
for experimentally observed plasticity in the absence of inhibition and performs
comparably to back-propagation of error (BP) on several non-linearly separable
benchmarks. Our findings bridge the gap between functional and experimentally
observed plasticity rules and make concrete predictions on inhibitory modulation
of excitatory plasticity.

1

Introduction

How do neurons far away from the sensory periphery and motor output system update their connections to contribute to network computation meaningfully? This question, formally known as
the “credit assignment problem,” is one of the outstanding questions in systems neuroscience. Classic learning theories assume synaptic plasticity in the brain is mainly Hebbian, i.e., changes in a
synapse’s efficacy depend merely on the pre- and postsynaptic activity of the neurons it connects
[1]. A plethora of experiments in different brain areas support the notion of Hebbian plasticity [2, 3]
and diverse phenomenological plasticity models quantitatively capture observed synaptic plasticity
dynamics [4–8]. Theories of reinforcement learning suggested further extensions of Hebbian learning
to three-factor rules that account for reward modulation, whereby a global modulatory factor, e.g.,
dopamine, explicitly influences the sign of plasticity [9, 10]. Again, there is ample experimental
evidence for the role of neuromodulators in gating plasticity in various brain areas [11, 12]. Yet,
recent work argues that global neuromodulation is insufficient to learn complex function mappings in
large networks [13, 14] and that more fine-grained control over the sign of plasticity is required, as in
the BP algorithm used in deep learning [15–18]. This realization motivated several modeling studies
on how biological networks could approximate BP [19–25]. One central assumption in virtually all
of these models is that the sign of plasticity is explicitly modulated by a neuron-specific local error
signal akin to the gradient-based update used in BP [26]. However, learning rules with explicit error
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

