Adaptive Topological Feature via Persistent Homology:
Filtration Learning for Point Clouds
Naoki Nishikawa
The University of Tokyo
nishikawa-naoki259@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Yuichi Ike
Kyushu University
ike@imi.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Kenji Yamanishi
The University of Tokyo
yamanishi@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Machine learning for point clouds has been attracting much attention, with many
applications in various fields, such as shape recognition and material science. For
enhancing the accuracy of such machine learning methods, it is often effective to
incorporate global topological features, which are typically extracted by persistent homology. In the calculation of persistent homology for a point cloud, we
choose a filtration for the point cloud, an increasing sequence of spaces. Since the
performance of machine learning methods combined with persistent homology is
highly affected by the choice of a filtration, we need to tune it depending on data
and tasks. In this paper, we propose a framework that learns a filtration adaptively
with the use of neural networks. In order to make the resulting persistent homology
isometry-invariant, we develop a neural network architecture with such invariance.
Additionally, we show a theoretical result on a finite-dimensional approximation
of filtration functions, which justifies the proposed network architecture. Experimental results demonstrated the efficacy of our framework in several classification
tasks.

1

Introduction

Analysis of point clouds (finite point sets) has been increasing its importance, with many applications
in various fields such as shape recognition, material science, and pharmacology. Despite their
importance, point cloud data were difficult to deal with by machine learning, in particular, neural
networks. However, thanks to the recent development, there have appeared several neural network
architectures for point cloud data, such as DeepSet (Zaheer et al., 2017), PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a),
PointNet++ (Qi et al., 2017b), and PointMLP (Ma et al., 2022). These architectures have shown high
accuracy in tasks such as shape classification and segmentation.
In point cloud analysis, topological global information, such as connectivity, the existence of holes
and cavities, is known to be beneficial for many tasks (see, for example, (Hiraoka et al., 2016;
Kovacev-Nikolic et al., 2016)). One way to incorporate topological information into machine learning
is to use persistent homology, which is a central tool in topological data analysis and attracting much
attention recently. By defining an increasing sequence of spaces, called a filtration, from a point cloud
X ⇢ Rd , we can compute its persistent homology, which reflects the topology of X. Topological
features obtained through persistent homology are then combined with neural network methods and
enhance the accuracy of many types of tasks, such as point cloud segmentation (Liu et al., 2022),
surface classification (Zeppelzauer et al., 2016), and fingerprint classification (Giansiracusa et al.,
2019).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

