Compressed Video Prompt Tuning

Bing Li1,2 Jiaxin Chen2 Xiuguo Bao3 Di Huang1,2∗
1
SKLSDE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
IRIP Lab, SCSE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
CNCERT/CC, Beijing, China
{libingsy, jiaxinchen, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn, baoxiuguo@139.com

Abstract
Compressed videos offer a compelling alternative to raw videos, showing the possibility to significantly reduce the on-line computational and storage cost. However,
current approaches to compressed video processing generally follow the resourceconsuming pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm, which does not fully take advantage of such properties, making them not favorable enough for widespread
applications. Inspired by recent successes of prompt tuning techniques in computer
vision, this paper presents the first attempt to build a prompt based representation
learning framework, which enables effective and efficient adaptation of pre-trained
raw video models to compressed video understanding tasks. To this end, we propose a novel prompt tuning approach, namely Compressed Video Prompt Tuning
(CVPT), emphatically dealing with the challenging issue caused by the inconsistency between pre-training and downstream data modalities. Specifically, CVPT
replaces the learnable prompts with compressed modalities (e.g. Motion Vectors
and Residuals) by re-parameterizing them into conditional prompts followed by
layer-wise refinement. The conditional prompts exhibit improved adaptability and
generalizability to instances compared to conventional individual learnable ones,
and the Residual prompts enhance the noisy motion cues in the Motion Vector
prompts for further fusion with the visual cues from I-frames. Additionally, we
design Selective Cross-modal Complementary Prompt (SCCP) blocks. After inserting them into the backbone, SCCP blocks leverage semantic relations across
diverse levels and modalities to improve cross-modal interactions between prompts
and input flows. Extensive evaluations on HMDB-51, UCF-101 and SomethingSomething v2 demonstrate that CVPT remarkably outperforms the state-of-the-art
counterparts, delivering a much better balance between accuracy and efficiency.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in compressed video understanding [51, 36, 8, 46,
11, 19] due to its great potential in saving the computational and storage cost for on-line processing,
which directly performs inference on compressed data and thus bypasses the resource-consuming
decoding phase.
Raw videos consist of dense RGB frames conveying coherent and consistent content, while compressed videos are composed of sparsely decoded RGB frames with entire spatial information, i.e.
Intra-frames (I-frames), and incompletely decoded RGB frames with free but coarse motion clues, i.e.
Predicted frames (P-frames) or Bidirectionally predicted frames (B-frames). In this case, existing
approaches to compressed video understanding generally follow the pre-training and fine-tuning
paradigm, which initially pre-trains models on compressed videos from a large database (e.g. Kinetics400 [3]) and fully fine-tunes them on downstream ones. According to different network structures,
* Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

