Multi Time Scale World Models
Vaisakh Shaj1∗ Saleh Gholam Zadeh1,2 Ozan Demir3 Luiz Ricardo Douat3
Gerhard Neumann1
1
Karlsruhe Institute Of Technology (KIT), Germany
2
SAP SE, Germany
3
Robert Bosch GmbH, Germany

Abstract
Intelligent agents use internal world models to reason and make predictions about
different courses of their actions at many scales [21]. Devising learning paradigms
and architectures that allow machines to learn world models that operate at multiple
levels of temporal abstractions while dealing with complex uncertainty predictions
is a major technical hurdle [17]. In this work, we propose a probabilistic formalism
to learn multi-time scale world models which we call the Multi Time Scale State
Space (MTS3) model. Our model uses a computationally efficient inference scheme
on multiple time scales for highly accurate long-horizon predictions and uncertainty
estimates over several seconds into the future. Our experiments, which focus on
action conditional long horizon future predictions, show that MTS3 outperforms
recent methods on several system identification benchmarks including complex
simulated and real-world dynamical systems. Code is available at this repository:
https://github.com/ALRhub/MTS3.

1

Introduction

World models attempt to learn a compact and expressive representation of the environment dynamics
from observed data. These models can predict possible future world states as a function of an
imagined action sequence and are a key ingredient of model-predictive control [3] and model-based
reinforcement learning (RL). One important dimension of world models is the level of temporal
granularity or the time scale at which the model operates. Existing literature on world models operates
at a single level of temporal abstraction, typically at a fine-grained level such as milliseconds. One
drawback of single-time scale world models is that they may not capture longer-term trends and
patterns in the data [17].
For efficient long-horizon prediction and planning, the model needs to predict at multiple levels of
temporal abstractions [27, 22]. Intuitively, low-level temporal abstractions should contain precise
details about the input so as to predict accurately in the short term, while high-level, abstract
representations should simplify accurate long-term predictions. Both abstractions must also interrelate
with each other at least in the sense that the higher-level predictions/plans can be turned into low-level
moment-by-moment predictions. For example, in robotic manipulation, the robot must be able to
perform precise and coordinated movements to grasp and manipulate the object at a fast time scale
while at a slower time scale, the robot must also be able to recognize and utilize higher-level patterns
and structures in the task, such as the shape, size and location of objects, and the overall goal of the
manipulation task.
Furthermore, temporal abstractions can capture relevant task structures across dynamical systems
under non-stationary which can be used to identify the similarities and differences between tasks,
allowing the robot to transfer knowledge learned from one task to another [26, 17].
∗

Corresponding author. Email to <vaisakhs.shaj@gmail.com>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

