Efficient Online Clustering with Moving Costs

Dimitris Christou∗
UT Austin
christou@cs.utexas.edu

Stratis Skoulakis∗
LIONS, EPFL
efstratios.skoulakis@epfl.ch

Volkan Cevher
LIONS, EPFL
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this work we consider an online learning problem, called Online k-Clustering
with Moving Costs, at which a learner maintains a set of k facilities over T rounds
so as to minimize the connection cost of an adversarially selected sequence of
clients. The learner is informed on the positions of the clients at each round t only
after its facility-selection and can use this information to update its decision in
the next round. However, updating the facility positions comes with an additional
moving cost based on the moving distance of the facilities. We present the first
O(log n)-regret polynomial-time online learning algorithm guaranteeing that the
overall cost (connection + moving) is at most O(log n) times the time-averaged
connection cost of the best fixed solution. Our work improves on the recent result
of Fotakis et al. [31] establishing O(k)-regret guarantees only on the connection
cost.

1

Introduction

Due to their various applications in diverse fields (e.g. machine learning, operational research, data
science etc.), clustering problems have been extensively studied. In the well-studied k-median
problem, given a set of clients, k facilities should be placed on a metric with the objective to minimize
the sum of the distance of each client from its closest center [55, 14, 13, 67, 6, 44, 52, 65, 51, 15, 54, 3].
In many modern applications (e.g., epidemiology, social media, conference, etc.) the positions of the
clients are not static but rather evolve over time [57, 56, 64, 59, 23, 5]. For example the geographic
distribution of the clients of an online store or the distribution of Covid-19 cases may drastically
change from year to year or respectively from day to day [31]. In such settings it is desirable to
update/change the positions of the facilities (e.g., compositions of warehouses or Covid test-units) so
as to better serve the time-evolving trajectory of the clients.
The clients’ positions may change in complex and unpredictable ways and thus an a priori knowledge
on their trajectory is not always available. Motivated by this, a recent line of research studies
clustering problems under the online learning framework by assuming that the sequence of clients’
positions is unknown and adversarially selected [18, 28, 16, 31]. More precisely, a learner must
place k facilities at each round t ≥ 1 without knowing the positions of clients at round t which are
revealed to the learner only after its facility-selection. The learner can use this information to update
its decision in the next round; however, moving a facility comes with an additional moving cost that
should be taken into account in the learner’s updating decision, e.g. moving Covid-19 test-units
comes with a cost [18, 28].
Building on this line of works, we consider the following online learning problem:
Problem 1 (Online k-Clustering with Moving Costs). Let G(V, E, w) be a weighted graph with
|V | = n vertices and k facilities. At each round t = 1, . . . , T :
1. The learner selects Ft ⊆ V , with |Ft | = k, at which facilities are placed.
∗

First author contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

