Hyperbolic Graph Neural Networks at Scale:
A Meta Learning Approach
Nurendra Choudhary
Virginia Tech
Arlington, VA, USA
nurendra@vt.edu

Nikhil Rao
Microsoft
Sunnyvale, CA, USA
nikhilrao@microsoft.com

Chandan K. Reddy
Virginia Tech
Arlington, VA, USA
reddy@cs.vt.edu

Abstract
The progress in hyperbolic neural networks (HNNs) research is hindered by their
absence of inductive bias mechanisms, which are essential for generalizing to new
tasks and facilitating scalable learning over large datasets. In this paper, we aim to
alleviate these issues by learning generalizable inductive biases from the nodes’
local subgraph and transfer them for faster learning over new subgraphs with a
disjoint set of nodes, edges, and labels in a few-shot setting. We introduce a novel
method, Hyperbolic GRAph Meta Learner (H-GRAM), that, for the tasks of node
classification and link prediction, learns transferable information from a set of
support local subgraphs in the form of hyperbolic meta gradients and label hyperbolic protonets to enable faster learning over a query set of new tasks dealing with
disjoint subgraphs. Furthermore, we show that an extension of our meta-learning
framework also mitigates the scalability challenges seen in HNNs faced by existing approaches. Our comparative analysis shows that H-GRAM effectively learns
and transfers information in multiple challenging few-shot settings compared to
other state-of-the-art baselines. Additionally, we demonstrate that, unlike standard HNNs, our approach is able to scale over large graph datasets and improve
performance over its Euclidean counterparts.

1

Introduction

Graphs are extensively used in various applications, including image processing, natural language
processing, chemistry, and bioinformatics. With modern graph datasets ranging from hundreds of
thousands to billions of nodes, research in the graph domain has shifted towards larger and more
complex graphs, e.g., the nodes and edges in the traditional Cora dataset [29] are in the order of
103 , whereas, the more recent OGBN datasets [17] are in the order of 106 . However, despite their
potential, Hyperbolic Neural Networks (HNNs), which capture the hierarchy of graphs in hyperbolic
space, have struggled to scale up with the increasing size and complexity of modern datasets.
HNNs have outperformed their Euclidean counterparts by taking advantage of the inherent hierarchy
present in many modern datasets [4, 10, 13]. Unlike a standard Graph Neural Network (GNN), a
HNN learns node representations based on an “anchor” or a “root” node for the entire graph, and the
operations needed to learn these embeddings are a function of this root node. Specifically, HNN formulations [13] depend on the global origin (root node) for several transformation operations (such
as Möbius addition, Möbius multiplication, and others), and hence focusing on subgraph structures
to learn representations becomes meaningless when their relationship to the root node is not considered. Thus, state-of-the-art HNNs such as HGCN [4], HAT [15], and HypE [8] require access
to the entire dataset to learn representations, and hence only scale to experimental datasets (with
⇡103 nodes). Despite this major drawback, HNNs have shown impressive performance on several research domains including recommendation systems [32], e-commerce [9], natural language
processing [11], and knowledge graphs [5, 8]. It is thus imperative that one develops methods to
scale HNNs to larger datasets, so as to realize their full potential. To this end, we introduce a novel
method, Hyperbolic GRAph Meta Learner (H-GRAM), that utilizes meta-learning to learn infor37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

