Exact Representation of Sparse Networks with
Symmetric Nonnegative Embeddings
Sudhanshu Chanpuriya1 , Ryan A. Rossi2 , Anup Rao2 , Tung Mai2 ,
Nedim Lipka2 , Zhao Song2 , and Cameron Musco3
1

2

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, schariya@illinois.edu
Adobe Research, {ryrossi,anuprao,tumai,lipka,zsong}@adobe.com
3
University of Massachusetts Amherst, cmusco@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Graph models based on factorization of the adjacency matrix often fail to capture
network structures related to links between dissimilar nodes (heterophily). We
introduce a novel graph factorization model that leverages two nonnegative vectors
per node to interpretably account for links between both similar and dissimilar
nodes. We prove that our model can exactly represent any graph with low arboricity, a property that many real-world networks satisfy; our proof also applies to
related models but has much greater scope than the closest prior bound, which
is based on low max degree. Our factorization also has compelling properties
besides expressiveness: due to its symmetric structure and nonnegativity, fitting the
model inherently finds node communities, and the model’s link predictions can be
interpreted in terms of these communities. In experiments on real-world networks,
we demonstrate our factorization’s effectiveness on a variety of tasks, including
community detection and link prediction.

1

Introduction

Graphs data naturally arises in a variety of fields including sociology (Mason & Verwoerd, 2007),
biology (Scott, 1988), and computer networking (Bonato, 2004). A key task in machine learning
for graph data is forming models of graphs that can predict edges between nodes, form useful
representations of nodes, and reveal interpretable structure in the graph, such as detecting clusters of
nodes. Many graph models fall under the framework of edge-independent graph generative models,
which output the probabilities of edges existing between any pair of nodes. The parameters of such
models can be trained iteratively on the network, or some fraction of the network which is known, in
the link prediction task, i.e., by minimizing a predictive loss. To choose among these models, one
must consider two criteria: 1) whether the model can express structures of interest in the graph, 2)
whether the model expresses these structures in an interpretable way.
Expressiveness of low-dimensional embeddings As real-world graphs are high-dimensional
objects, graph models generally compress information about the graph. For example, dot product
models associate each node with a real-valued “embedding” vector; the predicted probability of a link
between two nodes increases with the similarity of their embeddings. These models can alternatively
be seen as factorizing the graph’s adjacency matrix to approximate it with a low-rank matrix. Recent
work of Seshadhri et al. (2020) has shown that dot product models are limited in their ability to
model common structures in real-world graphs, such as triangles incident only on low-degree nodes.
In response, Chanpuriya et al. (2020) showed that with the logistic principal components analysis
(LPCA) model, which has two embeddings per node (i.e., using the dot product of the ‘left’ embedding
of one node and the ‘right’ embedding of another), not only can such structures be represented, but
further, any graph can be exactly represented with embedding vectors whose lengths are linear in the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

