Scattering Vision Transformer: Spectral Mixing
Matters
Badri Narayana Patro
Microsoft

Vijay Srinivas Agneeswaran
Microsoft

badripatro@microsoft.com

vagneeswaran@microsoft.com

Abstract
Vision transformers have gained significant attention and achieved state-of-theart performance in various computer vision tasks, including image classification,
instance segmentation, and object detection. However, challenges remain in addressing attention complexity and effectively capturing fine-grained information within
images. Existing solutions often resort to down-sampling operations, such as pooling, to reduce computational cost. Unfortunately, such operations are non-invertible
and can result in information loss. In this paper, we present a novel approach called
Scattering Vision Transformer (SVT) to tackle these challenges. SVT incorporates
a spectrally scattering network that enables the capture of intricate image details.
SVT overcomes the invertibility issue associated with down-sampling operations
by separating low-frequency and high-frequency components. Furthermore, SVT
introduces a unique spectral gating network utilizing Einstein multiplication for
token and channel mixing, effectively reducing complexity. We show that SVT
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the ImageNet dataset with a significant
reduction in a number of parameters and FLOPS. SVT shows 2% improvement
over LiTv2 and iFormer. SVT-H-S reaches 84.2% top-1 accuracy, while SVT-H-B
reaches 85.2% (state-of-art for base versions) and SVT-H-L reaches 85.7% (again
state-of-art for large versions). SVT also shows comparable results in other vision
tasks such as instance segmentation. SVT also outperforms other transformers
in transfer learning on standard datasets such as CIFAR10, CIFAR100, Oxford
Flower, and Stanford Car datasets. The project page is available on this webpage
(https://badripatro.github.io/svt/).

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been a remarkable surge in the interest and adoption of Large Language
Models (LLMs), driven by the release and success of prominent models such as GPT-3, ChatGPT [1],
and Palm [8]. These LLMs have achieved significant breakthroughs in the field of Natural Language
Processing (NLP). Building upon their successes, subsequent research endeavors have extended the
language transformer paradigm to diverse domains including computer vision, speech recognition,
video processing, and even climate and weather prediction. In this paper, we specifically focus on
exploring the potential of LLMs for vision-related tasks. By leveraging the power of these language
models, we aim to push the boundaries of vision applications and investigate their capabilities in
addressing complex vision challenges.
Several adaptations of transformers have been introduced in the field of computer vision for various
tasks. For image classification, notable vision transformers include ViT [13], DeIT [56], PVT [61],
Swin [39], Twin [9], and CSWin transformers [12]. The different vision transformers improved the
performance of image classification tasks significantly compared to Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) such as ResNets and RegNets, as discussed in efficient vision transformer research work [43].
This breakthrough in computer vision has led to state-of-the-art results in various vision tasks,
including image segmentation such as SegFormer [66], TopFormer [77] and SegViT [74] and object
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

