Data-Informed Geometric Space Selection

Shuai Zhang
ETH Zurich
cheungshuai@outlook.com

Wenqi Jiang
ETH Zurich
wenqi.jiang@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Geometric representation learning (e.g., hyperbolic and spherical geometry) has
proven to be efficacious in solving many intricate machine learning tasks. The
fundamental challenge of geometric representation learning lies in aligning the
inherent geometric bias with the underlying structure of the data, which is a rarely
explored topic in the literature. Existing methods heavily rely on heuristic assumptions on the data structure to decide the type of geometry to be adopted, which
often leads to suboptimal performance. This work aims to automate the alignment
process via a data-informed strategy such that we optimize model performance
with minimal overhead. Specifically, a sparse gating mechanism is employed to
enable each input data point p to select K geometric spaces from a given candidate
geometric space pool with N (K < N ) spaces of different geometry. The selected
K spaces are then tightly integrated to formulate a Cartesian product space, which
is leveraged to process this input data p. In doing so, each input data is processed
by the spaces it selected with maximum specialization. We empirically show that
this method can effectively align data and spaces without human interventions
and further boost performance on real-world tasks, demonstrating its potential in
eliciting the expressive power of geometric representations and practical usability.

1

Introduction

Representing data in low-dimensional geometric spaces (e.g., Euclidean, hyperbolic, and spherical)
has been an invaluable technique in a variety of machine learning tasks. Euclidean space has been the
most widely adopted and predominant geometric space across many tasks [8, 31]. Recent research
has shown that non-Euclidean geometry, such as hyperbolic and spherical geometry, can be more
effective in representing data with specific/intricate inherent structures. Typically, hyperbolic space,
a type of manifold with constant negative (sectional) curvature, provides a greater ability to model
tree-like structures and capture hierarchical patterns [32, 11, 21]. Conversely, spherical space, with
positive curvature, is well-suited for fitting data with cyclical structures [44, 30]. Different geometry
endows models with different inductive bias that prioritizes learning specific patterns in the data.
Geometric representation learning faces a significant challenge in effectively aligning underlying
data structures with appropriate geometric spaces. Earlier approaches tend to map all data to a single
geometric space, operating under the implicit assumption that the majority, if not all, of the data
conforms to the same geometric pattern. This assumption of a uniform geometric pattern across all
data points is unrealistic. As such, there has been growing interest in hybridizing different geometric
spaces [22, 37, 4] via Cartesian product to form a mixed curvature space. By leveraging the benefits
of multiple geometric spaces, this approach can offer improved performance compared to methods
that rely on a single geometric space.
Real-world data is usually characterized by intricate patterns that a single geometric space cannot
adequately capture. Thus, employing a one-space-fits-all approach is unlikely to produce optimal
solutions. In addition, the Cartesian product space representation learning technique does not
discriminate between input examples based on their underlying geometric structures. For example,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

