LLM-Pruner: On the Structural Pruning
of Large Language Models

Xinyin Ma Gongfan Fang Xinchao Wang∗
National University of Singapore
maxinyin@u.nus.edu, gongfan@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in language understanding and generation. However, such impressive capability typically comes
with a substantial model size, which presents significant challenges in both the
deployment, inference, and training stages. With LLM being a general-purpose
task solver, we explore its compression in a task-agnostic manner, which aims to
preserve the multi-task solving and language generation ability of the original LLM.
One challenge to achieving this is the enormous size of the training corpus of LLM,
which makes both data transfer and model post-training over-burdensome. Thus,
we tackle the compression of LLMs within the bound of two constraints: being taskagnostic and minimizing the reliance on the original training dataset. Our method,
named LLM-Pruner, adopts structural pruning that selectively removes non-critical
coupled structures based on gradient information, maximally preserving the majority of the LLM’s functionality. To this end, the performance of pruned models
can be efficiently recovered through tuning techniques, LoRA, in merely 3 hours,
requiring only 50K data. We validate the LLM-Pruner on three LLMs, including
LLaMA, Vicuna, and ChatGLM, and demonstrate that the compressed models still
exhibit satisfactory capabilities in zero-shot classification and generation. The code
is available at: https://github.com/horseee/LLM-Pruner

1

Introduction

Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) [39, 51, 50, 44, 64, 4, 74] have demonstrated remarkable
proficiency in language understanding and generation. With the increase in model size, they are
better equipped to handle complex tasks [3, 5, 58, 60] and even exhibit emergent abilities [57].
However, notwithstanding their impressive performance, LLMs pose challenges in deployment and
inference. Their extensive scale engenders substantial computational demands, and the multitude
of parameters involved can induce long latencies and other related issues. Several techniques are
proposed to solve these problems, like model pruning [56, 61, 72, 21], knowledge distillation [46, 41,
47],quantization [1, 13] within the context of pre-trained language model (PLM).
While previous methods have effectively maintained model performance amidst parameter reduction,
they primarily target compression within specialized domains or for designated tasks in the context
of task-specific compression. For instance, a PLM is fine-tuned on a particular dataset, such as one
of the classification tasks in the GLUE benchmark [53], after which these models are distilled into
a smaller classification model [46, 18]. Although this paradigm could potentially be employed for
LLM compression, it compromises the LLM’s capacity as a versatile task solver, rendering it suited
to a single task exclusively.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

