Optimal Learners for Realizable Regression:
PAC Learning and Online Learning

Idan Attias
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
idanatti@post.bgu.ac.il

Steve Hanneke
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Alkis Kalavasis
Yale University
alvertos.kalavasis@yale.edu

Amin Karbasi
Yale University, Google Research
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Grigoris Velegkas
Yale University
grigoris.velegkas@yale.edu

Abstract
In this work, we aim to characterize the statistical complexity of realizable regression both in the PAC learning setting and the online learning setting.
Previous work had established the sufficiency of finiteness of the fat shattering dimension for PAC learnability and the necessity of finiteness of the scaled Natarajan
dimension, but little progress had been made towards a more complete characterization since the work of Simon (SICOMP ’97). To this end, we first introduce
a minimax instance optimal learner for realizable regression and propose a novel
dimension that both qualitatively and quantitatively characterizes which classes of
real-valued predictors are learnable. We then identify a combinatorial dimension
related to the Graph dimension that characterizes ERM learnability in the realizable
setting. Finally, we establish a necessary condition for learnability based on a
combinatorial dimension related to the DS dimension, and conjecture that it may
also be sufficient in this context.
Additionally, in the context of online learning we provide a dimension that characterizes the minimax instance optimal cumulative loss up to a constant factor and
design an optimal online learner for realizable regression, thus resolving an open
question raised by Daskalakis and Golowich in STOC ’22.

1

Introduction

Real-valued regression is one of the most fundamental and well-studied problems in statistics and
data science [Vap99, GBC16, Bac21], with numerous applications in domains such as economics
and medicine [DG17]. However, despite its significance and applicability, theoretical understanding
of the statistical complexity of real-valued regression is still lacking.
Perhaps surprisingly, in the fundamental realizable Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) setting
[Val84] and the realizable online setting [Lit88, DG22], we do not know of any characterizing
dimension or optimal learners for the regression task. This comes in sharp contrast with binary and
multiclass classification, both in the offline and the online settings, where the situation is much more
clear [Lit88, HLW94, BEHW89, Han16, DSS14, BCD+ 22, Nat89, DSBDSS15, RST23]. Our goal
in this work is to make progress regarding the following important question:
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

