On-the-Fly Adapting Code Summarization on
Trainable Cost-Effective Language Models

Yufan Cai

Yun Lin∗

Chenyan Liu

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
National University of Singapore

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

National University of Singapore

lin_yun@sjtu.edu.cn

chenyan@u.nus.edu

cai_yufan@u.nus.edu
Jinglian Wu

Yifan Zhang

Yiming Liu

National University of Singapore

National University of Singapore

National University of Singapore

jinglian_wu@u.nus.edu

yfzhang@nus.edu.sg

e0945794@u.nus.edu

Yeyun Gong

Jin Song Dong

Microsoft

National University of Singapore

yegong@microsoft.com

dcsdjs@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Deep learning models are emerging to summarize source code to comment for code
documentation and program comprehension. We can achieve good performance by
training the model on large training corpus. However, in practice, the code samples
from different projects can have contradictory training signal for learning a deep
comment generator, making the model struggled to fit all the training samples.
In this work, we introduce a novel approach, AdaCom, to improve the performance
of comment generators by on-the-fly model adaptation. This research is motivated
by the observation that deep comment generators often need to strike a balance
as they need to fit all the training samples. Specifically, for one certain target
code c, some training samples Sp could have made more contributions while other
samples So could have counter effects. However, the traditional fine-tuned models
need to fit both Sp and So from a global perspective, leading to compromised
performance for one certain target code c. In this context, we design AdaCom to
(1) detect whether the model might have a compromised performance on a target
code c and (2) retrieve a few helpful training samples Sp that have contradictory
samples in the training dataset and, (3) adapt the model on the fly by re-training
the Sp to strengthen the helpful samples and unlearn the harmful samples. Our
extensive experiments on 7 comment generators and 4 public datasets show that (1)
AdaCom can significantly boost the performance of comment generation (BLEU4
score by on average 14.9%, METEOR by 12.2%, and ROUGE-L by 7.4%), (2)
the adaptation on one code sample is cost-effective and acceptable as an on-the-fly
solution, and (3) AdaCom can adapt well on out-of-distribution code samples.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models are increasingly emerging to generate comments from the source code, facilitating programmers’ tasks such as code documentation [27], program comprehension [18], and reverseengineering [17]. Regarding the code-to-comment generation problem as a language translation or
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

