Boosting Learning for LDPC Codes
to Improve the Error-Floor Performance
Hee-Youl Kwak
University of Ulsan
ghy1228@gmail.com

Dae-Young Yun
Seoul National University
bigbowl204@snu.ac.kr

Sang-Hyo Kim∗
Sungkyunkwan University
iamshkim@skku.edu

Yongjune Kim∗
POSTECH
yongjune@postech.ac.kr

Jong-Seon No
Seoul National University
jsno@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been successfully commercialized in
communication systems due to their strong error correction capabilities and simple
decoding process. However, the error-floor phenomenon of LDPC codes, in which
the error rate stops decreasing rapidly at a certain level, presents challenges for
achieving extremely low error rates and deploying LDPC codes in scenarios demanding ultra-high reliability. In this work, we propose training methods for neural
min-sum (NMS) decoders to eliminate the error-floor effect. First, by leveraging
the boosting learning technique of ensemble networks, we divide the decoding
network into two neural decoders and train the post decoder to be specialized for
uncorrected words that the first decoder fails to correct. Secondly, to address the
vanishing gradient issue in training, we introduce a block-wise training schedule
that locally trains a block of weights while retraining the preceding block. Lastly,
we show that assigning different weights to unsatisfied check nodes effectively lowers the error-floor with a minimal number of weights. By applying these training
methods to standard LDPC codes, we achieve the best error-floor performance compared to other decoding methods. The proposed NMS decoder, optimized solely
through novel training methods without additional modules, can be integrated into
existing LDPC decoders without incurring extra hardware costs. The source code
is available at https://github.com/ghy1228/LDPC_Error_Floor.

1

Introduction

The field of learning-based decoding for error-correcting codes began with research on training neural
networks to produce the information vector when given a distorted codeword [1, 2, 3, 4]. These
works assume an arbitrary neural network with no prior knowledge of decoding algorithms, and
accordingly, face the challenge of learning a decoding algorithm. In contrast, model-based neural
decoders are designed by mapping a well-known graph-based iterative decoding algorithm, such as
belief propagation (BP) and min-sum (MS) decoding algorithms, to a neural network and then training
its weights [5]. Compared to the arbitrary network approaches or the error correction transformer
[6], model-based neural decoders offer the advantages of guaranteeing the performance of existing
iterative algorithms and using hardware architectures [7] that are already well optimized for iterative
decoding algorithms.
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

