Chatting Makes Perfect: Chat-based Image Retrieval

Matan Levy1

Rami Ben-Ari2
1

Nir Darshan2

Dani Lischinski1

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
2
OriginAI, Israel
Levy@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Chats emerge as an effective user-friendly approach for information retrieval, and
are successfully employed in many domains, such as customer service, healthcare,
and finance. However, existing image retrieval approaches typically address the
case of a single query-to-image round, and the use of chats for image retrieval has
been mostly overlooked. In this work, we introduce ChatIR: a chat-based image
retrieval system that engages in a conversation with the user to elicit information,
in addition to an initial query, in order to clarify the user’s search intent. Motivated
by the capabilities of today’s foundation models, we leverage Large Language
Models to generate follow-up questions to an initial image description. These
questions form a dialog with the user in order to retrieve the desired image from a
large corpus. In this study, we explore the capabilities of such a system tested on a
large dataset and reveal that engaging in a dialog yields significant gains in image
retrieval. We start by building an evaluation pipeline from an existing manually
generated dataset and explore different modules and training strategies for ChatIR.
Our comparison includes strong baselines derived from related applications trained
with Reinforcement Learning. Our system is capable of retrieving the target image
from a pool of 50K images with over 78% success rate after 5 dialogue rounds,
compared to 75% when questions are asked by humans, and 64% for a single shot
text-to-image retrieval. Extensive evaluations reveal the strong capabilities and
examine the limitations of CharIR under different settings. Project repository is
available at https://github.com/levymsn/ChatIR.

1

Introduction

Users have always been the central focus of information retrieval. Conversational search offers
opportunities to enhance search effectiveness and efficiency. The tremendous growth in the volume
of searchable visual media underscores the need for fast and reliable retrieval systems. Retrieval
capabilities are indispensable in general internet image search, as well as in specific domains, such as
e-commerce or surveillance. Current approaches to image retrieval in computer vision primarily focus
on image-to-image [10, 46], text-to-image [30, 31] and composed-image retrieval [19, 27]. However,
a single query might fail to fully convey the search intent, and multiple trials may be required before
a satisfactory result is retrieved. Furthermore, it is up to the user to decide how to modify the query
in each trial, while the retrieval system processes each attempt independently.
Motivated by these difficulties and inspired by recent progress in Large Language Models (LLM),
which have demonstrated unprecedented natural language chat capabilities [36–38, 48], we introduce
and explore a new image retrieval “protocol”: Chat-based Image Retrieval, which we dub ChatIR. A
schematic view of ChatIR and the system that we propose in this paper is provided in Figure 1. The
process starts with a user-provided short description of the desired image, similarly to text-to-image
retrieval. However, from this point on, the retrieval system is able to progressively refine the query by
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

