Certified Minimax Unlearning with Generalization
Rates and Deletion Capacity

Jiaqi Liu1 , Jian Lou1,2,† , Zhan Qin1,† , Kui Ren1
1
Zhejiang University
2
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center
{jiaqi.liu, jian.lou, qinzhan, kuiren}@zju.edu.cn
†
Corresponding authors

Abstract
We study the problem of (ϵ, δ)-certified machine unlearning for minimax models.
Most of the existing works focus on unlearning from standard statistical learning
models that have a single variable and their unlearning steps hinge on the direct
Hessian-based conventional Newton update. We develop a new (ϵ, δ)-certified
machine unlearning algorithm for minimax models. It proposes a minimax unlearning step consisting of a total Hessian-based complete Newton update and the
Gaussian mechanism borrowed from differential privacy. To obtain the unlearning
certification, our method injects calibrated Gaussian noises by carefully analyzing
the “sensitivity” of the minimax unlearning step (i.e., the closeness between the
minimax unlearning variables and the retraining-from-scratch variables). We derive
the generalization rates in terms of population strong and weak primal-dual risk for
three different cases of loss functions, i.e., (strongly-)convex-(strongly-)concave
losses. We also provide the deletion capacity to guarantee that a desired population risk can be maintained as long as the number of deleted samples does not
exceed the derived amount. With training samples n and model dimension d, it
yields the order O(n/d1/4 ), which shows a strict gap over the baseline method of
differentially private minimax learning that has O(n/d1/2 ). In addition, our rates
of generalization and deletion capacity match the state-of-the-art results derived
previously for standard statistical learning models.

1

Introduction

Minimax models have been widely applied in a variety of machine learning applications, including
generative adversarial networks [Goodfellow et al., 2014, Arjovsky et al., 2017], adversarially robust
learning [Madry et al., 2018, Sinha et al., 2018], and reinforcement learning [Du et al., 2017, Dai
et al., 2018]. This is largely credited to the two-variable (i.e., primal and dual variables) model
structure of minimax models, which is versatile enough to accommodate such diverse instantiations.
As is common in machine learning practice, training a successful minimax model relies crucially
on a potentially large corpus of training samples that are contributed by users. This raises privacy
concerns for minimax models. Unlike standard statistical learning (STL) models, the privacy studies
for minimax models are relatively newer. Most of the existing studies focus on privacy protection
during the training phase under the differential privacy (DP) notion [Dwork et al., 2006] and federated
minimax learning settings [Sharma et al., 2022]. Recent works in this direction have successfully
achieved several optimal generalization performances measured in terms of the population primal37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

