Language Models Can Improve Event Prediction
by Few-Shot Abductive Reasoning

Xiaoming Shi1

Siqiao Xue1 Kangrui Wang3 Fan Zhou1 James Y. Zhang1
Jun Zhou1 Chenhao Tan2 Hongyuan Mei3
1
Ant Group 2 UChicago 3 TTIC

{peter.sxm,siqiao.xsq,hanlian.zf,james.z,jun.zhoujun}@antgroup.com
chenhao@uchicago.edu {kangrui,hongyuan}@ttic.edu

Abstract
Large language models have shown astonishing performance on a wide range of
reasoning tasks. In this paper, we investigate whether they could reason about
real-world events and help improve the prediction performance of event sequence
models. We design LAMP, a framework that integrates a large language model in
event prediction. Particularly, the language model performs abductive reasoning to
assist an event sequence model: the event model proposes predictions on future
events given the past; instructed by a few expert-annotated demonstrations, the
language model learns to suggest possible causes for each proposal; a search
module finds out the previous events that match the causes; a scoring function learns
to examine whether the retrieved events could actually cause the proposal. Through
extensive experiments on several challenging real-world datasets, we demonstrate
that our framework—thanks to the reasoning capabilities of large language models—
could significantly outperform the state-of-the-art event sequence models.

1

Introduction

Prompting large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-3.5 has recently become a standard approach
to perform text-based reasoning tasks. In this paper, we investigate their capabilities in reasoning
about real-world events and improving event prediction. Particularly, we focus on the problem of
modeling sequences of time-stamped events and predicting future events given the past. For example,
in the healthcare domain, we would like to model patients’ sequences of time-stamped hospital
visits and predict their future symptoms given their past diagnosis and treatments. It has been a
long-standing and important problem in machine learning. Large language models are potentially
useful for advancing solutions to this problem because event sequences are often accompanied with
rich text information which large language models excel at handling. For example,
• Healthcare. Each hospital visit will have a doctor note summarizing this visit, including the
department that the patient visits, the clinical measurements and treatments, and any future medical
plans. By reading such textual information, a large language model may be elicited to recall the
medical knowledge that it has read during pretraining and then reason about the future hospital
visits such as what symptoms or treatments that the patient may have.
• Political. Each political event may generate a series of news articles describing the political agents
involved in it and discussing its possible influences. A language model reading these articles may
recall its knowledge—which is acquired from pretraining—about these agents, their relations, and
fundamental principles in politics such that it could reason about future political events.
• Similar scenarios arise in commercial, dialogue, finance, etc.
In this paper, we propose LAMP, a framework that integrates a large language model in event
prediction. The overview of our framework is illustrated in Figure 1. Given a history of previous
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

