On the Generalization Error of Stochastic Mirror
Descent for Quadratically-Bounded Losses: an
Improved Analysis

Ta Duy Nguyen
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
taduy@bu.edu

Alina Ene
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
aene@bu.edu

Huy Le Nguyen
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu

Abstract
In this work, we revisit the generalization error of stochastic mirror descent for
quadratically bounded losses studied in Telgarsky (2022). Quadratically bounded
losses is a broad class of loss functions, capturing both Lipschitz and smooth
functions, for both regression and classification problems. We study the high
probability generalization for this class of losses on linear predictors in both
realizable and non-realizable cases when the data are sampled IID or from a
Markov chain. The prior work relies on an intricate coupling argument between
the iterates of the original problem and those projected onto a bounded domain.
This approach enables blackbox application of concentration inequalities, but
also leads to suboptimal guarantees due in part to the use of a union bound
across all iterations. In this work, we depart significantly from the prior work of
Telgarsky (2022), and introduce a novel approach for establishing high probability
generalization guarantees. In contrast to the prior work, our work directly analyzes
the moment generating function of a novel supermartingale sequence and leverages
the structure of stochastic mirror descent. As a result, we obtain improved bounds
in all aforementioned settings. Specifically, in the realizable case and non-realizable
case with light-tailed sub-Gaussian data,√
we improve the bounds by a log T factor,
matching the correct rates of 1/T and 1/ T , respectively. In the more challenging
case of heavy-tailed polynomial data, we improve the existing bound by a poly T
factor.

1

Introduction

Along with convergence analysis of optimization methods, understanding the generalization of models
trained by these methods on unseen data is an important question in machine learning. However,
despite the number of works attempting to answer it, the problem has not been fully understood, even
in the simplest setting of linear predictors constructed with the standard stochastic gradient/mirror
descent. A great part of prior works [33, 15, 30, 31, 32] focus only on the generalization on linearly
separable data and/or of models trained with specific losses with exponentially decaying tails such as
logistic loss. The question of what we can guarantee beyond these settings remains open.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

