Lower Bounds on Adaptive Sensing for Matrix
Recovery

Praneeth Kacham
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
pkacham@cs.cmu.edu

David P. Woodruff
Computer Science Department
Carngie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study lower bounds on adaptive sensing algorithms for recovering low rank
matrices using linear measurements. Given an n × n matrix A, a general linear
measurement S(A), for an n × n matrix S, is just the inner product of S and A,
each treated as n2 -dimensional vectors. By performing as few linear measurements
as possible on a rank-r matrix A, we hope to construct a matrix Â that satisfies
∥A − Â∥2F ≤ c∥A∥2F ,

(1)
P
for a small constant c. Here ∥A∥F denotes the Frobenius norm ( i,j A2i,j )1/2 . It is
commonly assumed that when measuring A with S, the response is corrupted with
an independent Gaussian random variable of mean 0 and variance σ 2 . Candés and
Plan (IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory 2011) study non-adaptive algorithms for low
rank matrix recovery using random linear measurements. They use the restricted
isometry property (RIP) of Random Gaussian Matrices to give tractable algorithms
to estimate A from the measurements.
At the edge of the noise level where recovery is information-theoretically feasible, it
is known that their non-adaptive algorithms need to perform Ω(n2 ) measurements,
which amounts to reading the entire matrix. An important question is whether
adaptivity helps in decreasing the overall number of measurements. While for
the related problem of sparse recovery, adaptive algorithms have been extensively
studied, as far as we are aware adaptive algorithms and lower bounds on them seem
largely unexplored for matrix recovery. We show that any adaptive algorithm that
uses k linear measurements in each round and outputs an approximation as in (1)
with probability ≥ 9/10 must run for t = Ω(log(n2 /k)/ log log n) rounds. Our
lower bound shows that any adaptive algorithm which uses n2−β (for any constant
β > 0) linear measurements in each round must run for Ω(log n/ log log n) rounds
to compute a good reconstruction with probability ≥ 9/10. Hence any adaptive
algorithm that has o(log n/ log log n) rounds must use an overall Ω(n2 ) linear
measurements. Our techniques also readily extend to obtain lower bounds on
adaptive algorithms for tensor recovery.
Our hard distribution also allows us to give a measurement-vs-rounds trade-off
for many sensing problems in numerical linear algebra, such as spectral norm
low rank approximation, Frobenius norm low rank approximation, singular vector
approximation, and more.

1

Introduction

Sparse recovery, also known as compressed sensing, is the study of under-determined systems
of equations subject to a sparsity constraint. Suppose we know that an unknown vector x ∈ Rn
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

