Laplacian Canonization: A Minimalist Approach to
Sign and Basis Invariant Spectral Embedding

1

Jiangyan Ma1∗
Yifei Wang2∗
Yisen Wang3,4†
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
Spectral embedding is a powerful graph embedding technique that has received a lot
of attention recently due to its effectiveness on Graph Transformers. However, from
a theoretical perspective, the universal expressive power of spectral embedding
comes at the price of losing two important invariance properties of graphs, sign
and basis invariance, which also limits its effectiveness on graph data. To remedy
this issue, many previous methods developed costly approaches to learn new
invariants and suffer from high computation complexity. In this work, we explore a
minimal approach that resolves the ambiguity issues by directly finding canonical
directions for the eigenvectors, named Laplacian Canonization (LC). As a pure
pre-processing method, LC is light-weighted and can be applied to any existing
GNNs. We provide a thorough investigation, from theory to algorithm, on this
approach, and discover an efficient algorithm named Maximal Axis Projection
(MAP) that works for both sign and basis invariance and successfully canonizes
more than 90% of all eigenvectors. Experiments on real-world benchmark datasets
like ZINC, MOLTOX21, and MOLPCBA show that MAP consistently outperforms
existing methods while bringing minimal computation overhead. Code is available
at https://github.com/PKU-ML/LaplacianCanonization.

1

Introduction

Despite the popularity of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for graph representation learning [55,
56, 54, 27, 13], it is found that many existing GNNs have limited expressive power and cannot
tell the difference between many non-isomorphic graphs [57, 35]. Existing approaches to improve
expressive power, such as high-order GNNs [35] and subgraph aggregation [9], often incur significant
computation costs over vanilla GNNs, limiting their use in practice. In comparison, a simple but
effective strategy is to use discriminative node identifiers. For example, GNNs with random features
can lead to universal expressive power [44, 1]. However, these unique node identifiers often lead
to the loss of the permutation invariance property of GNNs, which is an important inductive bias
of graph data that matters for sample complexity and generalization [24]. Therefore, during the
pursuit of more expressive GNNs, we should also maintain the invariance properties of graph data.
Balancing these two conflicting demands presents a significant challenge for the development of
advanced GNNs.
Spectral embedding (SE) is a classical approach to encode node positions using eigenvectors U of
the Laplacian matrix L, which has the advantage of being expressive and permutation equivariant.
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

