Quilt-1M: One Million Image-Text Pairs for
Histopathology

Wisdom O. Ikezogwo∗
Mehmet S. Seyfioglu
Fatemeh Ghezloo
Dylan Geva Fatwir S. Mohammed Pavan K. Anand
Ranjay Krishna Linda G. Shapiro
University of Washington
{wisdomik,msaygin,fghezloo,dgeva,pka4,ranjay,shapiro}@cs.washington.edu
fatwir@uw.edu

Abstract
Recent accelerations in multi-modal applications have been made possible with the
plethora of image and text data available online. However, the scarcity of analogous
data in the medical field, specifically in histopathology, has slowed comparable
progress. To enable similar representation learning for histopathology, we turn
to YouTube, an untapped resource of videos, offering 1, 087 hours of valuable
educational histopathology videos from expert clinicians. From YouTube, we curate
Q UILT: a large-scale vision-language dataset consisting of 802, 144 image and
text pairs. Q UILT was automatically curated using a mixture of models, including
large language models, handcrafted algorithms, human knowledge databases, and
automatic speech recognition. In comparison, the most comprehensive datasets
curated for histopathology amass only around 200K samples. We combine Q UILT
with datasets from other sources, including Twitter, research papers, and the internet
in general, to create an even larger dataset: Q UILT-1M, with 1M paired imagetext samples, marking it as the largest vision-language histopathology dataset to
date. We demonstrate the value of Q UILT-1M by fine-tuning a pre-trained CLIP
model. Our model outperforms state-of-the-art models on both zero-shot and
linear probing tasks for classifying new histopathology images across 13 diverse
patch-level datasets of 8 different sub-pathologies and cross-modal retrieval tasks2 .

1

Introduction

Whole-slide histopathology images are dense in information, and even individual image patches can
hold unique, complex patterns critical for tissue characterization. Summarizing this information
into a single label is an oversimplification that fails to capture the complexity of the field, which
covers thousands of evolving disease sub-types [55]. This highlights the need for more expressive,
dense, interconnected representations beyond the reach of a singular categorical label. As such,
natural language descriptions can provide this comprehensive signal, linking diverse features of
histopathology sub-patch structures [20, 24].
If there were a large-scale vision-language dataset for histopathology, researchers would be able to
leverage the significant advancements in self-supervised vision and language pre-training to develop
effective histopathology models [46]. Unfortunately, there is a significant scarcity of comprehensive
datasets for histopathology. Notable open-source contributions have been made with datasets like
ARCH [20] and OpenPath [24]. Yet, these sources are still somewhat limited due to their size, as the
∗
2

Reach corresponding author at wisdomik@cs.washington.edu;
The data and code will be available at Quilt-1M

: Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

