Online List Labeling with Predictions

Samuel McCauley
Department of Computer Science
Williams College
Williamstown, MA 01267
sam@cs.williams.edu

Benjamin Moseley
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
moseleyb@andrew.cmu.edu

Aidin Niaparast
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
aniapara@andrew.cmu.edu

Shikha Singh
Department of Computer Science
Williams College
Williamstown, MA 01267
shikha@cs.williams.edu

Abstract
A growing line of work shows how learned predictions can be used to break
through worst-cast barriers to improve the running time of an algorithm. However,
incorporating predictions into data structures with strong theoretical guarantees
remains underdeveloped. This paper takes a step in this direction by showing that
predictions can be leveraged in the fundamental online list labeling problem. In the
problem, n items arrive over time and must be stored in sorted order in an array of
size Θ(n). The array slot of an element is its label and the goal is to maintain sorted
order while minimizing the total number of elements moved (i.e., relabeled). We
design a new list labeling data structure and bound its performance in two models.
In the worst-case learning-augmented model, we give guarantees in terms of the
error in the predictions. Our data structure provides strong theoretical guarantees—
it is optimal for any prediction error and guarantees the best-known worst-case
bound even when the predictions are entirely erroneous. We also consider a
stochastic error model and bound the performance in terms of the expectation and
variance of the error. Finally, the theoretical results are demonstrated empirically. In
particular, we show that our data structure performs well on numerous real datasets,
including temporal datasets where predictions are constructed from elements that
arrived in the past (as is typically done in a practical use case).

1

Introduction

A burgeoning recent line of work has focused on coupling machine learning with discrete optimization
algorithms. The area is known as algorithms with predictions, or alternatively, learning augmented
algorithms [41, 44]. This area has developed a framework for beyond-worst-case analysis that is
generally applicable. In this framework an algorithm is given a prediction that can be erroneous. The
algorithm can use the prediction to tailor itself to the given problem instance and the performance is
bounded in terms of the error in the prediction.
Much prior work has focused on using this framework in the online setting where learned predictions
are used to cope with uncertainty [36]. This framework has been further used for warm-starting offline
algorithms to improve the beyond worst-case running times of combinatorial optimization problems.
This includes results on weighted bipartite matching [21], maximum flows [15], shortest-paths [13]
and convex optimization [46].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

