Temporal Continual Learning with Prior
Compensation for Human Motion Prediction

Jianwei Tang
Sun Yat-sen University
tangjw7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Jiangxin Sun
Sun Yat-sen University
sunjx5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Xiaotong Lin
Sun Yat-sen University
linxt29@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Lifang Zhang
Dongguan University of Technology
2017028@dgut.edu.cn

Wei-Shi Zheng
Sun Yat-sen University
wszheng@ieee.org

Jian-Fang Hu∗
Sun Yat-sen University
hujf5@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Human Motion Prediction (HMP) aims to predict future poses at different moments
according to past motion sequences. Previous approaches have treated the prediction of various moments equally, resulting in two main limitations: the learning of
short-term predictions is hindered by the focus on long-term predictions, and the
incorporation of prior information from past predictions into subsequent predictions is limited. In this paper, we introduce a novel multi-stage training framework
called Temporal Continual Learning (TCL) to address the above challenges. To
better preserve prior information, we introduce the Prior Compensation Factor
(PCF). We incorporate it into the model training to compensate for the lost prior
information. Furthermore, we derive a more reasonable optimization objective
through theoretical derivation. It is important to note that our TCL framework
can be easily integrated with different HMP backbone models and adapted to
various datasets and applications. Extensive experiments on four HMP benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and flexibility of TCL. The code is available
at https://github.com/hyqlat/TCL.

1

Introduction

Human Motion Prediction (HMP) aims to predict future poses at varied temporal moments based
on the observed motion sequences. The accurate prediction of human motion plays a vital role in
many applications, such as autonomous driving, human-robot interaction, and security monitoring,
enabling the anticipation and mitigation of risks. This task is challenging due to its requirement for
predicting multiple moments, including short-term predictions for the “near-future” and long-term
predictions for the “far-future”.
Previous approaches address this task by autoregressively forecasting using recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) and transformer architectures [1, 4, 5, 9–12, 14, 26, 37, 40, 42], or parallelly generating all
frames with graph convolution networks (GCNs) [2, 6, 7, 23, 25, 30, 31, 28]. These methods employ
∗
Jian-Fang Hu is the corresponding author. Hu is also with Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of
Information Security Technology, Guangzhou, China and Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced
Computing, Ministry of Education, China.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

