Online Label Shift: Optimal Dynamic Regret meets
Practical Algorithms

Dheeraj Baby∗
UC Santa Barbara

Saurabh Garg∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Tzu-Ching Yen∗
Carnegie Mellon University

dheeraj@ucsb.edu

sgarg2@andrew.cmu.edu

tzuchiny@andrew.cmu.edu

Sivaraman Balakrishnan
Carnegie Mellon University

Zachary C. Lipton
Carnegie Mellon University

Yu-Xiang Wang
UC Santa Barbara

sbalakri@andrew.cmu.edu

zlipton@andrew.cmu.edu

yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
This paper focuses on supervised and unsupervised online label shift, where the
class marginals Q(y) varies but the class-conditionals Q(x|y) remain invariant. In
the unsupervised setting, our goal is to adapt a learner, trained on some offline labeled data, to changing label distributions given unlabeled online data. In the supervised setting, we must both learn a classifier and adapt to the dynamically evolving
class marginals given only labeled online data. We develop novel algorithms that
reduce the adaptation problem to online regression and guarantee optimal dynamic
regret without any prior knowledge of the extent of drift in the label distribution.
Our solution is based on bootstrapping the estimates of online regression oracles
that track the drifting proportions. Experiments across numerous simulated and
real-world online label shift scenarios demonstrate the superior performance of our
proposed approaches, often achieving 1-3% improvement in accuracy while being
sample and computationally efficient. Code is publicly available at this url.

1

Introduction

Supervised machine learning algorithms are typically developed assuming independent and identically
distributed (iid) data. However, real-world environments evolve dynamically [55, 67, 46, 29]. Absent
further assumptions on the nature of the shift, such problems are intractable. One line of research
has explored causal structures such as covariate shift [64], label shift [61, 51], and missingness shift
[86], for which the optimal target predictor is identified from labeled source and unlabeled target data.
Let’s denote the feature-label pair of an example by (x, y). Label shift addresses the setting where
the label marginal distribution Q(y) may change but the conditional distribution Q(x|y) remains
fixed. Most prior work addresses the batch setting for unsupervised adaptation, where a single shift
occurs between a source and target population [61, 51, 1, 2, 1, 26]. However, in the real world, shifts
are more likely to occur continually and unpredictably, with data arriving in an online fashion. A
nascent line of research tackles online distribution shift, typically in settings where labeled data is
available in real time [4], seeking to minimize the dynamic regret.
Researchers have only begun to explore the role that structures like label shift might play in such
online settings. Initial attempts to learn under unsupervised online label shifts were made by Wu
et al. [76] and Bai et al. [8], both of which rely on reductions to Online Convex Optimization (OCO)
[37, 54]. This line of research aims in updating a classification model based on online data so that
the overall regret is controlled. However, Wu et al. [76] only control for static regret against a fixed
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

