Dynamics of Finite Width Kernel and Prediction
Fluctuations in Mean Field Neural Networks
Blake Bordelon & Cengiz Pehlevan
John Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Center for Brain Science,
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural & Artificial Intelligence,
Harvard University
Cambridge MA, 02138
blake_bordelon@g.harvard.edu, cpehlevan@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
We analyze the dynamics of finite width effects in wide but finite feature learning
neural networks. Starting from a dynamical mean field theory description of
infinite width deep neural network
kernel and prediction dynamics, we provide a
√
characterization of the O(1/ width) fluctuations of the DMFT order parameters
over random initializations of the network weights. Our results, while perturbative
in width, unlike prior analyses, are non-perturbative in the strength of feature
learning. In the lazy limit of network training, all kernels are random but static in
time and the prediction variance has a universal form. However, in the rich, feature
learning regime, the fluctuations of the kernels and predictions are dynamically
coupled with a variance that can be computed self-consistently. In two layer
networks, we show how feature learning can dynamically reduce the variance
of the final tangent kernel and final network predictions. We also show how
initialization variance can slow down online learning in wide but finite networks. In
deeper networks, kernel variance can dramatically accumulate through subsequent
layers at large feature learning strengths, but feature learning continues to improve
the signal-to-noise ratio of the feature kernels. In discrete time, we demonstrate
that large learning rate phenomena such as edge of stability effects can be well
captured by infinite width dynamics and that initialization variance can decrease
dynamically. For CNNs trained on CIFAR-10, we empirically find significant
corrections to both the bias and variance of network dynamics due to finite width.

1

Introduction

Learning dynamics of deep neural networks are challenging to analyze and understand theoretically,
but recent progress has been made by studying the idealization of infinite-width networks. Two
types of infinite-width limits have been especially fruitful. First, the kernel or lazy infinite-width
limit, which arises in the standard or neural tangent kernel (NTK) parameterization, gives prediction
dynamics which correspond to a linear model [1–5]. This limit is theoretically tractable but fails
to capture adaptation of internal features in the neural network, which are thought to be crucial to
the success of deep learning in practice. Alternatively, the mean field or µ-parameterization allows
feature learning at infinite width [6–9].
With a set of well-defined infinite-width limits, prior theoretical works have analyzed finite networks
in the NTK parameterization perturbatively, revealing that finite width both enhances the amount of
feature evolution (which is still small in this limit) but also introduces variance in the kernels and
the predictions over random initializations [10–15]. Because of these competing effects, in some
situations wider networks are better, and in others wider networks perform worse [16].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

