Offline Reinforcement Learning with Differential
Privacy

Dan Qiao
Department of Computer Science
UC Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
danqiao@ucsb.edu

Yu-Xiang Wang
Department of Computer Science
UC Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
The offline reinforcement learning (RL) problem is often motivated by the need to
learn data-driven decision policies in financial, legal and healthcare applications.
However, the learned policy could retain sensitive information of individuals in the
training data (e.g., treatment and outcome of patients), thus susceptible to various
privacy risks. We design offline RL algorithms with differential privacy guarantees
which provably prevent such risks. These algorithms also enjoy strong instancedependent learning bounds under both tabular and linear Markov Decision Process
(MDP) settings. Our theory and simulation suggest that the privacy guarantee
comes at (almost) no drop in utility comparing to the non-private counterpart for a
medium-size dataset.

1

Introduction

Offline Reinforcement Learning (or batch RL) aims to learn a near-optimal policy in an unknown
environment1 through a static dataset gathered from some behavior policy µ. Since offline RL
does not require access to the environment, it can be applied to problems where interaction with
environment is infeasible, e.g., when collecting new data is costly (trade or finance [Zhang et al.,
2020]), risky (autonomous driving [Sallab et al., 2017]) or illegal / unethical (healthcare [Raghu
et al., 2017]). In such practical applications, the data used by an RL agent usually contains sensitive
information. Take medical history for instance, for each patient, at each time step, the patient reports
her health condition (age, disease, etc.), then the doctor decides the treatment (which medicine to use,
the dosage of medicine, etc.), finally there is treatment outcome (whether the patient feels good, etc.)
and the patient transitions to another health condition. Here, (health condition, treatment, treatment
outcome) corresponds to (state, action, reward) and the dataset can be considered as n (number of
patients) trajectories sampled from a MDP with horizon H (number of treatment steps). However,
learning agents are known to implicitly memorize details of individual training data points verbatim
[Carlini et al., 2019], even if they are irrelevant for learning [Brown et al., 2021], which makes offline
RL models vulnerable to various privacy attacks.
Differential privacy (DP) [Dwork et al., 2006] is a well-established definition of privacy with many
desirable properties. A differentially private offline RL algorithm will return a decision policy that
is indistinguishable from a policy trained in an alternative universe any individual user is replaced,
thereby preventing the aforementioned privacy risks. There is a surge of recent interest in developing
RL algorithms with DP guarantees, but they focus mostly on the online setting [Vietri et al., 2020,
Garcelon et al., 2021, Liao et al., 2021, Chowdhury and Zhou, 2021, Luyo et al., 2021].
1

The environment is usually characterized by a Markov Decision Process (MDP) in this paper.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

