The Transient Nature of Emergent
In-Context Learning in Transformers

Aaditya K. Singh∗
Gatsby Unit, UCL
Erin Grant
Gatsby Unit & SWC, UCL

Stephanie C.Y. Chan∗
Google DeepMind
Andrew M. Saxe†
Gatsby Unit & SWC, UCL

Ted Moskovitz
Gatsby Unit, UCL
Felix Hill†
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Transformer neural networks can exhibit a surprising capacity for in-context learning (ICL) despite not being explicitly trained for it. Prior work has provided a
deeper understanding of how ICL emerges in transformers, e.g., through the lens of
mechanistic interpretability, Bayesian inference, or by examining the distributional
properties of training data. However, in each of these cases, ICL is treated largely
as a persistent phenomenon; namely, once ICL emerges, it is assumed to persist
asymptotically. Here, we show that the emergence of ICL during transformer
training is, in fact, often transient. We train transformers on synthetic data designed
so that both ICL and in-weights learning (IWL) strategies can lead to correct predictions. We find that ICL first emerges, then disappears and gives way to IWL, all
while the training loss decreases, indicating an asymptotic preference for IWL. The
transient nature of ICL is observed in transformers across a range of model sizes
and datasets, raising the question of how much to “overtrain” transformers when
seeking compact, cheaper-to-run models. We find that L2 regularization may offer
a path to more persistent ICL that removes the need for early stopping based on
ICL-style validation tasks. Finally, we present initial evidence that ICL transience
may be caused by competition between ICL and IWL circuits.

1

Introduction

In-context learning (ICL) is the ability of a model to use inputs at inference time to adapt its behavior,
without weight updates, in order to solve tasks not present during training. The first examples of
this behavior in neural networks were observed in architectures specifically designed and trained for
few-shot learning, the capacity to learn a desired behavior from only a few examples [1–3].2 Training
in these cases involved shuffling the labels corresponding to input exemplars on each “episode” so
that, to perform well on the training set, the model had to recall exemplar-label mappings from
context to make future predictions. At test time, novel exemplar-label mappings were provided, and
the network had to use these to classify query exemplars.
Research on ICL changed with the development of the transformer [5]. Brown et al. [6] first
observed that a transformer-based language model, GPT-3, trained auto-regressively at sufficient
scale, exhibited ICL without any specific effort of the authors to promote it via the training objective
or data. Since then, a large body of literature has studied [7–12] or reported [13–15] examples of ICL
in transformers trained at scale.
∗

Co-first authors; direct correspondence to aaditya.singh.21@ucl.ac.uk and scychan@google.com
Co-senior authors
2
Few-shot learning can also be implemented via methods that apply gradient updates [e.g., 4], but we focus
on implementations of ICL that do not require any weight updates.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

