Learning in the Presence of Low-dimensional Structure:
A Spiked Random Matrix Perspective

Jimmy Ba1,2,3, Murat A. Erdogdu1,2, Taiji Suzuki4,5, Zhichao Wang6, Denny Wu7,8
1

University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 xAI, 4 University of Tokyo, 5 RIKEN AIP,
6
University of California San Diego, 7 New York University, 8 Flatiron Institute
{jba,erdogdu}@cs.toronto.edu, taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp,
zhw036@ucsd.edu, dennywu@nyu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning a single-index target function f∗ : Rd → R
under the spiked covariance data:


1
f∗ (x) = σ∗ √1+θ
⟨x, µ⟩ , x ∼ N (0, I d + θµµ⊤ ), θ ≍ dβ for β ∈ [0, 1),
where the link function σ∗ : R → R is a degree-p polynomial with information
exponent k (defined as the lowest degree in the Hermite expansion of σ∗ ), and it
depends on the projection of input x onto the spike (signal) direction µ ∈ Rd . In
the proportional asymptotic limit where the number of training examples n and
the dimensionality d jointly diverge: n, d → ∞, n/d → ψ ∈ (0, ∞), we ask the
following question: how large should the spike magnitude θ be, in order for (i)
kernel methods, (ii) neural networks optimized by gradient descent, to learn f∗ ?
We show that for kernel ridge regression, β ≥ 1 − p1 is both sufficient and necessary. Whereas for two-layer neural networks trained with gradient descent,
β > 1 − k1 suffices. Our results demonstrate that both kernel methods and neural
networks benefit from low-dimensional structures in the data. Further, since k ≤ p
by definition, neural networks can adapt to such structures more effectively.

1

Introduction

Learning under spiked covariance. Real-world data is often high-dimensional but it also exhibits certain low-dimensional structures. Indeed, the number of input features is exceedingly
large in machine learning, yet most relevant information is concentrated in a low-dimensional
subspace [LV07, HTFF09]. Such structures have important consequences on learning performance. In random matrix theory, high dimensionality is reflected by the proportional asymptotic limit where the numbers of training examples and input features diverge to infinity at the
same rate, whereas the low-dimensional structure is often described by a spiked random matrix
model [Joh01, BAP05, BS06, BGN11] in which a low-rank signal (“spike”) is hidden in a largedimensional noise (“bulk”). In this work, we restrict ourselves to the simple setting where the signal
is rank-1, and consider the following data-generating process:


1
x ∼ N (0, I d + θµµ⊤ ), f∗ (x) = σ∗ √1+θ
⟨x, µ⟩ ,
(1.1)
where the goal is to estimate the target function (teacher) f∗ , which is a single-index model depending on the signal direction µ ∈ Rd , and σ∗ : R → R is an unknown link function. The signal µ is
also embedded in the spiked input data, and θ > 0 controls the spike magnitude; we scale θ ≍ dβ
for β ∈ [0, 1), where larger β indicates a more prominent low-dimensional structure, and hence the
learning problem becomes easier. We aim to characterize the efficiency of learning f∗ using kernel
methods and neural networks (NNs) in relation to the strength of the low-dimensional signal θ.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

