Unleashing the Full Potential of Product Quantization
for Large-Scale Image Retrieval

Yu Liang1,4∗

Shiliang Zhang2

Kenli Li1†

Xiaoyu Wang3†

1

College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University
2
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology(Guangzhou)
4
Intellifusion Inc.
{leungyu, lkl}@hnu.edu.cn, slzhang.jdl@pku.edu.cn, fanghuaxue@gmail.com

Abstract
Due to its promising performance, deep hashing has become a prevalent method
for approximate nearest neighbors search (ANNs). However, most of current
deep hashing methods are validated on relatively small-scale datasets, leaving
potential threats when are applied to large-scale real-world scenarios. Specifically,
they can be constrained either by the computational cost due to the large number
of training categories and samples, or unsatisfactory accuracy. To tackle those
issues, we propose a novel deep hashing framework based on product quantization (PQ). It uses a softmax-based differentiable PQ branch to learn a set of
predefined PQ codes of the classes. Our method is easy to implement, does not
involve large-scale matrix operations, and learns highly discriminate compact
codes. We validate our method on multiple large-scaled datasets, including ImageNet100, ImageNet1K, and Glint360K, where the category size scales from 100
to 360K and sample number scales from 10K to 17 million, respectively. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method. Code is available at
https://github.com/yuleung/FPPQ.

1

Introduction

Approximate Nearest Neighbors Search (ANNs) aims to quickly find necessary information within
vast amounts of data. It is commonly used in image and video search [49, 37, 4], recommendation
systems [44, 8], and anomaly detection [34, 1] tasks. Hashing [18, 7, 16, 37], which is a key
component of ANNs, has been continuously and rapidly developed over time. Hashing enables the
efficient mapping of high-dimensional floating-point data into binary code, with the main objective
of minimizing storage space and retrieval time while maintaining satisfactory retrieval accuracy.
In the past decade, researchers have been exploring the use of deep learning to optimize hash technology for improved retrieval performance [18, 23, 7, 27, 12, 48]. Compared to traditional methods,
deep hashing has shown significant improvement. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, existing
deep hash or deep quantization methods have not been comprehensively tested in large-scale data
retrieval scenarios, which are commonly encountered in real-world applications. For example, in
face recognition [9, 2, 52, 39, 29], where the underlying databases may contain millions of categories
and hundreds of millions of samples. The large-scale datasets pose higher requirements to the
* Work done as an intern at Intellifusion.
†

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

