DAW: Exploring the Better Weighting Function for
Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation

1

Rui Sun1∗
Huayu Mai1∗
Tianzhu Zhang1,2†
Feng Wu1,2
Deep Space Exploration Laboratory/School of Information Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{issunrui, mai556}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The critical challenge of semi-supervised semantic segmentation lies how to fully
exploit a large volume of unlabeled data to improve the model’s generalization
performance for robust segmentation. Existing methods tend to employ certain
criteria (weighting function) to select pixel-level pseudo labels. However, the
trade-off exists between inaccurate yet utilized pseudo-labels, and correct yet
discarded pseudo-labels in these methods when handling pseudo-labels without
thoughtful consideration of the weighting function, hindering the generalization
ability of the model. In this paper, we systematically analyze the trade-off in previous methods when dealing with pseudo-labels. We formally define the trade-off
between inaccurate yet utilized pseudo-labels, and correct yet discarded pseudolabels by explicitly modeling the confidence distribution of correct and inaccurate pseudo-labels, equipped with a unified weighting function. To this end, we
propose Distribution-Aware Weighting (DAW) to strive to minimize the negative
equivalence impact raised by the trade-off. We find an interesting fact that the
optimal solution for the weighting function is a hard step function, with the jump
point located at the intersection of the two confidence distributions. Besides, we
devise distribution alignment to mitigate the issue of the discrepancy between the
prediction distributions of labeled and unlabeled data. Extensive experimental
results on multiple benchmarks including mitochondria segmentation demonstrate
that DAW performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/yuisuen/DAW.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task that has achieved conspicuous achievements credited
to the recent advances in deep neural networks [1]. However, its data-driven nature makes it
heavily dependent on massive pixel-level annotations, which are laborious and time-consuming
to gather. To alleviate the data-hunger issue, considerable works [2–7] have turned their attention
to semi-supervised semantic segmentation, which has demonstrated great potential in practical
applications [8, 9]. Since only limited labeled data is accessible, how to fully exploit a large volume
of unlabeled data to improve the model’s generalization performance for robust segmentation is thus
extremely challenging.
In previous literature, pseudo-labeling [10–12] and consistency regularization [13–15] have emerged
as mainstream paradigms to leverage unlabeled data for semi-supervised segmentation. In specific,
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

