Prefix-Tree Decoding for Predicting Mass Spectra
from Molecules
Samuel Goldman
Computational and Systems Biology
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
samlg@mit.edu

John Bradshaw
Chemical Engineering
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
jbrad@mit.edu

Jiayi Xin
Statistics and Actuarial Science
The University of Hong Kong
Pokfulam, Hong Kong
xinjiayi@connect.hku.hk

Connor W. Coley
Chemical Engineering
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
ccoley@mit.edu

Abstract
Computational predictions of mass spectra from molecules have enabled the discovery of clinically relevant metabolites. However, such predictive tools are still
limited as they occupy one of two extremes, either operating (a) by fragmenting
molecules combinatorially with overly rigid constraints on potential rearrangements
and poor time complexity or (b) by decoding lossy and nonphysical discretized
spectra vectors. In this work, we use a new intermediate strategy for predicting
mass spectra from molecules by treating mass spectra as sets of molecular formulae,
which are themselves multisets of atoms. After first encoding an input molecular
graph, we decode a set of molecular subformulae, each of which specify a predicted peak in the mass spectrum, the intensities of which are predicted by a second
model. Our key insight is to overcome the combinatorial possibilities for molecular
subformulae by decoding the formula set using a prefix tree structure, atom-type
by atom-type, representing a general method for ordered multiset decoding. We
show promising empirical results on mass spectra prediction tasks.

1

Introduction
Input

O

HO

O

O

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

C9O3H4

C14O1H10

COH
C7O1H6 7 1 4
C8O2H6

Intensity

Collision cell
Mass spectrum
As the primary tool to discover unknown
mixture
small molecule structures from biological samples, tandem mass spectrometry
(MS/MS) experiments have enabled the identification of numerous important molecules
implicated in health and disease [4, 38, 51].
M/Z
Tandem mass spectrometers are capable of
Learned simulator
isolating, fragmenting, and measuring the reSCARF
sulting fragment masses of small molecules Precursor molecule
from a sample, producing a signature (a
Figure 1: Tandem mass spectrometers measure fragmass spectrum) for each detected molecule
mentation patterns of molecules, resulting in character(Figure 1, top).
istic peaks that are indicative of their structure. SCARF
simulates these fragmentation patterns in silico.

