Sketchy: Memory-efficient Adaptive Regularization
with Frequent Directions
Vladimir Feinberg
Google DeepMind
vladf@google.com

Xinyi Chen
Princeton University
Google DeepMind

Y. Jennifer Sun
Princeton University
Google DeepMind

Rohan Anil
Google DeepMind

Elad Hazan
Princeton University
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Adaptive regularization methods that exploit more than the diagonal entries exhibit
state of the art performance for many tasks, but can be prohibitive in terms of
memory and running time. We find the spectra of the Kronecker-factored gradient
covariance matrix in deep learning (DL) training tasks are concentrated on a small
leading eigenspace that changes throughout training, motivating a low-rank sketching approach. We describe a generic method for reducing memory and compute
requirements of maintaining a matrix preconditioner using the Frequent Directions
(FD) sketch. While previous approaches have explored applying FD for secondorder optimization, we present a novel analysis which allows efficient interpolation
between resource requirements and the degradation in regret guarantees with rank
k: in the online convex optimization (OCO) setting over dimension d, we match
full-matrix d2 memory regret using only dk memory up to additive error in the bottom d k eigenvalues of the gradient covariance. Further, we show extensions of
our work to Shampoo, resulting in a method competitive in quality with Shampoo
and Adam, yet requiring only sub-linear memory for tracking second moments.

1

Introduction

DL optimization commonly relies on adaptive gradient methods, namely the Adam optimizer [1]. It
differs from stochastic gradient descent in that the learning rate is a structured diagonal matrix built
from previous gradients rather than a scalar. In full matrix AdaGrad [2], the inverse matrix square
root of the sum of outer products of previous gradients is the learning rate.
Full matrix preconditioning is impractical for modern deep learning architectures: for instance,
the ResNet-50 architecture [3] has over 23 million parameters, requiring more than 2 petabytes to
represent its gradient covariance. Thus, diagonal preconditioning methods remain popular. However,
previous work has demonstrated state-of-the-art results in some settings, such as large-batch data
parallel training, for nondiagonal forms of preconditioning [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. In particular, Shampoo
[5, 9] introduces a factorization of full matrix preconditioning method with adoption in large-scale
industrial applications such as training Google’s ads click-through-rate model [10]. Furthermore, as
hardware evolves, memory efficiency becomes an increasing concern, as “logic improves much faster
than wires and SRAM, so logic is relatively free” [11]: from TPUv2 to TPUv3, per-chip bfloat16
operations per second improved 2.67⇥ but memory bandwidth only improved 1.29⇥. GPUs exhibit
a similar pattern for compute and memory increase, at 5⇥ and 2.2⇥, for V100 to A100 [12].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

