f -Policy Gradients: A General Framework for Goal
Conditioned RL using f -Divergences

Siddhant Agarwal
The University of Texas at Austin
siddhant@cs.utexas.edu

Ishan Durugkar
Sony AI
ishan.durugkar@sony.com

Peter Stone
The University of Texas at Austin
Sony AI
pstone@cs.utexas.edu

Amy Zhang
The University of Texas at Austin
amy.zhang@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning (RL) problems often have access to
sparse rewards where the agent receives a reward signal only when it has achieved
the goal, making policy optimization a difficult problem. Several works augment
this sparse reward with a learned dense reward function, but this can lead to
sub-optimal policies if the reward is misaligned. Moreover, recent works have
demonstrated that effective shaping rewards for a particular problem can depend on
the underlying learning algorithm. This paper introduces a novel way to encourage
exploration called f -Policy Gradients, or f -PG. f -PG minimizes the f-divergence
between the agent’s state visitation distribution and the goal, which we show can
lead to an optimal policy. We derive gradients for various f-divergences to optimize this objective. Our learning paradigm provides dense learning signals for
exploration in sparse reward settings. We further introduce an entropy-regularized
policy optimization objective, that we call state-MaxEnt RL (or s-MaxEnt RL) as
a special case of our objective. We show that several metric-based shaping rewards
like L2 can be used with s-MaxEnt RL, providing a common ground to study such
metric-based shaping rewards with efficient exploration. We find that f -PG has
better performance compared to standard policy gradient methods on a challenging gridworld as well as the Point Maze and FetchReach environments. More
information on our website https://agarwalsiddhant10.github.io/projects/fpg.html.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms aim to identify the optimal behavior (policy) for solving
a task by interacting with the environment. The field of RL has made large strides in recent years
(Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Ouyang et al., 2022; Wurman et al.,
2022) and has been applied to complex tasks ranging from robotics (Gupta et al., 2019), protein
synthesis (Jumper et al., 2021), computer architecture (Fawzi et al., 2022) and finance (Liu et al.,
2021). Goal-Conditioned RL (GCRL) is a generalized form of the standard RL paradigm for learning
a policy that can solve many tasks, as long as each task can be defined by a single rewarding goal
state. Common examples of goal-conditioned tasks arise in robotics where the goal states can be a
target object configuration for manipulation-based tasks (Kim et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2019; OpenAI
et al., 2021) or a target location for navigation-based tasks (Shah et al., 2020; Gervet et al., 2023).
In any reinforcement learning setup, the task is conveyed to the agent using rewards (Silver et al.,
2021). In goal-conditioned RL settings, a common reward function used is 1 when the goal is
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

