SustainGym: Reinforcement Learning Environments
for Sustainable Energy Systems

Christopher Yeh1 , Victor Li1 , Rajeev Datta1 , Julio Arroyo1 , Nicolas Christianson1 ,
Chi Zhang2 , Yize Chen3 , Mehdi Hosseini4 , Azarang Golmohammadi4 ,
Yuanyuan Shi2 , Yisong Yue1 , Adam Wierman1
1
California Institute of Technology
2
University of California, San Diego
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Beyond Limits
1
{cyeh,vhli,rdatta,jarroyoi,yyue,adamw}@caltech.edu
2
chz056@ucsd.edu, yyshi@eng.ucsd.edu
3
yizechen@ust.hk
4
{mhosseini, agolmohammadi}@beyond.ai

Abstract
The lack of standardized benchmarks for reinforcement learning (RL) in sustainability applications has made it difficult to both track progress on specific domains
and identify bottlenecks for researchers to focus their efforts. In this paper, we
present SustainGym, a suite of five environments designed to test the performance
of RL algorithms on realistic sustainable energy system tasks, ranging from electric
vehicle charging to carbon-aware data center job scheduling. The environments
test RL algorithms under realistic distribution shifts as well as in multi-agent settings. We show that standard off-the-shelf RL algorithms leave significant room
for improving performance and highlight the challenges ahead for introducing RL
to real-world sustainability tasks.

1

Introduction

While reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have demonstrated tremendous success in applications
ranging from game-playing, e.g., Atari and Go, to robotic control, e.g., [1–3], most RL algorithms
continue to only be benchmarked using toy environments—e.g., OpenAI Gym [4]. These toy
environments generally do not have realistic physical constraints, nor realistic environmental shifts
over time. Furthermore, these environments are generally limited to single-agent systems, whereas
real-world systems tend to involve coordination and/or competition between actors. The realism gap
limits the reliable deployment of off-the-shelf RL algorithms in real-world systems.
Developing better RL algorithms to address these challenges requires a means of empirically benchmarking and comparing the performance of different algorithms in real-world settings. Our inspiration
comes from progress in supervised machine learning (ML), where widespread adoption of breakthrough techniques was fueled by large datasets with standardized benchmarks, such as ImageNet for
computer vision [5] and the GLUE benchmark for natural language processing [6]. More recently,
many supervised learning datasets have been created to address specific real-world sustainability
challenges, such as monitoring global progress towards sustainable development goals [7].
In this work, we introduce SustainGym, a suite of 5 RL environments that realistically model
sustainability settings, summarized in Table 1:
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

