Adversarial Self-Training Improves Robustness and
Generalization for Gradual Domain Adaptation

Lianghe Shi
Weiwei Liu∗
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University

Abstract
Gradual Domain Adaptation (GDA), in which the learner is provided with additional intermediate domains, has been theoretically and empirically studied in
many contexts. Despite its vital role in security-critical scenarios, the adversarial
robustness of the GDA model remains unexplored. In this paper, we adopt the
effective gradual self-training method and replace vanilla self-training with adversarial self-training (AST). AST first predicts labels on the unlabeled data and then
adversarially trains the model on the pseudo-labeled distribution. Intriguingly, we
find that gradual AST improves not only adversarial accuracy but also clean accuracy on the target domain. We reveal that this is because adversarial training (AT)
performs better than standard training when the pseudo-labels contain a portion of
incorrect labels. Accordingly, we first present the generalization error bounds for
gradual AST in a multiclass classification setting. We then use the optimal value of
the Subset Sum Problem to bridge the standard error on a real distribution and the
adversarial error on a pseudo-labeled distribution. The result indicates that AT may
obtain a tighter bound than standard training on data with incorrect pseudo-labels.
We further present an example of a conditional Gaussian distribution to provide
more insights into why gradual AST can improve the clean accuracy for GDA.

1

Introduction

The key assumption of classical machine learning—that training and test data come from the same
distribution—may not always hold in many real-world applications [15]. A data distribution typically
evolves due to changes in conditions: for example, changing weather in vehicle identification [14],
sensor aging in sensor measurement [43], the evolution of road conditions in self-driving [6], etc.
To address this problem, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) has been developed to train a
model that performs well on an unlabeled target domain by leveraging labeled data from a similar yet
distinct source domain.
Various works in UDA [5, 53, 34] theoretically demonstrate that the generalization error can be
controlled by the domain discrepancy. Hence, the domain shift between the source domain and
the target domain is expected to be small [15]. However, in some applications, the domain shift is
substantial, leading to a sharp drop in the performance of the UDA method [26]. Furthermore, since
changes in real-world data are more often gradual than abrupt [16], there are many intermediate
domains between the source domain and the target domain. To get a better solution to the gradually
shifting data, some recent works have focused on the Gradual Domain Adaptation (GDA) problem,
where the learner is additionally provided with unlabeled intermediate domains. The large gap
between the source and target domains is then divided up into multiple small shifts between the
∗

Correspondence to: Weiwei Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

