Sparse Parameterization for Epitomic
Dataset Distillation
Xing Wei1 Anjia Cao1 Funing Yang1 Zhiheng Ma2∗
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
weixing@mail.xjtu.edu.cn zh.ma@siat.ac.cn
{caoanjia7, moolink}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The success of deep learning relies heavily on large and diverse datasets, but the
storage, preprocessing, and training of such data present significant challenges. To
address these challenges, dataset distillation techniques have been proposed to obtain smaller synthetic datasets that capture the essential information of the originals.
In this paper, we introduce a Sparse Parameterization for Epitomic datasEt Distillation (SPEED) framework, which leverages the concept of dictionary learning and
sparse coding to distill epitomes that represent pivotal information of the dataset.
SPEED prioritizes proper parameterization of the synthetic dataset and introduces
techniques to capture spatial redundancy within and between synthetic images. We
propose Spatial-Agnostic Epitomic Tokens (SAETs) and Sparse Coding Matrices
(SCMs) to efficiently represent and select significant features. Additionally, we
build a Feature-Recurrent Network (FReeNet) to generate hierarchical features with
high compression and storage efficiency. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of SPEED in handling high-resolution datasets, achieving state-of-the-art
performance on multiple benchmarks and downstream applications. Our framework
is compatible with a variety of dataset matching approaches, generally enhancing
their performance. This work highlights the importance of proper parameterization in epitomic dataset distillation and opens avenues for efficient representation
learning. Source code is available at https://github.com/MIV-XJTU/SPEED.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved remarkable success across diverse domains, thanks to its ability to
extract insightful representations from large and diverse datasets [1–5]. Nevertheless, the storage,
preprocessing, and training of these massive datasets introduce significant challenges that strain
storage and computational resources. In response to these challenges, dataset distillation techniques
have arisen as a means to distill a more compact synthetic dataset that encapsulates the pivotal
information of the original dataset. The central concept of dataset distillation is the extraction of an
epitomic representation, capturing the core characteristics and patterns of the original dataset while
minimizing storage demands. By doing so, deep learning models trained on the distilled dataset can
attain performance levels similar to those trained on the original dataset but with significantly reduced
storage and training costs. This approach opens new horizons for applications requiring cost-effective
storage solutions and expedited training times, such as neural architecture search [6–8] and continual
learning [9–11].
The success of dataset distillation heavily relies on two essential factors: proper parameterization of
the synthetic dataset and an effective design of the matching objective to align it with the original
∗

Zhiheng Ma is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

