Waypoint Transformer: Reinforcement Learning via
Supervised Learning with Intermediate Targets

Anirudhan Badrinath

Yannis Flet-Berliac
Allen Nie
Emma Brunskill
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{abadrina, yfletberliac, anie, ebrun}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Despite the recent advancements in offline reinforcement learning via supervised
learning (RvS) and the success of the decision transformer (DT) architecture in
various domains, DTs have fallen short in several challenging benchmarks. The
root cause of this underperformance lies in their inability to seamlessly connect
segments of suboptimal trajectories. To overcome this limitation, we present a novel
approach to enhance RvS methods by integrating intermediate targets. We introduce
the Waypoint Transformer (WT), using an architecture that builds upon the DT
framework and conditioned on automatically-generated waypoints. The results
show a significant increase in the final return compared to existing RvS methods,
with performance on par or greater than existing popular temporal difference
learning-based methods. Additionally, the performance and stability improvements
are largest in the most challenging environments and data configurations, including
AntMaze Large Play/Diverse and Kitchen Mixed/Partial.

1

Introduction

Traditionally, offline reinforcement learning (RL) methods that compete with state-of-the-art (SOTA)
algorithms have relied on objectives encouraging pessimism in combination with value-based methods.
Notable examples of this approach include Batch Conservative Q-Learning (BCQ), Conservative
Q-Learning (CQL), and Pessimistic Q-Learning (PQL) [Fujimoto et al., 2019, Kumar et al., 2020,
Liu et al., 2020]. However, these methods can be challenging to train and often require intricate
hyperparameter tuning and various tricks to ensure stability and optimal performance across tasks.
Reinforcement learning via supervised learning (RvS) has emerged as a simpler alternative to
traditional offline RL methods [Emmons et al., 2021]. RvS approaches are based on behavioral
cloning (BC), either conditional or non-conditional, to train a policy. Importantly, these methods
eliminate the need for any temporal-difference (TD) learning, such as fitted value or action-value
functions. This results in a simpler algorithmic framework based on supervised learning, allowing
for progress in offline RL to build upon work in supervised learning. There are several successful
applications of RvS methods, including methods conditioned on goals and returns [Kumar et al.,
2019, Janner et al., 2021, Ding et al., 2019, Chen et al., 2021, Emmons et al., 2021].
However, RvS methods have typically struggled in tasks where seamlessly connecting (or "stitching")
appropriate segments of suboptimal training trajectories is critical for success [Kumar et al., 2022]. For
example, when tasked with reaching specific locations in the AntMaze maze navigation environment
or completing a series of tasks in the FrankaKitchen environment, RvS methods typically perform
significantly worse than TD learning methods such as Implicit Q-Learning [Fu et al., 2020, Kostrikov
et al., 2021].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

