NurViD: A Large Expert-Level Video Database for
Nursing Procedure Activity Understanding

Ming Hu1,2,3∗ Lin Wang1,2,4∗ Siyuan Yan1,3∗ Don Ma1∗
Qingli Ren5 Peng Xia1,2,3 Wei Feng1,2,3
Peibo Duan3 Lie Ju1,2,3 Zongyuan Ge1,2,3
1
AIM Lab, Faculty of IT, Monash University, Australia
2
Airdoc-Monash Research, Airdoc, China
3
Faculty of Engineering, Monash University, Australia
4
College of Intelligent Systems Science and Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, China
5
Nursing College, Shanxi Medical University, China

Abstract
The application of deep learning to nursing procedure activity understanding has
the potential to greatly enhance the quality and safety of nurse-patient interactions.
By utilizing the technique, we can facilitate training and education, improve quality
control, and enable operational compliance monitoring. However, the development
of automatic recognition systems in this field is currently hindered by the scarcity of
appropriately labeled datasets. The existing video datasets pose several limitations:
1) these datasets are small-scale in size to support comprehensive investigations
of nursing activity; 2) they primarily focus on single procedures, lacking expertlevel annotations for various nursing procedures and action steps; and 3) they
lack temporally localized annotations, which prevents the effective localization
of targeted actions within longer video sequences. To mitigate these limitations,
we propose NurViD, a large video dataset with expert-level annotation for nursing
procedure activity understanding. NurViD consists of over 1.5k videos totaling 144
hours, making it approximately four times longer than the existing largest nursing
activity datasets. Notably, it encompasses 51 distinct nursing procedures and 177
action steps, providing a much more comprehensive coverage compared to existing
datasets that primarily focus on limited procedures. To evaluate the efficacy of
current deep learning methods on nursing activity understanding, we establish three
benchmarks on NurViD: procedure recognition on untrimmed videos, procedure
and action recognition on trimmed videos, and action detection. Our benchmark
and code will be available at https:// github.com/minghu0830/ NurViD-benchmark.

1

Introduction

The application of deep learning (DL) in understanding nursing procedure activities has the potential
to greatly enhance the quality of nurse-patient interactions, while also playing a crucial role in
preventing medical disputes, minimizing missed nursing procedures, and reducing nursing errors [32,
45, 35, 37, 21, 11]. DL-based automatic approaches offer several key benefits for nurses, including:
(1) Reliable: it enables objective, precise, and consistent assessments of nursing skills, eliminating the
subjectivity inherent in traditional evaluations by experts [27]. (2) Real-time guidance: it facilitates
immediate feedback on nurses’ performance, empowering them to identify areas for improvement in a
timely manner [30]. (3) Cost-effective: it can alleviate the burden of manual observations, evaluations,
and training by experts [39].
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

