Stochastic Approximation Approaches to
Group Distributionally Robust Optimization

Lijun Zhang1,2 , Peng Zhao1 , Zhen-Hua Zhuang1 , Tianbao Yang3 , Zhi-Hua Zhou1
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA
{zhanglj, zhaop, zhuangzh, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, tianbao-yang@tamu.edu

Abstract
This paper investigates group distributionally robust optimization (GDRO), with
the purpose to learn a model that performs well over m different distributions.
First, we formulate GDRO as a stochastic convex-concave saddle-point problem,
and demonstrate that stochastic mirror descent (SMD), using m samples in each
iteration, achieves an O(m(log m)/ϵ2 ) sample complexity for finding an ϵ-optimal
solution, which matches the Ω(m/ϵ2 ) lower bound up to a logarithmic factor.
Then, we make use of techniques from online learning to reduce the number of
samples required in each round from m to 1, keeping the same sample complexity.
Specifically, we cast GDRO as a two-players game where one player simply
performs SMD and the other executes an online algorithm for non-oblivious multiarmed bandits. Next, we consider a more practical scenario where the number of
samples that can be drawn from each distribution is different, and propose a novel
formulation of weighted GDRO, which allows us to derive distribution-dependent
convergence rates. Denote by ni the sample budget for the i-th distribution, and
assume n1 ≥ n2 ≥ · · · ≥ nm . In the first approach, we incorporate non-uniform
sampling into SMD such that the sample budget is satisfied in expectation,
and
√
prove that the excess risk of the i-th distribution decreases at an O( n1 log m/ni )
rate. In the second approach, we use mini-batches to meet the budget exactly
and also reduce the variance in stochastic gradients, and then leverage stochastic
mirror-prox algorithm, which can exploit small variances, to optimize a carefully
designed weighted GDRO problem. Under appropriate conditions, it attains
p an
√
O((log m)/ ni ) convergence rate, which almost matches the optimal O( 1/ni )
rate of only learning from the i-th distribution with ni samples.

1

Introduction

In the classical statistical machine learning, our goal is to minimize the risk with respect to a fixed
distribution P0 [Vapnik, 2000], i.e.,



min R0 (w) = Ez∼P0 ℓ(w; z) ,
(1)
w∈W

where z ∈ Z is a sample drawn from P0 , W denotes a hypothesis class, and ℓ(w; z) is a loss
measuring the prediction error of model w on z. During the past decades, various algorithms have
been developed to optimize (1), and can be grouped in two categories: sample average approximation
(SAA) and stochastic approximation (SA) [Kushner and Yin, 2003]. In SAA, we minimize an
empirical risk defined as the average loss over a set of samples drawn from P0 , and in SA, we directly
solve the original problem by using stochastic observations of the objective R0 (·).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

