Gradient Descent with Linearly Correlated Noise:
Theory and Applications to Differential Privacy

Anastasia Koloskova∗
EPFL, Switzerland

Ryan McKenna
Google Research

Zachary Charles
Google Research

Keith Rush
Google Research

Brendan McMahan
Google Research

Abstract
We study gradient descent under linearly correlated noise. Our work is motivated
by recent practical methods for optimization with differential privacy (DP), such as
DP-FTRL, which achieve strong performance in settings where privacy amplification techniques are infeasible (such as in federated learning). These methods inject
privacy noise through a matrix factorization mechanism, making the noise linearly
correlated over iterations. We propose a simplified setting that distills key facets
of these methods and isolates the impact of linearly correlated noise. We analyze
the behavior of gradient descent in this setting, for both convex and non-convex
functions. Our analysis is demonstrably tighter than prior work and recovers multiple important special cases exactly (including anti-correlated perturbed gradient
descent). We use our results to develop new, effective matrix factorizations for
differentially private optimization, and highlight the benefits of these factorizations
theoretically and empirically.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) is a critical framework for designing algorithms with provable statistical
privacy guarantees. DP stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD, Abadi et al. [1]) is particularly
important for enabling private empirical risk minimization (ERM) of machine learning models. Many
works have analyzed the convergence behavior of DP ERM methods, including DP-SGD [5, 16, 48, 8].
However, obtaining good privacy/utility trade-offs with DP-SGD can require excessively large batch
sizes or privacy amplification techniques such as subsampling [4, 5, 55] and shuffling [15, 16]. In
some applications, including cross-device federated learning, limited and device-controlled client
availability can make sampling or shuffling infeasible [21]. Even outside of such applications, many
implementations of DP-SGD do not properly use the Poisson subsampling scheme analyzed by Abadi
et al. [1] for amplification, and instead use a single fixed permutation of the dataset [7].
Kairouz et al. [20] propose an alternative method, DP-FTRL, which can attain good privacy/utility
trade-offs without amplification. Their key insight is that for SGD-style algorithms, the variance on
prefix sums g0 + · · · + gt , t ∈ {1, . . . , T } of gradients gj is more important than the variance on
individual gradients. By adding carefully tailored noise that is linearly correlated over iterations to the
gradients, one can reduce the error on the prefix sums, at the cost of increased error on the individual
gradients, for a fixed privacy budget. The DP-FTRL mechanism is competitive with or better than
DP-SGD, even without relying on privacy amplification, and enabled McMahan and Thakurta [31] to
train the first differentially private machine learning model on user data in a production setting.
∗
Work performed while doing an internship at Google Research. Correspondence to: Anastasia Koloskova
<anastasia.koloskova@epfl.ch>, Ryan McKenna <mckennar@google.com>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

