ChatGPT-Powered Hierarchical Comparisons
for Image Classification

Zhiyuan Ren, Yiyang Su, and Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
{renzhiy1, suyiyan1, liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract
The zero-shot open-vocabulary setting poses challenges for conventional image
classification. Vision-language models pretrained on image-text pairs like CLIP
offer a solution based on comparing image and class label embeddings. Incorporating class-specific knowledge provided by large language models (LLMs) such as
ChatGPT in descriptions can further enhance CLIP’s accuracy. However, CLIP still
exhibits a bias towards certain classes and generates similar descriptions for closely
related but different classes. To address these problems, we present a novel image
classification framework via hierarchical comparisons. By recursively comparing
and grouping classes with LLMs, we construct a class hierarchy. With such a
hierarchy, we can classify an image by descending from the top to the bottom of the
hierarchy, comparing image and text embeddings at each level. Through extensive
experiments and analyses, we demonstrate that our proposed approach is intuitive,
effective, and explainable. Code is available here.

1

Introduction

Conventional image classification approaches typically evaluate their performance on the same set of
categories as their training data. However, this evaluation paradigm fails to capture the challenges in
real-world scenarios, where classes in the test set are not overlapped with the training set, i.e. zeroshot, and the test set may comprise an unknown number of classes, i.e. open-vocabulary. Zero-shot
open-vocabulary image classification, on the other hand, accommodates the open-ended nature of
class diversity in practical applications, thereby serving as a more accurate proxy for real-world
generalizability, and is the focus of this paper.
Through training with aligned image-text pairs, CLIP [37] can generate embeddings for both seen and
unseen classes. To apply it in zero-shot open-vocabulary image classification, one simply obtains an
image embedding from CLIP’s image encoder and compares it with the text embeddings of all label
candidates. Recently, Menon and Vondrick [29] propose a simple yet effective method, classification
by description. They use LLMs to generate text descriptions for unseen class labels and compare
the image embedding with the embeddings of the descriptions. Their method exploits the semantic
information offered by LLMs to bolster the efficacy of CLIP in image classification.
Nevertheless, their classification accuracy is still limited by a few factors. Firstly, in image classification, CLIP is biased towards some classes in classification [45]. In practice, we observe that
CLIP fails to distinguish among semantically similar categories, and often misclassifies a few classes
as one specific class. For instance, in the CUB [43] dataset, the great-crested flycatcher, the least
flycatcher, and the yellow-bellied flycatcher are misclassified by CLIP as Arcadian flycatcher most of
the time. Classification by description [29] does not address this issue because the descriptions for
these classes are similar. Secondly, descriptions generated by LLMs just from the labels are generic
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

