Cookie Consent Has Disparate Impact on
Estimation Accuracy

Erik Miehling

Rahul Nair

Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy

Elizabeth Daly
Robert Redmond

IBM Research
erik.miehling@ibm.com
{rahul.nair,elizabeth.daly}@ie.ibm.com
{knatesa,rredmond}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Cookies are designed to enable more accurate identification and tracking of user
behavior, in turn allowing for more personalized ads and better performing ad
campaigns. Given the additional information that is recorded, questions related to
privacy and fairness naturally arise. How does a user’s consent decision influence
how much the system can learn about their demographic and tastes? Is the impact
of a user’s consent decision on the recommender system’s ability to learn about
their latent attributes uniform across demographics? We investigate these questions
in the context of an engagement-driven recommender system using simulation. We
empirically demonstrate that when consent rates exhibit demographic-dependence,
user consent has a disparate impact on the recommender agent’s ability to estimate users’ latent attributes. In particular, we find that when consent rates are
demographic-dependent, a user disagreeing to share their cookie may counterintuitively cause the recommender agent to know more about the user than if the
user agreed to share their cookie. Furthermore, the gap in base consent rates across
demographics serves as an amplifier: users from the lower consent rate demographic who provide consent generally experience higher estimation errors than
the same users from the higher consent rate demographic, and conversely for users
who choose to withhold consent, with these differences increasing in consent rate
gap. We discuss the need for new notions of fairness that encourage consistency
between a user’s privacy decisions and the system’s ability to estimate their latent
attributes.

1

Introduction

Increased regulation surrounding cookies has emerged in recent years in response to growing concerns
over online privacy and data protection. In the EU, cookie policy is driven primarily by the General
Data Protection Regulation (13) and the ePrivacy Directive (10) which dictate that if a website wishes
to use cookies to identify and track users, beyond “strictly necessary cookies,” then consent must be
explicitly obtained from the user. There is currently no federal law regulating the use of cookies in
the US, however, several states have imposed regulation that requires websites to disclose their data
collection practices to users (5, 40).
Marketers use cookies to narrow in on target audiences most likely to buy their products, primarily
via improved user tracking and enhanced personalization. The actual mechanisms for obtaining
user consent can introduce some additional fairness and privacy concerns. Many cookie consent
interfaces are designed such that web content is at least partially obscured until the user makes a
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

