Banana: Banach Fixed-Point Network for Pointcloud
Segmentation with Inter-Part Equivariance

Congyue Deng1∗ Jiahui Lei2∗ Bokui Shen1 Kostas Daniilidis2,3 Leonidas Guibas1
1
2
3
Stanford University
University of Pennsylvania
Archimedes, Athena RC
{congyue, willshen, guibas}@cs.stanford.edu, {leijh, kostas}@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract
Equivariance has gained strong interest as a desirable network property that inherently ensures robust generalization. However, when dealing with complex systems such as articulated objects or multi-object scenes, effectively capturing interpart transformations poses a challenge, as it becomes entangled with the overall
structure and local transformations. The interdependence of part assignment and
per-part group action necessitates a novel equivariance formulation that allows
for their co-evolution. In this paper, we present Banana, a Banach ﬁxed-point
network for pointcloud segmentation with inter-part equivariance by construction. Our key insight is to iteratively solve a ﬁxed-point problem, where pointpart assignment labels and per-part SE(3)-equivariance co-evolve simultaneously.
We provide theoretical derivations of both per-step equivariance and global convergence, which induces an equivariant ﬁnal convergent state. Our formulation
naturally provides a strict deﬁnition of inter-part equivariance that generalizes to
unseen inter-part conﬁgurations. Through experiments conducted on both articulated objects and multi-object scans, we demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our approach
in achieving strong generalization under inter-part transformations, even when
confronted with substantial changes in pointcloud geometry and topology.

1

Introduction

From articulated objects to multi-object scenes, multi-body systems, i.e. shapes composed of multiple parts where each part can be moved separately, are prevalent in various daily-life scenarios. However, modeling such systems presents considerable challenges compared to rigid objects, primarily
due to the inﬁnite shape variations resulting from inter-part pose transformations with exponentially
growing complexities. Successfully modeling these shapes demands generalization across potential inter-part conﬁgurations. While standard data augmentation techniques can potentially alleviate
such problems, exhaustive augmentation can be highly expensive especially given the complexity
of such systems compared to rigid objects. Meanwhile, recent rigid-shape analysis techniques have
made signiﬁcant progress in building generalization through the important concept of equivariance
[39, 14, 79, 2, 81, 71, 20, 11, 15, 3, 36, 42, 55]. Equivariance dictates that when a transformation
is applied to the input data, the network’s output should undergo a corresponding transformation.
For example, if a is rotated by 90 degrees, the segmentation masks should also rotate accordingly.
However, to the best of our knowledge, no existing work has managed to extend the formulation of
equivariance to inter-part conﬁgurations.
In this paper, we address the challenge of achieving inter-part equivariance in the context of part
segmentation, a fundamental task in analysis, which is also the key to generalizing equivaraince from
single object to multi-body system. Extending equivariance to multi-body systems presents notable
challenges in both formulation and realization. When dealing with a shape that allows for inter-part
motions, the model must exhibit equivariance to both global and local state changes, which can only
be deﬁned by combining part assignment and per-part transformations. For example, to model an
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

