Diffusion Model is an Effective Planner and Data
Synthesizer for Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning
Haoran He 1,2∗ Chenjia Bai2† Kang Xu2,3
Dong Wang2

Bin Zhao2,5

Zhuoran Yang4

Weinan Zhang1

Xuelong Li2,5†

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Fudan University 4 Yale University 5 Northwestern Polytechnical University

1
3

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated highly-expressive generative capabilities in
vision and NLP. Recent studies in reinforcement learning (RL) have shown that
diffusion models are also powerful in modeling complex policies or trajectories
in offline datasets. However, these works have been limited to single-task settings
where a generalist agent capable of addressing multi-task predicaments is absent.
In this paper, we aim to investigate the effectiveness of a single diffusion model
in modeling large-scale multi-task offline data, which can be challenging due to
diverse and multimodal data distribution. Specifically, we propose Multi-Task Diffusion Model (MTD IFF), a diffusion-based method that incorporates Transformer
backbones and prompt learning for generative planning and data synthesis in multitask offline settings. MTD IFF leverages vast amounts of knowledge available in
multi-task data and performs implicit knowledge sharing among tasks. For generative planning, we find MTD IFF outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms across
50 tasks on Meta-World and 8 maps on Maze2D. For data synthesis, MTD IFF
generates high-quality data for testing tasks given a single demonstration as a
prompt, which enhances the low-quality datasets for even unseen tasks.

1

Introduction

The high-capacity generative models trained on large, diverse datasets have demonstrated remarkable
success across vision and language tasks. An impressive and even preternatural ability of these models,
e.g. large language models (LLMs), is that the learned model can generalize among different tasks by
simply conditioning the model on instructions or prompts [49, 46, 7, 12, 60, 42, 66]. The success of
LLMs and vision models inspires us to utilize the recent generative model to learn from large-scale
offline datasets that include multiple tasks for generalized decision-making in reinforcement learning
(RL). Thus far, recent attempts in offline decision-making take advantage of the generative capability
of diffusion models [54, 20] to improve long-term planning [21, 2] or enhance the expressiveness of
policies [63, 11, 8]. However, these works are limited to small-scale datasets and single-task settings
where broad generalization and general-purpose policies are not expected. In multi-task offline RL
which considers learning a single model to solve multi-task problems, the dataset often contains noisy,
multimodal, and long-horizon trajectories collected by various policies across tasks and with various
qualities, which makes it more challenging to learn policies with broad generalization and transferable
capabilities. Gato [47] and other generalized agents [29, 65] take transformer-based architecture
∗
†

The work was conducted during the internship of Haoran He at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
Corresponding authors: Chenjia Bai (baichenjia@pjlab.org.cn), Xuelong Li

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

