Resolving the Tug-of-War: A Separation of
Communication and Learning in Federated Learning

Junyi Li
Computer Science
University of Maryland College Park
junyili.ai@gmail.com

Heng Huang ∗
Computer Science
University of Maryland College Park
henghuanghh@gmail.com

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a promising privacy-preserving machine learning
paradigm over distributed data. In this paradigm, each client trains the parameter
of a model locally and the server aggregates the parameter from clients periodically. Therefore, we perform the learning and communication over the same
set of parameters. However, we find that learning and communication have fundamentally divergent requirements for parameter selection, akin to two opposite
teams in a tug-of-war game. To mitigate this discrepancy, we introduce FedSep,
a novel two-layer federated learning framework. FedSep consists of separated
communication and learning layers for each client and the two layers are connected through decode/encode operations. In particular, the decoding operation is
formulated as a minimization problem. We view FedSep as a federated bilevel optimization problem and propose an efficient algorithm to solve it. Theoretically, we
demonstrate that its convergence matches that of the standard FL algorithms. The
separation of communication and learning in FedSep offers innovative solutions
to various challenging problems in FL, such as Communication-Efficient FL and
Heterogeneous-Model FL. Empirical validation shows the superior performance of
FedSep over various baselines in these tasks.

1

Introduction

In Federated Learning (FL) [37], a set of clients jointly solve a machine learning task under the
coordination of a central server. The process of FL involves two category of operations: Learning
and Communication. For the learning operation, each client optimizes their local objectives, and
for the communication operation, clients exchange local parameters to facilitate knowledge sharing.
In the existing FL pipeline, both Learning and Communication operations hinge on the same set of
parameters. However, these two operations have fundamentally divergent requirements, akin to two
teams engaged in a tug-of-war, each pulling in opposite directions. In fact, on the communication
side, it is imperative that the parameters of all clients reside in a uniform space. Moreover, to mitigate
the high communication costs, a major bottleneck in FL, it is beneficial to maintain these parameters
within a low-dimensional space. In contrast, on the learning side, given the heterogeneity of devices,
including variations in hardware and data distribution, it is advantageous to allow the parameter
space to differ across clients. Furthermore, to accommodate the implementation of state-of-the-art
large-scale machine learning models (such as Transformers [47]), a high-dimensional parameter
space is desirable. In summary, a huge discrepancy of requirements to parameter selection exists
between the communication and the learning in FL.
∗

This work was partially supported by NSF IIS 1838627, 1837956, 1956002, 2211492, CNS 2213701, CCF
2217003, DBI 2225775.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

