Exponentially Convergent Algorithms for
Supervised Matrix Factorization
Joowon Lee
Department of Statistics
University of Wisconsin - Madison, WI, USA
jlee2256@wisc.edu

Hanbaek Lyu
Department of Mathematics
University of Wisconsin - Madison, WI, USA
hlyu@math.wisc.edu

Weixin Yao
Department of Statistics
University of California, Riverside, CA, USA
weixiny@ucr.edu

Abstract
Supervised matrix factorization (SMF) is a classical machine learning method
that simultaneously seeks feature extraction and classification tasks, which are not
necessarily a priori aligned objectives. Our goal is to use SMF to learn low-rank
latent factors that offer interpretable, data-reconstructive, and class-discriminative
features, addressing challenges posed by high-dimensional data. Training SMF
model involves solving a nonconvex and possibly constrained optimization with
at least three blocks of parameters. Known algorithms are either heuristic or
provide weak convergence guarantees for special cases. In this paper, we provide
a novel framework that ‘lifts’ SMF as a low-rank matrix estimation problem in a
combined factor space and propose an efficient algorithm that provably converges
exponentially fast to a global minimizer of the objective with arbitrary initialization
under mild assumptions. Our framework applies to a wide range of SMF-type
problems for multi-class classification with auxiliary features. To showcase an
application, we demonstrate that our algorithm successfully identified well-known
cancer-associated gene groups for various cancers.

1

Introduction

In classical classification models, such as logistic regression, a conditional class-generating probability
distribution is modeled as a simple function of the observed features with unknown parameters to be
trained. However, the raw observed features may be high-dimensional, and most of them might be
uninformative and hard to interpret (e.g., pixel values of an image). Therefore, it would be desirable
to extract more informative and interpretable low-dimensional features prior to the classification
task. For instance, the multi-layer perceptron or deep neural networks (DNN) in general [8, 9] use
additional feature extraction layers prior to the logistic regression layer. This allows the model itself
to learn the most effective (supervised) feature extraction mechanism and the association of the
extracted features with class labels simultaneously.
Matrix factorization (MF) is a classical unsupervised feature extraction framework, which learns
latent structures of complex datasets and is regularly applied in the analysis of text and images [13,
32, 44]. Various matrix factorization models such as singular value decomposition (SVD), principal
component analysis (PCA), and nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) provide fundamental tools for
unsupervised feature extraction tasks [17, 55, 2, 25]. Extensive research has been conducted to adapt
matrix factorization models to perform classification tasks by supervising the matrix factorization
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

