Distributed Inference and Fine-tuning of
Large Language Models Over The Internet

Alexander Borzunov∗
HSE Univesity, Yandex

Max Ryabinin
HSE Univesity, Yandex

Artem Chumachenko
Neiro.ai

Dmitry Baranchuk
Yandex

Tim Dettmers
University of Washington

Younes Belkada
Hugging Face

Pavel Samygin
Yandex School of Data Analysis

Colin Raffel
Hugging Face

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are useful in many NLP tasks and become more
capable with size, with the best open-source models having over 50 billion parameters. However, using these 50B+ models requires high-end hardware, making
them inaccessible to most researchers. In this work, we investigate methods for
cost-efficient inference and fine-tuning of LLMs, comparing local and distributed
strategies. We observe that a large enough model (50B+) can run efficiently even
on geodistributed devices in a consumer-grade network. This could allow running
LLM efficiently by pooling together idle compute resources of multiple research
groups and volunteers. We address two open problems: (1) how to perform inference and fine-tuning reliably if any device can disconnect abruptly and (2) how
to partition LLMs between devices with uneven hardware, joining and leaving at
will. In order to do that, we develop special fault-tolerant inference algorithms and
load-balancing protocols that automatically assign devices to maximize the total
system throughput. We showcase these algorithms in P ETALS1 — a decentralized
system that runs Llama 2 (70B) and BLOOM (176B) over the Internet up to 10×
faster than offloading for interactive generation. We evaluate the performance of
our system in simulated conditions and a real-world setup spanning two continents.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the NLP community has found that pretrained language models greatly accelerated
progress on many research problems through either fine-tuning (Radford et al., 2018) or simple
prompting (Brown et al., 2020). Their quality tends to improve as we increase model scale (Radford
et al., 2019; Kaplan et al., 2020). Following this trend, modern language models often have hundreds
of billions of parameters (Brown et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021).
Most recently, several research groups open-sourced their pretrained LLMs with over 50B parameters (Zhang et al., 2022; BigScience, 2022a; Touvron et al., 2023a,b). However, they are still difficult
to use due to the sheer size in terms of parameters. For example, OPT-175B and BLOOM-176B need
over 350 GB accelerator memory for inference and even more for fine-tuning. As a result, even basic
inference for these LLMs requires multiple high-end GPUs or multi-node clusters. Recent studies
∗
1

Correspondence to: borzunov.alexander@gmail.com
P ETALS source code and documentation are available at https://petals.dev

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

