Mnemosyne: Learning to Train Transformers with
Transformers
Deepali Jain ∗
Google DeepMind,
jaindeepali@google.com
Avinava Dubey ∗
Google Research,
avinavadubey@google.com

Krzysztof Choromanski ∗
Google DeepMind and Columbia University,
kchoro@google.com
Sumeet Singh
Google DeepMind,
ssumeet@google.com

Tingnan Zhang
Google DeepMind,
tingnan@google.com

Vikas Sindhwani
Google DeepMind,
sindhwani@google.com

Jie Tan
Google DeepMind,
jietan@google.com

Abstract
In this work, we propose a new class of learnable optimizers, called Mnemosyne.
It is based on the novel spatio-temporal low-rank implicit attention Transformers
that can learn to train entire neural network architectures, including other Transformers, without any task-specific optimizer tuning. We show that Mnemosyne:
(a) outperforms popular LSTM optimizers (also with new feature engineering to
mitigate catastrophic forgetting of LSTMs), (b) can successfully train Transformers
while using simple meta-training strategies that require minimal computational resources, (c) matches accuracy-wise SOTA hand-designed optimizers with carefully
tuned hyper-parameters (often producing top performing models). Furthermore,
Mnemosyne provides space complexity comparable to that of its hand-designed
first-order counterparts, which allows it to scale to training larger sets of parameters.
We conduct an extensive empirical evaluation of Mnemosyne on: (a) fine-tuning
a wide range of Vision Transformers (ViTs) from medium-size architectures to
massive ViT-Hs (36 layers, 16 heads), (b) pre-training BERT models and (c) soft
prompt-tuning large 11B+ T5XXL models. We complement our results with a
comprehensive theoretical analysis of the compact associative memory used by
Mnemosyne which we believe was never done before.

1

Introduction

Learning-to-learn (L2L) systems [66, 63, 4, 5, 52, 28, 60, 74, 2, 12] used to train machine learning
(ML) optimizers can be thought of as a natural lifting (to the optimizer-space) of the idea that has
revolutionized ML: replacing hand-engineered features with the learned ones.
The idea to train ML optimizers is tempting, yet the lift to the optimizer-space comes at a price: the
instances used to train such systems are the optimization problems themselves. Generalization in
such a setting means: the ability to transfer knowledge to "similar" optimization tasks not seen in
training. Rigorous mathematical analysis of the properties of L2L systems, that involves defining
distributions over optimization problems, becomes challenging and is a subject on its own. Indeed,
the literature on meta-learning is voluminous [73, 6, 53, 76, 1, 39, 24] and of critical importance
in many disciplines such as Robotics, where transfer knowledge from simulator to hardware is a
notoriously difficult problem [42, 32, 57].
∗

equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

