LightSpeed: Light and Fast
Neural Light Fields on Mobile Devices

Aarush Gupta1

Junli Cao2,† Chaoyang Wang2,† Ju Hu2 Sergey Tulyakov2
Jian Ren2 László A Jeni1
1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Snap Inc.
Project page: https://lightspeed-r2l.github.io

Abstract
Real-time novel-view image synthesis on mobile devices is prohibitive due to the
limited computational power and storage. Using volumetric rendering methods,
such as NeRF and its derivatives, on mobile devices is not suitable due to the high
computational cost of volumetric rendering. On the other hand, recent advances in
neural light field representations have shown promising real-time view synthesis
results on mobile devices. Neural light field methods learn a direct mapping from a
ray representation to the pixel color. The current choice of ray representation is
either stratified ray sampling or Plücker coordinates, overlooking the classic light
slab (two-plane) representation, the preferred representation to interpolate between
light field views. In this work, we find that using the light slab representation is an
efficient representation for learning a neural light field. More importantly, it is a
lower-dimensional ray representation enabling us to learn the 4D ray space using
feature grids which are significantly faster to train and render. Although mostly
designed for frontal views, we show that the light-slab representation can be further
extended to non-frontal scenes using a divide-and-conquer strategy. Our method
offers superior rendering quality compared to previous light field methods and
achieves a significantly improved trade-off between rendering quality and speed.

1

Introduction

Real-time rendering of photo-realistic 3D content on mobile devices such as phones is crucial for
mixed-reality applications. However, this presents a challenge due to the limited computational power
and memory of mobile devices. The current graphics pipeline requires storing tens of thousands of
meshes for complex scenes and performing ray tracing for realistic lighting effects, which demands
powerful graphics processing power that is not feasible on current mobile devices. Recently, neural
radiance field (NeRF [23]) has been the next popular choice for photo-realistic view synthesis, which
offers a simplified rendering pipeline. However, the computational cost of integrating the radiance
field remains a bottleneck for real-time implementation on mobile devices. There have been several
attempts to reduce the computational cost of this integration step, such as using more efficient radiance
representations [13, 40, 28, 17, 5, 10] or distilling meshes from radiance field [34, 6, 39, 35, 27, 29].
Among these approaches, only a handful of mesh-based methods [6, 29] have demonstrated realtime rendering capabilities on mobile phones, but with a significant sacrifice in rendering fidelity.
Moreover, all aforementioned methods require significant storage space (over 200MB), which is
undesirable for mobile devices with limited onboard storage.
†

These authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

