Disentangling Voice and Content with Self-Supervision
for Speaker Recognition

Tianchi Liu1,2 , Kong Aik Lee∗ 3, 1 , Qiongqiong Wang1 , Haizhou Li4, 2
1

Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A⋆ STAR), Singapore
2
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
4
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
{liu tianchi, wang qiongqiong}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, kongaik.lee@ieee.org, haizhouli@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
For speaker recognition, it is difficult to extract an accurate speaker representation
from speech because of its mixture of speaker traits and content. This paper proposes a disentanglement framework that simultaneously models speaker traits and
content variability in speech. It is realized with the use of three Gaussian inference
layers, each consisting of a learnable transition model that extracts distinct speech
components. Notably, a strengthened transition model is specifically designed
to model complex speech dynamics. We also propose a self-supervision method
to dynamically disentangle content without the use of labels other than speaker
identities. The efficacy of the proposed framework is validated via experiments
conducted on the VoxCeleb and SITW datasets with 9.56% and 8.24% average reductions in EER and minDCF, respectively. Since neither additional model training
nor data is specifically needed, it is easily applicable in practical use.

1

Introduction

Automatic speaker recognition aims to identify a person from his/her voice [2] based on speech
recordings [22]. Typically, two fixed-dimensional representations are extracted from the enrollment
and test speech utterances, respectively [68]. Then the recognition procedure is done by measuring
their similarity [22]. These representations are referred to as the speaker embeddings [67]. The
concept of speaker embedding is similar to that of the face embedding [64] in the face recognition
task and the token embedding [16] in the language model, while the main difference lies in the
carriers of the information source and the nature of downstream tasks. Different from the discrete
sequential inputs in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and continuous inputs in Computer Vision
(CV), speech signals are continuous-valued variable-length sequences [24]. Speech signals contain
both speaker traits and content [32]. For speaker recognition, to form a refined speaker embedding
of a speech signal, conventional methods aggregate the frame-level features by pooling across the
time-axis to extract speaker characteristics while factoring out content information. Simple temporal
aggregation fails to disentangle the content information and therefore affects the quality of the
resulting embeddings. The content information is regarded as unwanted variations hindering the
accurate representation of voice characteristics.
To reduce the effects of the content variation, prior works model the phonetic content representation
and use it as a reference for speaker embedding extraction. In [89], the phonetic bottleneck features
from the last hidden layer of a pre-trained automatic speech recognition (ASR) network are combined
with raw acoustic features to normalize the phonetic variations. A coupled stem is designed in [88] to
jointly learn acoustic features and frame-level ASR bottleneck features. In [42], a phonetic attention
mask dynamically generated from a sub-branch is used to benefit speaker recognition. The existing
methods can be summarized into two types in terms of content representation modeling: (1) by a
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

