Tools for Verifying Neural Models’ Training Data

Dami Choi∗

Yonadav Shavit∗

David Duvenaud

U. Toronto & Vector Institute

Harvard University

U. Toronto & Vector Institute

choidami@cs.toronto.edu

yonadav@g.harvard.edu

duvenaud@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
It is important that consumers and regulators can verify the provenance of large
neural models to evaluate their capabilities and risks. We introduce the concept of
a “Proof-of-Training-Data”: any protocol that allows a model trainer to convince a
Verifier of the training data that produced a set of model weights. Such protocols
could verify the amount and kind of data and compute used to train the model,
including whether it was trained on specific harmful or beneficial data sources.
We explore efficient verification strategies for Proof-of-Training-Data that are
compatible with most current large-model training procedures. These include a
method for the model-trainer to verifiably pre-commit to a random seed used in
training, and a method that exploits models’ tendency to temporarily overfit to
training data in order to detect whether a given data-point was included in training.
We show experimentally that our verification procedures can catch a wide variety
of attacks, including all known attacks from the Proof-of-Learning literature.

1

Introduction

How can we verify the capabilities of large machine learning models? Today, such claims are based
on trust and reputation: customers and regulators believe that well-known companies building AI
models wouldn’t lie about the training data used in their models. However, as the ability to build
new AI models proliferates, users need to trust an ever-larger array of model providers at their word,
and regulators may increasingly face malicious AI developers who may lie to appear compliant with
standards and regulations. Worse, countries developing militarily-significant AI systems may not
trust each others’ claims about these systems’ capabilities, making it hard to coordinate on limits.
AI developers can enable greater trust by having a third party verify the developer’s claims about their
system, much as the iOS App Store checks apps for malicious code. Current black-box approaches to
model auditing allow some probing of capabilities [Cen23], but these audits’ utility is limited and a
model’s capabilities can be hidden [GTB22, GKVZ22]. An auditor can more effectively target their
examination if they also know the model’s training data, including the total quantity, inclusion of
data likely to enable specific harmful capabilities (such as texts on cyber-exploit generation), and
inclusion of safety-enhancing data (such as instruction-tuning [OWJ+ 22]). However, if auditors rely
on AI developers to self-report the data, developers could falsify their reports. This uncertainty limits
the trust such audits can create.
In this work, we define the problem of Proof-of-Training-Data (PoTD): a protocol by which a thirdparty auditor (the “Verifier”) can verify which data was used by the developer (the “Prover”) to
train a model. Our verification procedures assume that the Verifier can be given access to sensitive
information and IP (e.g., training data, model weights) and is trusted to keep it secure; we leave the
additional challenge of simultaneously preserving the confidentiality of the training data and model
weights to future work. In principle, one could solve PoTD by cryptographically attesting to the
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

