Networks are Slacking Off: Understanding
Generalization Problem in Image Deraining

Jinjin Gu1,2

Xianzheng Ma1 Xiangtao Kong1,3 Yu Qiao1,3 Chao Dong1,3,∗
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 The University of Sydney
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
jinjin.gu@sydney.edu.au, xianzhengma@pjlab.org.cn
{xt.kong, yu.qiao, chao.dong}@siat.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Deep deraining networks consistently encounter substantial generalization issues
when deployed in real-world applications, although they are successful in laboratory benchmarks. A prevailing perspective in deep learning encourages using
highly complex data for training, with the expectation that richer image background
content will facilitate overcoming the generalization problem. However, through
comprehensive and systematic experimentation, we discover that this strategy does
not enhance the generalization capability of these networks. On the contrary, it
exacerbates the tendency of networks to overfit specific degradations. Our experiments reveal that better generalization in a deraining network can be achieved by
simplifying the complexity of the training background images. This is because that
the networks are “slacking off” during training, that is, learning the least complex
elements in the image background and degradation to minimize training loss. When
the background images are less complex than the rain streaks, the network will
prioritize the background reconstruction, thereby suppressing overfitting the rain
patterns and leading to improved generalization performance. Our research offers a
valuable perspective and methodology for better understanding the generalization
problem in low-level vision tasks and displays promising potential for practical
application.

1

Introduction

The burgeoning progress in deep learning has produced a series of promising low-level vision
networks that significantly surpass traditional methods in benchmark tests [10, 30, 12]. However, the
intrinsic overfitting issue has prevented these deep models from real-world applications, especially
when the real-world degradation differs a lot from the training data [20, 31, 33, 34]. We call this
dilemma the generalization problem. As a traditional and important low-level vision task, image
deraining also faces a severe generalization problem. Existing deraining models tend to do nothing
for the rain streaks that are beyond their training distribution, see Figure 1 for an example. The model
trained with synthetic rainy images cannot remove rain streak for images with different rain patterns
as the training data.
Despite its significance, the generalization problem in the context of deraining tasks is not comprehensively explored in the existing literature. Understanding the underlying causes of these generalization
performance issues is imperative to propose effective solutions. However, analyzing generalization
in a low-level task is far from straightforward, as it is not a simple extension of the generalization
research in high-level vision tasks. This paper aims to take the pioneering step towards a more
profound understanding of this challenge.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

