CELL-E 2: Translating Proteins to Pictures and Back
with a Bidirectional Text-to-Image Transformer
Emaad Khwaja∗ ‡
emaad@berkeley.edu

Yun S. Song† ‡
yss@berkeley.edu

Aaron Agarunov§
agarunov.aaron@gmail.com

Bo Huang ¶∥ ∗∗
bo.huang@ucsf.edu

Abstract
We present CELL-E 2, a novel bidirectional transformer that can generate images
depicting protein subcellular localization from the amino acid sequences (and vice
versa). Protein localization is a challenging problem that requires integrating sequence and image information, which most existing methods ignore. CELL-E 2
extends the work of CELL-E, not only capturing the spatial complexity of protein localization and produce probability estimates of localization atop a nucleus
image, but also being able to generate sequences from images, enabling de novo
protein design. We train and ﬁnetune CELL-E 2 on two large-scale datasets of
human proteins. We also demonstrate how to use CELL-E 2 to create hundreds
of novel nuclear localization signals (NLS). Results and interactive demos are featured at https://bohuanglab.github.io/CELL-E_2/.

1

Introduction

Subcelllular protein localization is a vital aspect of molecular biology as it helps in understanding the
functioning of cells and organisms [1]. The correct localization of a protein is critical for its proper
functioning, and mislocalization can lead to various diseases [2]. Protein localization prediction
models have typically relied on protein sequence data [3, 4] or ﬂuorescent microscopy images [5, 6]
as input to predict which subcelleular organelles a protein would localize to, designated as discrete
class labels [7, 8]. The CELL-E model was markedly different in that it utilized an autoregressive
text-to-image framework to predict subcellular localization as an images [9], thereby overcoming
bias from discrete class labels derived from manual annotation [10]. Furthermore, CELL-E was
capable of producing a 2D probability density function as an image based on localization data seen
throughout the dataset, yielding more a far more interpretable output for the end user.
Although novel, CELL-E was inherently restricted by the following limitations:
Autoregressive Generation. Alongside other autoregressive models [11–14], CELL-E was limited by slow generation times and unidirectionality. When provided with input, CELL-E required a
separate step for each image patch (256 for the output image composed of tokens of size 16 × 16).
∗

UC Berkeley - UCSF Joint Bioengineering Graduate Program
Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley, CA 94720
‡
Computer Science Division, UC Berkeley, CA 94720
§
Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 10065
¶
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, UCSF, San Francisco, CA 94143
∥
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, UCSF, San Francisco, CA 94143
∗∗
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub - San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

