Jigsaw: Learning to Assemble Multiple
Fractured Objects

Jiaxin Lu ∗
Yifan Sun ∗
Qixing Huang
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
{lujiaxin, yifansun12}@utexas.edu
huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Automated assembly of 3D fractures is essential in orthopedics, archaeology, and
our daily life. This paper presents Jigsaw, a novel framework for assembling physically broken 3D objects from multiple pieces. Our approach leverages hierarchical
features of global and local geometry to match and align the fracture surfaces.
Our framework consists of four components: (1) front-end point feature extractor
with attention layers, (2) surface segmentation to separate fracture and original
parts, (3) multi-parts matching to find correspondences among fracture surface
points, and (4) robust global alignment to recover the global poses of the pieces.
We show how to jointly learn segmentation and matching and seamlessly integrate
feature matching and rigidity constraints. We evaluate Jigsaw on the Breaking Bad
dataset and achieve superior performance compared to state-of-the-art methods.
Our method also generalizes well to diverse fracture modes, objects, and unseen
instances. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first learning-based method
designed specifically for 3D fracture assembly over multiple pieces. Our code is
available at https://jiaxin-lu.github.io/Jigsaw/.

1

Introduction

The task of assembling 3D fractures has extensive applications across numerous fields. For instance,
orthopedic doctors need to realign dislocated bone fragments, and subsequently create bone plates
and screws to heal compound fractures. Archaeologists, on the other hand, need to recreate the
original shape and functionality of unearthed artifacts by assembling the fractures. These procedures
demand significant expertise, are prone to errors, and can be tedious. Even in the context of daily
life, furniture assembly can be a challenging and exhausting task that requires an understanding of
mechanical structures and component matching. In the past two decades, many efforts attempted
to address the challenge of automatic assembly. Traditional methods apply hand-crafted geometric
features to detect the fracture surfaces and optimize pairwise matching among these surfaces [1, 2].
Recently the availability of large scale 3D datasets [3, 4, 5, 6] have boosted learning based frameworks
for solving 3D assembly tasks. Semantic-aware methods [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] target at assembly
from semantically segmented parts and predict semantic labels as matching priors. Geometry based
methods [13, 14, 15] leverage fracture shapes and continuity of textures in the procedure of piece
matching.
However, in the context of fracture assembly for restoring broken objects, there is no guarantee
that individual pieces will retain semantic meanings. Texture information may also be either nonaccessible or lacking, such as on glass bottles or worn artifacts. This calls for a general 3D assembly
solver that utilizes hierarchical features of both the global piece surfaces and local geometry shapes
of fractures. In this work, we introduce a Joint Learning of Segmentation and Alignment Framework
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

