Unlocking Deterministic Robustness
Certification on ImageNet

Kai Hu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
kaihu@andrew.cmu.edu
Zifan Wang
Center for AI Safety
San Francisco, CA 94111
zifan@safe.ai

Andy Zou
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
andyzou@cmu.edu

Klas Leino
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
kleino@cs.cmu.edu

Matt Fredrikson
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
mfredrik@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Despite the promise of Lipschitz-based methods for provably-robust deep learning
with deterministic guarantees, current state-of-the-art results are limited to feedforward Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) on low-dimensional data, such as
CIFAR-10. This paper investigates strategies for expanding certifiably robust
training to larger, deeper models. A key challenge in certifying deep networks is
efficient calculation of the Lipschitz bound for residual blocks found in ResNet
and ViT architectures. We show that fast ways of bounding the Lipschitz constant
for conventional ResNets are loose, and show how to address this by designing a
new residual block, leading to the Linear ResNet (LiResNet) architecture. We then
introduce Efficient Margin MAximization (EMMA), a loss function that stabilizes
robust training by penalizing worst-case adversarial examples from multiple classes
simultaneously. Together, these contributions yield new state-of-the-art robust
accuracy on CIFAR-10/100 and Tiny-ImageNet under ℓ2 perturbations. Moreover,
for the first time, we are able to scale up fast deterministic robustness guarantees to
ImageNet, demonstrating that this approach to robust learning can be applied to
real-world applications. Our code is publicly available on GitHub.1

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have been shown to be vulnerable to well-crafted tiny perturbations, also
known as adversarial examples [19, 45]. Methods for achieving provably-robust inference—that is,
predictions that are guaranteed to be consistent within a norm-bounded ϵ-ball around an input—are
desirable in adversarial settings, as they offer guarantees that hold up against arbitrary perturbations.
Thus, The focus of this paper is to train a network that can certify its predictions within an ϵ-ball.
Over the last few years, a wide body of literature addressing robustness certification has emerged [6, 7,
18, 24, 26, 29, 32, 33, 43, 46, 48, 52]. To date, the methods that achieve the best certified performance
are derived from randomized smoothing (RS) [6]; however, this approach has two main drawbacks.
First, it provides only a probabilistic guarantee, which may generate a false positive claim around
0.1% of the time [6]; by contrast, deterministic certification may be preferred in safety-critical
applications, e.g., malware detection and autonomous driving. Additionally, RS requires significant
1

Code available at https://github.com/hukkai/liresnet.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

