OpenLane-V2: A Topology Reasoning Benchmark
for Unified 3D HD Mapping

Huijie Wang1∗ , Tianyu Li1∗ , Yang Li1∗ , Li Chen1 , Chonghao Sima1 , Zhenbo Liu2 ,
Bangjun Wang1 , Peijin Jia1 , Yuting Wang1 , Shengyin Jiang1 , Feng Wen2 ,
Hang Xu2 , Ping Luo1 , Junchi Yan1 , Wei Zhang2 , Hongyang Li1
1

OpenDriveLab, Shanghai AI Lab

2

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

https://github.com/OpenDriveLab/OpenLane-V2

Abstract
Accurately depicting the complex traffic scene is a vital component for autonomous
vehicles to execute correct judgments. However, existing benchmarks tend to
oversimplify the scene by solely focusing on lane perception tasks. Observing
that human drivers rely on both lanes and traffic signals to operate their vehicles
safely, we present OpenLane-V2, the first dataset on topology reasoning for traffic
scene structure. The objective of the presented dataset is to advance research in
understanding the structure of road scenes by examining the relationship between
perceived entities, such as traffic elements and lanes. Leveraging existing datasets,
OpenLane-V2 consists of 2,000 annotated road scenes that describe traffic elements
and their correlation to the lanes. It comprises three primary sub-tasks, including
the 3D lane detection inherited from OpenLane, accompanied by corresponding
metrics to evaluate the model’s performance. We evaluate various state-of-the-art
methods, and present their quantitative and qualitative results on OpenLane-V2 to
indicate future avenues for investigating topology reasoning in traffic scenes.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the availability of large-scale datasets and benchmarks has greatly facilitated research
on autonomous driving. A critical aspect would be understanding the complex driving environment,
which is the prerequisite for reasonable decisions. Many datasets [1, 10, 18, 44, 45] focus on
perceiving visible lanelines to keep vehicles on the right track, while others [13, 14, 37, 39, 46]
are specified in acquiring traffic information through detecting traffic signals. Nevertheless, this
separation of tasks represents a limited understanding of the driving scene. For instance, when driving
into a crossroad without any visible laneline, an autonomous vehicle might wonder which direction
to go. Meanwhile, when a vehicle proceeds into an intersection where there is a green light presented,
it is still possible that the traffic signal does not control the lane in which the car is driving. In this
work, we build a strong association among traffic elements and lanes, aiming to create a topology
relationship of the physical world and thus facilitate decision-making in the downstream tasks.
To keep autonomous vehicles driving in the correct position, the concept of lanes needs to be
introduced. The perception of lanelines, which are the visible separation of lanes, is well explored.
Previous datasets [1, 18, 25, 45] annotate lanelines on images in the perspective view. Such a 2D
representation is insufficient to fulfill real-world requirements. When projecting 2D laneline into
bird’s-eye-view (BEV) space, lane direction would diverge/converge if the height dimension is
ignored, leading to improper action decisions in the planning and control module in challenging
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

