CS-Isolate: Extracting Hard Confident Examples
by Content and Style Isolation

Yexiong Lin1 Yu Yao2,3 Xiaolong Shi1
Mingming Gong4 Xu Shen5 Dong Xu6 Tongliang Liu1∗
1

The University of Sydney; 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence;
3
Carnegie Mellon University; 4 The University of Melbourne;
5
Alibaba DAMO Academy; 6 The University of Hong Kong.

Abstract
Label noise widely exists in large-scale image datasets. To mitigate the side effects
of label noise, state-of-the-art methods focus on selecting confident examples
by leveraging semi-supervised learning. Existing research shows that the ability
to extract hard confident examples, which are close to the decision boundary,
significantly influences the generalization ability of the learned classifier. In this
paper, we find that a key reason for some hard examples being close to the decision
boundary is due to the entanglement of style factors with content factors. The
hard examples become more discriminative when we focus solely on content
factors, such as semantic information, while ignoring style factors. Nonetheless,
given only noisy data, content factors are not directly observed and have to be
inferred. To tackle the problem of inferring content factors for classification when
learning with noisy labels, our objective is to ensure that the content factors of
all examples in the same underlying clean class remain unchanged as their style
information changes. To achieve this, we utilize different data augmentation
techniques to alter the styles while regularizing content factors based on some
confident examples. By training existing methods with our inferred content factors,
CS-Isolate proves their effectiveness in learning hard examples on benchmark
datasets. The implementation is available at https://github.com/tmllab/
2023_NeurIPS_CS-isolate.

1

Introduction

Large-scale machine learning datasets frequently contain noisy labels, as seen in datasets like
ImageNet [9] and Clothing1M [55]. Training deep neural networks with such noisy data would result
in poor generalization ability, as these networks can memorize incorrect labels [13, 3].
To mitigate the side effects of label noise, different methods have been proposed [33, 13, 37, 61, 30,
31, 49]. Major existing state-of-the-art methods are based on confident examples selection [61, 2].
Intuitively, those methods first exploit the memorization effect, enabling deep neural networks to
learn simple patterns shared by the majority of training examples [60, 1, 19]. Since clean labels
typically constitute the majority in each noisy class [7, 39], deep neural networks initially fit the
training data with correct labels and then progressively fit examples with incorrect labels [13]. To
prevent the model from fitting incorrect labels, early stopping is usually employed [44, 3, 50, 4].
Then the small-loss trick is used to extract the confident examples with high certainty [21, 35, 28, 38].
If extracted examples have high quality, the performance of a classifier can be enhanced.
∗

Corresponding author: Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

