A Unified, Scalable Framework for
Neural Population Decoding

Mehdi Azabou1,∗, Vinam Arora1 , Venkataramana Ganesh1 , Ximeng Mao2,3 ,
Santosh Nachimuthu1 , Michael J. Mendelson1 , Blake Richards2,4 ,
Matthew G. Perich2,3 , Guillaume Lajoie2,3 , Eva L. Dyer1,∗
1
Georgia Tech, 2 Mila, 3 Université de Montréal, 4 McGill University

Abstract
Our ability to use deep learning approaches to decipher neural activity would likely
benefit from greater scale, in terms of both model size and datasets. However, the
integration of many neural recordings into one unified model is challenging, as
each recording contains the activity of different neurons from different individual
animals. In this paper, we introduce a training framework and architecture designed
to model the population dynamics of neural activity across diverse, large-scale
neural recordings. Our method first tokenizes individual spikes within the dataset
to build an efficient representation of neural events that captures the fine temporal
structure of neural activity. We then employ cross-attention and a PerceiverIO
backbone to further construct a latent tokenization of neural population activities.
Utilizing this architecture and training framework, we construct a large-scale multisession model trained on large datasets from seven nonhuman primates, spanning
over 158 different sessions of recording from over 27,373 neural units and over
100 hours of recordings. In a number of different tasks, we demonstrate that our
pretrained model can be rapidly adapted to new, unseen sessions with unspecified
neuron correspondence, enabling few-shot performance with minimal labels. This
work presents a powerful new approach for building deep learning tools to analyze
neural data and stakes out a clear path to training at scale.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in machine learning, particularly in the context of large-scale pretrained models
like GPT [1, 2, 3, 4], have showcased the immense potential of scaling up, both the terms of the size
of datasets and models [5, 6]. Similarly, in neuroscience, there is a growing need for a foundational
model that can bridge the gaps between diverse datasets, experiments, and individuals, allowing for a
more holistic understanding of brain function and information processing [7]. The development of
such a model would allow researchers to uncover underlying patterns and interactions within neural
populations [8], and potentially allow for more robust decoding of brain states.
However, creating a large-scale neural decoding model that can effectively combine spiking datasets
from various sources is a complex challenge [9]. One of the central challenges is the lack of a shared
“vocabulary” in neural recordings. Unlike the case for text—wherein every document written in
a given language shares a basic lexicon for tokenization—there is no one-to-one correspondence
between neurons in different individuals. As such, every recording from a different individual
involves a unique set of neurons that cannot be easily aligned with another set. An additional core
challenge lies in the inherent variability of neuron sets observed across different days [10]. Even
when monitoring the same individual, variability in electrode/tissue interface can lead to distinct
∗

Contact: {mazabou,evadyer}@gatech.edu. Project page and code: https://poyo-brain.github.io

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

