P LAN E: Representation Learning over Planar Graphs

Radoslav Dimitrov∗ †
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
contact@radoslav11.com

Zeyang Zhao∗†
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
zeyzang.zhao@cs.ox.ac.uk

Ralph Abboud∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
ralph@ralphabb.ai

İsmail İlkan Ceylan
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
ismail.ceylan@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Graph neural networks iteratively compute representations of nodes of an input
graph through a series of transformations in such a way that the learned graph
function is isomorphism invariant on graphs, which makes the learned representations graph invariants. On the other hand, it is well-known that graph invariants
learned by these class of models are incomplete: there are pairs of non-isomorphic
graphs which cannot be distinguished by standard graph neural networks. This is
unsurprising given the computational difficulty of graph isomorphism testing on
general graphs, but the situation begs to differ for special graph classes, for which
efficient graph isomorphism testing algorithms are known, such as planar graphs.
The goal of this work is to design architectures for efficiently learning complete
invariants of planar graphs. Inspired by the classical planar graph isomorphism
algorithm of Hopcroft and Tarjan, we propose P LAN E as a framework for planar
representation learning. P LAN E includes architectures which can learn complete
invariants over planar graphs while remaining practically scalable. We validate the
strong performance of P LAN E architectures on various planar graph benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Graphs are used for representing relational data in a wide range of domains, including physical [53],
chemical [17, 36], and biological [21, 68] systems, which led to increasing interest in machine
learning (ML) over graphs. Graph neural networks (GNNs) [23, 51] have become prominent for
graph ML for a wide range of tasks, owing to their capacity to explicitly encode desirable relational
inductive biases [6]. GNNs iteratively compute representations of nodes of an input graph through
a series of transformations in such a way that the learned graph-level function represents a graph
invariant: a property of graphs which is preserved under all isomorphic transformations.
Learning functions on graphs is challenging for various reasons, particularly since the learning
problem contains the infamous graph isomorphism problem, for which the best known algorithm,
given in a breakthrough result by Babai [4], runs in quasi-polynomial time. A large class of GNNs
can thus only learn incomplete graph invariants for scalablity purposes. In fact, standard GNNs are
known to be at most as expressive as the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm (1-WL)[59] in
terms of distinguishing power [45, 63]. There are simple non-isomorphic pairs of graphs, such as the
pair shown in Figure 1, which cannot be distinguished by 1-WL and by a large class of GNNs. This
∗
†

This work is largely conducted while these authors were still affiliated with the University of Oxford.
Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

