Neural Harmonics: Bridging Spectral Embedding and
Matrix Completion in Self-Supervised Learning

Marina Munkhoeva†‡

Ivan Oseledets §

Abstract
Self-supervised methods received tremendous attention thanks to their seemingly
heuristic approach to learning representations that respect the semantics of the
data without any apparent supervision in the form of labels. A growing body
of literature is already being published in an attempt to build a coherent and
theoretically grounded understanding of the workings of a zoo of losses used in
modern self-supervised representation learning methods. In this paper, we attempt
to provide an understanding from the perspective of a Laplace operator and connect
the inductive bias stemming from the augmentation process to a low-rank matrix
completion problem. To this end, we leverage the results from low-rank matrix
completion to provide theoretical analysis on the convergence of modern SSL
methods and a key property that affects their downstream performance.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised methods have garnered significant interest due to their heuristic approach to learning
representations that capture the semantic information of data without requiring explicit supervision in
the form of labels. Contrastive learning based methods among the former would use the repulsion
among arbitrary pair of points in the batch, while non-contrastive would rely on the consistency
among different views of the same image. While self-supervised representation learning becomes
more ubiquitous in the wild, especially in the important domain such as medical imaging [16], the
theoretical grounding of these methods would potentially help avoid the pitfalls in applications.
Unsurprisingly, researchers are already trying to build theoretically sound understanding of modern
self-supervised representation learning methods.
The overall goal of this work is to understand self-supervised representation learning through the lens
of nonlinear dimensionality reduction methods (e.g. Laplacian Eigenmaps [3]) and low-rank matrix
completion problem [28]. To this end, we take on a Laplace operator perspective on learning the
optimal representations in the manifold assumption. We then derive a trace maximization formulation
to learn eigenfunctions of the Laplace operator of the underlying data manifold. We adopt the heat
kernel based embedding map that in theory under certain conditions is an almost isometric embedding
of the low-dimensional manifold into the Euclidean space. As a result, we discuss how existing
several SSL methods (e.g. S IM CLR [9], BARLOW T WINS [1], VICR EG [2]) can be comprehended
under this view.
It is important to note that our current understanding of the topic lacks one crucial aspect. Traditional
spectral methods commonly operate with complete kernel matrices, whereas our approach deals with
incomplete and potentially noisy ones. The only available similarity information among examples
is derived from the data augmentation process, which generates a positive pair. Meanwhile the
†

Correspondence to marina.munkhoeva@tuebingen.mpg.de
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
§
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute (AIRI), Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech),
Moscow, Russian Federation
‡

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

