The Target-Charging Technique
for Privacy Analysis across Interactive Computations

Edith Cohen
Google Research and Tel Aviv University
edith@cohenwang.com

Xin Lyu
UC Berkeley
lyuxin1999@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose the Target Charging Technique (TCT), a unified privacy analysis
framework for interactive settings where a sensitive dataset is accessed multiple times using differentially private algorithms. Unlike traditional composition,
where privacy guarantees deteriorate quickly with the number of accesses, TCT
allows computations that don’t hit a specified target, often the vast majority, to be
essentially free (while incurring instead a small overhead on those that do hit their
targets). TCT generalizes tools such as the sparse vector technique and top-k selection from private candidates and extends their remarkable privacy enhancement
benefits from noisy Lipschitz functions to general private algorithms.

1

Introduction

In many practical settings of data analysis and optimization, the dataset D is accessed multiple times
interactively via different algorithms (Ai ), so that Ai depends on the transcript of prior responses
(Aj (D))j<i . When each Ai is privacy-preserving, we are interested in tight end-to-end privacy
analysis. We consider the standard statistical framework of differential privacy introduced in [11].
Composition theorems [14] are a generic way to do that and achieve overall privacy cost that scales
linearly or (via “advanced” composition) with square-root dependence in the number of private
computations. We aim for a broad understanding of scenarios where the overall privacy bounds
can be lowered significantly via the following paradigm: Each computation is specified by a private
algorithm Ai together with a target ⊤i , that is a subset of its potential outputs. The total privacy cost
depends only on computations where the output hits its target, that is Ai (D) ∈ ⊤i . This paradigm
is suitable and can be highly beneficial when (i) the specified targets are a good proxy for the actual
privacy exposure and (ii) we expect the majority of computations to not hit their target, and thus
essentially be “free” in terms of privacy cost.
The Sparse Vector Technique (SVT) [12, 30, 18, 34] is a classic special case. SVT is designed
for computations that have the form of approximate threshold tests applied to Lipschitz functions.
Concretely, each such AboveThreshold test is specified by a 1-Lipschitz function f and a threshold
value t and we wish to test whether f (D) ≳ t. The textbook SVT algorithm compares a noisy
value with a noisy threshold (independent Laplace noise for the values and threshold noise that
can be updated only after positive responses). Remarkably, the overall privacy cost depends only
on positive responses: Roughly, composition is applied to twice the number of positive responses
instead of to the total number of computations. In our terminology, the target of each test is a
positive response. SVT privacy analysis benefits when the majority of AboveThreshold test results
are negative (and hence “free”). This makes SVT a key ingredient in a range of methods [13]:
private multiplicative weights [18], Propose-Test-Release [10], fine privacy analysis via distance-tostability [33], model-agnostic private learning [1],and designing streaming algorithms that are robust
to adaptive inputs [19, 6].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

