Implicit Manifold Gaussian Process Regression

Bernardo Fichera1

Viacheslav Borovitskiy2
1

2

EPFL

Andreas Krause2

Aude Billard1

ETH Zürich

Abstract
Gaussian process regression is widely used because of its ability to provide
well-calibrated uncertainty estimates and handle small or sparse datasets. However,
it struggles with high-dimensional data. One possible way to scale this technique to
higher dimensions is to leverage the implicit low-dimensional manifold upon which
the data actually lies, as postulated by the manifold hypothesis. Prior work ordinarily requires the manifold structure to be explicitly provided though, i.e. given by
a mesh or be known to be one of the well-known manifolds like the sphere. In contrast, in this paper we propose a Gaussian process regression technique capable of
inferring implicit structure directly from data (labeled and unlabeled) in a fully differentiable way. For the resulting model, we discuss its convergence to the Matérn
Gaussian process on the assumed manifold. Our technique scales up to hundreds of
thousands of data points, and improves the predictive performance and calibration
of the standard Gaussian process regression in some high-dimensional settings.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes are among the most adopted models for learning unknown functions within the
Bayesian framework. Their data efficiency and aptitude for uncertainty quantification make them
appealing for modeling and decision-making applications in the fields like robotics (Deisenroth and
Rasmussen, 2011), geostatistics (Chilès and Delfiner, 2012), numerics (Hennig et al., 2015), etc.

Prediction

Uncertainty

The most widely used Gaussian process models, like squared exponential and Matérn (Rasmussen
and Williams, 2006), impose the simple assumption of differentiability of the unknown function
while also respecting the geometry of Rd by virtue of being stationary or isotropic. Such simple
assumptions make uncertainty estimates reliable, albeit too conservative at times. The same simplicity
makes these models struggle from the curse of dimensionality. We hypothesize that it is still possible
to leverage these simple priors for real world high-dimensional problems granted that they are adapted
to the implicit low-dimensional submanifolds where the data actually lies, as illustrated by Figure 1.

(a) Euclidean, prediction

(b) Ours, prediction

(c)Euclidean, uncertainty

(d) Ours, uncertainty

Figure 1: Euclidean (standard Matérn-5/2 kernel) vs ours (implicit manifold) Gaussian process
regression for data that lies on a dumbbell-shaped curve (1-dimensional manifold) assumed unknown.
The data contains a small set of labeled points and a large set of unlabeled points. Our technique
recognizes that the two lines in the middle are intrinsically far away from each other, giving a much
better model on and near the manifold. Far away from the manifold it reverts to the Euclidean model.
Code available at https://github.com/nash169/manifold-gp.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

