Variational Gaussian Processes with
Decoupled Conditionals

Xinran Zhu1

Kaiwen Wu2 Natalie Maus2 Jacob R. Gardner2 David Bindel1
1
Cornell University 2 University of Pennsylvania
{xz584,bindel}@cornell.edu {kaiwenwu,nmaus,jacobrg}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Variational Gaussian processes (GPs) approximate exact GP inference by using a
small set of inducing points to form a sparse approximation of the true posterior,
with the fidelity of the model increasing with additional inducing points. Although
the approximation error in principle can be reduced by using more inducing points,
this leads to scaling optimization challenges and computational complexity. To
achieve scalability, inducing point methods typically introduce conditional independencies and then approximations to the training and test conditional distributions.
In this paper, we consider an alternative approach to modifying the training and test
conditionals, in which we make them more flexible. In particular, we investigate
decoupling the parametric form of the predictive mean and covariance in the conditionals, and learn independent parameters for predictive mean and covariance. We
derive new evidence lower bounds (ELBO) under these more flexible conditionals,
and provide two concrete examples of applying the decoupled conditionals. Empirically, we find this additional flexibility leads to improved model performance on a
variety of regression tasks and Bayesian optimization (BO) applications.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) are a powerful class of non-parametric probabilistic models [38]. Their
flexibility and ability to make probabilistic predictions make them particularly useful in situations
where uncertainty estimates are important [23, 30, 43, 45, 56]. Although elegant, exact GPs become
intractable for large datasets since the computational cost scales cubically with the size of the dataset.
To overcome this limitation, various sparse approximate GP approaches have been developed, mostly
relying on sparse approximations of the true posterior [28, 29, 36]. Among those, variational GPs
have become increasingly popular because they enable stochastic minibatching and apply to both
regression [17] and classification [18] tasks. However, the approximate posterior and variational
inference leave an unavoidable gap from the exact model. Especially with too few inducing points,
variational GPs could yield suboptimal accuracy performance due to a lack of expressiveness. Using
more inducing points closes this gap in principle, but leads to additional computational complexity
and optimization difficulties [15]. While several works have studied ways of allowing more or better
placed inducing points to improve accuracy of variational GPs, [34, 41, 50, 57], it is nevertheless
challenging to use more than a small fraction of the dataset size in inducing points.
In this work, we take a different approach to improving model expressiveness for better accuracy
of variational GPs through decoupling conditionals. To start, we point out that inducing point
approximations rely on two key conditionals (see Sec. 3.1) – the training and the test conditional,
where the mean and covariance are parameterized by inducing points and kernel hyperparameters.
Typically, prior works have focused on various relaxations of these conditionals that enable significant
computational complexity benefits [36, 44, 46, 47, 48]. In this work, we consider alternative changes
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

