FedFed: Feature Distillation against Data
Heterogeneity in Federated Learning

Zhiqin Yang1,2∗ Yonggang Zhang2∗

Yu Zheng3

Xinmei Tian5

†
1,6

Hao Peng
Tongliang Liu4 Bo Han2
Beihang University 2 Hong Kong Baptist University 3 Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney 5 University of Science and Technology of China
6
Kunming University of Science and Technology
1

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) typically faces data heterogeneity, i.e., distribution shifting
among clients. Sharing clients’ information has shown great potentiality in mitigating data heterogeneity, yet incurs a dilemma in preserving privacy and promoting
model performance. To alleviate the dilemma, we raise a fundamental question:
Is it possible to share partial features in the data to tackle data heterogeneity? In
this work, we give an affirmative answer to this question by proposing a novel
approach called Federated Feature distillation (FedFed). Specifically, FedFed
partitions data into performance-sensitive features (i.e., greatly contributing to
model performance) and performance-robust features (i.e., limitedly contributing
to model performance). The performance-sensitive features are globally shared to
mitigate data heterogeneity, while the performance-robust features are kept locally.
FedFed enables clients to train models over local and shared data. Comprehensive
experiments demonstrate the efficacy of FedFed in promoting model performance.
The code is publicly available at: https://github.com/tmlr-group/FedFed

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL), beneficial for training over multiple distributed data sources, has recently
received increasing attention [1, 2, 3]. In FL, many clients collaboratively train a global model by
aggregating gradients (or model parameters) without the need to share local data. However, the
major concern is heterogeneity issues [4, 5, 6] caused by Non-IID distribution of distributed data
and diverse computing capability across clients. The heterogeneity issues can cause unstable model
convergence and degraded prediction accuracy, hindering further FL deployments in practice [1].
To address the heterogeneity challenge, the seminal work, federated averaging (FedAvg), introduces
the model aggregation of locally trained models [4]. It addresses the diversity of computing and
communication but still faces the issue of client drift induced by data heterogeneity [7]. Therefore,
a branch of works for defending data heterogeneity has been explored by devising new learning
objectives [6], aggregation strategies [8], and constructing shareable information across clients [9].
Among explorations as aforementioned, sharing clients’ information has been considered to be a
straightforward and promising approach to mitigate data heterogeneity [9, 10].
However, the dilemma of preserving data privacy and promoting model performance hinders the
practical effectiveness of the information-sharing strategy. Specifically, it shows that a limited
amount of shared data could significantly improve model performance [9]. Unfortunately, no
matter for sharing raw data, synthesized data, logits, or statistical information [10, 11, 12, 7] can
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author (penghao@act.buaa.edu.cn)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

