Neuro-symbolic Learning Yielding Logical Constraints

Yuan Yao

1

Zenan Li1 Yunpeng Huang1 Zhaoyu Li2
Jingwei Xu1 Taolue Chen3 Xiaoxing Ma1

Jian Lü1

1

State Key Lab of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Canada
3
School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, UK
{lizn, hyp}@smail.nju.edu.cn, zhaoyu@cs.toronto.edu,
t.chen@bbk.ac.uk, {y.yao,jingweix,xxm,lj}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Neuro-symbolic systems combine neural perception and logical reasoning, representing one of the priorities of AI research. End-to-end learning of neuro-symbolic
systems is highly desirable, but remains to be challenging. Resembling the distinction and cooperation between System 1 and System 2 of human thought (à la
Kahneman), this paper proposes a framework that fuses neural network training,
symbol grounding, and logical constraint synthesis to support learning in a weakly
supervised setting. Technically, it is cast as a game with two optimization problems
which correspond to neural network learning and symbolic constraint learning respectively. Such a formulation naturally embeds symbol grounding and enables the
interaction between the neural and the symbolic part in both training and inference.
The logical constraints are represented as cardinality constraints, and we use the
trust region method to avoid degeneracy in learning. A distinguished feature of the
optimization lies in the Boolean constraints for which we introduce a difference-ofconvex programming approach. Both theoretical analysis and empirical evaluations
substantiate the effectiveness of the proposed framework.

1

Introduction

Perception and reasoning serve as fundamental human abilities that are intrinsically linked within the
realm of human intelligence [Kahneman, 2011, Booch et al., 2021]. The objective of our study is
to develop a learning framework for neuro-symbolic systems (e.g., the one illustrated in Figure 1),
enabling simultaneous learning of neural perception and symbolic reasoning.
The merit of neuro-symbolic learning lies in resembling the integration of System 1 and System
2 of human minds [Kahneman, 2011, Yoshua and Gary, 2020, LeCun, 2022]. First, it eliminates
unnatural and sometimes costly human labeling of the latent variables and conducts learning in an
end-to-end fashion. Second, it generates not only a neural network for perception, but also a set of
explicit (symbolic) constraints enabling exact and interpretable logical reasoning. Last but not least,
the mutually beneficial interaction between the neural and the symbolic parts during both training
and inference stages potentially achieves better performance than separated learning approaches.
However, existing approaches do not provide an adequate solution to the problem. They either (1)
are not end-to-end, i.e., human intervention is employed to label the latent z so that the task can
be divided into a purely neural subtask of image classification and a purely symbolic subtask of
constraint solving, or (2) are not interpretable, i.e., can only approximate symbolic reasoning with
neural network but without explicit logical constraints generated (e.g., Wang et al. [2019], Yang et al.
[2023]), which inevitably sacrifices the exactness and interpretability of symbolic reasoning, resulting
in an inaccurate black-box predictor but not a genuine neuro-symbolic system.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

