Variational Inference with Gaussian Score Matching

Chirag Modi
Center for Computational Astrophysics,
Center for Computational Mathematics,
Flatiron Institute, New York
cmodi@flatironinstitute.org

Charles C. Margossian
Center for Computational Mathematics,
Flatiron Institute, New York
cmargossian@flatironinstitute.org

Yuling Yao
Center for Computational Mathematics,
Flatiron Institute, New York
yyao@flatironinstitute.org

Robert M. Gower
Center for Computational Mathematics,
Flatiron Institute, New York
rgower@flatironinstitute.org

David M. Blei
Department of Computer Science, Statistics,
Columbia University, New York
david.blei@columbia.edu

Lawrence K. Saul
Center for Computational Mathematics,
Flatiron Institute, New York
lsaul@flatironinstitute.org

Abstract
Variational inference (VI) is a method to approximate the computationally intractable posterior distributions that arise in Bayesian statistics. Typically, VI fits
a simple parametric distribution to be close to the target posterior, optimizing
an appropriate objective such as the evidence lower bound (ELBO). In this work,
we present a new approach to VI. Our method is based on the principle of score
matching—namely, that if two distributions are equal then their score functions
(i.e., gradients of the log density) are equal at every point on their support. With
this principle, we develop score-matching VI, an iterative algorithm that seeks to
match the scores between the variational approximation and the exact posterior. At
each iteration, score-matching VI solves an inner optimization, one that minimally
adjusts the current variational estimate to match the scores at a newly sampled value
of the latent variables. We show that when the variational family is a Gaussian, this
inner optimization enjoys a closed-form solution, which we call Gaussian score
matching VI (GSM-VI). GSM-VI is a “black box” variational algorithm in that
it only requires a differentiable joint distribution, and as such it can be applied to
a wide class of models. We compare GSM-VI to black box variational inference
(BBVI), which has similar requirements but instead optimizes the ELBO. We
first study how GSM-VI behaves as a function of the problem dimensionality, the
condition number of the target covariance matrix (when the target is Gaussian), and
the degree of mismatch between the approximating and exact posterior distribution.
We then study GSM-VI on a collection of real-world Bayesian inference problems
from the posteriorDB database of datasets and models. We find that GSM-VI is
faster than BBVI and equally or more accurate. Specifically, over a wide range of
target posteriors, GSM-VI requires 10-100x fewer gradient evaluations than BBVI
to obtain a comparable quality of approximation.1

1

We provide a Python implementation of GSM-VI algorithm at https://github.com/modichirag/GSM-VI.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

