AVIS: Autonomous Visual Information Seeking
with Large Language Model Agent

Ziniu Hu12∗

Ahmet Iscen2

David A Ross2
1

Chen Sun2

Kai-Wei Chang1

Cordelia Schmid2

Yizhou Sun1

Alireza Fathi2

University of California, Los Angeles, 2 Google Research

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an autonomous information seeking visual question answering framework, AVIS. Our method leverages a Large Language Model (LLM)
to dynamically strategize the utilization of external tools and to investigate their
outputs via tree search, thereby acquiring the indispensable knowledge needed
to provide answers to the posed questions. Responding to visual questions that
necessitate external knowledge, such as "What event is commemorated by the
building depicted in this image?", is a complex task. This task presents a combinatorial search space that demands a sequence of actions, including invoking
APIs, analyzing their responses, and making informed decisions. We conduct
a user study to collect a variety of instances of human decision-making when
faced with this task. This data is then used to design a system comprised of three
components: an LLM-powered planner that dynamically determines which tool
to use next, an LLM-powered reasoner that analyzes and extracts key information
from the tool outputs, and a working memory component that retains the acquired
information throughout the process. The collected user behavior serves as a guide
for our system in two key ways. First, we create a transition graph by analyzing
the sequence of decisions made by users. This graph delineates distinct states and
confines the set of actions available at each state. Second, we use examples of user
decision-making to provide our LLM-powered planner and reasoner with relevant
contextual instances, enhancing their capacity to make informed decisions. We
show that AVIS achieves state-of-the-art results on knowledge-intensive visual
question answering benchmarks such as Infoseek [7] and OK-VQA [26].

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs), such as GPT3 [5], LaMDA [16], PALM [9], BLOOM [34] and
LLaMA [37], have showcased the capacity to memorize and utilize a significant amount of world
knowledge. They demonstrate emerging abilities [38] like in-context learning [5], code generation [19], and common sense reasoning [24]. Recently, there is a growing focus towards adapting
LLMs to handle multi-modal inputs and outputs involving both vision and language. Noteworthy
examples of such visual language models (VLMs) include GPT4 [29], Flamingo [4] and PALI [6].
They set the state of the art for several tasks, including image captioning, visual question answering,
and open vocabulary recognition.
While LLMs excel beyond human capabilities in tasks involving textual information retrieval, the
current state of the art VLMs perform inadequately on datasets designed for visual information
∗

This work was done when Ziniu was an intern at Google.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

