Learning Generalizable Agents via Saliency-Guided
Features Decorrelation
Sili Huang1

Yanchao Sun2
Jifeng Hu3
Siyuan Guo4
Hechang Chen*5
6∗
7
8∗
Yi Chang
Lichao Sun
Bo Yang
1,8
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education
1,3,4,5,6
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
7
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, USA

Abstract
In visual-based Reinforcement Learning (RL), agents often struggle to generalize well to environmental variations in the state space that were not observed
during training. The variations can arise in both task-irrelevant features, such as
background noise, and task-relevant features, such as robot configurations, that
are related to the optimal decisions. To achieve generalization in both situations,
agents are required to accurately understand the impact of changed features on
the decisions, i.e., establishing the true associations between changed features and
decisions in the policy model. However, due to the inherent correlations among
features in the state space, the associations between features and decisions become entangled, making it difficult for the policy to distinguish them. To this end,
we propose Saliency-Guided Features Decorrelation (SGFD) to eliminate these
correlations through sample reweighting. Concretely, SGFD consists of two core
techniques: Random Fourier Functions (RFF) and the saliency map. RFF is utilized
to estimate the complex non-linear correlations in high-dimensional images, while
the saliency map is designed to identify the changed features. Under the guidance
of the saliency map, SGFD employs sample reweighting to minimize the estimated
correlations related to changed features, thereby achieving decorrelation in visual
RL tasks. Our experimental results demonstrate that SGFD can generalize well on
a wide range of test environments and significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in handling both task-irrelevant variations and task-relevant variations.

1

Introduction

Learning control from high-dimensional visual observations is a critical requirement for real-world
applications and has received significant attention in recent years [43, 18, 10]. Reinforcement
Learning (RL) has demonstrated its effectiveness in solving visual tasks by learning from compact
representations of sensory inputs [12, 13]. However, current algorithms exhibit limited reliability
when deployed in unseen environments, despite achieving satisfactory performance during training
[7, 48]. It remains an open challenge to learn policies with good generalization across both changed
task-irrelevant and relevant features [24]. Consider a simple example during the evaluation stage:
a well-trained robot may fail to accomplish the task when confronted with task-irrelevant visual
disturbances or changes to the task-relevant robotic arm, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Generalization to task-irrelevant features in vision RL tasks has been widely discussed [49, 11, 6, 3].
Since it is a well-established consensus that task-irrelevant features should not affect the decision,
agents are typically designed to maintain an invariant policy when these features are changed
∗

Corresponding Author. Bo Yang, Hechang Chen and Yi Chang.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

