Geometric Neural Diffusion Processes
Emile Mathieu∗
University Of Cambridge

Vincent Dutordoir∗
University Of Cambridge
Secondmind Labs

Valentin De Bortoli
Center for Science of Data, ENS Ulm

Yee Whye Teh
University Of Oxford

Michael J. Hutchinson∗
University Of Oxford

Richard E. Turner
University Of Cambridge,
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Denoising diffusion models have proven to be a flexible and effective paradigm
for generative modelling. Their recent extension to infinite dimensional Euclidean
spaces has allowed for the modelling of stochastic processes. However, many
problems in the natural sciences incorporate symmetries and involve data living in
non-Euclidean spaces. In this work, we extend the framework of diffusion models
to incorporate a series of geometric priors in infinite-dimension modelling. We do
so by a) constructing a noising process which admits, as limiting distribution, a
geometric Gaussian process that transforms under the symmetry group of interest,
and b) approximating the score with a neural network that is equivariant w.r.t. this
group. We show that with these conditions, the generative functional model admits
the same symmetry. We demonstrate scalability and capacity of the model, using a
novel Langevin-based conditional sampler, to fit complex scalar and vector fields,
with Euclidean and spherical codomain, on synthetic and real-world weather data.

1

Introduction

Traditional denoising diffusion models are defined on finite-dimension Euclidean spaces (Song
and Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021). Extensions
have recently been developed for more exotic distributions, such as those supported on Riemannian
manifolds (De Bortoli et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022; Lou and Ermon, 2023; Fishman et al., 2023),
and on function spaces of the form f : Rn → Rd (Dutordoir et al., 2022; Kerrigan et al., 2022; Lim
et al., 2023a; Pidstrigach et al., 2023; Franzese et al., 2023; Bond-Taylor and Willcocks, 2023) (i.e.
stochastic processes). In this work, we extend diffusion models to further deal with distributions
over functions that incorporate non-Euclidean geometry in two different ways. This investigation of
geometry also naturally leads to the consideration of symmetries in these distributions, and as such
we also present methods for incorporating these into diffusion models.
Firstly, we look at tensor fields. Tensor fields are geometric objects that assign to all points on
some manifold a value that lives in some vector space V . Roughly speaking, these are functions
of the form f : M → V . These objects are central to the study of physics as they form a generic
mathematical framework for modelling natural phenomena. Common examples include the pressure
of a fluid in motion as f : R3 → R, representing wind over the Earth’s surface as f : S 2 → TS 2 ,
where TS 2 is the tangent-space of the sphere, or modelling the stress in a deformed object as
f : Object → TR3 ⊗ TR3 , where ⊗ is the tensor-product of the tangent spaces. Given the inherent
symmetry in the laws of nature, these tensor fields can transform in a way that preserves these
symmetries. Any modelling of these laws may benefit from respecting these symmetries.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

∗

Equal contribution

