Enhancing Minority Classes by Mixing: An
Adaptative Optimal Transport Approach for
Long-tailed Classification

1

Jintong Gao1 , He Zhao2 , Zhuo Li3,4 , Dandan Guo1∗
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University 2 CSIRO’s Data61
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
gaojt20@mails.jlu.edu.cn
he.zhao@ieee.org
221019088@link.cuhk.edu.cn
guodandan@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract
Real-world data usually confronts severe class-imbalance problems, where several
majority classes have a significantly larger presence in the training set than minority
classes. One effective solution is using mixup-based methods to generate synthetic
samples to enhance the presence of minority classes. Previous approaches mix
the background images from the majority classes and foreground images from the
minority classes in a random manner, which ignores the sample-level semantic
similarity, possibly resulting in less reasonable or less useful images. In this work,
we propose an adaptive image-mixing method based on optimal transport (OT) to
incorporate both class-level and sample-level information, which is able to generate
semantically reasonable and meaningful mixed images for minority classes. Due to
its flexibility, our method can be combined with existing long-tailed classification
methods to enhance their performance and it can also serve as a general data
augmentation method for balanced datasets. Extensive experiments indicate that
our method achieves effective performance for long-tailed classification tasks. The
code is available at https://github.com/JintongGao/Enhancing-Minority-Classesby-Mixing.

1

Introduction

Large-scale balanced datasets play a vital role in the remarkable success of deep neural networks for
various tasks. However, datasets in many real-world applications often exhibit unexpected long-tailed
distributions where most of the data belongs to several majority classes while the rest spreads across
lots of minority classes. The model trained on such a long-tailed dataset will be biased toward
majority classes, leading to poor generalizations about minority classes.
Re-weighting [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], over-sampling [8, 9, 10, 11, 12], under-sampling [13, 14, 15, 16],
data augmentation [17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23], two-stage methods [24, 25, 26, 27], and other methods
[28, 29] are common solutions to the long-tailed problem. Among them, over-sampling and data
augmentation aim to balance the data distribution by oversampling or generating closely related
minority classes. As the representative data augmentation techniques, mixup and its variants [30,
31, 32] have performed satisfactorily in the computer vision fields, whose key idea is constructing
mixed samples by performing linear interpolations between data/features and corresponding labels.
Considering mixup-based methods are designed for balanced data, applying them to long-tailed
classification without any adjustments may ignore the specificity of long-tailed data distribution.
Recently, some novel mixup-based methods for the long-tailed problem have been explored [22, 33,
∗

Corresponding author. This work was supported by NSFC (62306125).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

