Towards Revealing the Mystery behind
Chain of Thought: A Theoretical Perspective

Guhao Feng1,5,∗ Bohang Zhang2,∗ Yuntian Gu3,∗ Haotian Ye3,∗
Di He2,B Liwei Wang2,4,B
1
School of EECS, Peking University 2 National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University 3 Yuanpei College,
Peking University 4 Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University 5 Pazhou Lab
fenguhao@stu.pku.edu.cn
haotianye@pku.edu.cn

zhangbohang@pku.edu.cn
dihe@pku.edu.cn

guyuntian@stu.pku.edu.cn
wanglw@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent studies have discovered that Chain-of-Thought prompting (CoT) can dramatically improve the performance of Large Language Models (LLMs), particularly
when dealing with complex tasks involving mathematics or reasoning. Despite
the enormous empirical success, the underlying mechanisms behind CoT and how
it unlocks the potential of LLMs remain elusive. In this paper, we take a first
step towards theoretically answering these questions. Specifically, we examine the
expressivity of LLMs with CoT in solving fundamental mathematical and decisionmaking problems. By using circuit complexity theory, we first give impossibility
results showing that bounded-depth Transformers are unable to directly produce
correct answers for basic arithmetic/equation tasks unless the model size grows
super-polynomially with respect to the input length. In contrast, we then prove by
construction that autoregressive Transformers of constant size suffice to solve both
tasks by generating CoT derivations using a commonly used math language format.
Moreover, we show LLMs with CoT can handle a general class of decision-making
problems known as Dynamic Programming, thus justifying their power in tackling
complex real-world tasks. Finally, an extensive set of experiments show that, while
Transformers always fail to directly predict the answers, they can consistently learn
to generate correct solutions step-by-step given sufficient CoT demonstrations.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as a foundation model in natural
language processing. Among them, the autoregressive paradigm has gained arguably the most
popularity [51, 9, 46, 69, 57, 16, 52, 54], based on the philosophy that all different tasks can be
uniformly treated as sequence generation problems. Specifically, given any task, the input along with
the task description can be together encoded as a sequence of tokens (called the prompt); the answer is
then generated by predicting subsequent tokens conditioned on the prompt in an autoregressive way.
Previous studies highlighted that a carefully designed prompt greatly matters LLMs’ performance
[32, 38]. In particular, the so-called Chain-of-Thought prompting (CoT) [61] has been found crucial
for tasks involving arithmetic or reasoning, where the correctness of generated answers can be dramatically improved via a modified prompt that triggers LLMs to output intermediate derivations. Practically, this can be achieved by either adding special phrases such as “let’s think step by step” or by giving few-shot CoT demonstrations [34, 61, 56, 44, 70, 63]. However, despite the striking performance,
the underlying mechanism behind CoT remains largely unclear and mysterious. On one hand, are there
∗

Equal contributions.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

