ReTR: Modeling Rendering Via Transformer for
Generalizable Neural Surface Reconstruction
Yixun Liang1∗ Hao He1, 2∗ Ying-Cong Chen1, 2†
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou).
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
yliang982@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, hheat@connect.ust.hk, yingcongchen@ust.hk

Abstract
Generalizable neural surface reconstruction techniques have attracted great attention in recent years. However, they encounter limitations of low confidence depth
distribution and inaccurate surface reasoning due to the oversimplified volume
rendering process employed. In this paper, we present Reconstruction TRansformer (ReTR), a novel framework that leverages the transformer architecture to
redesign the rendering process, enabling complex render interaction modeling. It
introduces a learnable meta-ray token and utilizes the cross-attention mechanism
to simulate the interaction of rendering process with sampled points and render
the observed color. Meanwhile, by operating within a high-dimensional feature
space rather than the color space, ReTR mitigates sensitivity to projected colors in
source views. Such improvements result in accurate surface assessment with high
confidence. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on various datasets,
showcasing how our method outperforms the current state-of-the-art approaches in
terms of reconstruction quality and generalization ability. Our code is available at
https://github.com/YixunLiang/ReTR.

1

Introduction

In the realm of computer vision and graphics, extracting geometric information from multi-view
images poses a significant challenge with far-reaching implications for various fields, including
robotics, augmented reality, and virtual reality. As a popular approach to this problem, neural
implicit reconstruction techniques [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] are frequently employed, generating accurate
and plausible geometry from multi-view images by utilizing volume rendering and neural implicit
representations based on the Sign Distance Function (SDF) [7] and its variant. Despite their efficacy,
these methods possess inherent limitations such as the lack of cross-scene generalization capabilities
and the necessity for extensive computational resources for training them from scratch for each scene.
Furthermore, these techniques heavily rely on a large number of input views.
Recent studies such as SparseNeuS [9] and VolRecon [8] have attempted to overcome these challenges
by integrating prior image information with volume rendering methods, thereby achieving impressive
cross-scene generalization capabilities while only requiring sparse views as input. Nevertheless,
these solutions are still based on volume rendering, which poses some intrinsic drawbacks in surface
reconstruction. Specifically, volume rendering is a simplification of the physical world and might not
capture the full extent of its complexity. It models the interactions of incident photons and particles
into density, which is predicted solely based on sampled point features. This oversimplified modeling
fails to disentangle the contribution of the light transport effect and surface properties to the observed
color, resulting in an inaccurate assessment of the actual surface. Moreover, the prediction of color
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

