NAR-Former V2: Rethinking Transformer for
Universal Neural Network Representation Learning

Yun Yi1,3,† Haokui Zhang2,3,∗ Rong Xiao3 Nannan Wang1,∗ Xiaoyu Wang3
1
Xidian University 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University 3 Intellifusion
yuny220@163.com
hkzhang1991@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
xiao.rong@intellif.com
nnwang@xidian.edu.cn
fanghuaxue@gmail.com

Abstract
As more deep learning models are being applied in real-world applications, there
is a growing need for modeling and learning the representations of neural networks themselves. An effective representation can be used to predict target attributes of networks without the need for actual training and deployment procedures, facilitating efﬁcient network design and deployment. Recently, inspired
by the success of Transformer, some Transformer-based representation learning
frameworks have been proposed and achieved promising performance in handling
cell-structured models. However, graph neural network (GNN) based approaches
still dominate the ﬁeld of learning representation for the entire network. In this
paper, we revisit the Transformer and compare it with GNN to analyze their
different architectural characteristics. We then propose a modiﬁed Transformerbased universal neural network representation learning model NAR-Former V2.
It can learn efﬁcient representations from both cell-structured networks and entire networks. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst take the network as a graph and design
a straightforward tokenizer to encode the network into a sequence. Then, we
incorporate the inductive representation learning capability of GNN into Transformer, enabling Transformer to generalize better when encountering unseen architecture. Additionally, we introduce a series of simple yet effective modiﬁcations to enhance the ability of the Transformer in learning representation from
graph structures. In encoding entire networks and then predicting the latency, our
proposed method surpasses the GNN-based method NNLP by a signiﬁcant margin on the NNLQP dataset. Furthermore, regarding accuracy prediction on the
cell-structured NASBench101 and NASBench201 datasets, our method achieves
highly comparable performance to other state-of-the-art methods. The code is
available at https://github.com/yuny220/NAR-Former-V2.

1

Introduction

With the maturity of deep learning technology, an increasing number of deep neural network models of various sizes and structures are being proposed and implemented in academic research and
industrial applications. In this process, the rapid deployment of networks and the design of new networks that meet task requirements are signiﬁcant. To address this issue, researchers propose using
machine learning models to solve the deployment and design problems of the models themselves.
One popular strategy is encoding the input neural network and utilizing the resulting neural network
representation to predict a speciﬁc target attribute directly without actually executing the evaluation
program. In recent years, we have witnessed success in accelerating model deployment and design
†
∗

This work was done while Yun Yi was an intern at Intellifusion.
Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

