Uncertainty Quantification over Graph with
Conformalized Graph Neural Networks

Kexin Huang1

Ying Jin2

Emmanuel Candès2,3

Jure Leskovec1

1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
2
Department of Statistics, Stanford University
3
Department of Mathematics, Stanford University
kexinh@cs.stanford.edu, ying531@stanford.edu,
candes@stanford.edu, jure@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are powerful machine learning prediction models
on graph-structured data. However, GNNs lack rigorous uncertainty estimates,
limiting their reliable deployment in settings where the cost of errors is significant.
We propose conformalized GNN (CF-GNN), extending conformal prediction
(CP) to graph-based models for guaranteed uncertainty estimates. Given an entity
in the graph, CF-GNN produces a prediction set/interval that provably contains
the true label with pre-defined coverage probability (e.g. 90%). We establish a
permutation invariance condition that enables the validity of CP on graph data
and provide an exact characterization of the test-time coverage. Besides valid
coverage, it is crucial to reduce the prediction set size/interval length for practical
use. We observe a key connection between non-conformity scores and network
structures, which motivates us to develop a topology-aware output correction
model that learns to update the prediction and produces more efficient prediction
sets/intervals. Extensive experiments show that CF-GNN achieves any pre-defined
target marginal coverage while significantly reducing the prediction set/interval
size by up to 74% over the baselines. It also empirically achieves satisfactory
conditional coverage over various raw and network features.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown great potential in learning representations for graphstructured data, which has led to their widespread adoption in weather forecasting [29], drug discovery [31], and recommender systems [46], etc. As GNNs are increasingly deployed in high-stakes
settings, it is important to understand the uncertainty in the predictions they produce. One prominent
approach to uncertainty quantification is to construct a prediction set/interval that informs a plausible
range of values the true outcome may take. A large number of methods have been proposed to achieve
this goal [17, 49, 28, 44]. However, these methods often lack theoretical and empirical guarantees
regarding their validity, i.e. the probability that the prediction set/interval covers the outcome [2].
This lack of rigor hinders their reliable deployment in situations where errors can be consequential.
Conformal prediction [43] (CP) is a framework for producing statistically guaranteed uncertainty
estimates. Given a user-specified miscoverage level α ∈ (0, 1), it leverages a set of “calibration”
data to output prediction sets/intervals for new test points that provably include the true outcome
with probability at least 1 − α. Put another way, the conformal prediction sets provably only miss
the test outcomes at most α fraction of the time. With its simple formulation, clear guarantee and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

