Graph Convolutional Kernel Machine
versus Graph Convolutional Networks

Zhihao Wu1 , Zhao Zhang1,2 , Jicong Fan1,3∗
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
2
Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
{zhihaowu1999,cszzhang}@gmail.com, fanjicong@cuhk.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCN) with one or two hidden layers have been
widely used in handling graph data that are prevalent in various disciplines. Many
studies showed that the gain of making GCNs deeper is tiny or even negative. This
implies that the complexity of graph data is often limited and shallow models
are often sufficient to extract expressive features for various tasks such as node
classification. Therefore, in this work, we present a framework called graph convolutional kernel machine (GCKM)1 for graph-based machine learning. GCKMs
are built upon kernel functions integrated with graph convolution. An example
is the graph convolutional kernel support vector machine (GCKSVM) for node
classification, for which we analyze the generalization error bound and discuss
the impact of the graph structure. Compared to GCNs, GCKMs require much
less effort in architecture design, hyperparameter tuning, and optimization. More
importantly, GCKMs are guaranteed to obtain globally optimal solutions and have
strong generalization ability and high interpretability. GCKMs are composable, can
be extended to large-scale data, and are applicable to various tasks (e.g., node or
graph classification, clustering, feature extraction, dimensionality reduction). The
numerical results on benchmark datasets show that, besides the aforementioned
advantages, GCKMs have at least competitive accuracy compared to GCNs.

1

Introduction

Graph data are prevalent in science and engineering. In recent years, neural networks and deep
learning methods have shown promising performance in handling various graph data. Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) have been developed into various basic frameworks, including famous GCN
[Kipf and Welling, 2017], GIN [Xu et al., 2019], GraphSAGE [Hamilton et al., 2017], GAT
[Velickovic et al., 2018], etc. As one of the most attractive GNN paradigms, GCN, the graph
convolutional network [Kipf and Welling, 2017], has gained widespread attention since it was
proposed. Many widely developed domains like machine learning [Chen et al., 2023b; Cai et
al., 2022; Fan et al., 2022; Fan, 2022b], data mining [Chang et al., 2021; Fan, 2021; Wu et
al., 2022], computer vision [Guan et al., 2022; Cai and Fan, 2022; Wu et al., 2023], etc., have
also made extensive use of numerous GCN variants. Despite the better performance compared
to classical graph methods (e.g., DeepWalk [Perozzi et al., 2014], LINE [Tang et al., 2015] and
node2vector [Grover and Leskovec, 2016]), some recent studies have pointed out a few drawbacks of GCNs [Wang et al., 2020; Bo et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023]. Perhaps the failure of
deep GCNs is the most notorious one that severely restricted the further development of GCNs.
∗
1

Corresponding author.
The source code is available at https://github.com/ZhihaoWu99/GCKM.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

