May the Force be with You: Unified Force-Centric
Pre-Training for 3D Molecular Conformations

Rui Feng
Computational Science and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
rfeng@gatech.edu

Qi Zhu
Computer Science Department
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
qi.zhu.ckc@gmail.com

Huan Tran
Materials Science and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
huan.tran@mse.gatech.edu

Binghong Chen
Computational Science and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
binghong@gatech.edu

Aubrey Toland
Materials Science and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
artoland@gatech.edu

Rampi Ramprasad
Materials Science and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
rampi.ramprasad@mse.gatech.edu

Chao Zhang
Computational Science and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
chaozhang@gatech.edu

Abstract
Recent works have shown the promise of learning pre-trained models for 3D molecular representation. However, existing pre-training models focus predominantly on
equilibrium data and largely overlook off-equilibrium conformations. It is challenging to extend these methods to off-equilibrium data because their training objective
relies on assumptions of conformations being the local energy minima. We address
this gap by proposing a force-centric pretraining model for 3D molecular conformations covering both equilibrium and off-equilibrium data. For off-equilibrium
data, our model learns directly from their atomic forces. For equilibrium data,
we introduce zero-force regularization and forced-based denoising techniques to
approximate near-equilibrium forces. We obtain a unified pre-trained model for 3D
molecular representation with over 15 million diverse conformations. Experiments
show that, with our pre-training objective, we increase forces accuracy by around 3
times compared to the un-pre-trained Equivariant Transformer model. By incorporating regularizations on equilibrium data, we solved the problem of unstable
MD simulations in vanilla Equivariant Transformers, achieving state-of-the-art
simulation performance with 2.45 times faster inference time than NequIP. As a
powerful molecular encoder, our pre-trained model achieves on-par performance
with state-of-the-art property prediction tasks.

1

Introduction

Representation learning for 3D molecules is a crucial task in the field of AI for science. Recent years
have seen significant advancements in Graph Neural Networks [24, 19, 12] and Equivariant Graph
Neural Networks architectures [30, 9, 1, 11, 23] to capture interatomic features in 3D molecular
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

