Adaptive Test-Time Personalization for
Federated Learning

Wenxuan Bao1∗ , Tianxin Wei1∗ , Haohan Wang1 , Jingrui He1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{wbao4,twei10,haohanw,jingrui}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Personalized federated learning algorithms have shown promising results in adapting models to various distribution shifts. However, most of these methods require
labeled data on testing clients for personalization, which is usually unavailable in
real-world scenarios. In this paper, we introduce a novel setting called test-time personalized federated learning (TTPFL), where clients locally adapt a global model
in an unsupervised way without relying on any labeled data during test-time. While
traditional test-time adaptation (TTA) can be used in this scenario, most of them
inherently assume training data come from a single domain, while they come from
multiple clients (source domains) with different distributions. Overlooking these
domain interrelationships can result in suboptimal generalization. Moreover, most
TTA algorithms are designed for a specific kind of distribution shift and lack the
flexibility to handle multiple kinds of distribution shifts in FL. In this paper, we find
that this lack of flexibility partially results from their pre-defining which modules
to adapt in the model. To tackle this challenge, we propose a novel algorithm
called ATP to adaptively learns the adaptation rates for each module in the model
from distribution shifts among source domains. Theoretical analysis proves the
strong generalization of ATP. Extensive experiments demonstrate its superiority in
handling various distribution shifts including label shift, image corruptions, and domain shift, outperforming existing TTA methods across multiple datasets and model
architectures. Our code is available at https://github.com/baowenxuan/ATP.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is a distributed learning system where multiple clients collaborate to train
a machine learning model under the orchestration of the central server, while keeping their data
decentralized [31, 18]. However, clients in FL typically exhibit distinct data distributions. For
example, in the context of animal image classification, users tend to capture pictures of various
animals prevalent in their respective regions, introducing label shift [51] to the local image dataset.
Meanwhile, even when capturing images of the same species, the visual appearance can be influenced
by the environment and camera settings, introducing feature shift [34]. It is crucial that each client
can adapt the model to align with its unique data distribution [44]. Previous personalized federated
learning (PFL) works have mainly focused on improving the performance on clients participating in
training [41, 37, 25, 4] or generalization to new clients [8, 7, 6], assuming the availability of labeled
data. However, in many real-world scenarios, clients do not have labeled data for personalization,
which limits the application of PFL algorithms. For example, when employing an animal image
classifier to mobile phones, their users may capture images of various animals, but without any
accompanying labels indicating the species of the animal.
* Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

