Belief Projection-Based Reinforcement Learning for
Environments with Delayed Feedback

Jangwon Kim1
jangwonkim@postech.ac.kr

Hangyeol Kim 2
hangyeol.kim@koreaaero.com

Jongchan Baek3
jcbaek@etri.re.kr

Jiwook Kang2
jiwook.kang@koreaaero.com

Soohee Han1
soohee.han@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a novel actor-critic algorithm for an environment with delayed feedback,
which addresses the state-space explosion problem of conventional approaches.
Conventional approaches use an augmented state constructed from the last observed state and actions executed since visiting the last observed state Using the
augmented state space, the correct Markov decision process for delayed environments can be constructed; however, this causes the state space to explode as the
number of delayed timesteps increases, leading to slow convergence. Our proposed algorithm, called Belief-Projection-Based Q-learning (BPQL), addresses
the state-space explosion problem by evaluating the values of the critic for which
the input state size is equal to the original state-space size rather than that of the
augmented one. We compare BPQL to traditional approaches in continuous control
tasks and demonstrate that it significantly outperforms other algorithms in terms of
asymptotic performance and sample efficiency. We also show that BPQL solves
long-delayed environments, which conventional approaches are unable to do.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) methods have been successfully applied to diverse domains, such
as decision-making tasks and robotic control problems [23, 2]. The deep RL framework has shown
its potential by mastering the highly complex board game Go and defeating the professional Go
player Lee [30]. It has also demonstrated superhuman performance, even in games where a perfect
model is not provided, such as Atari video games [24]. Furthermore, modern deep RL algorithms
have achieved significant performance improvements in continuous control domains, such as robotic
locomotion [28, 29, 14]. Recently, many attempts have been made to apply RL-based control in
not only simulations but also the real-world domain [13, 16, 22, 26]. Remarkable examples include
applying the RL method to a quadrupedal robot to learn walking gaits and plan the motion of robotic
manipulation in the real world [14, 17].
Despite recent progress in RL methods, adapting RL algorithms to the real world remains challenging
for many reasons. Delayed feedback from the environment is a particular challenge. For example,
latency may occur when the controller attempts to communicate with an agent if the agent is located far
from the controller or if a large quantity of data, such as high-resolution images, must be transmitted.
Furthermore, hardware issues can cause sensing or actuator delays. This delayed feedback may
hinder achieving the control objectives.
1

Computational Control Engineering Lab., Pohang University of Science and Technology. 2 Korea Aerospace
Industries, Ltd. 3 Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

