Structure from Duplicates:
Neural Inverse Graphics from a Pile of Objects

Tianhang Cheng1 Wei-Chiu Ma2 Kaiyu Guan1 Antonio Torralba2 Shenlong Wang1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{tcheng12, kaiyug, shenlong}@illinois.edu
{weichium, torralba}@mit.edu

Input RGB

6 DoF pose

Albedo

Surface normal

Roughness/Metallic

Object insertion

Material editing 1

Material editing 2

Relighting 1

Relighting 2

Figure 1: Structure from duplicates (SfD) is a novel inverse graphics framework that reconstructs
geometry, material, and illumination from a single image containing multiple identical objects.

Abstract
Our world is full of identical objects (e.g., cans of coke, cars of same model).
These duplicates, when seen together, provide additional and strong cues for us to
effectively reason about 3D. Inspired by this observation, we introduce Structure
from Duplicates (SfD), a novel inverse graphics framework that reconstructs geometry, material, and illumination from a single image containing multiple identical
objects. SfD begins by identifying multiple instances of an object within an image,
and then jointly estimates the 6DoF pose for all instances. An inverse graphics
pipeline is subsequently employed to jointly reason about the shape, material of
the object, and the environment light, while adhering to the shared geometry and
material constraint across instances. Our primary contributions involve utilizing
object duplicates as a robust prior for single-image inverse graphics and proposing
an in-plane rotation-robust Structure from Motion (SfM) formulation for joint
6-DoF object pose estimation. By leveraging multi-view cues from a single image,
SfD generates more realistic and detailed 3D reconstructions, significantly outperforming existing single image reconstruction models and multi-view reconstruction
approaches with a similar or greater number of observations. Code available at
https://github.com/Tianhang-Cheng/SfD

1

Introduction

Given a single/set of image(s), the goal of inverse rendering is to recover the underlying geometry,
material, and lighting of the scene. The task is of paramount interest to many applications in computer
vision, graphics, and robotics and has drawn extensive attention across the communities over the past
few years[74; 47; 21; 45].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

