Equivariant Flow Matching with Hybrid Probability
Transport for 3D Molecule Generation

Yuxuan Song1,∗, Jingjing Gong1,∗ , Minkai Xu2 , Ziyao Cao1
Yanyan Lan 1,3 , Stefano Ermon2 , Hao Zhou1 ,Wei-Ying Ma1
1

Institute of AI Industry Research(AIR), Tsinghua University
2
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
{songyuxuan,gongjingjing}@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The generation of 3D molecules requires simultaneously deciding the categorical
features (atom types) and continuous features (atom coordinates). Deep generative
models, especially Diffusion Models (DMs), have demonstrated effectiveness in
generating feature-rich geometries. However, existing DMs typically suffer from
unstable probability dynamics with inefficient sampling speed. In this paper, we
introduce geometric flow matching, which enjoys the advantages of both equivariant
modeling and stabilized probability dynamics. More specifically, we propose a
hybrid probability path where the coordinates probability path is regularized by an
equivariant optimal transport, and the information between different modalities is
aligned. Experimentally, the proposed method could consistently achieve better
performance on multiple molecule generation benchmarks with 4.75× speed up of
sampling on average.2

1

Introduction

Geometric generative models aim to approximate the distribution of complex geometries and emerge
as an important research direction in various scientific domains. A general formulation of the
geometries in scientific fields could be the point clouds where each point is embedded in the Cartesian
coordinates and labeled with rich features. For example, the molecules are the atomic graphs in
3D [44] and the proteins could be seen as the proximity spatial graphs [15]. Therefore, with the
ability of density estimation and generating novel geometries, geometric generative models have
appealing potentials in many important scientific discovery problems, e.g., material science [36], de
novo drug design [11] and protein engineering [45].
With the advancements of deep generative modeling, there has been a series of fruitful research
progresses achieved in geometric generative modeling, especially molecular structures. For example,
[9, 30] and [42] proposed data-driven methods to generate 3D molecules (in silico) with autoregressive
and flow-based models respectively. However, despite great potential, the performance is indeed
limited considering several important empirical evaluation metrics such as validity, stability, and
molecule size, due to the insufficient capacity of the underlying generative models [40]. Most recently,
diffusion models (DMs) have shown surprising results on many generative modeling tasks which
generate new samples by simulating a stochastic differential equation (SDE) to transform the prior
density to the data distribution. With the simple regression training objective, several attempts [13]
on applying DMs in this field have also demonstrated superior performance. However, existing
∗
2

Equal Contribution, Hao Zhou (zhouhao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.
The code is available at https://github.com/AlgoMole/MolFM

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

