Online RL in Linearly 𝑞 𝜋 -Realizable MDPs Is as Easy
as in Linear MDPs If You Learn What to Ignore

Gellért Weisz
Google DeepMind, London, UK
University College London, London, UK

András György
Google DeepMind, London, UK

Csaba Szepesvári
Google DeepMind, Montreal, Canada
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada

Abstract
We consider online reinforcement learning (RL) in episodic Markov decision processes (MDPs) under the linear 𝑞 𝜋 -realizability assumption, where it is assumed
that the action-values of all policies can be expressed as linear functions of stateaction features. This class is known to be more general than linear MDPs, where
the transition kernel and the reward function are assumed to be linear functions of
the feature vectors. As our ﬁrst contribution, we show that the difference between
the two classes is the presence of states in linearly 𝑞 𝜋 -realizable MDPs where
for any policy, all the actions have approximately equal values, and skipping over
these states by following an arbitrarily ﬁxed policy in those states transforms the
problem to a linear MDP. Based on this observation, we derive a novel (computationally inefﬁcient) learning algorithm for linearly 𝑞 𝜋 -realizable MDPs that
simultaneously learns what states should be skipped over and runs another learning algorithm on the linear MDP hidden in the problem. The method returns an
𝜀-optimal policy after polylog(𝐻, 𝑑)/𝜀 2 interactions with the MDP, where 𝐻 is
the time horizon and 𝑑 is the dimension of the feature vectors, giving the ﬁrst
polynomial-sample-complexity online RL algorithm for this setting. The results
are proved for the misspeciﬁed case, where the sample complexity is shown to
degrade gracefully with the misspeciﬁcation error.

1

Introduction

We consider reinforcement learning where an agent interacts in an online fashion with an environment modeled as a Markov decision process: The agent, observing a state, takes an action that
results in a random next state and reward, the latter of which is to be maximized over time. To tackle
large, possibly inﬁnite state spaces, additional structure needs to be introduced to this problem. One
such structure is a “feature-map” that maps state-action pairs to 𝑑-dimensional vectors (for some
positive integer 𝑑) with the intention that a “good feature-map extracts important information from
the state-action pairs so that learning with this extra information becomes tractable. An example
is the case of linear MDPs [Jin et al., 2020a], where the assumption is that both the transition and
reward functions are linearly factorizable and their left factors are given by the feature-map. In contrast, value-based approaches, such as 𝑞 𝜋 -realizability [Du et al., 2019, Lattimore et al., 2020] aim
to model only the action-values with the features. In this work, we focus on the latter, a strictly more
general setting than that of linear MDPs [Zanette et al., 2020, Proposition 4].
There are several sample-efﬁcient algorithms discovering near-optimal policies in linear MDPs under various MDP access models and settings (online access: Jin et al. [2020a]; batch setting: Jin et al.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

