No Change, No Gain: Empowering Graph Neural
Networks with Expected Model Change Maximization
for Active Learning

Zixing Song
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
New Territories, Hong Kong SAR
zxsong@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Yifei Zhang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
New Territories, Hong Kong SAR
yfzhang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Irwin King
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
New Territories, Hong Kong SAR
king@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are crucial for machine learning applications
with graph-structured data, but their success depends on sufficient labeled data.
We present a novel active learning (AL) method for GNNs, extending the Expected Model Change Maximization (EMCM) principle to improve prediction
performance on unlabeled data. By presenting a Bayesian interpretation for the
node embeddings generated by GNNs under the semi-supervised setting, we efficiently compute the closed-form EMCM acquisition function as the selection
criterion for AL without re-training. Our method establishes a direct connection
with expected prediction error minimization, offering theoretical guarantees for AL
performance. Experiments demonstrate our method’s effectiveness compared to
existing approaches, in terms of both accuracy and efficiency.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have gained significant recognition in machine learning applications,
particularly for graph-structured data [71, 32, 68]. Nevertheless, their efficacy is predominantly
contingent on the availability of ample labeled data. The labeling process, often demanding human
intervention and domain knowledge, poses high costs in real-world applications. Active Learning
(AL) presents a compelling solution to mitigate the issue of limited labeled data [1]. AL boosts the
performance of passive learning by iteratively training a model based on the current set of labeled
nodes and selecting the query nodes to expand this set based on the different query heuristics or the
designed acquisition function. The main idea is to identify the most informative nodes for the oracle
to annotate, thereby enhancing test node predictions upon their addition to the training set.
Recently, active learning methods for graph-structured data have seen an upsurge, adapting general
active learning techniques to accommodate the non-IID nature of graphs [88, 89, 90]. Predominantly,
these methods employ heuristic approaches, selecting nodes based on rudimentary measures such as
uncertainty and influence score. While efficient, these strategies lack a direct correlation with expected
prediction performance on remaining unlabeled nodes—our primary concern. Hence, We advocate
for performance-based active learning methods, selecting nodes that directly optimize anticipated
model performance [4].To balance efficiency, we employ the Expected Model Change Maximization
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

