Exploring Diverse In-Context Configurations for
Image Captioning

1

Xu Yang1∗, Yongliang Wu1 , Mingzhuo Yang2 , Haokun Chen1 , Xin Geng1
School of Computer Science & Engineering, Key Lab of New Generation Artificial Intelligence
Technology & Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Ministry of Education), Southeast University
2
The Chinese University of HongKong, Shenzhen
xuyang_palm@seu.edu.cn, yongliangwu@seu.edu.cn,
118020068@link.cuhk.edu.cn, chenhaokun@seu.edu.cn, xgeng@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
After discovering that Language Models (LMs) can be good in-context few-shot
learners, numerous strategies have been proposed to optimize in-context sequence
configurations. Recently, researchers in Vision-Language (VL) domains also develop their few-shot learners, while they only use the simplest way, i.e. , randomly
sampling, to configure in-context image-text pairs. In order to explore the effects
of varying configurations on VL in-context learning, we devised four strategies for
image selection and four for caption assignment to configure in-context image-text
pairs for image captioning. Here Image Captioning is used as the case study since it
can be seen as the visually-conditioned LM. Our comprehensive experiments yield
two counter-intuitive but valuable insights, highlighting the distinct characteristics
of VL in-context learning due to multi-modal synergy, as compared to the NLP case.
Furthermore, in our exploration of optimal combination strategies, we observed an
average performance enhancement of 20.9 in CIDEr scores compared to the baseline. The code is given in https://github.com/yongliang-wu/ExploreCfg.

1

Introduction

In contemporary times, the Language Model (LM) [1; 2] has emerged as a pivotal player in the
field of Natural Language Processing (NLP). It accomplishes this by unifying a range of diverse
NLP tasks into a shared prompt paradigm [3; 4]. To elaborate, a LM, unsupervised trained via
conditional language modeling on a substantial volume of non-annotated data collected from the web,
can reformulate various downstream tasks into fitting textual prompts. These prompts contain slots,
the word probabilities of which are calculated using the pre-trained LM. This process obviates the
necessity for gradient updates to the parameters of LM, thus mitigating the challenges associated
with additional data collection and fine-tuning. To further enhance the effectiveness of this paradigm,
the few-shot prompt (or in-context learning) [5] is proposed where a few examples are provided as
additional contexts to guide the LM to generate the desired result.
Witnessing the success of the prompt paradigm in the NLP field, there has been a concerted effort
by researchers to replicate its function in the Vision-Language Model (VLM). To facilitate this,
Flamingo [6] is proposed to align well-trained large-scale vision and language models through
some trainable cross-modal adapters. Consequently, the resultant model is capable of addressing
Vision-Language (VL) tasks by processing a prompt sequence, which includes several interleaved
image and text examples for in-context learning. Since the primary objective of Flamingo is to build
a VLM for the few-shot prompt, they only apply a straightforward strategy to configure the in-context
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

