ADGym: Design Choices for Deep Anomaly Detection

Minqi Jiang1,∗ , Chaochuan Hou1,∗ , Ao Zheng1,∗, Songqiao Han1,† ,
Hailiang Huang1,2,† , Qingsong Wen3 , Xiyang Hu4,† , Yue Zhao4,†
1
AI Lab, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
2
MoE Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 4 Carnegie Mellon University
jiangmq95@163.com, houchaochuan@foxmail.com, zheng-ao@outlook.com,
{han.songqiao,hlhuang}@shufe.edu.cn, qingsongedu@gmail.com,
{xiyanghu,zhaoy}@cmu.edu

Abstract
Deep learning (DL) techniques have recently found success in anomaly detection
(AD) across various fields such as finance, medical services, and cloud computing.
However, most of the current research tends to view deep AD algorithms as a whole,
without dissecting the contributions of individual design choices like loss functions
and network architectures. This view tends to diminish the value of preliminary
steps like data preprocessing, as more attention is given to newly designed loss
functions, network architectures, and learning paradigms. In this paper, we aim to
bridge this gap by asking two key questions: (i) Which design choices in deep AD
methods are crucial for detecting anomalies? (ii) How can we automatically select
the optimal design choices for a given AD dataset, instead of relying on generic, preexisting solutions? To address these questions, we introduce ADGym, a platform
specifically crafted for comprehensive evaluation and automatic selection of AD
design elements in deep methods. Our extensive experiments reveal that relying
solely on existing leading methods is not sufficient. In contrast, models developed
using ADGym significantly surpass current state-of-the-art techniques.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection (AD) aims to identify data objects that significantly deviate from the majority of
samples, with numerous successful applications in intrusion detection [36, 44], fault detection [22, 85],
medical diagnosis [13, 38], fraud detection [2, 8, 9], social media analysis [81, 86], etc. Recently,
deep neural networks have become the primary techniques in AD due to their powerful representation
learning capacity [57]. Among all, weakly-supervised AD (WSAD) methods [56, 58, 59, 69, 83, 90],
which leverage imperfect ground truth anomaly labels (e.g., those that are incomplete, inaccurate,
or inexact) in deep neural networks for AD, have gained attention in this new frontier [29]. A
comprehensive study by [26] showcases WSAD’s superiority over unsupervised AD techniques,
especially for real-world conditions where the ground truth labels are never complete and accurate.
Thus, our work introduces ADGym, a platform for understanding and designing deep WSAD
methods2 , with the potential to be extended to unsupervised and supervised deep AD methods.
Goal I: Understanding Design Choices of Deep AD. Many WSAD methods attribute their improvements to novel network architectures or loss functions, based on the authors’ understanding of
anomalies. However, these choices represent only a fraction of the design considerations, as there are
many other factors to consider, such as data preprocessing and model training techniques. In Table
∗
2

Contribute equally. † Corresponding authors.
For brevity, AD methods in this work refer to deep WSAD methods.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

