Optimal Guarantees for Algorithmic Reproducibility
and Gradient Complexity in Convex Optimization

Liang Zhang∗
ETH Zurich & Max Planck Institute
liang.zhang@inf.ethz.ch

Junchi Yang∗
ETH Zurich
junchi.yang@inf.ethz.ch

Amin Karbasi
Yale University & Google Research
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Niao He
ETH Zurich
niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Algorithmic reproducibility measures the deviation in outputs of machine learning
algorithms upon minor changes in the training process. Previous work suggests that
first-order methods would need to trade-off convergence rate (gradient complexity)
for better reproducibility. In this work, we challenge this perception and demonstrate that both optimal reproducibility and near-optimal convergence guarantees
can be achieved for smooth convex minimization and smooth convex-concave
minimax problems under various error-prone oracle settings. Particularly, given
the inexact initialization oracle, our regularization-based algorithms achieve the
best of both worlds – optimal reproducibility and near-optimal gradient complexity
– for minimization and minimax optimization. With the inexact gradient oracle, the
near-optimal guarantees also hold for minimax optimization. Additionally, with
the stochastic gradient oracle, we show that stochastic gradient descent ascent is
optimal in terms of both reproducibility and gradient complexity. We believe our
results contribute to an enhanced understanding of the reproducibility-convergence
trade-off in the context of convex optimization.

1

Introduction

In the realm of machine learning, improving model performance remains a primary focus; however,
this alone falls short when it comes to the practical deployment of algorithms. There has been a
growing emphasis on the development of machine learning systems that prioritize trustworthiness and
reliability. Central to this pursuit is the concept of reproducibility [38, 64], which requires algorithms
to yield consistent outputs, in the face of minor changes to the training environment. Unfortunately, a
lack of reproducibility has been reported across various domains [10, 40, 41, 64], posing significant
challenges to the integrity and dependability of scientific research. Notably, empirical studies in
Henderson et al. [43] have revealed that reproducing baseline algorithms in reinforcement learning
is a formidable task due to both inherent sources (e.g., random seeds, environment properties) and
external sources (e.g., hyperparameters, codebases) of non-determinism. These findings underscore
the criticality of having access to the relevant code and data, as well as sufficient documentation of
experimental details, to ensure reproducibility in machine learning algorithms.
Instead of considering the irreproducibility issue solely from an empirical perspective, Ahn et al. [1]
initiated the theoretical study of reproducibility in machine learning as an inherent characteristic of the
algorithms themselves. They focus on first-order algorithms for convex minimization problems and
∗

Equal Contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

