A Randomized Approach to Tight Privacy Accounting

Jiachen T. Wang
Princeton University
tianhaowang@princeton.edu
Ruoxi Jia
Virginia Tech
ruoxijia@vt.edu

Saeed Mahloujifar
Princeton University
sfar@princeton.edu

Tong Wu
Princeton University
tongwu@princeton.edu

Prateek Mittal
Princeton University
pmittal@princeton.edu

Abstract
Bounding privacy leakage over compositions, i.e., privacy accounting, is a key challenge in differential privacy (DP). However, the privacy parameter (ε or δ) is often
easy to estimate but hard to bound. In this paper, we propose a new differential privacy paradigm called estimate-verify-release (EVR), which tackles the challenges
of providing a strict upper bound for the privacy parameter in DP compositions
by converting an estimate of privacy parameter into a formal guarantee. The EVR
paradigm first verifies whether the mechanism meets the estimated privacy guarantee, and then releases the query output based on the verification result. The core
component of the EVR is privacy verification. We develop a randomized privacy
verifier using Monte Carlo (MC) technique. Furthermore, we propose an MC-based
DP accountant that outperforms existing DP accounting techniques in terms of
accuracy and efficiency. MC-based DP verifier and accountant is applicable to
an important and commonly used class of DP algorithms, including the famous
DP-SGD. An empirical evaluation shows the proposed EVR paradigm improves
the utility-privacy tradeoff for privacy-preserving machine learning.

1

Introduction

The concern of privacy is a major obstacle to deploying machine learning (ML) applications. In
response, ML algorithms with differential privacy (DP) guarantees have been proposed and developed.
For privacy-preserving ML algorithms, DP mechanisms are often repeatedly applied to private training
data. For instance, when training deep learning models using DP-SGD [1], it is often necessary to
execute sub-sampled Gaussian mechanisms on the private training data thousands of times.
A major challenge in machine learning with differential privacy is privacy accounting, i.e., measuring the privacy loss of the composition of DP mechanisms. A privacy accountant takes a list of
mechanisms, and returns the privacy parameter (ε and δ) for the composition of those mechanisms.
Specifically, a privacy accountant is given a target ε and finds the smallest achievable δ such that the
composed mechanism M is (ε, δ)-DP (we can also fix δ and find ε). We use δM (ε) to denote the
smallest achievable δ given ε, which is often referred to as optimal privacy curve in the literature.
Training deep learning models with DP-SGD is essentially the adaptive composition for thousands
of sub-sampled Gaussian Mechanisms. Moment Accountant (MA) is a pioneer solution for privacy
loss calculation in differentially private deep learning [1]. However, MA does not provide the
optimal δM (ε) in general [44]. This motivates the development of more advanced privacy accounting
techniques that outperforms MA. Two major lines of such works are based on Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT) (e.g., [19] and Central Limit Theorem (CLT) [7, 41]. Both techniques can provide an estimate
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

