Utilitarian Algorithm Configuration
Devon R. Graham
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC
drgraham@cs.cs.ubc.ca

Kevin Leyton-Brown
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC
kevinlb@cs.ubc.ca

Tim Roughgarden
Columbia University & a16z crypto
New York, NY
tim.roughgarden@gmail.com

Abstract
We present the first nontrivial procedure for configuring heuristic algorithms to
maximize the utility provided to their end users while also offering theoretical
guarantees about performance. Existing procedures seek configurations that minimize expected runtime. However, very recent theoretical work argues that expected
runtime minimization fails to capture algorithm designers’ preferences. Here we
show that the utilitarian objective also confers significant algorithmic benefits.
Intuitively, this is because mean runtime is dominated by extremely long runs
even when they are incredibly rare; indeed, even when an algorithm never gives
rise to such long runs, configuration procedures that provably minimize mean
runtime must perform a huge number of experiments to demonstrate this fact. In
contrast, utility is bounded and monotonically decreasing in runtime, allowing for
meaningful empirical bounds on a configuration’s performance. This paper builds
on this idea to describe effective and theoretically sound configuration procedures.
We prove upper bounds on the runtime of these procedures that are similar to
theoretical lower bounds, while also demonstrating their performance empirically.

1

Introduction

Heuristic algorithms are surprisingly effective at solving hard computational problems. However, no
single set of heuristics works well on all problems; the design choices must be tuned to a distribution
of problem instances in the same way that the parameters of a machine learning model are tuned to a
dataset. This black-box optimization problem is called algorithm configuration. Roughly speaking,
the literature on algorithm configuration is divided into two camps. The older and larger camp designs
heuristic procedures that aim to find good configurations as quickly as possible (Birattari et al., 2002;
Hutter et al., 2009, 2011; Ansótegui et al., 2009; López-Ibáñez et al., 2016). A second, more recent
line of work aims to provably identify approximately optimal configurations and to offer guarantees
about the runtime required to do so (Kleinberg et al., 2017; Weisz et al., 2018; Kleinberg et al., 2019;
Weisz et al., 2019, 2020). Virtually all of the work in both camps has focused on minimizing some
version of capped average runtime, although one exception of which we are aware is Tornede et al.
(2020), which explores objectives like higher-order polynomials of runtime that might better capture
a user’s level of risk-aversion.
Very recently, a theoretical argument has been made that minimizing expected runtime is inconsistent
with a plausible set of axioms about algorithm designers’ preferences (Graham et al., 2023). Runtime
is an economic good and, like other economic goods, the value an individual assigns to it is not
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

