Risk-Averse Active Sensing for Timely Outcome
Prediction under Cost Pressure
Yuchao Qin
Univerisity of Cambridge, UK

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge, UK
Alan Turing Institute, UK

Changhee Lee
Chung-Ang University, South Korea

Abstract
Timely outcome prediction is essential in healthcare to enable early detection and
intervention of adverse events. However, in longitudinal follow-ups to patients’
health status, cost-efficient acquisition of patient covariates is usually necessary due
to the significant expense involved in screening and lab tests. To balance the timely
and accurate outcome predictions with acquisition costs, an effective active sensing
strategy is crucial. In this paper, we propose a novel risk-averse active sensing
approach RAS that addresses the composite decision problem of when to conduct
the acquisition and which measurements to make. Our approach decomposes the
policy into two sub-policies: acquisition scheduler and feature selector, respectively.
Moreover, we introduce a novel risk-aversion training strategy to focus on the
underrepresented subgroup of high-risk patients for whom timely and accurate
prediction of disease progression is of greater value. Our method outperforms
baseline active sensing approaches in experiments with both synthetic and realworld datasets, and we illustrate the significance of our policy decomposition and
the necessity of a risk-averse sensing policy through case studies.

1

Introduction

Timely decision-making through accumulated observation history has attracted significant attention
in the machine learning community, with broad impact and applications in healthcare [8]. Consider
a typical decision-making scenario in which an agent employs a sensing policy to actively collect
diagnosis-related information from an underlying feature trajectory. In the presence of cost pressure,
the goal of the agent is to achieve timely and accurate predictions of a time-varying outcome of interest
based on the sensing history, i.e., feature observations accumulated over time, while maintaining a
reasonable expense of feature acquisition. At each decision step, we refer to the problem of deciding
when to make new acquisitions and which features to measure as active sensing [2, 24]. The optimal
sensing policy can be achieved by negotiating the subjective trade-off between outcome prediction
(accuracy and timeliness) and acquisition cost over time.
A special class of the active sensing problem has been extensively explored in the optimal stopping
literature [2, 6, 15]. In optimal stopping, the agent focuses on the timely diagnosis of a terminal
status, where observation ceases immediately after a confident diagnosis can be made [1, 5]. Thereby,
the acquisition cost in optimal stopping is typically considered as the time span of the information
collection process. Recently, Jarrett and van der Schaar [9] introduced a novel sensing framework to
allow for the consideration of measurement cost of individual feature variables in optimal stopping,
enabling better scheduling of the acquisition sequences. However, their approach still focuses on
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

