Interactive Multi-fidelity Learning for Cost-effective
Adaptation of Language Model with Sparse Human
Supervision
Jiaxin Zhang1 ,

Zhuohang Li2 , Kamalika Das1 , Sricharan Kumar1
2
Intuit AI Research
Vanderbilt University
{jiaxin_zhang, kamalika_das, sricharan_kumar}@intuit.com
zhuohang.li@vanderbilt.edu
1

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in various tasks. However, their suitability for domain-specific tasks, is limited due to
their immense scale at deployment, susceptibility to misinformation, and more importantly, high data annotation costs. We propose a novel Interactive Multi-Fidelity
Learning (IMFL) framework for the cost-effective development of small domainspecific LMs under limited annotation budgets. Our approach formulates the
domain-specific fine-tuning process as a multi-fidelity learning problem, focusing
on identifying the optimal acquisition strategy that balances low-fidelity automatic LLM annotations and high-fidelity human annotations to maximize model
performance. We further propose an exploration-exploitation query strategy that
enhances annotation diversity and informativeness, incorporating two innovative
designs: 1) prompt retrieval that selects in-context examples from human-annotated
samples to improve LLM annotation, and 2) variable batch size that controls the
order for choosing each fidelity to facilitate knowledge distillation, ultimately enhancing annotation quality. Extensive experiments on financial and medical tasks
demonstrate that IMFL achieves superior performance compared with single fidelity
annotations. Given a limited budget of human annotation, IMFL significantly outperforms the 3⇥ human annotation baselines in all four tasks and achieves very
close performance as 5⇥ human annotation on two of the tasks. These promising
results suggest that the high human annotation costs in domain-specific tasks can be
significantly reduced by employing IMFL, which utilizes fewer human annotations,
supplemented with cheaper and faster LLM (e.g., GPT-3.5) annotations to achieve
comparable performance.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) like GPT-3/ChatGPT/GPT-4 [4, 47, 5] have lately attracted great
interest from both academia and industry due to their impressive in-context learning (ICL) abilities.
However, the current state-of-the-art LLMs have since quickly grown from hundreds of billions [7]
to even a trillion [20] parameters. Models of this scale require specialized hardware, massive-scale
training data, and extensive computational power, which are inaccessible for most product or research
teams. In addition, the generalizability of LLMs is predominantly decided by the scope of the
underlying pre-training data. In fact, LLMs do not perform well out of the box in many real-world
domains where specialized knowledge beyond the standard fields of pre-training is required (i.e.,
domain shifts), such as healthcare [26] and finance [46].
As an alternative to general-purpose LLMs, practitioners oftentimes find small domain-specific
language models (LMs) to be more favorable as they require less training data and are faster to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

