End-to-End Meta-Bayesian Optimisation with
Transformer Neural Processes
Alexandre Maraval∗
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
alexandre.maraval1@huawei.com

Matthieu Zimmer∗
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
matthieu.zimmer@huawei.com

Antoine Grosnit
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Technische Universität Darmstadt
antoine.grosnit2@huawei.com

Haitham Bou Ammar
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab,
University College London
haitham.ammar@huawei.com

Abstract
Meta-Bayesian optimisation (meta-BO) aims to improve the sample efficiency
of Bayesian optimisation by leveraging data from related tasks. While previous
methods successfully meta-learn either a surrogate model or an acquisition function independently, joint training of both components remains an open challenge.
This paper proposes the first end-to-end differentiable meta-BO framework that
generalises neural processes to learn acquisition functions via transformer architectures. We enable this end-to-end framework with reinforcement learning (RL)
to tackle the lack of labelled acquisition data. Early on, we notice that training
transformer-based neural processes from scratch with RL is challenging due to
insufficient supervision, especially when rewards are sparse. We formalise this
claim with a combinatorial analysis showing that the widely used notion of regret
as a reward signal exhibits a logarithmic sparsity pattern in trajectory lengths. To
tackle this problem, we augment the RL objective with an auxiliary task that guides
part of the architecture to learn a valid probabilistic model as an inductive bias.
We demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art regret results against
various baselines in experiments on standard hyperparameter optimisation tasks and
also outperforms others in the real-world problems of mixed-integer programming
tuning, antibody design, and logic synthesis for electronic design automation.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimisation (BO) techniques are sample-efficient sequential model-based solvers optimising expensive-to-evaluate black-box objectives. Traditionally, BO methods operate in isolation
focusing on one task at a time, a setting that led to numerous successful applications, including
but not limited to hyperparameter tuning [1], drug and chip design [2], and robotics [3]. Although
successful, focusing on only one objective in isolation may increase sample complexities on new
tasks since standard BO algorithms work tabula-rasa as they start optimising from scratch, ignoring
previously observed black-box functions.
To improve sample efficiency on new target tasks, meta-BO makes use of data collected on related
source tasks [4] and attempts to transfer knowledge in between. Those methods are primarily
composed of two parts: 1) a (meta) surrogate model predicting the function to optimise and 2) a
(meta) acquisition function (AF) estimating how good a queried location is. Regarding surrogate
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

