GRAND-SLAMIN’ Interpretable Additive Modeling
with Structural Constraints
Shibal Ibrahim
MIT
Cambridge, MA
shibal@mit.edu

Gabriel Isaac Afriat
MIT
Cambridge, MA
afriatg@mit.edu

Kayhan Behdin
MIT
Cambridge, MA
behdink@mit.edu

Rahul Mazumder
MIT
Cambridge, MA
rahulmaz@mit.edu

Abstract
Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) are a family of flexible and interpretable
models with old roots in statistics. GAMs are often used with pairwise interactions
to improve model accuracy while still retaining flexibility and interpretability but
lead to computational challenges as we are dealing with order of p2 terms. It
is desirable to restrict the number of components (i.e., encourage sparsity) for
easier interpretability, and better computational and statistical properties. Earlier
approaches, considering sparse pairwise interactions, have limited scalability, especially when imposing additional structural interpretability constraints. We propose
a flexible GRAND-SLAMIN framework that can learn GAMs with interactions under sparsity and additional structural constraints in a differentiable end-to-end
fashion. We customize first-order gradient-based optimization to perform sparse
backpropagation to exploit sparsity in additive effects for any differentiable loss
function in a GPU-compatible manner. Additionally, we establish novel nonasymptotic prediction bounds for our estimators with tree-based shape functions.
Numerical experiments on real-world datasets show that our toolkit performs
favorably in terms of performance, variable selection and scalability when compared with popular toolkits to fit GAMs with interactions. Our work expands
the landscape of interpretable modeling while maintaining prediction accuracy
competitive with non-interpretable black-box models. Our code is available at
https://github.com/mazumder-lab/grandslamin.

1

Introduction

Many state-of-the-art learners e.g., tree ensembles, neural networks, kernel support vector machines,
can be difficult to interpret. There have been various efforts to derive some post-training explainability
from these models —see [5] for a survey. Post-hoc explainability attempts to explain black-box
prediction with interpretable instance-specific approximations e.g, LIME [49] and SHAP [35].
However, such approximations are known to be unstable [12, 28], expensive [51] and inaccurate [32].
Hence, it is desirable to consider modeling approaches that are inherently interpretable.
Amongst classical approaches, there are some models that have inherent interpretability e.g., Linear
models, CART [4] and Generalized Additive Models (GAMs)[14]. GAMs [15] which have old roots
in statistics are considered a front-runner in the context of interpretable
modeling. They consider
P
an additive model of the main effects of the form: g(IE[y]) = j∈[p] fj (xj ), where xj denotes the
jth feature in input x ∈ Rp , fj is a univariate shape function and g denotes the link function that
adapts the model to various settings such as regression or classification. GAMs are considered easy
to interpret as the impact of each feature can be understood via visualizing the corresponding shape
function e.g., plotting fj (xj ) vs xj . However, such models often suffer in prediction performance
when compared to black-box methods e.g., deep neural networks (DNNs). This can be attributed in
part to the fact that GAMs do not consider interactions among covariates.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

