Seeing is not always believing: Benchmarking Human
and Model Perception of AI-Generated Images

Zeyu Lu1,2,∗ Di Huang2,3,∗ Lei Bai2,∗,† Jingjing Qu 2 Chengyue Wu 4
Xihui Liu4 Wanli Ouyang2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
The University of Sydney 4 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Photos serve as a way for humans to record what they experience in their daily
lives, and they are often regarded as trustworthy sources of information. However,
there is a growing concern that the advancement of artificial intelligence (AI)
technology may produce fake photos, which can create confusion and diminish
trust in photographs. This study aims to comprehensively evaluate agents for
distinguishing state-of-the-art AI-generated visual content. Our study benchmarks
both human capability and cutting-edge fake image detection AI algorithms, using
a newly collected large-scale fake image dataset Fake2M. In our human perception
evaluation, titled HPBench, we discovered that humans struggle significantly to
distinguish real photos from AI-generated ones, with a misclassification rate of
38.7%. Along with this, we conduct the model capability of AI-Generated images
detection evaluation MPBench and the top-performing model from MPBench
achieves a 13% failure rate under the same setting used in the human evaluation.
We hope that our study can raise awareness of the potential risks of AI-generated
images and facilitate further research to prevent the spread of false information.
More information can refer to https://github.com/Inf-imagine/Sentry.
(a) Are these real photos?

(c) Human got 38.7% of the questions wrong in HPBench.

Human Perception
(b) Fake2M Dataset

(d) The best model trained on Fake2M selected from MPBench
got 13.7% of the questions wrong in HPBench.

Model Perception

Figure 1: Left: (a) Determining whether an image is real is a difficult problem. (b) We introduce
a new, large-scale and diverse
dataset, named "Fake2M". Right: (c) The average human ability to
Stable Diffusion
distinguish between high-quality
DeepFloyd IF AI-generated images and real images is only 61% in HPBench. (d)
The highest performingStyleGAN3
model trained on the Fake2M dataset, selected from MPBench, achieves an
accuracy of 87% on HPBench.
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding author: bailei@pjlab.org.cn.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

