Causal Effect Regularization: Automated Detection
and Removal of Spurious Correlations

Abhinav Kumar
Microsoft Research
abhinavkumar.wk@gmail.com

Amit Deshpande
Microsoft Research
amitdesh@microsoft.com

Amit Sharma
Microsoft Research
amshar@microsoft.com

Abstract
In many classification datasets, the task labels are spuriously correlated with some
input attributes. Classifiers trained on such datasets often rely on these attributes
for prediction, especially when the spurious correlation is high, and thus fail to
generalize whenever there is a shift in the attributes’ correlation at deployment.
If we assume that the spurious attributes are known a priori, several methods
have been proposed to learn a classifier that is invariant to the specified attributes.
However, in real-world data, information about spurious attributes is typically
unavailable. Therefore, we propose a method that automatically identifies spurious
attributes by estimating their causal effect on the label and then uses a regularization
objective to mitigate the classifier’s reliance on them. Although causal effect of an
attribute on the label is not always identified, we present two commonly occurring
data-generating processes where the effect can be identified. Compared to recent
work for identifying spurious attributes, we find that our method, AutoACER, is
more accurate in removing the attribute from the learned model, especially when
spurious correlation is high. Specifically, across synthetic, semi-synthetic, and
real-world datasets, AutoACER shows significant improvement in a metric used
to quantify the dependence of a classifier on spurious attributes (∆Prob), while
obtaining better or similar accuracy. Empirically we find that AutoACER mitigates
the reliance on spurious attributes even under noisy estimation of causal effects
or when the causal effect is not identified. To explain the empirical robustness of
our method, we create a simple linear classification task with two sets of attributes:
causal and spurious. Under this setting, we prove that AutoACER only requires
the ranking of estimated causal effects to be correct across attributes to select the
correct classifier.

1

Introduction

When trained on datasets where the task label is spuriously correlated with some input attributes,
machine learning classifiers have been shown to rely on these attributes (henceforth known as
spurious attributes) for prediction [10, 23, 11]. For example in a sentiment classification dataset
that we evaluate (Twitter-AAE [4]), a demographic attribute like race could be spuriously correlated
with the sentiment of a sentence [9]. Classifiers trained on such datasets are at risk of failure
during deployment when the correlation between the task label and the spurious attribute changes
[2, 22, 30, 10].
Assuming that a set of auxiliary attributes is available at training time (but not at test time), several
methods have been proposed to mitigate the classifier’s reliance on the spurious attributes. The
first category of methods assumes that the spurious attributes are known a priori. They develop
regularization [35, 15, 22], optimization [30] or data-augmentation [17, 16, 14] strategies to train
a classifier invariant to the specified spurious attributes. The second category of methods relaxes
the assumption of known spurious attributes by automatically identifying the spurious attributes and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

