An active learning framework for multi-group mean
estimation
Abdellah Aznag
Rachel Cummings
Adam N. Elmachtoub
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operational Research
Columbia University
{aa4683, rac2239, ae2516} @columbia.edu

Abstract
We consider a problem with multiple groups whose data distributions are unknown,
and an analyst would like to learn the mean of each group. We consider an active
learning framework to sequentially collect T samples with bandit feedback, each
period observing a sample from a chosen group. After observing a sample, the
analyst may update their estimate of the mean and variance of that group and
choose the next group accordingly. The analyst’s objective is to dynamically
collect samples to minimize the p-norm of the vector of variances of the mean
estimators after T rounds. We propose an algorithm, Variance-UCB, that selects
groups according to a an upper bound on the variance estimate adjusted to the
p-norm chosen. We show that the regret of Variance-UCB is Õ(T −2 ) for finite
p, and prove that no algorithm can do better. When p is infinite, we recover
the Õ(T −1.5 ) regret bound obtained in [4, 13] with improved dependence on the
remaining parameters and provide a new lower bound showing that no algorithm
can do better.

1

Introduction

Obtaining accurate estimates from limited labeled data is a fundamental challenge. To tackle this issue,
active learning has emerged as a promising solution framework where a decision-maker strategically
selects one sample at a time [35, 15, 22, 40, 24]. The estimation task becomes more complex when
faced with a large population of different groups, where it is important that all groups are represented
in the estimation procedure. If this allocation is not done correctly, the decision might incur structural
bias against some groups [32, 21, 33, 29]. If allowed to adjust the sampling allocation strategy,
the analyst can address their biases and re-allocate their sampling resources. A key challenge is to
dynamically collect data from different groups while maintaining a reasonable representation of all
the groups, which is the problem we tackle in this paper. We provide an active learning framework
for dynamic data collection with bandit feedback for estimating the means of multiple groups in a
representative manner.
We consider a population partitioned into multiple groups, each with data points drawn from an
unknown data distribution, and an analyst would like to learn the mean of each group. Each group’s
distribution has an unknown mean and unknown variance. At each time period, the analyst collects
one sample from a group of their choice and observes a sample from that group. Since only one
group is observed, this is also known as bandit feedback. Upon observation, the analyst exploits their
new knowledge to optimize their choice of the next group to observe. At the end of the time horizon
T , the analyst forms a mean estimate for each group. The objective of the analyst is to return a vector
of mean estimates with smallest p-norm of the variance vector of the mean estimates. The choice of
p-norm is motivated by its ability to capture different aspects of multi-group estimation performance
[10, 23, 28].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

