Ecosystem-level Analysis of Deployed Machine
Learning Reveals Homogeneous Outcomes

Connor Toups∗
Stanford University
Kathleen A. Creel
Northeastern University

Rishi Bommasani∗ †
Stanford University

Sarah H. Bana
Chapman University

Dan Jurafsky
Stanford University

Percy Liang
Stanford University

Abstract
Machine learning is traditionally studied at the model level: researchers measure
and improve the accuracy, robustness, bias, efficiency, and other dimensions of
specific models. In practice, however, the societal impact of any machine learning
model depends on the context into which it is deployed. To capture this, we
introduce ecosystem-level analysis: rather than analyzing a single model, we
consider the collection of models that are deployed in a given context. For example,
ecosystem-level analysis in hiring recognizes that a job candidate’s outcomes are
determined not only by a single hiring algorithm or firm but instead by the collective
decisions of all the firms to which the candidate applied. Across three modalities
(text, images, speech) and eleven datasets, we establish a clear trend: deployed
machine learning is prone to systemic failure, meaning some users are exclusively
misclassified by all models available. Even when individual models improve over
time, we find these improvements rarely reduce the prevalence of systemic failure.
Instead, the benefits of these improvements predominantly accrue to individuals
who are already correctly classified by other models. In light of these trends, we
analyze medical imaging for dermatology, a setting where the costs of systemic
failure are especially high. While traditional analyses reveal that both models and
humans exhibit racial performance disparities, ecosystem-level analysis reveals
new forms of racial disparity in model predictions that do not present in human
predictions. These examples demonstrate that ecosystem-level analysis has unique
strengths in characterizing the societal impact of machine learning.1

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) is pervasively deployed. Systems based on ML mediate our communication
and healthcare, influence where we shop or what we eat, and allocate opportunities like loans and jobs.
Research on the societal impact of ML typically focuses on the behavior of individual models. If we
center people, however, we recognize that the impact of ML on our lives depends on the aggregate
result of our many interactions with ML models.
In this work, we introduce ecosystem-level analysis to better characterize the societal impact of
machine learning on people. Our insight is that when a ML model is deployed, the impact on users
depends not only on its behavior but also on the behavior of other models and decision-makers (left of
Figure 1). For example, the decision of a single hiring algorithm to reject or accept a candidate does
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: nlprishi@stanford.edu.
1
All code is available at https://github.com/rishibommasani/EcosystemLevelAnalysis.

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

