Trans-Dimensional Generative Modeling
via Jump Diffusion Models

Andrew Campbell1
Valentin De Bortoli3

William Harvey2

Christian Weilbach2

Tom Rainforth1

Arnaud Doucet1

1

2

Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
3
CNRS ENS Ulm, Paris, France
{campbell, rainforth, doucet}@stats.ox.ac.uk
{wsgh, weilbach}@cs.ubc.ca
valentin.debortoli@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a new class of generative models that naturally handle data of varying
dimensionality by jointly modeling the state and dimension of each datapoint. The
generative process is formulated as a jump diffusion process that makes jumps between different dimensional spaces. We first define a dimension destroying forward
noising process, before deriving the dimension creating time-reversed generative
process along with a novel evidence lower bound training objective for learning
to approximate it. Simulating our learned approximation to the time-reversed
generative process then provides an effective way of sampling data of varying
dimensionality by jointly generating state values and dimensions. We demonstrate
our approach on molecular and video datasets of varying dimensionality, reporting better compatibility with test-time diffusion guidance imputation tasks and
improved interpolation capabilities versus fixed dimensional models that generate
state values and dimensions separately.

1

Introduction

Generative models based on diffusion processes [1–3] have become widely used in solving a range
of problems including text-to-image generation [4, 5], audio synthesis [6] and protein design [7].
These models define a forward noising diffusion process that corrupts data to noise and then learn the
corresponding time-reversed backward generative process that generates novel datapoints from noise.
In many applications, for example generating novel molecules [8] or videos [9, 10], the dimension of
the data can also vary. For example, a molecule can contain a varying number of atoms and a video
can contain a varying number of frames. When defining a generative model over these data-types,
it is therefore necessary to model the number of dimensions along with the raw values of each of
its dimensions (the state). Previous approaches to modeling such data have relied on first sampling
the number of dimensions from the empirical distribution obtained from the training data, and then
sampling data using a fixed dimension diffusion model (FDDM) conditioned on this number of
dimensions [8]. For conditional modeling, where the number of dimensions may depend on the
observations, this approach does not apply and we are forced to first train an auxiliary model that
predicts the number of dimensions given the observations [11].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

