Parameterizing Context: Unleashing the Power of
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning and In-Context
Tuning for Continual Table Semantic Parsing

Yongrui Chen1,2,∗ Shenyu Zhang1,2,∗ Guilin Qi1,2,† Xinnan Guo1,2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{yrchen, shenyuzhang, gqi}@seu.edu.cn, guoxinnan0727@163.com
1

Abstract
Continual table semantic parsing aims to train a parser on a sequence of tasks, where
each task requires the parser to translate natural language into SQL based on taskspecific tables but only offers limited training examples. Conventional methods
tend to suffer from overfitting with limited supervision, as well as catastrophic
forgetting due to parameter updates. Despite recent advancements that partially
alleviate these issues through semi-supervised data augmentation and retention of a
few past examples, the performance is still limited by the volume of unsupervised
data and stored examples. To overcome these challenges, this paper introduces a
novel method integrating parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) and in-context
tuning (ICT) for training a continual table semantic parser. Initially, we present
a task-adaptive PEFT framework capable of fully circumventing catastrophic
forgetting, which is achieved by freezing the pre-trained model backbone and
fine-tuning small-scale prompts. Building on this, we propose a teacher-student
framework-based solution. The teacher addresses the few-shot problem using ICT,
which procures contextual information by demonstrating a few training examples.
In turn, the student leverages the proposed PEFT framework to learn from the
teacher’s output distribution, then compresses and saves the contextual information
to the prompts subsequently, eliminating the need to store any training examples.
Experimental evaluations on two benchmarks affirm the superiority of our method
over prevalent few-shot and continual learning baselines across various metrics.

1

Introduction

Tabular data is a crucial source of information for human decision-makers in various domains,
including healthcare [1], retail [2] and finance [3]. Although structured query language (SQL)
provides an efficient means of accessing this data, a natural language interface would make it more
accessible to non-technical users. Consequently, there has been a growing interest in Table Semantic
Parsing (TSP), which involves mapping natural language queries over tabular data to formal programs.
Current research [4, 5, 6] on TSP have covered many scenarios, most of which assume the datasets are
static. In contrast, recent work [7] highlights the fact that new tables are often constantly emerging in
response to changing circumstances, leading to a continual stream of TSP tasks. With this comes two
new challenges: a) few-shot problem [8, 9, 10]: For a new task against unseen tables, the annotated
data available in a short period is typically limited, causing the parser to be prone to over-fitting. b)
∗
†

Equal contributors.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

