Order Matters in the Presence of Dataset Imbalance
for Multilingual Learning

Dami Choi∗ †
U. Toronto & Vector Institute
choidami@cs.toronto.edu

Derrick Xin∗
Google Research
dxin@google.com

Hamid Dadkhahi
Google Research
hdadkhahi@google.com

Justin Gilmer
Google Deepmind
gilmer@google.com

Orhan Firat
Google Deepmind
orhanf@google.com

Chih-Kuan Yeh
Google Deepmind
chihkuanyeh@google.com

Ankush Garg
Google Deepmind
ankugarg@google.com
Andrew M. Dai
Google Deepmind
adai@google.com

Behrooz Ghorbani
OpenAI
ghorbani@openai.com

Abstract
In this paper, we empirically study the optimization dynamics of multi-task learning,
particularly focusing on those that govern a collection of tasks with significant
data imbalance. We present a simple yet effective method of pre-training on highresource tasks, followed by fine-tuning on a mixture of high/low-resource tasks.
We provide a thorough empirical study and analysis of this method’s benefits
showing that it achieves consistent improvements relative to the performance tradeoff profile of standard static weighting. We analyze under what data regimes this
method is applicable and show its improvements empirically in neural machine
translation (NMT) and multi-lingual language modeling.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, large multi-task neural networks have emerged as a popular modeling
paradigm in deep learning. The appeal behind these models is that they can leverage transfer learning
among the tasks to outperform single-task models. Indeed, multi-task models have achieved state-ofthe-art performance in domains such as machine translation [2, 8], language understanding [24, 32],
and speech recognition [4, 3].
Unfortunately, optimizing such multi-task models remains a challenge. To effectively train these
models, the different tasks need to be balanced during training. This is often done by sampling each
task with a static probability.
Prior work [31, 20] shows evidence that when all tasks are in the data rich regime (high-resource),
such static sampling approaches yield optimal results. However, when certain tasks are data sparse
∗

Equal contribution † Work done as a student researcher at Google.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

