Rank-1 Matrix Completion with
Gradient Descent and Small Random Initialization
Daesung Kim
Samsung Electronics
dskim95phd@gmail.com

Hye Won Chung
School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
hwchung@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The nonconvex formulation of the matrix completion problem has received significant attention in recent years due to its affordable complexity compared to the
convex formulation. Gradient Descent (GD) is a simple yet efficient baseline algorithm for solving nonconvex optimization problems. The success of GD has been
witnessed in many different problems in both theory and practice when it is combined with random initialization. However, previous works on matrix completion
require either careful initialization or regularizers to prove the convergence of GD.
In this paper, we study the rank-1 symmetric matrix completion and prove that GD
converges to the ground truth when small random initialization is used. We show
that in a logarithmic number of iterations, the trajectory enters the region where
local convergence occurs. We provide an upper bound on the initialization size that
is sufficient to guarantee the convergence, and show that a larger initialization can
be used as more samples are available. We observe that the implicit regularization
effect of GD plays a critical role in the analysis, and for the entire trajectory, it
prevents each entry from becoming much larger than the others.

1

Introduction

Recovering a low-rank matrix from a set of linear measurements is at the heart of many statistical
learning problems. Depending on the structure of the matrix and the linear measurements, it reduces to
various problems such as phase retrieval [1], blind deconvolution [2], and matrix sensing [3]. Matrix
completion [4] is also one such type of problem where each measurement provides an entry of the
matrix, and the goal is to recover the low-rank matrix from a partial, usually very sparse, observation
of the entries. One of the most notable applications of matrix completion is collaborative filtering
[5], which aims to predict user preferences for items based on a highly incomplete observation of
user-item ratings. There are also a number of different applications, such as principal component
analysis [6] and image reconstruction [7], just to name a few.
Extensive amount of work has been dedicated to provide an efficient recovery algorithm for matrix
completion with theoretical guarantees [8]. The convex relaxation based nuclear norm minimization
[4, 9] was the first algorithm proven to recover the matrix with near optimal sample complexity.
Despite its theoretical success, the convex algorithm was found hard to be used in practical scenarios
due to its unaffordable computational complexity and memory size. Therefore, the nonconvex
formulation of matrix completion with quadratic loss has received significant attention in recent years.
Many different algorithms have been proposed for the nonconvex problem, and their convergence
toward the ground truth has been analyzed. Examples include optimization on Grassmann manifolds
[10], alternating minimization [11], projected gradient descent [12], gradient descent with regularizer
[13], and (vanilla) gradient descent [14, 15].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

