On permutation symmetries in Bayesian neural
network posteriors: a variational perspective

Simone Rossi
Stellantis, France

Ankit Singh
Stellantis, India

Thomas Hannagan
Stellantis, France

Abstract
The elusive nature of gradient-based optimization in neural networks is tied to their
loss landscape geometry, which is poorly understood. However recent work has
brought solid evidence that there is essentially no loss barrier between the local solutions of gradient descent, once accounting for weight-permutations that leave the
network’s computation unchanged. This raises questions for approximate inference
in Bayesian neural networks (BNNs), where we are interested in marginalizing over
multiple points in the loss landscape. In this work, we first extend the formalism
of marginalized loss barrier and solution interpolation to BNNs, before proposing
a matching algorithm to search for linearly connected solutions. This is achieved
by aligning the distributions of two independent approximate Bayesian solutions
with respect to permutation matrices. We build on the results of Ainsworth et
al. (2023), reframing the problem as a combinatorial optimization one, using an
approximation to the sum of bilinear assignment problem. We then experiment
on a variety of architectures and datasets, finding nearly zero marginalized loss
barriers for linearly connected solutions.

1

Introduction

Throughout the last decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved significant success in a wide
range of practical applications, becoming the fundamental ingredient for e.g., computer vision [e.g.,
57, 25, 41, 64], language models [e.g., 24, 82, 17] and generative models [e.g., 54, 96, 97, 98, 102, 34].
Despite recent important advancements, understanding the loss landscape of DNNs is still challenging.
The characterization of its highly non-convex nature, its relation with architectural choices like depth
and width and the connection with optimization and generalization are just some of the problems
which have been the focus of extensive research in the last few years [e.g., 76, 26, 36, 32, 2, 30, 38, 79].
It is well known, for example, that one of the fundamental characteristics of deep neural networks is
their ability to learn hierarchical features, and in this regards deeper networks seem to be exponentially
more expressive than shallower models [e.g., 3, 5, 7, 8, 18, 109], leading the loss landscape to have
many optima due to symmetries and over-parameterization [76, 26, 111, 94]. At the same time,
the role of the depth of a model in relation with its width is far less understood [80], despite wide
neural networks exhibiting important theoretical properties in their infinite limit behavior [e.g.,
73, 23, 29, 53, 48, 37, 20].
Two notions that have been useful to shed light on the geometry of loss landscapes are that of loss
barriers and mode connectivity [36, 26]. The mode connectivity hypothesis states that given two points
in the landscape, there exists a path connecting them such that the loss is constant or near constant (or,
said differently, the loss barrier is null). We refer to linear mode connectivity when the path connecting
the two solutions is linear [32]. Recently, evidence has surfaced that stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) solutions to the loss minimization problem can be linearly connected. Indeed, Entezari et al.
[30] discuss the role of permutation symmetries from a loss connectivity viewpoint, conjecturing the
possibility that mode connectivity is actually linear once accounting for all permutation invariances.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

