PyNeRF: Pyramidal Neural Radiance Fields
Haithem Turki
Carnegie Mellon University
hturki@cs.cmu.edu

Michael Zollhöfer
Meta Reality Labs Research
zollhoefer@meta.com

Christian Richardt
Meta Reality Labs Research
crichardt@meta.com

Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University
deva@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) can be dramatically accelerated by spatial grid
representations [6, 9, 20, 25]. However, they do not explicitly reason about scale
and so introduce aliasing artifacts when reconstructing scenes captured at different
camera distances. Mip-NeRF and its extensions propose scale-aware renderers that
project volumetric frustums rather than point samples but such approaches rely
on positional encodings that are not readily compatible with grid methods. We
propose a simple modification to grid-based models by training model heads at
different spatial grid resolutions. At render time, we simply use coarser grids to
render samples that cover larger volumes. Our method can be easily applied to
existing accelerated NeRF methods and significantly improves rendering quality
(reducing error rates by 20–90% across synthetic and unbounded real-world scenes)
while incurring minimal performance overhead (as each model head is quick to
evaluate). Compared to Mip-NeRF, we reduce error rates by 20% while training
over 60× faster.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in neural volumetric rendering techniques, most notably around Neural Radiance
Fields [19] (NeRFs), have lead to significant progress towards photo-realistic novel view synthesis.
However, although NeRF provides state-of-the-art rendering quality, it is notoriously slow to train
and render due in part to its internal MLP representation. It further assumes that scene content is
equidistant from the camera and rendering quality degrades due to aliasing and excessive blurring
when that assumption is violated.
Recent methods [6, 9, 20, 25] accelerate NeRF training and rendering significantly through the use of
grid representations. Others, such as Mip-NeRF [2], address aliasing by projecting camera frustum
volumes instead of point-sampling rays. However, these anti-aliasing methods rely on the base NeRF
MLP representation (and are thus slow) and are incompatible with grid representations due to their
reliance on non-grid-based inputs.
Inspired by divide-and-conquer NeRF extensions [22, 23, 27, 30] and classical approaches such as
Gaussian pyramids [1] and mipmaps [34], we propose a simple approach that can easily be applied
to any existing accelerated NeRF implementation. We train a pyramid of models at different scales,
sample along camera rays (as in the original NeRF), and simply query coarser levels of the pyramid
for samples that cover larger volumes (similar to voxel cone tracing [8]). Our method is simple
to implement and significantly improves the rendering quality of fast rendering approaches with
minimal performance overhead.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

