Parameter and Computation Efficient Transfer
Learning for Vision-Language Pre-trained Models

Qiong Wu12 , Wei Yu12 , Yiyi Zhou12 , Shubin Huang1 , Xiaoshuai Sun12 , Rongrong Ji12∗
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
{qiong, weiyu}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, zhouyiyi@xmu.edu.cn,
shubinhuang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {xssun, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
With ever increasing parameters and computation, vision-language pre-trained
(VLP) models exhibit prohibitive expenditure in downstream task adaption. Recent
endeavors mainly focus on parameter efficient transfer learning (PETL) for VLP
models by only updating a small number of parameters. However, excessive
computational overhead still plagues the application of VLPs. In this paper, we
aim at parameter and computation efficient transfer learning (PCETL) for VLP
models. In particular, PCETL not only needs to limit the number of trainable
parameters in VLP models, but also to reduce the computational redundancy during
inference, thus enabling a more efficient transfer. To approach this target, we
propose a novel dynamic architecture skipping (DAS) approach towards PCETL.
Instead of directly optimizing the intrinsic architectures of VLP models, DAS first
observes the significances of their modules to downstream tasks via a reinforcement
learning (RL) based process, and then skips the redundant ones with lightweight
networks, i.e., adapters, according to the obtained rewards. In this case, the VLP
model can well maintain the scale of trainable parameters while speeding up
its inference on downstream tasks. To validate DAS, we apply it to a bunch of
representative VLP models, and conduct extensive experiments on a set of VL
tasks. The experimental results not only show the great advantages of DAS in
reducing computational complexity, e.g. −11.97% FLOPs of METER on VQA2.0,
but also confirm its competitiveness against existing PETL methods in terms of
parameter scale and performance. Our source code is given in https://github.
com/DoubtedSteam/DAS.

1

Introduction

Inspired by the great success in natural language processing (NLP) [8, 19, 32, 36], large-scale
pre-training on massive image-text pairs also becomes the de-facto standard in vision-language
research [4, 24, 35, 65]. To accommodate the large-scale pre-training corpora, vision-language
pre-trained (VLP) models [4, 70, 10, 24, 28, 35, 56, 74] often adopt Transformer-based networks with
sheer sizes of parameters and computations. In this case, directly transferring these VLP models to
downstream tasks is excessively expensive in terms of memory footprint and computation overhead.
To reduce the costs of pre-training models, recent advances resort to parameter efficient transfer
learning (PETL) for affordable downstream task adaptions [16, 13, 26, 37, 59, 72, 74, 75]. In
particular, the PETL methods aim to save the memory usage for downstream tasks by only updating
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

