Consistent Diffusion Models:
Mitigating Sampling Drift by Learning to be
Consistent
Giannis Daras∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin

Yuval Dagan∗
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley

Alexandros G. Dimakis
Department of ECE
University of Texas at Austin

Constantinos Daskalakis
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
Imperfect score-matching leads to a shift between the training and the sampling
distribution of diffusion models. Due to the recursive nature of the generation
process, errors in previous steps yield sampling iterates that drift away from the
training distribution. However, the standard training objective via Denoising Score
Matching (DSM) is only designed to optimize over non-drifted data. To train
on drifted data, we propose to enforce a Consistency property (CP) which states
that predictions of the model on its own generated data are consistent across time.
Theoretically, we show that the differential equation that describes CP together
with the one that describes a conservative vector field, have a unique solution
given some initial condition. Consequently, if the score is learned well on nondrifted points via DSM (enforcing the true initial condition) then enforcing CP on
drifted points propagates true score values. Empirically, we show that enforcing
CP improves the generation quality for conditional and unconditional generation
on CIFAR-10, and in AFHQ and FFHQ. We open-source our code and models:
https://github.com/giannisdaras/cdm.

1

Introduction

The diffusion-based [47, 49, 18] approach to generative models has been successful across various
modalities, including images [41, 44, 14, 39, 29, 51, 43, 16, 10, 11], videos [19, 20, 21], audio [32],
3D structures [40], proteins [1, 53, 45, 9], and medical applications [23, 3].
Diffusion models generate data by first drawing a sample from a noisy distribution and slowly
denoising this sample to ultimately obtain a sample from the target distribution. This is achieved by
sampling, in reverse from time t = 1 down to t = 0, a stochastic process {xt }t∈[0,1] wherein x0 is
distributed according to the target distribution p0 and, for all t,
xt ∼ pt where pt := p0 ⊕ N (0, σt2 Id ),

(1)

where ⊕ denotes the convolution operator. That is, pt is the distribution resulting from corrupting a
sample from p0 with noise sampled from N (0, σt2 Id ), where σt is given by an increasing function of
t, such that σ0 = 0 and σ1 is sufficiently large so that p1 is nearly indistinguishable from pure noise.
We note that diffusion models have been generalized to other types of corruptions by the recent works
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

