Lovász Principle for Unsupervised Graph
Representation Learning

Ziheng Sun1,2
Chris Ding1
Jicong Fan 1,2∗
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
zihengsun@link.cuhk.edu.cn
{chrisding,fanjicong}@cuhk.edu.cn

1

Abstract
This paper focuses on graph-level representation learning that aims to represent
graphs as vectors that can be directly utilized in downstream tasks such as graph
classification. We propose a novel graph-level representation learning principle
called Lovász principle, which is motivated by the Lovász number in graph theory.
The Lovász number of a graph is a real number that is an upper bound for graph
Shannon capacity and is strongly connected with various global characteristics
of the graph. Specifically, we show that the handle vector for computing the
Lovász number is potentially a suitable choice for graph representation, as it
captures a graph’s global properties, though a direct application of the handle
vector is difficult and problematic. We propose to use neural networks to address
the problems and hence provide the Lovász principle. Moreover, we propose an
enhanced Lovász principle that is able to exploit the subgraph Lovász numbers
directly and efficiently. The experiments demonstrate that our Lovász principles
achieve competitive performance compared to the baselines in unsupervised and
semi-supervised graph-level representation learning tasks. The code of our Lovász
principles is publicly available on GitHub† .

1

Introduction

Graphs, such as chemical compounds, protein structures, and social networks, are non-Euclidean
data that represent the relationships between entities. There have been a large number of previous
works studying many aspects of graphs, including mutagenicity prediction of chemical compounds
[Debnath et al., 1991; Kriege and Mutzel, 2012], protein structure prediction [Borgwardt et al., 2005],
and community analysis of social networks [Yanardag and Vishwanathan, 2015].
Graph-based learning problems can be organized into two categories: node-level learning and graphlevel learning. In this paper, we will only focus on graph-level learning. It is known that in graph-level
learning, one fundamental task or step is to measure the distance or similarity between graphs. An
important class of methods comparing graphs is graph kernel and many graph kernels have been
proposed in the past decades [Siglidis et al., 2020]. For instance, random walk kernels [Gärtner
et al., 2003] are the most widely-used and well-studied graph kernel family, which measure the
graph similarity by counting the common random walks between graphs. The Weisfeiler-Lehman
[Weisfeiler and Leman, 1968] family kernels are based on node label reassignment. Most graph
kernels extract the similarity information between graphs by sampling sub-structures of graphs such
as walks or reassigning the attributes of nodes with their neighborhoods. Note that graph kernels are
implicit graph representation methods and hence their flexibilities are not high. In addition, the time
and space complexities are quadratic with the number of graphs.
∗

Corresponding author
https://github.com/SunZiheng0/Lovasz-Principle

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

