An Iterative Self-Learning Framework for Medical
Domain Generalization

1

Zhenbang Wu 1
Huaxiu Yao 2
David M Liebovitz 3
Jimeng Sun 1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, {zw12, jimeng}@illinois.edu
2
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, huaxiu@cs.unc.edu
3
Northwestern University, david.liebovitz@nm.org

Abstract
Deep learning models have been widely used to assist doctors with clinical decisionmaking. However, these models often encounter a significant performance drop
when applied to data that differs from the distribution they were trained on. This
challenge is known as the domain shift problem. Existing domain generalization
algorithms attempt to address this problem by assuming the availability of domain
IDs and training a single model to handle all domains. However, in healthcare
settings, patients can be classified into numerous latent domains, where the actual
domain categorizations are unknown. Furthermore, each patient domain exhibits
distinct clinical characteristics, making it sub-optimal to train a single model for
all domains. To overcome these limitations, we propose SLDG, a self-learning
framework that iteratively discovers decoupled domains and trains personalized
classifiers for each decoupled domain. We evaluate the generalizability of SLDG
across spatial and temporal data distribution shifts on two real-world public EHR
datasets: eICU and MIMIC-IV. Our results show that SLDG achieves up to 11%
improvement in the AUPRC score over the best baseline.

1

Introduction

Deep learning techniques have been increasingly popular in clinical predictive modeling with electronic health records (EHRs) [12, 11, 47, 58, 2]. However, these models typically assume that
the training (source) data and testing (target) data share the same underlying data distribution (i.e.,
domain). This assumption can become problematic when models are applied to new domains, such as
data from different hospitals or future time points [17, 59, 20, 37]. In these situations, domain shifts
caused by variations in patient cohorts, clinical standards, and terminology adoption can significantly
degrade the model’s performance.
This paper aims to develop a clinical predictive model on the source data that effectively handles
potential domain shifts when applied to the target data. Domain generalization (DG) [7] methods
have been widely utilized to address such problems, including techniques like domain alignment [32,
24, 25, 45, 31, 51, 62], meta-learning [23, 27, 26, 5, 22, 29], and ensemble learning [9, 42, 43, 61].
However, when applied in healthcare settings, these methods encounter the following limitations:
• Reliance on domain IDs. Most DG methods depend on the presence of domain IDs, which indicate
the domain to which each sample belongs, to guide the model training [24, 16, 4, 9, 42]. However,
as shown in Fig. 1, patients can be divided into numerous latent domains based on features such as
age, medical history, treatment, and symptoms. The actual categorization of these latent domains
can be difficult to obtain and vary across different tasks [1, 49]. Consequently, existing DG methods
often resort to broad domain categorizations, such as hospital or timestamp, which provide limited
information [59, 17].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

