UUKG: Unified Urban Knowledge Graph Dataset for
Urban Spatiotemporal Prediction

Yansong Ning1 , Hao Liu1,2∗, Hao Wang3 , Zhenyu Zeng3 , Hui Xiong1,2
AI Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
CSE, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Alibaba Cloud Intelligence Group
yning092@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn liuh@ust.hk
cashenry@126.com zhenyu.zzy@alibaba-inc.com xionghui@ust.hk
1

Abstract
Accurate Urban SpatioTemporal Prediction (USTP) is of great importance to the
development and operation of the smart city. As an emerging building block,
multi-sourced urban data are usually integrated as urban knowledge graphs (UrbanKGs) to provide critical knowledge for urban spatiotemporal prediction models.
However, existing UrbanKGs are often tailored for specific downstream prediction
tasks and are not publicly available, which limits the potential advancement. This
paper presents UUKG, the unified urban knowledge graph dataset for knowledgeenhanced urban spatiotemporal predictions. Specifically, we first construct UrbanKGs consisting of millions of triplets for two metropolises by connecting
heterogeneous urban entities such as administrative boroughs, POIs, and road segments. Moreover, we conduct qualitative and quantitative analysis on constructed
UrbanKGs and uncover diverse high-order structural patterns, such as hierarchies
and cycles, that can be leveraged to benefit downstream USTP tasks. To validate
and facilitate the use of UrbanKGs, we implement and evaluate 15 KG embedding
methods on the KG completion task and integrate the learned KG embeddings into
9 spatiotemporal models for five different USTP tasks. The extensive experimental
results not only provide benchmarks of knowledge-enhanced USTP models under
different task settings but also highlight the potential of state-of-the-art high-order
structure-aware UrbanKG embedding methods. We hope the proposed UUKG
fosters research on urban knowledge graphs and broad smart city applications. The
dataset and source code are available at https://github.com/usail-hkust/UUKG/.

1

Introduction

Urban SpatioTemporal Prediction (USTP) aims to forecast future urban dynamics by simultaneously
capturing the spatial and temporal autocorrelations from past observations. Recently, with the
development of machine learning technologies and the collection of large-scale urban data, USTP has
achieved remarkable progress in various urban predictive tasks, such as traffic management, pollution
monitoring, and emergency response [1, 2, 3]. USTP has become an essential service of the modern
smart city.
In prior literature, many efforts have been devoted to improving the USTP performance by exploiting latent knowledge from diverse urban data sources [4]. In particular, one commonly used
approach is manually extracting features from different datasets to integrate additional information.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

