Participatory Personalization in Classification

Hailey Joren
UC San Diego

Chirag Nagpal
Google Research

Katherine Heller
Google Research

Berk Ustun
UC San Diego

Abstract
Machine learning models are often personalized with information that is protected,
sensitive, self-reported, or costly to acquire. These models use information about
people but do not facilitate nor inform their consent. Individuals cannot opt out
of reporting personal information to a model, nor tell if they benefit from personalization in the first place. We introduce a family of classification models, called
participatory systems, that let individuals opt into personalization at prediction
time. We present a model-agnostic algorithm to learn participatory systems for
personalization with categorical group attributes. We conduct a comprehensive
empirical study of participatory systems in clinical prediction tasks, benchmarking
them with common approaches for personalization and imputation. Our results
demonstrate that participatory systems can facilitate and inform consent while
improving performance and data use across all groups who report personal data.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models routinely assign predictions to people – be it to screen a patient for a
mental illness [35], their risk of mortality in an ICU [44], or their likelihood of responding to
treatment [1]. Many models in such applications are designed to target heterogeneous subpopulations
using features that explicitly encode personal information. Typically, models are personalized with
categorical attributes that define groups [i.e., “categorization” as per 27]. In medicine, for example,
clinical prediction models use group attributes that are protected (e.g., sex in the ASCVD Score
for cardiovascular disease), sensitive (e.g., HIV_status in the VA COVID-19 Mortality Score),
self-reported (e.g., alcohol_use in the HAS-BLED Score for Major Bleeding Risk), or costly to
acquire (e.g., leukocytosis in the Alvarado Appendicitis Score).
Individuals expect the right to opt out of providing personal data and the ability to understand how
it will be used [see, e.g., personal data guidelines in GDPR, OECD privacy guidelines 26, 40]. In
many contexts, personalized models do not provide such functionality: individuals cannot opt out
of reporting data used to personalize their predictions nor tell if it would improve their predictions.
At the same time, practitioners assume that data available for training will be available at inference
time. In practice, this assumption has led to a proliferation of models that use information that
individuals may be unwilling or unable to report at prediction time [see e.g., the Denver HIV Risk
Score 29, which asks patients to report age, gender, race, and sexual_practices]. In tasks
where individuals self-report, they may not voluntarily report information that could improve their
predictions or may report incorrect information.
The broader need to facilitate and inform consent in personalized prediction tasks stems from the
fact that personalization may not improve performance for each group that reports personal data [51].
In practice, a personalized model can perform worse or the same as a generic model fit without
personal information for a group with specific characteristics. Such models violate the implicit
promise of personalization as individuals report personal information without receiving a tailored
performance gain in return. These instances of “worsenalization” are prevalent, hard to detect,
and hard to resolve [see 42, 51]. However, they would be resolved if individuals could opt out of
personalization and understand its expected gains (see Fig. 1).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

