Attentive Transfer Entropy to Exploit Transient
Emergence of Coupling Effect

Xiaolei Ru1 , Xin-Ya Zhang1 , Zijia Liu1 , Jack Murdoch Moore1∗, Gang Yan1∗
1
School of Physical Science and Engineering,
National Key Laboratory of Autonomous Intelligent Unmanned Systems,
MOE Frontiers Science Center for Intelligent Autonomous Systems,
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
{ruxl,xinyazhang,xwzliuzijia,jackmoore,gyan}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
We consider the problem of reconstructing coupled networks (e.g., biological
neural networks) connecting large numbers of variables (e.g., nerve cells) for which
state evolution is governed by dissipative dynamics consisting of strong self-drive
which dominates the evolution and weak coupling-drive. The core difficulty is
sparseness of coupling effect, which emerges with significant coupling force only
momentarily and otherwise remains quiescent in time series (e.g., neuronal activity
sequence). Here we propose an attention mechanism to guide the classifier to
make inference focusing on the critical regions of time series data where coupling
effect may manifest. Specifically, attention coefficients are assigned autonomously
by artificial neural networks trained to maximise the Attentive Transfer Entropy
(ATEn), which is a novel generalization of the iconic transfer entropy metric. Our
results show that, without any prior knowledge of dynamics, ATEn explicitly
identifies areas where the strength of coupling-drive is distinctly greater than
zero. This innovation substantially improves reconstruction performance for both
synthetic and real directed coupling networks using data generated by neuronal
models widely used in neuroscience.

1

Introduction

In this work, our task is to infer coupling relationships between observed variables based on time series
data and reconstruct the coupled network connecting large numbers of these variables (see Figure 1a).
Assume the time series xit records the state evolution of variable i governed
Pby coupled dissipative
dynamics, as represented by a general differential equation x˙it = g(xit ) + Bij f (xit , xjt ), where
g and f are self- and coupling functions respectively. The parent variable influences the evolution
behavior of the child variable via the coupling function f . Note that these two functions are hidden
and usually unknown for real systems. The asymmetric adjacency matrix B represents the directional
coupling relationship between variables. Hence, the goal is to infer matrix B from observed time
series xit , i = 1, 2, . . . , N where N is the number of variables in the system. If Bij = 1, the variable
j is a coupling driver (parent) of variable i, otherwise it is zero.
In neural dynamics (e.g., biological neuronal systems observed via neuronal activity sequences), the
coupling effect is usually too weak to be detected, making less applicable the classic unsupervised
techniques used across multiple research communities to infer coupling relationships [1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. This difficulty manifests in three aspects. First, the dynamics contains selfdrive and coupling-drive. The strength of the coupling force f (xit , ·) is usually many orders of
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

