A Unified Conditional Framework for Diffusion-based
Image Restoration

Yi Zhang 1 Xiaoyu Shi 1 Dasong Li 1 Xiaogang Wang 1 Jian Wang 2 ∗ Hongsheng Li 134 ∗
1
CUHK MMLab 2 Snap Research 3 Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory
zhangyi@link.cuhk.edu.hk, jwang4@snapchat.com, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
https://zhangyi-3.github.io/project/UCDIR

Abstract
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) have recently shown remarkable performance in image generation tasks, which are capable of generating highly realistic
images. When adopting DPMs for image restoration tasks, the crucial aspect lies in
how to integrate the conditional information to guide the DPMs to generate accurate
and natural output, which has been largely overlooked in existing works. In this
paper, we present a unified conditional framework based on diffusion models for
image restoration. We leverage a lightweight UNet to predict initial guidance and
the diffusion model to learn the residual of the guidance. By carefully designing the
basic module and integration module for the diffusion model block , we integrate
the guidance and other auxiliary conditional information into every block of the
diffusion model to achieve spatially-adaptive generation conditioning. To handle
high-resolution images, we propose a simple yet effective inter-step patch-splitting
strategy to produce arbitrary-resolution images without grid artifacts. We evaluate
our conditional framework on three challenging tasks: extreme low-light denoising,
deblurring, and JPEG restoration, demonstrating its significant improvements in
perceptual quality and the generalization to restoration tasks.

1

Introduction

Image restoration tasks are ill-posed problems whose solutions are not unique. But, most existing
methods for image restoration rely on learning regression models that produce deterministic results.
Unfortunately, such approaches often learn the “averaged” results of potential ground truth distribution, leading to blurry outputs that are not consistent with human perception. With the development of
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs), there exists remarkable progress in image generation, which
is able to generate realistic images with fine details. This progress has shed light on diffusion-based
image restoration tasks, which utilize conditional DPMs to generate images that align well with the
corresponding ground truth. With the input degraded input, conditional DPMs can produce realistic
images with significant improvements in perceptual quality.
When applying DPMs to image restoration, the crucial challenge lies in how to effectively integrate
degraded images and other conditional information (e.g., diffusion time step, degradation type,
and strength) into the DPMs. A better conditional framework can greatly enhance the generative
capacity of DPMs and guide them to generate realistic images that faithfully align with the ground
truths. However, it has been mostly overlooked in existing diffusion-based methods [50, 42, 41, 12].
Typically, these methods simply concatenate the degraded image as the input to the diffusion model,
which fails to fully exploit the potential of the diffusion model.
In this paper, we present a unified conditional framework for diffusion-based image restoration.
It effectively integrates multiple sources of conditional information into blocks of DPMs. This
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

