Amazon-M2: A Multilingual Multi-locale Shopping
Session Dataset for Recommendation and Text
Generation
Wei Jin12∗, Haitao Mao3∗ , Zheng Li1 , Haoming Jiang1 , Chen Luo1 ,
Hongzhi Wen3 , Haoyu Han3 , Hanqing Lu1 , Zhengyang Wang1 , Ruirui Li1 ,
Zhen Li1 , Monica Cheng1 , Rahul Goutam1 , Haiyang Zhang1 , Karthik Subbian1 ,
Suhang Wang4 , Yizhou Sun5 , Jiliang Tang3 , Bing Yin1 , and Xianfeng Tang1
1
Amazon.com 2 Emory University 3 Michigan State University
4
The Pennsylvania State University 5 University of California, Los Angeles
{joewjin,amzzhe,jhaoming,zhengywa,ruirul,luhanqin,cheluo}@amazon.com,
{amzzhn,chengxc,rgoutam,hhaiz,ksubbian,alexbyin,xianft}@amazon.com, wei.jin@emory.edu,
szw494@psu.edu, yzsun@cs.ucla.edu, {haitaoma,wenhongz,hanhaoy1,tangjili}@msu.edu

Abstract
Modeling customer shopping intentions is a crucial task for e-commerce, as it
directly impacts user experience and engagement. Thus, accurately understanding
customer preferences is essential for providing personalized recommendations.
Session-based recommendation, which utilizes customer session data to predict
their next interaction, has become increasingly popular. However, existing session
datasets have limitations in terms of item attributes, user diversity, and dataset scale.
As a result, they cannot comprehensively capture the spectrum of user behaviors
and preferences. To bridge this gap, we present the Amazon Multilingual Multilocale Shopping Session Dataset, namely Amazon-M2. It is the first multilingual
dataset consisting of millions of user sessions from six different locales, where
the major languages of products are English, German, Japanese, French, Italian,
and Spanish. Remarkably, the dataset can help us enhance personalization and
understanding of user preferences, which can benefit various existing tasks as well
as enable new tasks. To test the potential of the dataset, we introduce three tasks in
this work: (1) next-product recommendation, (2) next-product recommendation
with domain shifts, and (3) next-product title generation. With the above tasks, we
benchmark a range of algorithms on our proposed dataset, drawing new insights for
further research and practice. In addition, based on the proposed dataset and tasks,
we hosted a competition in the KDD CUP 20232 and have attracted thousands of
users and submissions. The winning solutions and the associated workshop can be
accessed at our website https://kddcup23.github.io/.

1

Introduction

In the era of information explosion, recommender systems have become a prevalent tool for understanding user preferences and reducing information overload [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Traditionally, the
majority of recommendation algorithms focus on understanding long-term user interests through utilizing user-profiles and behavioral records. However, they tend to overlook the user’s current purpose
∗

Equal contribution.
https://www.aicrowd.com/challenges/amazon-kdd-cup-23-multilingual-recommendationchallenge
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

