A Recurrent Neural Circuit Mechanism of
Temporal-scaling Equivariant Representation

Junfeng Zuo1
zuojunfeng@pku.edu.cn
Ying Nian Wu2
ywu@stat.ucla.edu
1

Xiao Liu1
xiaoliu23@pku.edu.cn

Si Wu1
siwu@pku.edu.cn

Wen-Hao Zhang3,4∗
wenhao.zhang@utsouthwestern.edu

Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies,
School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences,
Beijing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental Health,
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research,
Center of Quantitative Biology, Peking University.
2
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles.
3
Lyda Hill Department of Bioinformatics, UT Southwestern Medical Center.
4
O’Donnell Brain Institute, UT Southwestern Medical Center.

Abstract
Time perception is fundamental in our daily life. An important feature of time
perception is temporal scaling (TS): the ability to generate temporal sequences
(e.g., movements) with different speeds. However, it is largely unknown about
the mathematical principle underlying TS in the brain. The present theoretical
study investigates temporal scaling from the Lie group point of view. We propose a
canonical nonlinear recurrent circuit dynamics, modeled as a continuous attractor
network, whose neuronal population responses embed a temporal sequence that is
TS equivariant. We find the TS group operators can be explicitly represented by a
time-invariant control input to the network, whereby the input gain determines the
TS factor (group parameter), and the spatial offset between the control input and
the network state on the continuous attractor manifold gives rise to the generator
of the Lie group. The recurrent circuit’s neuronal responses are consistent with
experimental data. The recurrent circuit can drive a feedforward circuit to generate
complex sequences with different temporal scales, even in the case of negative
temporal scaling (“time reversal”). Our work for the first time analytically links
the abstract temporal scaling group and concrete neural circuit dynamics.

1

Introduction

We are living in a dynamic world and the brain can flexibly process sensory and motor events occurring
at different time scales [1–4]. An example of such temporal flexibility is self-initiated movements,
e.g., singing a song at normal or faster speed. The capability of temporally flexible movements
implies the brain flexibly control the underlying neural circuit dynamics. Indeed, experimental data
converges to an empirical principle of temporal scaling (TS) at the behavioral and neuronal levels
[2–5]. Specifically, when generating movements with longer intervals, it was found the neuronal
population activities evolve along the same (low-dimensional) manifold of the neuronal population
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

