Coop: Memory is not a Commodity

Jianhao Zhang∗
OneFlow Research
daquexian566@gmail.com

Shihan Ma∗
OneFlow Research
mmasss1205@gmail.com

Peihong Liu
OneFlow Research
peihong.l@outlook.com

Jinhui Yuan
OneFlow Research
yuanjinhui@oneflow.org

Abstract
Tensor rematerialization allows the training of deep neural networks (DNNs) under
limited memory budgets by checkpointing the models and recomputing the evicted
tensors as needed. However, the existing tensor rematerialization techniques
overlook the memory system in deep learning frameworks and implicitly assume
that free memory blocks at different addresses are identical. Under this flawed
assumption, discontiguous tensors are evicted, among which some are not used to
allocate the new tensor. This leads to severe memory fragmentation and increases
the cost of potential rematerializations. To address this issue, we propose to
evict tensors within a sliding window to ensure all evictions are contiguous and
are immediately used. Furthermore, we proposed cheap tensor partitioning and
recomputable in-place to further reduce the rematerialization cost by optimizing
the tensor allocation. We named our method Coop as it is a co-optimization
of tensor allocation and tensor rematerialization. We evaluated Coop on eight
representative DNNs. The experimental results demonstrate that Coop achieves up
to 2× memory saving and hugely reduces compute overhead, search latency, and
memory fragmentation compared to the state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Recent development of deep neural networks (DNNs) shows a continuous rage on increasing the scale
of the network structures, which dramatically improves the capability of the neural network [1, 2, 3, 4].
Training such gigantic models with billions of parameters, however, requires huge on-device memory
[5]. Tensor rematerialization, also known as activation checkpointing, is one technique that allows
the training of large DNNs under a limited GPU memory budget without compromising the model’s
accuracy. This technique has been widely applied in the training of large language models such as
GPT-3 [1, 6] and LLaMa [3].
The key idea of tensor rematerialization is to evict some intermediate tensors during forward propagation and recompute them as needed during backward propagation, essentially trading recomputing
time for memory. Tensor rematerialization can be traced back to checkpointing in reverse-mode
automatic differentiation [7, 8, 9], and was first applied to DNN training as a global optimization
technique for static computation graphs (SCGs) [10, 11, 12, 13].
√ Chen et al. ([10]) reduced the
memory cost of training a neural network with n layers to O( n) by dividing the network into
segments and dropping the intermediate results within each segment. Checkmate [11] further formalized tensor rematerialization as a mixed integer linear program and used numerical solvers to
find an optimal solution. Tensor rematerialization methods that support dynamic computational
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

