RoboCLIP:
One Demonstration is Enough to Learn Robot Policies
Sumedh A Sontakke1∗1 , Jesse Zhang1 , Sébastien M. R. Arnold4 ,
Karl Pertsch2,3 , Erdem Bıyık1,2 , Dorsa Sadigh3 , Chelsea Finn3 , and Laurent Itti1
1

Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California
2
University of California, Berkeley
3
Stanford University
4
Google Research

Abstract
Reward specification is a notoriously difficult problem in reinforcement learning,
requiring extensive expert supervision to design robust reward functions. Imitation learning (IL) methods attempt to circumvent these problems by utilizing
expert demonstrations but typically require a large number of in-domain expert
demonstrations. Inspired by advances in the field of Video-and-Language Models
(VLMs), we present RoboCLIP, an online imitation learning method that uses
a single demonstration (overcoming the large data requirement) in the form of
a video demonstration or a textual description of the task to generate rewards
without manual reward function design. Additionally, RoboCLIP can also utilize
out-of-domain demonstrations, like videos of humans solving the task for reward
generation, circumventing the need to have the same demonstration and deployment domains. RoboCLIP utilizes pretrained VLMs without any finetuning for
reward generation. Reinforcement learning agents trained with RoboCLIP rewards
demonstrate 2-3 times higher zero-shot performance than competing imitation
learning methods on downstream robot manipulation tasks, doing so using only
one video/text demonstration. Visit our website for experiment videos.

1

Introduction

Sequential decision-making problems typically require significant human supervision and data. In
the context of online reinforcement learning [Sutton and Barto, 2018], this manifests in the design of
good reward functions that map transitions to scalar rewards [Amodei et al., 2016, Hadfield-Menell
et al., 2017]. Extant approaches to manual reward function definition are not very principled and
defining rewards for complex long-horizon problems is often an art requiring significant human
expertise. Additionally, evaluating reward functions often requires knowledge of the true state of the
environment. For example, imagine a simple scenario where the agent must learn to lift an object off
the ground. Here, a reward useful for task success would be proportional to the height of the object
from the ground — a quantity non-trivial to obtain without full state information. Thus, significant
effort has been expounded in developing methods that can learn reward functions either explicitly
or implicitly from demonstrations, i.e., imitation learning [Pomerleau, 1988, Ng and Russell, 2000,
Abbeel and Ng, 2004, Ziebart et al., 2008]. With these methods, agent policies can either be directly
extracted from the demonstrations or trained to optimize rewards functions learned from them.
Imitation learning (IL), however, only somewhat alleviates the need for expert human intervention.
First, instead of designing complex reward functions, expert supervision is needed to collect massive
∗

corresponding author: ssontakk@usc.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

