EgoSchema: A Diagnostic Benchmark for Very
Long-form Video Language Understanding

Karttikeya Mangalam

Raiymbek Akshkulakov
Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley

{mangalam, raiymbek, malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu
egoschema.github.io

Abstract
We introduce EgoSchema, a very long-form video question-answering dataset,
and benchmark to evaluate long video understanding capabilities of modern vision
and language systems. Derived from Ego4D, EgoSchema consists of over 5000
human curated multiple choice question answer pairs, spanning over 250 hours of
real video data, covering a very broad range of natural human activity and behavior.
For each question, EgoSchema requires the correct answer to be selected between
five given options based on a three-minute-long video clip. While some prior
works have proposed video datasets with long clip lengths, we posit that merely the
length of the video clip does not truly capture the temporal difficulty of the video
task that is being considered. To remedy this, we introduce temporal certificate
sets, a general notion for capturing the intrinsic temporal understanding length
associated with a broad range of video understanding tasks & datasets. Based
on this metric, we find EgoSchema to have intrinsic temporal lengths over 5.7×
longer than the second closest dataset and 10× to 100× longer than any other video
understanding dataset. Further, our evaluation of several current state-of-the-art
video and language models shows them to be severely lacking in long-term video
understanding capabilities. Even models with several billions of parameters achieve
QA accuracy less than 33% (random is 20%) on the EgoSchema multi-choice
question answering task, while humans achieve about 76% accuracy. We posit that
EgoSchema, with its long intrinsic temporal structures and diverse complexity,
would serve as a valuable evaluation probe for developing effective long-term video
understanding systems in the future. Data and Zero-shot model evaluation code are
open-sourced under the Ego4D license at egoschema.github.io.

1

Introduction

We introduce EgoSchema, a diagnostic benchmark for assessing very long-form video-language
understanding capabilities of modern multimodal systems. Understanding long natural videos requires
a host of interconnected abilities such as action and scene understanding, perceiving and tracking
object states, long-term visual memory, abstract reasoning, hierarchical information aggregation, and
more. Shown in Fig. 1 is an exemplar of the curated EgoSchema dataset. Consider the visual cognitive
faculties involved in answering the question: ‘What is the overarching behavior of C and
the man in the video?’. First, is the spatial recognition capabilities for disambiguating the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

