DISCOVER:
Making Vision Networks Interpretable via
Competition and Dissection

Konstantinos Panousis
Department of Electrical Eng., Computer Eng., and Informatics
Cyprus University of Technology
Limassol 3036, Cyprus
k.panousis@cut.ac.cy
Sotirios Chatzis
Department of Electrical Eng., Computer Eng., and Informatics
Cyprus University of Technology
Limassol 3036, Cyprus
sotirios.chatzis@cut.ac.cy

Abstract
Modern deep networks are highly complex and their inferential outcome very hard
to interpret. This is a serious obstacle to their transparent deployment in safetycritical or bias-aware applications. This work contributes to post-hoc interpretability, and speciﬁcally Network Dissection. Our goal is to present a framework that
makes it easier to discover the individual functionality of each neuron in a network
trained on a vision task; discovery is performed in terms of textual description
generation. To achieve this objective, we leverage: (i) recent advances in multimodal vision-text models and (ii) network layers founded upon the novel concept
of stochastic local competition between linear units. In this setting, only a small
subset of layer neurons are activated for a given input, leading to extremely high
activation sparsity (as low as only ≈ 4%). Crucially, our proposed method infers
(sparse) neuron activation patterns that enables the neurons to activate/specialize
to inputs with speciﬁc characteristics, diversifying their individual functionality.
This capacity of our method supercharges the potential of dissection processes:
human understandable descriptions are generated only for the very few active neurons, thus facilitating the direct investigation of the network’s decision process.
As we experimentally show, our approach: (i) yields Vision Networks that retain
or improve classiﬁcation performance, and (ii) realizes a principled framework for
text-based description and examination of the generated neuronal representations.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have exhibited an overwhelming success in a variety
of tasks and applications, achieving state-of-the-art results in Machine Vision, Automatic Speech
Recognition, and NLP. This unprecedented success is however accompanied with a limited capacity
to audit them in view of reliability standards. Indeed, due to the immense complexity of their
architectures, DNNs are usually employed as off-the-shelf solutions for a variety of applications.
However, their vast and highly accelerated adoption rate emphasizes the importance of being able
to explain how DNNs function and interpret how predictions are made. This process will allow for
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

