Guide Your Agent with Adaptive Multimodal Rewards

Changyeon Kim1 Younggyo Seo2 Hao Liu3 Lisa Lee4
Jinwoo Shin1 Honglak Lee5,6 Kimin Lee1
1
KAIST 2 Dyson Robot Learning Lab 3 UC Berkeley
4
Google DeepMind 5 University of Michigan 6 LG AI Research

Abstract
Developing an agent capable of adapting to unseen environments remains a difficult
challenge in imitation learning. This work presents Adaptive Return-conditioned
Policy (ARP), an efficient framework designed to enhance the agent’s generalization ability using natural language task descriptions and pre-trained multimodal
encoders. Our key idea is to calculate a similarity between visual observations
and natural language instructions in the pre-trained multimodal embedding space
(such as CLIP) and use it as a reward signal. We then train a return-conditioned
policy using expert demonstrations labeled with multimodal rewards. Because the
multimodal rewards provide adaptive signals at each timestep, our ARP effectively
mitigates the goal misgeneralization. This results in superior generalization performances even when faced with unseen text instructions, compared to existing
text-conditioned policies. To improve the quality of rewards, we also introduce
a fine-tuning method for pre-trained multimodal encoders, further enhancing the
performance. Video demonstrations and source code are available on the project
website: https://sites.google.com/view/2023arp.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) has achieved promising results in learning behaviors directly from expert
demonstrations, reducing the necessity for costly and potentially dangerous interactions with environments [32, 59]. These approaches have recently been applied to learn control policies directly
from pixel observations [7, 36, 57]. However, IL policies frequently struggle to generalize to new
environments, often resulting in a lack of meaningful behavior [14, 58, 68, 79] due to overfitting to
various aspects of training data. Several approaches have been proposed to train IL agents capable of
adapting to unseen environments and tasks. These approaches include conditioning on a single expert
demonstration [18, 20], utilizing a video of human demonstration [6, 76], and incorporating the goal
image [16, 23]. However, such prior methods assume that information about target behaviors in test
environments is available to the agent, which is impractical in many real-world problems.
One alternative approach for improving generalization performance is to guide the agent with natural
language: training agents conditioned on language instructions [7, 50, 72]. Recent studies have
indeed demonstrated that text-conditioned policies incorporated with large pre-trained multimodal
models [22, 56] exhibit strong generalization abilities [46, 66]. However, simply relying on text
representations may fail to provide helpful information to agents in challenging scenarios. For
example, consider a text-conditioned policy (see Figure 1a) trained to collect a coin, which is
positioned at the end of the map, following the text instruction “collect a coin”. When we deploy the
learned agent to test environments where the coin’s location is randomized, it often fails to collect
the coin. This is because, when relying solely on expert demonstrations, the agent might mistakenly
think that the goal is to navigate to the end of the level (see supporting results in Section 4.1). This
example shows the simple text-conditioned policy fails to fully exploit the provided text instruction
and suffers from goal misgeneralization (i.e., pursuing undesired goals, even when trained with a
correct specification) [15, 64].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

