Language-driven Scene Synthesis using
Multi-conditional Diffusion Model
An Dinh Vuong
FSOFT AI Center
Vietnam

Minh Nhat Vu
TU Wien, AIT GmbH
Austria

Toan Tien Nguyen
FSOFT AI Center
Vietnam

Baoru Huang
Imperial College London
UK

Dzung Nguyen
FSOFT AI Center
Vietnam

Thieu Vo
Ton Duc Thang University
Vietnam

Anh Nguyen
University of Liverpool
UK

Abstract
Scene synthesis is a challenging problem with several industrial applications.
Recently, substantial efforts have been directed to synthesize the scene using
human motions, room layouts, or spatial graphs as the input. However, few studies
have addressed this problem from multiple modalities, especially combining text
prompts. In this paper, we propose a language-driven scene synthesis task, which
is a new task that integrates text prompts, human motion, and existing objects
for scene synthesis. Unlike other single-condition synthesis tasks, our problem
involves multiple conditions and requires a strategy for processing and encoding
them into a unified space. To address the challenge, we present a multi-conditional
diffusion model, which differs from the implicit unification approach of other
diffusion literature by explicitly predicting the guiding points for the original data
distribution. We demonstrate that our approach is theoretically supportive. The
intensive experiment results illustrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art
benchmarks and enables natural scene editing applications. The source code and
dataset can be accessed at https://lang-scene-synth.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Scene synthesis has gained significant attention from the research community in the past few years (Ye
et al., 2022). This area of research has numerous applications such as virtual simulation, video
animation, and human-robot communication (Yi et al., 2023). Recently, many scene synthesis
methods have been proposed (Ye et al., 2022; Yi et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2019a). However, most
of these methods generate objects based on furniture distribution (Paschalidou et al., 2021) rather
than customized user preferences. On the contrary, arranging household appliances is a personalized
task, in which the most suitable room layout is usually the one that fits our eyes best (Chang et al.,
2017). In this work, we hypothesize that the scene can be synthesized from multiple conditions such
as human motion, object location, and customized user preferences (i.e., text prompts). We show
that the text prompt input plays an important role in generating physically realistic and semantically
meaningful scenes while enabling real-world scene editing applications.
Existing literature on scene synthesis often makes assumptions about scene representation, such as
knowing floor plan (Wang et al., 2018) or objects are represented using bounding boxes (Paschalidou
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

