Provable Guarantees for Nonlinear Feature Learning
in Three-Layer Neural Networks

Eshaan Nichani
Princeton University
eshnich@princeton.edu

Alex Damian
Princeton University
ad27@princeton.edu

Jason D. Lee
Princeton University
jasonlee@princeton.edu

Abstract
One of the central questions in the theory of deep learning is to understand how
neural networks learn hierarchical features. The ability of deep networks to extract
salient features is crucial to both their outstanding generalization ability and the
modern deep learning paradigm of pretraining and finetuneing. However, this
feature learning process remains poorly understood from a theoretical perspective,
with existing analyses largely restricted to two-layer networks. In this work we
show that three-layer neural networks have provably richer feature learning capabilities than two-layer networks. We analyze the features learned by a three-layer
network trained with layer-wise gradient descent, and present a general purpose
theorem which upper bounds the sample complexity and width needed to achieve
low test error when the target has specific hierarchical structure. We instantiate
our framework in specific statistical learning settings – single-index models and
functions of quadratic features – and show that in the latter setting three-layer
networks obtain a sample complexity improvement over all existing guarantees
for two-layer networks. Crucially, this sample complexity improvement relies on
the ability of three-layer networks to efficiently learn nonlinear features. We then
establish a concrete optimization-based depth separation by constructing a function
which is efficiently learnable via gradient descent on a three-layer network, yet
cannot be learned efficiently by a two-layer network. Our work makes progress
towards understanding the provable benefit of three-layer neural networks over
two-layer networks in the feature learning regime.

1

Introduction

The success of modern deep learning can largely be attributed to the ability of deep neural networks
to decompose the target function into a hierarchy of learned features. This feature learning process
enables both improved accuracy [29] and transfer learning [21]. Despite its importance, we still have a
rudimentary theoretical understanding of the feature learning process. Fundamental questions include
understanding what features are learned, how they are learned, and how they affect generalization.
From a theoretical viewpoint, a fascinating question is to understand how depth can be leveraged to
learn more salient features and as a consequence a richer class of hierarchical functions. The base case
for this question is to understand which features (and function classes) can be learned efficiently by
three-layer neural networks, but not two-layer networks. Recent work on feature learning has shown
that two-layer neural networks learn features which are linear functions of the input (see Section 1.2
for further discussion). It is thus a natural question to understand if three-layer networks can learn
nonlinear features, and how this can be leveraged to obtain a sample complexity improvement. Initial
learning guarantees for three-layer networks [16, 5, 4], however, consider simplified model and
function classes and do not discern specifically what the learned features are or whether a sample
complexity improvement can be obtained over shallower networks or kernel methods.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

