Learning Adaptive Tensorial Density Fields
for Clean Cryo-ET Reconstruction

Yuanhao Wang Ramzi Idoughi Wolfgang Heidrich
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
{yuanhao.wang,ramzi.idoughi,wolfgang.heidrich}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
We present a novel learning-based framework for reconstructing 3D structures
from tilt-series cryo-Electron Tomography (cryo-ET) data. Cryo-ET is a powerful
imaging technique that can achieve near-atomic resolutions. Still, it suffers from
challenges such as missing-wedge acquisition, large data size, and high noise levels.
Our framework addresses these challenges by using an adaptive tensorial-based
representation for the 3D density field of the scanned sample. First, we optimize a
quadtree structure to partition the volume of interest. Then, we learn a vector-matrix
factorization of the tensor representing the density field in each node. Moreover,
we use a loss function that combines a differentiable tomographic formation model
with three regularization terms: total variation, boundary consistency constraint,
and an isotropic Fourier prior. Our framework allows us to query the density
at any location using the learned representation and obtain a high-quality 3D
tomogram. We demonstrate the superiority of our framework over existing methods
using synthetic and real data. Thus, our framework boosts the quality of the
reconstruction while reducing the computation time and the memory footprint. The
code is available at https://github.com/yuanhaowang1213/adaptivetensordf.

1

Introduction

Tilt-series Cryo-ET is an important imaging tool used in a variety of fields, such as structural
biology [5] and material science [48]. It consists of reconstructing a 3D tomogram from captured
2D projections of the scanned sample. In cryo-ET, due to hardware constraints, the scanning
process is performed from a limited angular range, typically less than 120◦ . The tomographic
reconstruction with missing-wedges is known to be a challenging task. In addition, sample motion
and deformation that occurs during the acquisition step, induce misalignment between the projections,
which deteriorates the reconstruction quality. Also, cryo-ET requires a large amount of data, which
makes the reconstruction a resource-intensive task, both in terms of computational time and memory.
Last but not least, to prevent the sample from getting damaged, the scanning is performed with
low-intensity electron beams. This results in high level noise in the captured projections.
In the literature, several approaches have been proposed to overcome some of these challenges. The
misalignment and the motion can be corrected using marker tracking [28, 35, 49], or even by tracking
specific features between the projections [10, 19]. On the other hand, the high level noise was initially
reduced by applying image-based or volume-based denoising approaches on the projections or the
tomogram respectively. Recently, Bepler et al. [7] proposed to reconstruct two copies of the tomogram
using odd/even projections only. Then, using Noise2Noise [29] technique they learn a denoised
version of the tomogram. Kniesel et al. [26] combines a noise model for Scanning Transmission
Electron Microscopy (STEM) and an implicit 3D shape representation in a differentiable framework
to denoise the reconstructed data.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

