Finding Counterfactually Optimal Action Sequences
in Continuous State Spaces

Stratis Tsirtsis
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
Kaiserslautern, Germany
stsirtsis@mpi-sws.org

Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
Kaiserslautern, Germany
manuelgr@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Whenever a clinician reflects on the efficacy of a sequence of treatment decisions
for a patient, they may try to identify critical time steps where, had they made
different decisions, the patient’s health would have improved. While recent methods
at the intersection of causal inference and reinforcement learning promise to aid
human experts, as the clinician above, to retrospectively analyze sequential decision
making processes, they have focused on environments with finitely many discrete
states. However, in many practical applications, the state of the environment is
inherently continuous in nature. In this paper, we aim to fill this gap. We start by
formally characterizing a sequence of discrete actions and continuous states using
finite horizon Markov decision processes and a broad class of bijective structural
causal models. Building upon this characterization, we formalize the problem of
finding counterfactually optimal action sequences and show that, in general, we
cannot expect to solve it in polynomial time. Then, we develop a search method
based on the A∗ algorithm that, under a natural form of Lipschitz continuity of
the environment’s dynamics, is guaranteed to return the optimal solution to the
problem. Experiments on real clinical data show that our method is very efficient in
practice, and it has the potential to offer interesting insights for sequential decision
making tasks.

1

Introduction

Had the chess player moved the king one round later, would they have avoided losing the game? Had
the physician administered antibiotics one day earlier, would the patient have recovered? The process
of mentally simulating alternative worlds where events of the past play out differently than they did
in reality is known as counterfactual reasoning [1]. Thoughts of this type are a common by-product
of human decisions and they are tightly connected to the way we attribute causality and responsibility
to events and others’ actions [2]. The last decade has seen a rapid development of reinforcement
learning agents, presenting (close to) human-level performance in a variety of sequential decision
making tasks, such as gaming [3, 4], autonomous driving [5] and clinical decision support [6, 7]. In
conjunction with the substantial progress made in the field of causal inference [8, 9], this has led to a
growing interest in machine learning methods that employ elements of counterfactual reasoning to
improve or to retrospectively analyze decisions in sequential settings [10–15].
In the context of reinforcement learning, sequential decision making is typically modeled using
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) [16]. Here, we consider MDPs with a finite horizon where each
episode (i.e., each sequence of decisions) consists of a finite number of time steps. As an example,
consider a clinician treating a patient in an intensive care unit (ICU). At each time step, the clinician
observes the current state of the environment (e.g., the patient’s vital signs) and they choose among a
set of potential actions (e.g., standardized dosages of a drug). Consequently, the chosen action causes
the environment to transition (stochastically) into a new state, and the clinician earns a reward (e.g.,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

