Segment Any Point Cloud Sequences by Distilling
Vision Foundation Models
Youquan Liu1,∗ Lingdong Kong1,2,∗ Jun Cen3 Runnan Chen4 Wenwei Zhang1,5
Liang Pan5 Kai Chen1 Ziwei Liu5,B
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 National University of Singapore
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4 The University of Hong Kong
5
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{liuyouquan,konglingdong,zhangwenwei,chenkai}@pjlab.org.cn
jcenaa@connect.ust.hk {liang.pan,ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent advancements in vision foundation models (VFMs) have opened up new
possibilities for versatile and efficient visual perception. In this work, we introduce
Seal, a novel framework that harnesses VFMs for segmenting diverse automotive
point cloud sequences. Seal exhibits three appealing properties: i) Scalability:
VFMs are directly distilled into point clouds, obviating the need for annotations
in either 2D or 3D during pretraining. ii) Consistency: Spatial and temporal
relationships are enforced at both the camera-to-LiDAR and point-to-segment
regularization stages, facilitating cross-modal representation learning. iii) Generalizability: Seal enables knowledge transfer in an off-the-shelf manner to downstream
tasks involving diverse point clouds, including those from real/synthetic, low/highresolution, large/small-scale, and clean/corrupted datasets. Extensive experiments
conducted on eleven different point cloud datasets showcase the effectiveness and
superiority of Seal. Notably, Seal achieves a remarkable 45.0% mIoU on nuScenes
after linear probing, surpassing random initialization by 36.9% mIoU and outperforming prior arts by 6.1% mIoU. Moreover, Seal demonstrates significant
performance gains over existing methods across 20 different few-shot fine-tuning
tasks on all eleven tested point cloud datasets. The code is available at this link2 .

1

Introduction

Inspired by the achievements of large language models (LLMs) [87, 35, 113, 73, 18], a wave of vision
foundation models (VFMs), such as SAM [50], X-Decoder [122], and SEEM [123], has emerged.
These VFMs are revolutionizing the field of computer vision by facilitating the acquisition of pixellevel semantics with greater ease. However, limited studies have been conducted on developing
VFMs for the 3D domain. To bridge this gap, it holds great promise to explore the adaptation or
extension of existing 2D VFMs for 3D perception tasks.
As an important 3D perception task, accurately segmenting the surrounding points captured by
onboard LiDAR sensors is crucial for ensuring the safe operation of autonomous vehicles [92, 94, 81].
However, existing point cloud segmentation models rely heavily on large annotated datasets for
training, which poses challenges due to the labor-intensive nature of point cloud labeling [2, 95].
To address this issue, recent works have explored semi- [55, 59] or weakly-supervised [95, 60]
approaches to alleviate the annotation burden. While these approaches show promise, the trained
point segmentors tend to perform well only on data within their distribution, primarily due to
∗
2

Youquan and Lingdong contributed equally to this work. B Ziwei serves as the corresponding author.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/youquanl/Segment-Any-Point-Cloud.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

