UniTSFace: Unified Threshold Integrated
Sample-to-Sample Loss for Face Recognition

Qiufu Li 1,2,6,#
liqiufu@szu.edu.cn

Xi Jia 1,2,3,#
x.jia.1@cs.bham.ac.uk

Linlin Shen 1,2,6,∗
llshen@szu.edu.cn

Jiancan Zhou 1,2,4,#
zhoujiancan@foxmail.com

Jinming Duan 3,5
j.duan@bham.ac.uk

1

National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology,
Shenzhen University, China
2
Computer Vision Institute, Shenzhen University, China
3
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, UK
4
Aqara, Lumi United Technology Co., Ltd, China
5
Alan Turing Institute, UK
6
SZU Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, China

Abstract
Sample-to-class-based face recognition models can not fully explore the crosssample relationship among large amounts of facial images, while sample-to-samplebased models require sophisticated pairing processes for training. Furthermore,
neither method satisfies the requirements of real-world face verification applications, which expect a unified threshold separating positive from negative facial pairs.
In this paper, we propose a unified threshold integrated sample-to-sample based loss
(USS loss), which features an explicit unified threshold for distinguishing positive
from negative pairs. Inspired by our USS loss, we also derive the sample-to-sample
based softmax and BCE losses, and discuss their relationship. Extensive evaluation
on multiple benchmark datasets, including MFR, IJB-C, LFW, CFP-FP, AgeDB,
and MegaFace, demonstrates that the proposed USS loss is highly efficient and can
work seamlessly with sample-to-class-based losses. The embedded loss (USS and
sample-to-class Softmax loss) overcomes the pitfalls of previous approaches and
the trained facial model UniTSFace exhibits exceptional performance, outperforming state-of-the-art methods, such as CosFace, ArcFace, VPL, AnchorFace, and
UNPG. Our code is available at https://github.com/CVI-SZU/UniTSFace.

1

Introduction

Modern deep facial recognition systems, involving an enormous number of facial images and
identities, essentially rely on discriminative feature learning: the facial images from the same identity
should be close while those from different identities should be distant in the feature space. That is,
the similarity of a positive pair (two facial images from the same identity) is required to be larger than
any negative pair (two facial images from different identities). In other words, a unified threshold is
expected to distinguish positive from negative pairs.
The feature learning process of general deep face recognition models is either based on sample-toclass losses (such as Softmax loss (27; 28)) or sample-to-sample losses (such as contrastive (4; 10; 25)
Equal contribution; ∗ Corresponding author. Parts of the work were done when X. J and J. Z were students
at Shenzhen University.
#

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

