FlowPG: Action-constrained Policy Gradient with
Normalizing Flows

Janaka Chathuranga Brahmanage, Jiajing Ling, Akshat Kumar
School of Computing and Information Systems
Singapore Management University
{janakat.2022, jjling.2018}@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, akshatkumar@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Action-constrained reinforcement learning (ACRL) is a popular approach for
solving safety-critical and resource-allocation related decision making problems.
A major challenge in ACRL is to ensure agent taking a valid action satisfying
constraints in each RL step. Commonly used approach of using a projection layer on
top of the policy network requires solving an optimization program which can result
in longer training time, slow convergence, and zero gradient problem. To address
this, first we use a normalizing flow model to learn an invertible, differentiable
mapping between the feasible action space and the support of a simple distribution
on a latent variable, such as Gaussian. Second, learning the flow model requires
sampling from the feasible action space, which is also challenging. We develop
multiple methods, based on Hamiltonian Monte-Carlo and probabilistic sentential
decision diagrams for such action sampling for convex and non-convex constraints.
Third, we integrate the learned normalizing flow with the DDPG algorithm. By
design, a well-trained normalizing flow will transform policy output into a valid
action without requiring an optimization solver. Empirically, our approach results
in significantly fewer constraint violations (upto an order-of-magnitude for several
instances) and is multiple times faster on a variety of continuous control tasks.

1

Introduction

Action-constrained reinforcement learning (ACRL), where an agent’s action taken in each RL
step should satisfy specified constraints, has been applied to solve a diverse range of real-world
applications [18]. One example is the resource allocation problem in supply-demand matching [4].
The allocation of resources must satisfy constraints such as total assigned resources should be
within a specific upper and lower limit. In robotics, kinematics constraints (e.g., limits on velocity,
acceleration, torque among others) can be modeled effectively using action constraints [1, 13, 26, 32].
One of the main challenges in solving ACRL is to ensure that during training and evaluation, all
the action constraints are satisfied at each time step, while simultaneously improving the policy.
Lagrangian Relaxation (LR) is a popular approach for solving constrained RL problems [30], however
directly applying LR to ACRL is impractical due to the difficulty in defining cost functions (c(s, a))
that penalize infeasible actions for all (s, a), and the inability to guarantee zero constraint violation
during training and policy execution. Also, there are studies addressing ACRL with discrete action
spaces [19, 20]. As they use propositional logic, it is not clear how to extend them to continuous
action spaces. Recently proposed approaches aim to satisfy continuous action constraints using
an action projection step. One natural approach is to add a differentiable projection layer at the
end of the policy network to satisfy the constraints [2, 4, 7, 26]. This projection layer projects the
unconstrained policy action onto the feasible action space by solving a quadratic program (QP).
However, this approach has two primary limitations. Firstly, solving a QP at each RL step can be
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

