Beyond Invariance: Test-Time Label-Shift Adaptation
for Addressing “Spurious” Correlations

Qingyao Sun∗
Cornell University
qs234@cornell.edu

Kevin Murphy
Google DeepMind
kpmurphy@google.com

Sayna Ebrahimi
Google Cloud AI Research
saynae@google.com

Alexander D’Amour
Google DeepMind
alexdamour@google.com

Abstract
Changes in the data distribution at test time can have deleterious effects on the
performance of predictive models p(y|x). We consider situations where there
are additional meta-data labels (such as group labels), denoted by z, that can
account for such changes in the distribution. In particular, we assume that the prior
distribution p(y, z), which models the dependence between the class label y and
the “nuisance” factors z, may change across domains, either due to a change in the
correlation between these terms, or a change in one of their marginals. However,
we assume that the generative model for features p(x|y, z) is invariant across
domains. We note that this corresponds to an expanded version of the widely used
“label shift” assumption, where the labels now also include the nuisance factors
z. Based on this observation, we propose a test-time label shift correction that
adapts to changes in the joint distribution p(y, z) using EM applied to unlabeled
samples from the target domain distribution, pt (x). Importantly, we are able to
avoid fitting a generative model p(x|y, z), and merely need to reweight the outputs
of a discriminative model ps (y, z|x) trained on the source distribution. We evaluate
our method, which we call “Test-Time Label-Shift Adaptation” (TTLSA), on
several standard image and text datasets, as well as the CheXpert chest X-ray
dataset, and show that it improves performance over methods that target invariance
to changes in the distribution, as well as baseline empirical risk minimization
methods. Code for reproducing experiments is available at https://github.
com/nalzok/test-time-label-shift.

1

Introduction

Machine learning systems are known to be sensitive to so-called “spurious correlations” [Geirhos
et al., 2020, Wiles et al., 2022, Arjovsky et al., 2019] between irrelevant features of the inputs and the
predicted output label. These features and their associated correlations are called “spurious” because
they are expected to change across real-world distribution shifts. As a result, models that rely on
such spurious correlations often have worse performance when they are deployed on a target domain
that is distinct from the source domain on which they were trained [Geirhos et al., 2020, Izmailov
et al., 2022]. For example, Jabbour et al. [2020] show that neural networks trained to recognize
conditions like pneumonia from chest X-rays can learn to rely on features that are predictive of patient
demographics rather than the medical condition itself. When the correlation between demographic
∗

Work done as a master’s student at the University of Chicago.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

