Globally injective and bijective neural operators
Takashi Furuya1
2

Michael Puthawala2

Matti Lassas3

Maarten V. de Hoop4

1
Shimane University, takashi.furuya0101@gmail.com
South Dakota State University, Michael.Puthawala@sdstate.edu
3
University of Helsinki, matti.lassas@helsinki.fi
4
Rice University, mdehoop@rice.edu

Abstract
Recently there has been great interest in operator learning, where networks learn
operators between function spaces from an essentially infinite-dimensional perspective. In this work we present results for when the operators learned by these
networks are injective and surjective. As a warmup, we combine prior work in
both the finite-dimensional ReLU and operator learning setting by giving sharp
conditions under which ReLU layers with linear neural operators are injective. We
then consider the case when the activation function is pointwise bijective and obtain
sufficient conditions for the layer to be injective. We remark that this question,
while trivial in the finite-rank setting, is subtler in the infinite-rank setting and is
proven using tools from Fredholm theory. Next, we prove that our supplied injective neural operators are universal approximators and that their implementation,
with finite-rank neural networks, are still injective. This ensures that injectivity is
not ‘lost’ in the transcription from analytical operators to their finite-rank implementation with networks. Finally, we conclude with an increase in abstraction and
consider general conditions when subnetworks, which may have many layers, are
injective and surjective and provide an exact inversion from a ‘linearization.’ This
section uses general arguments from Fredholm theory and Leray-Schauder degree
theory for non-linear integral equations to analyze the mapping properties of neural
operators in function spaces. These results apply to subnetworks formed from the
layers considered in this work, under natural conditions. We believe that our work
has applications in Bayesian uncertainty quantification where injectivity enables
likelihood estimation and in inverse problems where surjectivity and injectivity
corresponds to existence and uniqueness of the solutions, respectively.

1

Introduction

In this work, we produce results at the intersection of two fields: neural operators (NO), and injective
and bijective networks. Neural operators [Kovachki et al., 2021a,b] are neural networks that take a
infinite dimensional perspective on approximation by directly learning an operator between Sobolev
spaces. Injectivity and bijectivity on the other hand are fundamental properties of networks that
enable likelihood estimation by the change of variables formula, are critical in applications to inverse
problems, and are useful properties for downstream applications.
The key contribution of our work is the translation of fundamental notions from the finite-rank setting
to the infinite-rank setting. By the ‘infinite-dimension setting’ we refer to the case when the object of
approximation is a mapping between Sobolev spaces. This task, although straight-forward on first
inspection, often requires dramatically different arguments and proofs as the topology, analysis and
notion of noise are much simpler in the finite-rank case as compared to the infinite-rank case. We
see our work as laying the groundwork for the application of neural operators to generative models
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

