Estimating the Rate-Distortion Function by
Wasserstein Gradient Descent
Yibo Yang1 Stephan Eckstein2 Marcel Nutz3 Stephan Mandt1
University of California, Irvine 2 ETH Zurich 3 Columbia University
{yibo.yang, mandt}@uci.edu
stephan.eckstein@math.ethz.ch
mnutz@columbia.edu

1

Abstract
In the theory of lossy compression, the rate-distortion (R-D) function R(D) describes how much a data source can be compressed (in bit-rate) at any given level
of fidelity (distortion). Obtaining R(D) for a given data source establishes the
fundamental performance limit for all compression algorithms. We propose a new
method to estimate R(D) from the perspective of optimal transport. Unlike the
classic Blahut–Arimoto algorithm which fixes the support of the reproduction distribution in advance, our Wasserstein gradient descent algorithm learns the support
of the optimal reproduction distribution by moving particles. We prove its local
convergence and analyze the sample complexity of our R-D estimator based on a
connection to entropic optimal transport. Experimentally, we obtain comparable or
tighter bounds than state-of-the-art neural network methods on low-rate sources
while requiring considerably less tuning and computation effort. We also highlight
a connection to maximum-likelihood deconvolution and introduce a new class of
sources that can be used as test cases with known solutions to the R-D problem.

1

Introduction

The rate-distortion (R-D) function R(D) occupies a central place in the theory of lossy compression.
For a given data source and a fidelity (or distortion) criterion, R(D) characterizes the minimum
possible communication cost needed to reproduce a source sample within an error threshold of D, by
any compression algorithm [Shannon, 1959]. A basic scientific and practical question is therefore
establishing R(D) for any given data source of interest, which helps assess the (sub)optimality of
the compression algorithms and guide their development. The classic algorithm by Blahut [1972]
and Arimoto [1972] assumes a known discrete source and computes its R(D) by an exhaustive
optimization procedure. This often has limited applicability in practice, and a line of research has
sought to instead estimate R(D) from data samples [Harrison and Kontoyiannis, 2008, Gibson, 2017],
with recent methods [Yang and Mandt, 2022, Lei et al., 2023a] inspired by deep generative models.
In this work, we propose a new approach to R-D estimation from the perspective of optimal transport.
Our starting point is the formulation of the R-D problem as the minimization of a certain rate functional [Harrison and Kontoyiannis, 2008] over the space of probability measures on the reproduction
alphabet. Optimization over such an infinite-dimensional space has long been studied under gradient
flows [Ambrosio et al., 2008], and we consider a concrete algorithmic implementation based on
moving particles in space. This formulation of the R-D problem also suggests connections to entropic
optimal transport and non-parametric statistics, each offering us new insight into the solution of the
R-D problem under a quadratic distortion. More specifically, our contributions are three-fold:
First, we introduce a neural-network-free R(D) upper bound estimator for continuous alphabets. We
implement the estimator by Wasserstein gradient descent (WGD) over the space of reproduction
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

