Interpreting Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
in Security via Rule Extraction

Ruoyu Li§† , Qing Li∗† , Yu Zhang§ , Dan Zhao† , Yong Jiang♮† , Yong Yang‡
§
Tsinghua University, China; † Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
♮
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, China
‡
Tencent Security Platform Department, China
{liry19,yu-zhang23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {liq,zhaod01}@pcl.ac.cn
jiangy@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn; coolcyang@tencent.com

Abstract
Many security applications require unsupervised anomaly detection, as malicious
data are extremely rare and often only unlabeled normal data are available for
training (i.e., zero-positive). However, security operators are concerned about the
high stakes of trusting black-box models due to their lack of interpretability. In this
paper, we propose a post-hoc method to globally explain a black-box unsupervised
anomaly detection model via rule extraction. First, we propose the concept of distribution decomposition rules that decompose the complex distribution of normal
data into multiple compositional distributions. To find such rules, we design an
unsupervised Interior Clustering Tree that incorporates the model prediction into
the splitting criteria. Then, we propose the Compositional Boundary Exploration
(CBE) algorithm to obtain the boundary inference rules that estimate the decision
boundary of the original model on each compositional distribution. By merging
these two types of rules into a rule set, we can present the inferential process
of the unsupervised black-box model in a human-understandable way, and build
a surrogate rule-based model for online deployment at the same time. We conduct comprehensive experiments on the explanation of four distinct unsupervised
anomaly detection models on various real-world datasets. The evaluation shows
that our method outperforms existing methods in terms of diverse metrics including
fidelity, correctness and robustness.

1

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) have revolutionized many security
applications such as network intrusion detection [1–3] and malware identification [4, 5] that outperform traditional methods in terms of accuracy and generalization. Among these works, unsupervised
anomaly detection becomes more promising, which detects malicious activities by the deviation
from normality. Compared to supervised methods, this type of method is more desirable in security
domains as 1) it hardly requires labeled attack/malicious data during the training (i.e., zero-positive
learning), which are typically much more sparse and difficult to obtain in contrast with benign data;
2) it does not fit any known threats, enabling better detection on unforeseen anomalies.
Due to the black-box nature of these models, ML/DL models are usually not directly interpretable
and understandable. Many local explanation methods [6–10] have attempted to interpret the models
by presenting feature importance of the decision for a single point. However, globally explaining
black-box models, especially using rule extraction to characterize the whole decision boundaries, is
particularly desirable in security systems since it can provide the following benefits:
∗

Corresponding author: Qing Li.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

