DynaDojo: An Extensible Benchmarking Platform
for Scalable Dynamical System Identification

Logan Mondal Bhamidipaty∗
Tommy Bruzzese∗
Stanford University
Stanford University
loganmb@cs.stanford.edu
tbru@cs.stanford.edu
Rami Mrad
UC Berkeley
ramiratlmrad@berkeley.edu

Caryn Tran∗
Northwestern University
caryn@u.northwestern.edu

Max Kanwal†
Stanford University
kanwal@stanford.edu

Abstract
Modeling complex dynamical systems poses significant challenges, with traditional methods struggling to work across a variety of systems and scale to highdimensional dynamics. In response, we present DynaDojo, a novel benchmarking
platform designed for data-driven dynamical system identification. DynaDojo
enables comprehensive evaluation of how an algorithm’s performance scales across
three key dimensions: (1) the number of training samples provided, (2) the complexity of the dynamical system being modeled, and (3) the training samples required to
achieve a target error threshold. Furthermore, DynaDojo enables studying out-ofdistribution generalization (by providing multiple test conditions for each system)
and active learning (by supporting closed-loop control). Through its user-friendly
and easily extensible API, DynaDojo accommodates a wide range of user-defined
Algorithms, Systems, and Challenges (scaling metrics). The platform also
prioritizes resource-efficient training for running on a cluster. To showcase its
utility, in DynaDojo 0.9, we include implementations of 7 baseline algorithms
and 20 dynamical systems, along with many demo notebooks. This work aspires
to make DynaDojo a unifying benchmarking platform for system identification,
paralleling the role of OpenAI’s Gym in reinforcement learning.1

1

Introduction

Dynamical systems, fundamental to disciplines like physics, engineering, economics, and neuroscience, are difficult to predict and control when nonlinear and high-dimensional. Traditional methods
that rely on a known underlying model structure fall short when faced with modern problems like
stock market forecasting or modeling human social interactions, where the structure is either unknown
or non-existent. This has prompted a shift toward data-driven modeling (system identification), and
especially model-free methods, bypassing the need for predefined equations [1]. To benefit from
these data-driven approaches, however, researchers and practitioners need tailored benchmarks to
easily evaluate and compare methods for system identification in their area of study.
In this work, we present DynaDojo, an open, extensible benchmarking platform to standardize the
process of benchmarking any learning algorithm on any dynamical system. Modeled after OpenAI’s
Gym [2] and Procgen [3], DynaDojo introduces abstractions over algorithms, systems, and challenges
∗

equal contribution
corresponding author
1
https://github.com/DynaDojo/dynadojo
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

