Parsel : Algorithmic Reasoning with Language
Models by Composing Decompositions

Eric Zelikman, Qian Huang, Gabriel Poesia, Noah D. Goodman, Nick Haber
Stanford University
{ezelikman, qhwang, poesia, ngoodman, nhaber}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Despite recent success in large language model (LLM) reasoning, LLMs struggle
with hierarchical multi-step reasoning tasks like generating complex programs. For
these tasks, humans often start with a high-level algorithmic design and implement each part gradually. We introduce Parsel, a framework enabling automatic
implementation and validation of complex algorithms with code LLMs. With
Parsel, we automatically decompose algorithmic tasks into hierarchical natural
language function descriptions and then search over combinations of possible function implementations using tests. We show that Parsel can be used across domains
requiring hierarchical reasoning, including program synthesis and robotic planning.
We find that, using Parsel, LLMs solve more competition-level problems in the
APPS dataset, resulting in pass rates over 75% higher than prior results from directly sampling AlphaCode and Codex, while often using a smaller sample budget.
Moreover, with automatically generated tests, we find that Parsel can improve the
state-of-the-art pass@1 performance on HumanEval from 67% to 85%. We also
find that LLM-generated robotic plans using Parsel are more than twice as likely to
be considered accurate than directly generated plans. Lastly, we explore how Parsel
addresses LLM limitations and discuss how Parsel may be useful for human programmers. We release our code at https://github.com/ezelikman/parsel.

1

Introduction

To a language model for code (as for a human), each new token is a new chance to break the program.
Chen et al. [12] highlighted this issue in a simple synthetic experiment: when asked to generate
a program with a series of simple string transformations, the performance of their code language
model, Codex, drops dramatically with the number of steps. As they pointed out, a human who can
implement a few building blocks should be able to compose these blocks with arbitrary length.
Unlike other token generators, human programmers have (mostly) learned to break down complex
tasks into manageable parts that work alone (i.e., are modular) and work together (i.e., are compositional). And, when human-generated tokens cause functions to break, the functions can ideally be
rewritten independently of the rest of the program. In contrast, naively, we expect code language
models to generate token sequences that are correct in their entirety. Motivated by this, we study how
to leverage language models to decompose problems and assemble their compositional solutions.
We introduce Parsel, a framework that enables the decomposition, implementation, then composition
of complex programs from natural language. The process consists of three main steps: 1) A
language model generates a Parsel program by decomposing a natural language task into natural
language function descriptions. 2) For each function description, a language model generates modular
implementations. 3) The Parsel synthesizer then builds up programs by testing minimal, combinatorial
groups of implementations against sets of constraints (e.g. input-output examples).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

