Individualized Dosing Dynamics
via Neural Eigen Decomposition

Stav Belogolovsky∗
stav.belo@gmail.com

Ido Greenberg∗
gido@campus.technion.ac.il

Danny Eytan†
biliary.colic@gmail.com

Shie Mannor∗‡
shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Dosing models often use differential equations to model biological dynamics. Neural differential equations in particular can learn to predict the derivative of a process,
which permits predictions at irregular points of time. However, this temporal flexibility often comes with a high sensitivity to noise, whereas medical problems
often present high noise and limited data. Moreover, medical dosing models must
generalize reliably over individual patients and changing treatment policies. To
address these challenges, we introduce the Neural Eigen Stochastic Differential
Equation algorithm (NESDE). NESDE provides individualized modeling (using
a hypernetwork over patient-level parameters); generalization to new treatment
policies (using decoupled control); tunable expressiveness according to the noise
level (using piecewise linearity); and fast, continuous, closed-form prediction (using spectral representation). We demonstrate the robustness of NESDE in both
synthetic and real medical problems, and use the learned dynamics to publish
simulated medical gym environments.

1

Introduction

Sequential forecasting in irregular points of time is required in many real-world problems, such as
modeling dosing dynamics of various medicines (pharmacodynamics). Consider a patient whose
physiological or biochemical state requires continuous monitoring, while blood tests are only available
with a limited frequency. Pharmacodynamics models often rely on an ordinary differential equation
models (ODE) for forecasting. Additional expressiveness can be obtained via customized learned
models, such as neural-ODE, which learns to predict the derivative of the process [Chen et al., 2018,
Liu et al., 2019]. By predicting the derivative, neural-ODE can make irregular predictions at flexible
time-steps, unlike regular models that operate in constant time-steps (e.g., Kalman filter, Kalman
[1960] and recurrent neural networks, Rumelhart et al. [1986]).
However, real-world forecasting remains a challenge for several reasons. First, the variation between
patients often requires personalized modeling. Second, neural-ODE methods are often data-hungry:
they aggregate numerous derivatives provided by a non-linear neural network, which is often sensitive
to noise. Training over a large dataset may stabilize the predictions, but data is often limited. Third,
most neural-ODE methods only provide a point-estimate, while uncertainty estimation is often critical
in medical settings. Fourth, for every single prediction, the neural-ODE runs a numeric ODE solver,
∗

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, Technion—Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa, Israel
‡
Nvidia Research
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

