A Diffusion-Model of Joint Interactive Navigation
Matthew Niedoba1,2

J. Wilder Lavington1,2

Justice Sefas1,2

Xiaoxuan Liang1,2

Berend Zwartsenberg2
1

Yunpeng Liu1,2
Dylan Green1,2

Adam Scibior1,2

Vasileios Lioutas1,2

Setareh Dabiri2

Frank Wood1,2

University of British Columbia, 2 Inverted AI
mniedoba@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Simulation of autonomous vehicle systems requires that simulated traffic participants exhibit diverse and realistic behaviors. The use of prerecorded real-world
traffic scenarios in simulation ensures realism but the rarity of safety critical events
makes large scale collection of driving scenarios expensive. In this paper, we
present DJINN – a diffusion based method of generating traffic scenarios. Our
approach jointly diffuses the trajectories of all agents, conditioned on a flexible
set of state observations from the past, present, or future. On popular trajectory
forecasting datasets, we report state of the art performance on joint trajectory
metrics. In addition, we demonstrate how DJINN flexibly enables direct test-time
sampling from a variety of valuable conditional distributions including goal-based
sampling, behavior-class sampling, and scenario editing.

1

Introduction

Accurate simulations are critical to the development of autonomous vehicles (AVs) because they
facilitate the safe testing of complex driving systems [15]. One of the most popular methods of
simulation is virtual replay [46], in which the performance of autonomous systems are evaluated
by replaying previously recorded traffic scenarios. Although virtual replay is a valuable tool for
AV testing, recording diverse scenarios is expensive and time consuming, as safety-critical traffic
behaviors are rare [17]. Methods for producing synthetic traffic scenarios of specific driving behaviors
are therefore essential to accelerate AV development and simulation quality.
Producing these synthetic traffic scenarios involves generating the joint future motion of all the
agents in a scene, a task which is closely related to the problem of trajectory forecasting. Due to the
complexity of learning a fully autonomous end-to-end vehicle controller, researchers often opt to split
the problem into three main tasks [52]: perception, trajectory forecasting, and planning. In trajectory
forecasting, the future positions of all agents are predicted up to a specified future time based on
the agent histories and the road information. Due to the utility of trajectory forecasting models
in autonomous vehicle systems along with the availability of standard datasets and benchmarks to
measure progress [4, 53], a variety of effective trajectory forecasting methods are now available.
Unfortunately, most methods produce deterministic sets of trajectory forecasts per-agent [47, 9]
which are difficult to combine to produce realistic joint traffic scenes [30].
Generative models of driving behavior have been proposed as an alternative to deterministic trajectory
forecasting methods for traffic scene generation [40, 46]. These models re-frame trajectory forecasting
as modeling the joint distribution of future agent state conditioned on past observations and map
context. However, given that the distribution of traffic scenes in motion forecasting datasets are
similar to real-world driving, modelling the data distribution does not ensure that models will generate
rare, safety critical events.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

