In-Context Learning Unlocked for Diffusion Models

Zhendong Wang1,2 , Yifan Jiang1 , Yadong Lu2 , Yelong Shen2 , Pengcheng He2
Weizhu Chen2 , Zhangyang Wang1 , and Mingyuan Zhou1
1
The University of Texas at Austin, 2 Microsoft Azure AI

Example Pair: Depth -> Image

Text Guidance

Output

Query: Depth Map

Text Guidance

“Suzy Parker
photographed by
Georges Dambier for
ELLE #fashion, with a
pink dress and red
hair”

“BUTTERMERE
MORNING”

Output

Query: Hed Map

“Girl Picking
Poppies_OSG by One
Simple Gallery”

Example Pair: Seg -> Image

Text Guidance

Example Pair: Hed -> Image

Query: Seg

Output

Example Pair: Scribble -> Image

Text Guidance

Output

New Task: Scribble

“a turtle stands in
forest”

Figure 1: Illustration of the in-context learning ability enabled by our proposed Prompt Diffusion for conditioned
image generation tasks: With a prompt consisting of a task-specific example pair of images and text guidance,
given a new query image that aligns in type with the source image in the example pair, Prompt Diffusion can
comprehend the desired task and generate the corresponding output image on both seen (trained) and unseen
(new) task types.

Abstract
We present Prompt Diffusion, a framework for enabling in-context learning in
diffusion-based generative models. Given a pair of task-specific example images,
such as depth from/to image and scribble from/to image, and a text guidance, our
model automatically understands the underlying task and performs the same task
on a new query image following the text guidance. To achieve this, we propose
a vision-language prompt that can model a wide range of vision-language tasks
and a diffusion model that takes it as input. The diffusion model is trained jointly
on six different tasks using these prompts. The resulting Prompt Diffusion model
becomes the first diffusion-based vision-language foundation model capable of
in-context learning. It demonstrates high-quality in-context generation for the
trained tasks and effectively generalizes to new, unseen vision tasks using their
respective prompts. Our model also shows compelling text-guided image editing
results. Our framework aims to facilitate research into in-context learning for
computer vision. We share our code and pre-trained models at https://github.
com/Zhendong-Wang/Prompt-Diffusion.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

