Faster Discrete Convex Function Minimization with
Predictions: The M-Convex Case
Shinsaku Sakaue
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
sakaue@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Taihei Oki
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
oki@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Recent years have seen a growing interest in accelerating optimization algorithms
with machine-learned predictions. Sakaue and Oki (NeurIPS 2022) have developed
a general framework that warm-starts the L-convex function minimization method
with predictions, revealing the idea’s usefulness for various discrete optimization
problems. In this paper, we present a framework for using predictions to accelerate
M-convex function minimization, thus complementing previous research and extending the range of discrete optimization algorithms that can benefit from predictions.
Our framework is particularly effective for an important subclass called laminar
convex minimization, which appears in many operations research applications. Our
methods can improve time complexity bounds upon the best worst-case results by
using predictions and even have potential to go beyond a lower-bound result.

1

Introduction

Recent research on algorithms with predictions [29] has demonstrated that we can improve algorithms’
performance beyond the limitations of the worst-case analysis using predictions learned from past
data. In particular, a surge of interest has been given to research on using predictions to improve the
time complexity of algorithms, which we refer to as warm-starts with predictions for convenience.
Since Dinitz et al. [11]’s seminal work on speeding up the Hungarian method for weighted bipartite
matching with predictions, researchers have extended this idea to algorithms for various problems [7,
35, 10]. Sakaue and Oki [39] have found similarities between the idea and standard warm-starts in
continuous convex optimization and extended it to L-convex function minimization, a broad class
of discrete optimization problems studied in discrete convex analysis [31]. They thus have shown
that warm-starts with predictions can improve the time complexity of algorithms for various discrete
optimization problems, including weighted bipartite matching and weighted matroid intersection.
In this paper, we extend the idea of warm-starts with predictions to a new direction called M-convex
function minimization, another important problem class studied in discrete convex analysis. The Mconvexity is known to be in conjugate relation to the L-convexity. Hence, exploring the applicability
of warm-starts with predictions to M-convex function minimization is crucial to broaden further
the range of algorithms that can benefit from predictions, as is also mentioned in [39]. This paper
mainly discusses an important subclass of M-convex function minimization called laminar convex
minimization (Laminar), a large problem class widely studied in operations research (see references
in Section 1.2). To make it easy to imagine, we describe the most basic form (Box) of Laminar,
(Box)

minimize
n
x∈Z

n
X
i=1

fi (xi )

subject to

n
X

xi = R, ℓi ≤ xi ≤ ui (i = 1, . . . , n),

(1)

i=1

where f1 , . . . , fn : R → R are univariate convex functions, R ∈ Z, ℓ1 , . . . , ℓn ∈ Z ∪ {−∞}, and
u1 , . . . , un ∈ Z ∪ {+∞}. Note that the variable x ∈ Zn is an integer vector, which is needed when,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

