Imitation Learning from Vague Feedback

Xin-Qiang Cai1 , Yu-Jie Zhang1 , Chao-Kai Chiang1 , Masashi Sugiyama2,1
1
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
2
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
Imitation learning from human feedback studies how to train well-performed
imitation agents with an annotator’s relative comparison of two demonstrations
(one demonstration is better/worse than the other), which is usually easier to collect
than the perfect expert data required by traditional imitation learning. However, in
many real-world applications, it is still expensive or even impossible to provide a
clear pairwise comparison between two demonstrations with similar quality. This
motivates us to study the problem of imitation learning with vague feedback, where
the data annotator can only distinguish the paired demonstrations correctly when
their quality differs significantly, i.e., one from the expert and another from the nonexpert. By modeling the underlying demonstration pool as a mixture of expert and
non-expert data, we show that the expert policy distribution can be recovered when
the proportion α of expert data is known. We also propose a mixture proportion
estimation method for the unknown α case. Then, we integrate the recovered
expert policy distribution with generative adversarial imitation learning to form an
end-to-end algorithm1 . Experiments show that our methods outperform standard
and preference-based imitation learning methods on various tasks.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) is a popular approach for training agents to perform tasks by learning from
expert demonstrations [1–3]. It has been applied successfully to a variety of tasks, including robot
control [1], autonomous driving [4], and game playing [5]. However, traditional IL methods struggle
when presented with both expert and non-expert demonstrations, as the agents may learn incorrect
behaviors from the non-expert demonstrations [6]. This problem, which researchers refer to as
“Imitation Learning from Imperfect Demonstration” (ILfID), arises when the demonstrations used to
train the model may contain some non-expert data [6–9].
One popular solution to ILfID is resorting to an oracle to provide specific information, such as explicit
labels (confidence from an expert) of each demonstration, as in Figure 1a. However, such a specific
oracle is quite expensive. A more recent framework, Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) [10, 11], incorporates human feedback into the learning process, including a key part of
the pipeline used for training ChatGPT [12]. There exist two widely studied paradigms of feedback:
full ranking and global binary comparison, as in Figures 1b and 1c. Methods that use full-ranked
demonstrations assumed that the feedback between every pair of trajectories is available, and further
employed preference-based methods to solve the problem [13, 14]. Other studies have investigated
situations where demonstrations can be divided into two global binary datasets, allowing the learner
to filter out non-expert data from these global comparisons [7, 8]. However, data processed by any
feedback of Figures 1a, 1b, and 1c require the guarantee that clear ranking information or at least one
set consisting of pure expert demonstrations exists, so that off-the-shall IL methods can be applied
immediately. The availability of expert demonstrations raises the question of what if, in practice,
the feedback is not clear enough to provide purely expert demonstrations but mixed with non-expert
demonstrations? The question poses a challenge that previous methods fail to address since none of
1

The code is available on https://github.com/caixq1996/COMPILER.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

