Thought Cloning: Learning to Think while Acting
by Imitating Human Thinking

Shengran Hu1,2
srhu@cs.ubc.ca
1

Jeff Clune1,2,3
jclune@gmail.com

Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
2
Vector Institute
3
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Language is often considered a key aspect of human thinking, providing us with
exceptional abilities to generalize, explore, plan, replan, and adapt to new situations. However, Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents are far from human-level
performance in any of these abilities. We hypothesize one reason for such cognitive
deficiencies is that they lack the benefits of thinking in language and that we can
improve AI agents by training them to think like humans do. We introduce a
novel Imitation Learning framework, Thought Cloning, where the idea is to not
just clone the behaviors of human demonstrators, but also the thoughts humans
have as they perform these behaviors. While we expect Thought Cloning to truly
shine at scale on internet-sized datasets of humans thinking out loud while acting
(e.g. online videos with transcripts), here we conduct experiments in a domain
where the thinking and action data are synthetically generated. Results reveal that
Thought Cloning learns much faster than Behavioral Cloning and its performance
advantage grows the further out of distribution test tasks are, highlighting its ability
to better handle novel situations. Thought Cloning also provides important benefits
for AI Safety and Interpretability, and makes it easier to debug and improve AI.
Because we can observe the agent’s thoughts, we can (1) more easily diagnose
why things are going wrong, making it easier to fix the problem, (2) steer the agent
by correcting its thinking, or (3) prevent it from doing unsafe things it plans to
do. Overall, by training agents how to think as well as behave, Thought Cloning
creates safer, more powerful agents.1

1

Introduction

Language may be the key to what separates humans from all other animals, endowing us with an
amazing level of general intelligence [1–4]. Crucially, the benefits of language are not confined to
improving our ability to communicate with others: language also helps us think better [2–4]. We first
describe the benefits of agents that can understand language (a common topic in AI) before moving
to the benefits of agents that think in language (a topic that has received far less attention).
There are many benefits that arise if our agents can understand language. Doing so is crucial for
agents to generalize to new tasks we want them to perform. This is because it is drastically more
sample efficient if one can tell an agent what the task is, rather than requiring the agent to figure out
the task through trial and error [5, 6]. Moreover, agents that can understand language allow us to
define new tasks at test time without having to anticipate every wish we might eventually have for
1

The source code, model weights, and dataset are available at https://github.com/ShengranHu/
Thought-Cloning.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

