ScaleLong: Towards More Stable Training of Diffusion
Model via Scaling Network Long Skip Connection

Zhongzhan Huang1,2 Pan Zhou2∗ Shuicheng Yan2 Liang Lin1∗
1
Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 Sea AI Lab
huangzhzh23@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; zhoupan@sea.com;
shuicheng.yan@gmail.com; linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
In diffusion models, UNet is the most popular network backbone, since its long
skip connects (LSCs) to connect distant network blocks can aggregate long-distant
information and alleviate vanishing gradient. Unfortunately, UNet often suffers
from unstable training in diffusion models which can be alleviated by scaling its
LSC coefficients smaller. However, theoretical understandings of the instability of
UNet in diffusion models and also the performance improvement of LSC scaling
remain absent yet. To solve this issue, we theoretically show that the coefficients
of LSCs in UNet have big effects on the stableness of the forward and backward
propagation and robustness of UNet. Specifically, the hidden feature and gradient
of UNet at any layer can oscillate and their oscillation ranges are actually large
which explains the instability of UNet training. Moreover, UNet is also provably
sensitive to perturbed input, and predicts an output distant from the desired output,
yielding oscillatory loss and thus oscillatory gradient. Besides, we also observe
the theoretical benefits of the LSC coefficient scaling of UNet in the stableness of
hidden features and gradient and also robustness. Finally, inspired by our theory,
we propose an effective coefficient scaling framework ScaleLong that scales the
coefficients of LSC in UNet and better improve the training stability of UNet.
Experimental results on four famous datasets show that our methods are superior to
stabilize training, and yield about 1.5× training acceleration on different diffusion
models with UNet or UViT backbones. Click here for Code.

1

Introduction

Norm of feature

Recently, diffusion models (DMs) [1–9] have
×10000 Depth = 12
×10000 Depth = 16
7.0
become the most successful generative models
Org
Org
2.0
because of their superiority on modeling real-CS
-CS
5.0
LS (ours)
LS (ours)
1.5
istic data distributions. The methodology of
CS (ours)
CS (ours)
DMs includes a forward diffusion process and a
1.0
3.0
corresponding reverse diffusion process. For forward process, it progressively injects Gaussian
0.5
1.0
noise into a realistic sample until the sample
0
becomes a Gaussian noise, while the reverse
0
20000 30000 0
10000
20000 30000
10000
Iterations
Iterations
process trains a neural network to denoise the
Figure 1: The feature oscillation in UNet.
injected noise at each step for gradually mapping the Gaussian noise into the vanilla sample. By decomposing the complex generative task into
a sequential application of denoising small noise, DMs achieve much better synthesis performance
than other generative models, e.g., generative adversarial networks [10] and variational autoencoders
[11], on image [12–15], 3D [16, 17] and video [18–21] data and beyond.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

