Hierarchical Randomized Smoothing

Yan Scholten1 , Jan Schuchardt1 , Aleksandar Bojchevski2 & Stephan Günnemann1
{y.scholten, j.schuchardt, s.guennemann}@tum.de, a.bojchevski@uni-koeln.de
1
Dept. of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich
2
University of Cologne, Germany

Abstract
Real-world data is complex and often consists of objects that can be decomposed
into multiple entities (e.g. images into pixels, graphs into interconnected nodes).
Randomized smoothing is a powerful framework for making models provably
robust against small changes to their inputs – by guaranteeing robustness of the
majority vote when randomly adding noise before classification. Yet, certifying
robustness on such complex data via randomized smoothing is challenging when
adversaries do not arbitrarily perturb entire objects (e.g. images) but only a subset
of their entities (e.g. pixels). As a solution, we introduce hierarchical randomized
smoothing: We partially smooth objects by adding random noise only on a randomly selected subset of their entities. By adding noise in a more targeted manner
than existing methods we obtain stronger robustness guarantees while maintaining
high accuracy. We initialize hierarchical smoothing using different noising distributions, yielding novel robustness certificates for discrete and continuous domains.
We experimentally demonstrate the importance of hierarchical smoothing in image
and node classification, where it yields superior robustness-accuracy trade-offs.
Overall, hierarchical smoothing is an important contribution towards models that
are both – certifiably robust to perturbations and accurate.1

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are vulnerable to small input changes. Consequently, their performance
is typically better during development than in the real world where noise, incomplete data and
adversaries are present. To address this problem, robustness certificates constitute useful tools that
provide provable guarantees for the stability of predictions under worst-case perturbations, enabling
us to analyze and guarantee robustness of our classifiers in practice.
Randomized smoothing (Lecuyer et al., 2019; Cohen et al., 2019) is a powerful and highly flexible
framework for making arbitrary classifiers certifiably robust by averaging out small discontinuities
in the underlying model. This is achieved by guaranteeing robustness of the majority vote when
randomly adding noise to a model’s input before classification. This typically yields a robustnessaccuracy trade-off – more noise increases certifiable robustness but also reduces clean accuracy.
Recent adversarial attacks against image classifiers (Su et al., 2019; Croce and Hein, 2019; Modas
et al., 2019) and graph neural networks (Ma et al., 2020) further motivate the need for more flexible
robustness certificates against threat models where adversaries are bounded by both: the number of
perturbed entities and perturbation strength. For example in social networks, adversaries typically cannot control entire graphs, but the perturbation of the controlled nodes may be (imperceptibly) strong.
When adversaries perturb only a subset of all entities, existing smoothing-based approaches sacrifice
robustness over accuracy (or vice versa): They either add noise to entire objects (e.g. images/graphs)
or ablate entire entities (e.g. pixels/nodes) even if only a small subset is perturbed and requires noising.
1

Project page: https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/hierarchical-smoothing

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

