An Efficient End-to-End Training Approach for
Zero-Shot Human-AI Coordination
Xue Yan 1 2 , Jiaxian Guo 3 , Xingzhou Lou 1 2 , Jun Wang 4 , Haifeng Zhang 1 2 , Yali Du∗ 5
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
University of Tokyo, Japan 4 University College London, UK 5 King’s College London, UK
{yanxue2021,louxingzhou2020,haifeng.zhang}@ia.ac.cn
jiaxian.guo@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk, yali.du@kcl.ac.uk
2

Abstract
The goal of zero-shot human-AI coordination is to develop an agent capable of
collaborating with humans without relying on human data. Prevailing two-stage
population-based methods require a diverse population of mutually distinct policies to simulate diverse human behaviors. The necessity of such populations
severely limits their computational efficiency. To address this issue, we propose E3T, an Efficient End-to-End Training approach for zero-shot human-AI
coordination. E3T employs a mixture of ego policy and random policy to construct the partner policy, making it both skilled in coordination and diverse. This
way, the ego agent is trained end-to-end with this mixture policy, eliminating
the need for a pre-trained population, and thus significantly improving training
efficiency. In addition, we introduce a partner modeling module designed to
predict the partner’s actions based on historical contexts. With the predicted partner’s action, the ego policy can adapt its strategy and take actions accordingly
when collaborating with humans exhibiting different behavior patterns. Empirical
results on the Overcooked environment demonstrate that our method substantially improves the training efficiency while preserving comparable or superior
performance than the population-based baselines. Demo videos are available at
https://sites.google.com/view/e3t-overcooked.

1

Introduction

Cooperation between AI agents and humans has gained significant attention, spanning various fields
such as robotics [5, 26], automatic driving [41], Human-AI dialogue [14] and Human-AI coordination
games [30]. Due to the high cost of collecting human data and involving humans during training,
recent studies [32, 15] have focused on zero-shot human-AI coordination problems, with the aim to
train an ego agent capable of collaborating with humans without relying on human data.
To train such an ego agent, the prevailing approach [15, 21] involves training the ego agent with
diverse partner agents that can simulate human behavior without the need of human data. One method
for achieving this is through self-play [33, 29], where the ego agent plays against itself as the partner
agent. However, empirical evidence has shown that self-play can lead to agents getting stuck in
a single cooperative pattern during training [15], hindering their ability to adapt to diverse human
behaviors. Alternative approaches like other-play [15] aim to introduce diversity by breaking the
symmetry of self-play policies. Nevertheless, this method relies on the assumption of strict symmetry
in the action or state space, limiting its practical applicability.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

