Brant: Foundation Model for
Intracranial Neural Signal

Daoze Zhang*
Zhejiang University
zhangdz@zju.edu.cn

Zhizhang Yuan*
Zhejiang University
zhizhangyuan@zju.edu.cn

Junru Chen
Zhejiang University
jrchen_cali@zju.edu.cn

Jingjing Wang
Zhejiang University
wjjxjj@zju.edu.cn

Yang Yang†
Zhejiang University
yangya@zju.edu.cn
Yafeng Li
Nuozhu Technology Co., Ltd.
yafeng.li@neurox.cn

Abstract
We propose a foundation model named Brant for modeling intracranial recordings,
which learns powerful representations of intracranial neural signals by pre-training,
providing a large-scale, off-the-shelf model for medicine. Brant is the largest model
in the field of brain signals and is pre-trained on a large corpus of intracranial data
collected by us. The design of Brant is to capture long-term temporal dependency
and spatial correlation from neural signals, combining the information in both time
and frequency domains. As a foundation model, Brant achieves SOTA performance
on various downstream tasks (i.e. neural signal forecasting, frequency-phase
forecasting, imputation and seizure detection), showing the generalization ability
to a broad range of tasks. The low-resource label analysis and representation
visualization further illustrate the effectiveness of our pre-training strategy. In
addition, we explore the effect of model size to show that a larger model with a
higher capacity can lead to performance improvements on our dataset. The source
code and pre-trained weights are available at: https://zju-brainnet.github.
io/Brant.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Brain signals are electrical impulses that are generated by brain neurons and transmit through neural
networks. These signals provide important information about brain activity and can usually be
monitored in two ways, namely scalp electroencephalography (EEG) and intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG). The former records the electrical brain activity through electrodes placed on
the scalp, while the latter implants intracranial electrodes into brain tissue directly to derive neural
recordings. Compared with EEG, iEEG manifests significant advantages by providing more abundant,
stereotactic and detailed information about brain wave patterns from deeper brain structures, which
has been the mainstream method to obtain deep brain information, and is essential in the therapies for
some brain diseases (e.g., Parkinson’s disease [1], epileptic seizure [2]).
Modeling intracranial recordings has drawn much research attention, but several issues still remain
unresolved. Currently, studies for modeling intracranial recordings are mainly divided into two
research lines, namely handcrafted feature based methods [3–8] and deep learning based methods
[9–12]. Handcrafted feature engineering requires lots of domain knowledge and may only work on
specific tasks. And most deep learning based methods are fully supervised, which relies heavily on
*
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

