M4: A Unified XAI Benchmark for Faithfulness
Evaluation of Feature Attribution Methods across
Metrics, Modalities and Models

Xuhong Li
Baidu Inc.
lixuhong@baidu.com
Yekun Chai
Baidu Inc.
chaiyekun@baidu.com

Mengnan Du
New Jersey Institute of Technology
mengnan.du@njit.edu
Himabindu Lakkaraju
Harvard University
hlakkaraju@seas.harvard.edu

Jiamin Chen
Baidu Inc.
chenjiamin01@baidu.com
Haoyi Xiong∗
Baidu Inc.
xionghaoyi@baidu.com

Abstract
While Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) techniques have been widely studied to explain predictions made by deep neural networks, the way to evaluate the
faithfulness of explanation results remains challenging, due to the heterogeneity of
explanations for various models and the lack of ground-truth explanations. This
paper introduces an XAI benchmark named M4 , which allows evaluating various
input feature attribution methods using the same set of faithfulness metrics across
multiple data modalities (images and texts) and network structures (ResNets, MobileNets, Transformers). A taxonomy for the metrics has been proposed as well.
We first categorize commonly used XAI evaluation metrics into three groups based
on the ground truth they require. We then implement classic and state-of-the-art
feature attribution methods using InterpretDL and conduct extensive experiments
to compare methods and gain insights. Extensive experiments have been conducted to provide holistic evaluations as benchmark baselines. Several interesting
observations are made for designing attribution algorithms. The implementation
of state-of-the-art explanation methods and evaluation metrics of M4 is publicly
available at https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/InterpretDL.

1

Introduction

Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance on numerous
AI tasks, they are often regarded as black boxes due to their lack of transparency. This opacity
hinders the adoption of deep models in high-stake applications that require explainability, such
as healthcare, criminal justice, and law. Explainable AI (XAI) aims to address this limitation by
developing techniques to provide explanations for predictions made by DNN models [15, 17]. In
recent years, researchers have proposed various XAI algorithms to enable deeper understanding of
DNNs [40, 46, 48, 6, 7, 9]. Among these techniques, post-hoc feature attribution is one of the most
widely used paradigms, which could provide insight into the behaviors of trained DNNs.
Although these feature attribution methods can be helpful in understanding deep models, their
faithfulness (i.e., how well explanations match model reasoning) is not always guaranteed. Unfaithful
explanations fail to provide a complete or accurate description of the algorithm that the model
implements, thus might yield futile or deceptive insights [41]. To address this, researchers have
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

