Rethinking Semi-Supervised Medical Image
Segmentation: A Variance-Reduction Perspective

Chenyu You1

Weicheng Dai1

S. Kevin Zhou3
1

Yale University

2

Yifei Min1
Lawrence Staib1

University of Oxford

3

Fenglin Liu2

David A. Clifton2

James S. Duncan1

University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
For medical image segmentation, contrastive learning is the dominant practice to
improve the quality of visual representations by contrasting semantically similar
and dissimilar pairs of samples. This is enabled by the observation that without
accessing ground truth labels, negative examples with truly dissimilar anatomical
features, if sampled, can significantly improve the performance. In reality, however,
these samples may come from similar anatomical regions and the models may
struggle to distinguish the minority tail-class samples, making the tail classes more
prone to misclassification, both of which typically lead to model collapse. In this
paper, we propose ARCO, a semi-supervised contrastive learning (CL) framework
with stratified group theory for medical image segmentation. In particular, we
first propose building ARCO through the concept of variance-reduced estimation
and show that certain variance-reduction techniques are particularly beneficial in
pixel/voxel-level segmentation tasks with extremely limited labels. Furthermore,
we theoretically prove these sampling techniques are universal in variance reduction.
Finally, we experimentally validate our approaches on eight benchmarks, i.e., five
2D/3D medical and three semantic segmentation datasets, with different label
settings, and our methods consistently outperform state-of-the-art semi-supervised
methods. Additionally, we augment the CL frameworks with these sampling
techniques and demonstrate significant gains over previous methods. We believe our
work is an important step towards semi-supervised medical image segmentation by
quantifying the limitation of current self-supervision objectives for accomplishing
such challenging safety-critical tasks. 1

1

Introduction

Model robustness and label efficiency are two highly desirable perspectives when it comes to building
reliable medical segmentation models. In the context of medical image analysis, a model is said to
be robust if (1) it has a high segmentation quality with only using extremely limited labels in longtailed medical data; (2) and fast convergence speed [1, 2, 3]. The success of traditional supervised
learning depends on training deep networks on a large amount of labeled data, but this improved
segmentation/model robustness often comes at the cost of annotations and clinical expertise [4, 5, 6].
Therefore, it is difficult to adopt these models in real-world clinical applications.
Recently, a significant amount of research efforts [7, 8, 9, 10] have resorted to unsupervised or
semi-supervised learning techniques for improving the segmentation robustness. One of the most
effective methods is contrastive learning (CL) [11, 12, 13, 14]. It aims to learn useful representations
1

Codes are available on here.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

