Eliminating Catastrophic Overfitting Via Abnormal
Adversarial Examples Regularization

Runqi Lin

Chaojian Yu

Tongliang Liu∗

Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney

{rlin0511, chyu8051, tongliang.liu}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Single-step adversarial training (SSAT) has demonstrated the potential to achieve
both efficiency and robustness. However, SSAT suffers from catastrophic overfitting (CO), a phenomenon that leads to a severely distorted classifier, making it
vulnerable to multi-step adversarial attacks. In this work, we observe that some
adversarial examples generated on the SSAT-trained network exhibit anomalous
behaviour, that is, although these training samples are generated by the inner
maximization process, their associated loss decreases instead, which we named
abnormal adversarial examples (AAEs). Upon further analysis, we discover a
close relationship between AAEs and classifier distortion, as both the number
and outputs of AAEs undergo a significant variation with the onset of CO. Given
this observation, we re-examine the SSAT process and uncover that before the
occurrence of CO, the classifier already displayed a slight distortion, indicated by
the presence of few AAEs. Furthermore, the classifier directly optimizing these
AAEs will accelerate its distortion, and correspondingly, the variation of AAEs will
sharply increase as a result. In such a vicious circle, the classifier rapidly becomes
highly distorted and manifests as CO within a few iterations. These observations
motivate us to eliminate CO by hindering the generation of AAEs. Specifically, we
design a novel method, termed Abnormal Adversarial Examples Regularization
(AAER), which explicitly regularizes the variation of AAEs to hinder the classifier
from becoming distorted. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
can effectively eliminate CO and further boost adversarial robustness with negligible additional computational overhead. Our implementation can be found at
https://github.com/tmllab/2023_NeurIPS_AAER.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated impressive performance in various
decision-critical domains, such as autonomous driving [25, 12], face recognition [31, 3] and medical
imaging diagnosis [8]. However, DNNs were found to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [35,
9, 16]. Although these adversarial perturbations are imperceptible to human eyes, they can lead to
a completely different prediction in DNNs. To this end, many adversarial defence strategies have
been proposed, such as pre-processing techniques [13], detection algorithms [27], verification and
provable defence [20, 44], and adversarial training (AT) [11, 26, 46]. Among them, AT is considered
to be the most effective method against adversarial attacks [2, 4].
Despite the notable progress in improving model robustness, the standard multi-step AT significantly increases the computational overhead due to the iterative steps of forward and backward
propagation [26, 40, 41, 42, 48, 47]. In light of this, several works have attempted to use single-step
adversarial training (SSAT) as a more efficient alternative to achieve robustness. Unfortunately, a
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

