Censored Sampling of Diffusion Models Using
3 Minutes of Human Feedback
TaeHo Yoon1

Kibeom Myoung1 Keon Lee4 Jaewoong Cho4 Albert No3 Ernest K. Ryu1,2
1
Department of Mathematical Science, Seoul National University
2
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
3
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Hongik University
4
KRAFTON

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently shown remarkable success in high-quality image generation. Sometimes, however, a pre-trained diffusion model exhibits partial misalignment in the sense that the model can generate good images, but it
sometimes outputs undesirable images. If so, we simply need to prevent the
generation of the bad images, and we call this task censoring. In this work, we
present censored generation with a pre-trained diffusion model using a reward
model trained on minimal human feedback. We show that censoring can be accomplished with extreme human feedback efficiency and that labels generated
with a mere few minutes of human feedback are sufficient. Code available at:
https://github.com/tetrzim/diffusion-human-feedback.

1

Introduction

Diffusion probabilistic models [19, 12, 42] have recently shown remarkable success in high-quality
image generation. Much of the progress is driven by scale [35, 36, 38], and this progression points
to a future of spending high costs to train a small number of large-scale foundation models [4] and
deploying them, sometimes with fine-tuning, in various applications. In particular use cases, however,
such pre-trained diffusion models may be misaligned with goals specified before or after the training
process. An example of the former is text-guided diffusion models occasionally generating content
with nudity despite the text prompt containing no such request. An example scenario of the latter is
deciding that generated images should not contain a certain type of concepts (for example, human
faces) even though the model was pre-trained on images with such concepts.
Fixing misalignment directly through training may require an impractical cost of compute and data.
To train a large diffusion model again from scratch requires compute costs of up to hundreds of
thousands of USD [30, 29]. To fine-tune a large diffusion model requires data size ranging from
1,000 [28] to 27,000 [25].1 We argue that such costly measures are unnecessary when the pre-trained
model is already capable of sometimes generating “good” images. If so, we simply need to prevent
the generation of “bad” images, and we call this task censoring. (Notably, censoring does not aim
to improve the “good” images.) Motivated by the success of reinforcement learning with human
feedback (RLHF) in language domains [9, 50, 43, 33], we perform censoring using human feedback.
In this work, we present censored generation with a pre-trained diffusion model using a reward model
trained on extremely limited human feedback. Instead of fine-tuning the pre-trained diffusion model,
we train a reward model on labels generated with a few minutes of human feedback and perform
guided generation. By not fine-tuning the diffusion model (score network), we reduce both compute
1
The prior work [28] fine-tunes a pre-trained diffusion model on a new dataset of size 1k using a so-called
adapter module while [25] improves text-to-image alignment using 27k human-feedback data.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

