On the Need for a Language Describing Distribution
Shifts: Illustrations on Tabular Datasets
Jiashuo Liu1,∗, Tianyu Wang2,∗ , Peng Cui1 , Hongseok Namkoong3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University
3
Decision, Risk, and Operations Division, Columbia Business School
liujiashuo77@gmail.com, tw2837@columbia.edu
cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, namkoong@gsb.columbia.edu
1

Abstract
Different distribution shifts require different algorithmic and operational interventions. Methodological research must be grounded by the specific shifts they address.
Although nascent benchmarks provide a promising empirical foundation, they implicitly focus on covariate shifts, and the validity of empirical findings depends on
the type of shift, e.g., previous observations on algorithmic performance can fail to
be valid when the Y |X distribution changes. We conduct a thorough investigation
of natural shifts in 5 tabular datasets over 86,000 model configurations, and find
that Y |X-shifts are most prevalent. To encourage researchers to develop a refined
language for distribution shifts, we build W HY S HIFT, an empirical testbed of
curated real-world shifts where we characterize the type of shift we benchmark
performance over. Since Y |X-shifts are prevalent in tabular settings, we identify
covariate regions that suffer the biggest Y |X-shifts and discuss implications for
algorithmic and data-based interventions. Our testbed highlights the importance of
future research that builds an understanding of why distributions differ.2

1

Introduction

The performance of predictive models has been observed to degrade under distribution shifts in a
wide range of applications, such as healthcare [9, 95, 76, 93], economics [36, 25], education [6],
vision [74, 63, 86, 98], and language [62, 7]. Distribution shifts vary in type, typically defined as
either a change in the marginal distribution of the covariates (X-shifts) or the conditional relationship
between the outcome and covariate (Y |X-shifts). Real-world scenarios comprise of both types of
shifts. In computer vision [62, 47, 81, 38, 101], Y |X-shifts are less likely to occur as Y is constructed
from human knowledge given an input X, unless the labeling noise is severe. For tabular datasets,
Y |X-shifts can be more common because of missing variables and hidden confounders. For example,
the prevalence of a disease may be affected by unrecorded covariates whose distribution changes
across domains, such as lifestyle factors and socioeconomic status [39, 103, 93].
Different types of distribution shifts require different solutions. When facing X-shifts, the implicit
goal of many researchers is to develop a single robust model that can be generalized effectively across
multiple domains. Various algorithms have been developed to align the marginal distributions (PX ),
including domain adaptation and importance sampling methods. However, under Y |X-shifts, there
may be a fundamental trade-off between learning algorithms: to perform well on a target distribution,
a model may have to necessarily perform worse on others. Algorithmically, typical methods for
∗

Equal contribution
More information on the data, codes and python packages about W HY S HIFT are available at https:
//github.com/namkoong-lab/whyshift.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

