Energy-Efficient Scheduling with Predictions

Eric Balkanski
Columbia University
eb3224@columbia.edu

Noemie Perivier
Columbia University
np2708@columbia.edu

Clifford Stein
Columbia University
cliff@ieor.columbia.edu

Hao-Ting Wei
Columbia University
hw2738@columbia.edu

Abstract
An important goal of modern scheduling systems is to efficiently manage power
usage. In energy-efficient scheduling, the operating system controls the speed at
which a machine is processing jobs with the dual objective of minimizing energy
consumption and optimizing the quality of service cost of the resulting schedule.
Since machine-learned predictions about future requests can often be learned from
historical data, a recent line of work on learning-augmented algorithms aims to
achieve improved performance guarantees by leveraging predictions. In particular,
for energy-efficient scheduling, Bamas et. al. [NeurIPS ’20] and Antoniadis et. al.
[SWAT ’22] designed algorithms with predictions for the energy minimization with
deadlines problem and achieved an improved competitive ratio when the prediction
error is small while also maintaining worst-case bounds even when the prediction
error is arbitrarily large.
In this paper, we consider a general setting for energy-efficient scheduling and
provide a flexible learning-augmented algorithmic framework that takes as input an
offline and an online algorithm for the desired energy-efficient scheduling problem.
We show that, when the prediction error is small, this framework gives improved
competitive ratios for many different energy-efficient scheduling problems, including energy minimization with deadlines, while also maintaining a bounded
competitive ratio regardless of the prediction error. Finally, we empirically demonstrate that this framework achieves an improved performance on real and synthetic
datasets.

1

Introduction

Large data centers and machine learning models are important contributors to the growing impact
that computing systems have on climate change. An important goal is thus to efficiently manage
power usage in order to not only complete computing tasks in a timely manner but to also minimize
energy consumption. In many operating systems, this tradeoff can be controlled by carefully scaling
the speed at which jobs run. An extensive area of scheduling has studied such online (and offline)
speed scaling problems (see, e.g., [1]). Since the speed of many processors is approximately the cube
root of their power [25, 15], these works assume that the power of a processor is equal to speed to
some power α ≥ 1, where α is thought of as being approximately 3 [28, 10] and the total energy
consumption is power integrated over time.
Online energy-efficient scheduling algorithms have mostly been evaluated using competitive analysis,
which provides robust guarantees that hold for any instance. However, since competitive analysis
evaluates algorithms over worst-case instances, it can often be pessimistic. In particular, it ignores the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

