Overcoming Recency Bias of Normalization Statistics
in Continual Learning: Balance and Adaptation

Yilin Lyu1∗ Liyuan Wang2∗ Xingxing Zhang2† Zicheng Sun1
Hang Su2 Jun Zhu2 Liping Jing1†
1
Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint Center for ML, Tsinghua University
{yilinlyu, zichengsun, lpjing}@bjtu.edu.cn
wly19@tsinghua.org.cn, xxzhang1993@gmail.com
{suhangss, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Continual learning entails learning a sequence of tasks and balancing their knowledge appropriately. With limited access to old training samples, much of the current
work in deep neural networks has focused on overcoming catastrophic forgetting of
old tasks in gradient-based optimization. However, the normalization layers provide
an exception, as they are updated interdependently by the gradient and statistics of
currently observed training samples, which require specialized strategies to mitigate recency bias. In this work, we focus on the most popular Batch Normalization
(BN) and provide an in-depth theoretical analysis of its sub-optimality in continual
learning. Our analysis demonstrates the dilemma between balance and adaptation
of BN statistics for incremental tasks, which potentially affects training stability
and generalization. Targeting on these particular challenges, we propose Adaptive
Balance of BN (AdaB2 N), which incorporates appropriately a Bayesian-based
strategy to adapt task-wise contributions and a modified momentum to balance
BN statistics, corresponding to the training and testing stages. By implementing
BN in a continual learning fashion, our approach achieves significant performance
gains across a wide range of benchmarks, particularly for the challenging yet
realistic online scenarios (e.g., up to 7.68%, 6.86% and 4.26% on Split CIFAR-10,
Split CIFAR-100 and Split Mini-ImageNet, respectively). Our code is available at
https://github.com/lvyilin/AdaB2N.

1

Introduction

Continual learning aims to acquire, accumulate and exploit knowledge from sequentially arrived
tasks. As the access to old training samples is typically limited, the acquired knowledge tends to
be increasingly relevant to the more recent tasks. Such recency bias, also known as catastrophic
forgetting [17], is generally attributed to the nature of gradient-based optimization in deep neural
networks (DNNs) [9, 30], where the learning of network parameters depends on a tug-of-war over
currently observed training samples. Numerous efforts have been devoted to addressing catastrophic
forgetting of these learnable parameters through rectifying their gradients. However, as an important
component of DNNs, the normalization layers employ particular updating rules that are only partially
gradient-based, and their recency bias in continual learning remains to be addressed.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

