Learning Probabilistic Symmetrization for
Architecture Agnostic Equivariance
Jinwoo Kim
Tien Dat Nguyen
Ayhan Suleymanzade
Hyeokjun An
Seunghoon Hong
KAIST

Abstract
We present a novel framework to overcome the limitations of equivariant architectures in learning functions with group symmetries. In contrary to equivariant
architectures, we use an arbitrary base model such as an MLP or a transformer
and symmetrize it to be equivariant to the given group by employing a small
equivariant network that parameterizes the probabilistic distribution underlying the
symmetrization. The distribution is end-to-end trained with the base model which
can maximize performance while reducing sample complexity of symmetrization.
We show that this approach ensures not only equivariance to given group but also
universal approximation capability in expectation. We implement our method on
various base models, including patch-based transformers that can be initialized
from pretrained vision transformers, and test them for a wide range of symmetry groups including permutation and Euclidean groups and their combinations.
Empirical tests show competitive results against tailored equivariant architectures,
suggesting the potential for learning equivariant functions for diverse groups using a
non-equivariant universal base architecture. We further show evidence of enhanced
learning in symmetric modalities, like graphs, when pretrained from non-symmetric
modalities, like vision. Code is available at https://github.com/jw9730/lps.

1

Introduction

Many perception problems in machine learning involve functions that are invariant or equivariant
to certain symmetry group of transformations of data. Examples include learning on sets and
graphs, point clouds, molecules, proteins, and physical data, to name a few [10, 12]. Equivariant
architecture design has emerged as a successful approach, where every building block of a model is
carefully restricted to be equivariant to a symmetry group of interest [5, 12, 23]. However, equivariant
architecture design faces fundamental limitations, as individual construction of models for each group
can be laborious or computationally expensive [91, 58, 64, 45], the architectural restrictions often lead
to limited expressive power [101, 56, 105, 40], and the knowledge learned from one problem cannot
be easily transferred to others of different symmetries as the architecture would be incompatible.
This motivates us to seek a symmetrization solution that can achieve group invariance and equivariance with general-purpose, group-agnostic architectures such as an MLP or a transformer. As a basic
form of symmetrization, any parameterized function fθ : X → Y on vector spaces X , Y can be made
invariant or equivariant by group averaging [102, 67], i.e., averaging over all possible transformations
of inputs x ∈ X and outputs y ∈ Y by a symmetry group G = {g}:
1 X
ϕθ (x) =
g · fθ (g −1 · x),
(1)
|G|
g∈G

where ϕθ is equivariant or invariant to the group G. An important advantage is that the symmetrized
function ϕθ can leverage the expressive power of the base function fθ ; it has been shown that ϕθ is a
universal approximator of invariant or equivariant functions if fθ is a universal approximator [102],
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

