A Heavy-Tailed Algebra for Probabilistic
Programming

Feynman Liang
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
feynman@berkeley.edu

Liam Hodgkinson
School of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Melbourne, Australia
lhodgkinson@unimelb.edu.au

Michael W. Mahoney
ICSI, LBNL, and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Despite the successes of probabilistic models based on passing noise through neural
networks, recent work has identified that such methods often fail to capture tail
behavior accurately—unless the tails of the base distribution are appropriately
calibrated. To overcome this deficiency, we propose a systematic approach for
analyzing the tails of random variables, and we illustrate how this approach can
be used during the static analysis (before drawing samples) pass of a probabilistic
programming language (PPL) compiler. To characterize how the tails change under
various operations, we develop an algebra which acts on a three-parameter family
of tail asymptotics and which is based on the generalized Gamma distribution. Our
algebraic operations are closed under addition and multiplication; they are capable
of distinguishing sub-Gaussians with differing scales; and they handle ratios sufficiently well to reproduce the tails of most important statistical distributions directly
from their definitions. Our empirical results confirm that inference algorithms that
leverage our heavy-tailed algebra attain superior performance across a number of
density modeling and variational inference (VI) tasks.

1

Introduction

Within the context of modern probabilistic programming languages (PPLs), recent developments
in functional programming [51], programming languages [3], and deep variational inference (VI)
[4] combine to facilitate efficient probabilistic modelling and inference. But despite the broadening
appeal of probabilistic programming, common pitfalls such as mismatched distribution supports [32]
and non-integrable expectations [53, 55, 60] remain uncomfortably commonplace and remarkably
challenging to address. In particular, heavy-tailed distributions arise in a wide range of statistical
applications and are known to present substantial technical challenges [37, 55, 60]. Recent innovations
aiming to improve PPLs have automated verification of distribution constraints [32], tamed noisy
gradient estimates [16] as well as unruly density ratios [53, 55], and approximated high-dimensional
distributions with non-trivial bulks [39]. To address the issue of heavy-tailed targets, approaches
which initialize with non-Gaussian tails have been proposed [25, 33]. However, these methods
typically require the use of optimization and/or sampling strategies to estimate the tails of the target
distribution. Such strategies are often unstable, or fail to allow for a sufficiently wide array of possible
tail behaviours.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

