Differentiable Random Partition Models
Thomas M. Sutter∗, Alain Ryser∗, Joram Liebeskind, Julia E. Vogt
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich

Abstract
Partitioning a set of elements into an unknown number of mutually exclusive
subsets is essential in many machine learning problems. However, assigning
elements, such as samples in a dataset or neurons in a network layer, to an unknown
and discrete number of subsets is inherently non-differentiable, prohibiting endto-end gradient-based optimization of parameters. We overcome this limitation
by proposing a novel two-step method for inferring partitions, which allows its
usage in variational inference tasks. This new approach enables reparameterized
gradients with respect to the parameters of the new random partition model. Our
method works by inferring the number of elements per subset and, second, by
filling these subsets in a learned order. We highlight the versatility of our generalpurpose approach on three different challenging experiments: variational clustering,
inference of shared and independent generative factors under weak supervision,
and multitask learning.

1

Introduction

Partitioning a set of elements into subsets is a classical mathematical problem that attracted much
interest over the last few decades (Rota, 1964; Graham et al., 1989). A partition over a given set is
a collection of non-overlapping subsets such that their union results in the original set. In machine
learning (ML), partitioning a set of elements into different subsets is essential for many applications,
such as clustering (Bishop and Svensen, 2004) or classification (De la Cruz-Mesía et al., 2007).
Random partition models (RPM, Hartigan, 1990) define a probability distribution over the space of
partitions. RPMs can explicitly leverage the relationship between elements of a set, as they do not
necessarily assume i.i.d. set elements. On the other hand, most existing RPMs are intractable for
large datasets (MacQueen, 1967; Plackett, 1975; Pitman, 1996) and lack a reparameterization scheme,
prohibiting their direct use in gradient-based optimization frameworks.
In this work, we propose the differentiable random partition model (DRPM), a fully-differentiable
relaxation for RPMs that allows reparametrizable sampling. The DRPM follows a two-stage procedure: first, we model the number of elements per subset, and second, we learn an ordering of the
elements with which we fill the elements into the subsets. The DRPM enables the integration of
partition models into state-of-the-art ML frameworks and learning RPMs from data using stochastic
optimization.
We evaluate our approach in three experiments, demonstrating the proposed DRPM’s versatility
and advantages. First, we apply the DRPM to a variational clustering task, highlighting how the
reparametrizable sampling of partitions allows us to learn a novel kind of Variational Autoencoder
(VAE, Kingma and Welling, 2014). By leveraging potential dependencies between samples in a
dataset, DRPM-based clustering overcomes the simplified i.i.d. assumption of previous works, which
used categorical priors (Jiang et al., 2016). In our second experiment, we demonstrate how to retrieve
sets of shared and independent generative factors of paired images using the proposed DRPM. In
∗

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to {thomas.sutter,alain.ryser}@inf.ethz.ch

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

