ResShift: Efficient Diffusion Model for Image
Super-resolution by Residual Shifting

Zongsheng Yue Jianyi Wang Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{zongsheng.yue,jianyi001,ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Diffusion-based image super-resolution (SR) methods are mainly limited by the low
inference speed due to the requirements of hundreds or even thousands of sampling
steps. Existing acceleration sampling techniques inevitably sacrifice performance
to some extent, leading to over-blurry SR results. To address this issue, we propose
a novel and efficient diffusion model for SR that significantly reduces the number of
diffusion steps, thereby eliminating the need for post-acceleration during inference
and its associated performance deterioration. Our method constructs a Markov
chain that transfers between the high-resolution image and the low-resolution
image by shifting the residual between them, substantially improving the transition
efficiency. Additionally, an elaborate noise schedule is developed to flexibly control
the shifting speed and the noise strength during the diffusion process. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that the proposed method obtains superior or at least
comparable performance to current state-of-the-art methods on both synthetic and
real-world datasets, even only with 15 sampling steps. Our code and model are
available at https://github.com/zsyOAOA/ResShift.

1

Introduction

Image super-resolution (SR) is a fundamental problem in low-level vision, aiming at recovering the
high-resolution (HR) image given the low-resolution (LR) one. This problem is severely ill-posed
due to the complexity and unknown nature of degradation models in real-world scenarios. Recently,
diffusion model [1, 2], a newly emerged generative model, has achieved unprecedented success
in image generation [3]. Furthermore, it has also demonstrated great potential in solving several
downstream low-level vision tasks, including image editing [4, 5], image inpainting [6, 7], image
colorization [8, 9]. There is also ongoing research exploring the potential of diffusion models to
tackle the long-standing and challenging SR task.
One common approach [10, 11] involves inserting the LR image into the input of current diffusion
model (e.g., DDPM [2]) and retraining the model from scratch on the training data for SR. Another
popular way [7, 12, 13, 14] is to use an unconditional pre-trained diffusion model as a prior and
modify its reverse path to generate the expected HR image. Unfortunately, both strategies inherit
the Markov chain underlying DDPM, which can be inefficient in inference, often taking hundreds or
even thousands of sampling steps. Although some acceleration techniques [15, 16, 17] have been
developed to compress the sampling steps in inference, they inevitably lead to a significant drop in
performance, resulting in over-smooth results as shown in Fig. 1, in which the DDIM [16] algorithm
is employed to speed up the inference. Thus, there is a need to design a new diffusion model for SR
that achieves both efficiency and performance, without sacrificing one for the other.
Let us revisit the diffusion model in the context of image generation. In the forward process, it builds
up a Markov chain to gradually transform the observed data into a pre-specified prior distribution,
typically a standard Gaussian distribution, over a large number of steps. Subsequently, image
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

