MADLAD-400: A Multilingual And Document-Level
Large Audited Dataset

Sneha Kudugunta†∗ Isaac Caswell Biao Zhang† Xavier Garcia†
Derrick Xin† Aditya Kusupati Romi Stella† Ankur Bapna† Orhan Firat†
†
Google DeepMind  Google Research

Abstract
We introduce MADLAD-400, a manually audited, general domain 3T token monolingual dataset based on CommonCrawl, spanning 419 languages. We discuss
the limitations revealed by self-auditing MADLAD-400, and the role data auditing
had in the dataset creation process. We then train and release a 10.7B-parameter
multilingual machine translation model on 250 billion tokens covering over 450
languages using publicly available data, and find that it is competitive with models
that are significantly larger, and report the results on different domains. In addition, we train a 8B-parameter language model, and assess the results on few-shot
translation. We make the baseline models 2 available to the research community.

1

Introduction

The availability of large multilingual corpora has accelerated the progress of multilingual natural
language processing (NLP) models [64, 16, 42, 8, 46]. However, most publicly available generaldomain multilingual corpora contain 100-200 languages [64, 46, 2], with some datasets containing
more languages in specific domains such as religious content [4], children’s books [40] or dialects [3].
A common approach to creating such datasets is to mine language specific data from general web
crawls such as CommonCrawl [52, 38, 63] to create datasets. We simply take this approach and scale
it. We train a document-level LangID model on 498 languages to obtain CommonCrawl annotations
at a document level and obtain a 5-trillion token, document-level monolingual dataset.
However, such web-scale corpora are known to be noisy and contain undesirable content [48, 43,
18], with their multilingual partitions often having their own specific issues such as unusable text,
misaligned and mislabeled/ambiguously labeled data [35]. To mitigate this, we manually audit
our data. Based on our findings, we discard 79 of the languages from our preliminary dataset,
rename or combine several languages and apply additional preprocessing steps. Finally, to validate
the efficacy of our dataset, we train multilingual machine translation models of various sizes up to
10.7B parameters, as well as an 8B decoder-only model, and then evaluate these models on highly
multilingual translation evaluation sets.
In Section 2, we describe the creation and composition of MADLAD-400, and discuss the results
of the audit. Then, in Section A.5, we describe the parallel data we collect using publicly available
sources to train the multilingual machine translation models described in Section 4.1. In Section 4,
we describe the training process of the multilingual machine translation models and 8B decoder-only
model, and then evaluate these models on highly multilingual translation datasets. Finally, we discuss
the limitations of this work and directions for future work.
∗
2

Correspondence: {snehakudugunta,icaswell}@google.com
https://github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/master/madlad_400

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

