Not All Out-of-Distribution Data Are Harmful
to Open-Set Active Learning

Yang Yang1 , Yuxuan Zhang1 , Xin Song2 , Yi Xu3∗
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Baidu Talent Intelligence Center, Baidu Inc
3
Dalian University of Technology
{yyang, xuan_zhang}@njust.edu.cn, songxin06@baidu.com, yxu@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Active learning (AL) methods have been proven to be an effective way to reduce the
labeling effort by intelligently selecting valuable instances for annotation. Despite
their great success with in-distribution (ID) scenarios, AL methods suffer from performance degradation in many real-world applications because out-of-distribution
(OOD) instances are always inevitably contained in unlabeled data, which may lead
to inefficient sampling. Therefore, several attempts have been explored open-set
AL by strategically selecting pure ID instances while filtering OOD instances. However, concentrating solely on selecting pseudo-ID instances may cause the training
constraint of the ID classifier and OOD detector. To address this issue, we propose
a simple yet effective sampling scheme, Progressive Active Learning (PAL), which
employs a progressive sampling mechanism to leverage the active selection of
valuable OOD instances. The proposed PAL measures unlabeled instances by
synergistically evaluating instances’ informativeness and representativeness, and
thus it can balance the pseudo-ID and pseudo-OOD instances in each round to
enhance both the capacity of the ID classifier and the OOD detector. Extensive
experiments on various open-set AL scenarios demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed PAL, compared with the state-of-the-art methods. The code is available
at https://github.com/njustkmg/PAL.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved great success in many tasks such as image classification [14], article
prediction [35], and graph classification [32]. The main factor underlying its excellent performance
lies in the availability of an extensive dataset with manual annotations, which can be costly in
real-world applications [16]. To reduce the high labeling cost, active learning is an effective approach
that involves iteratively selecting valuable instances from the unlabeled data pool and querying their
labels for model retraining [4].
The basic assumption shared by various existing active learning methods is that all unlabeled instances
are collected from the ID domain [1, 28], showing that the labeled and unlabeled instances share
the same distribution. However, this assumption is unrealistic in real-world scenarios as unlabeled
instances are primarily gathered from the open world, where massive instances belong to the OOD
domain. Taking the image classification task as an example, the goal is to classify mammals, but a
considerable proportion of the unlabeled instances consists of unknown classes (i.e., OOD domain),
such as bees, apples, and tables. Once these images are selected for labeling, it would be a waste of
the annotation budget since they are not used for training the ID classifier. Therefore, it is important
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

