Geometry-Aware Adaptation for Pretrained Models

Nicholas Roberts, Xintong Li, Dyah Adila, Sonia Cromp,
Tzu-Heng Huang, Jitian Zhao, Frederic Sala
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{nick11roberts, fredsala}@cs.wisc.edu
{xli2224, adila, cromp, thuang273, jzhao326}@wisc.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models—including prominent zero-shot models—are often
trained on datasets whose labels are only a small proportion of a larger label
space. Such spaces are commonly equipped with a metric that relates the labels
via distances between them. We propose a simple approach to exploit this information to adapt the trained model to reliably predict new classes—or, in the
case of zero-shot prediction, to improve its performance—without any additional
training. Our technique is a drop-in replacement of the standard prediction rule,
swapping arg max with the Fréchet mean. We provide a comprehensive theoretical
analysis for this approach, studying (i) learning-theoretic results trading off label
space diameter, sample complexity, and model dimension, (ii) characterizations
of the full range of scenarios in which it is possible to predict any unobserved
class, and (iii) an optimal active learning-like next class selection procedure to
obtain optimal training classes for when it is not possible to predict the entire range
of unobserved classes. Empirically, using easily-available external metrics, our
proposed approach, L OKI, gains up to 29.7% relative improvement over SimCLR
on ImageNet and scales to hundreds of thousands of classes. When no such metric
is available, L OKI can use self-derived metrics from class embeddings and obtains
a 10.5% improvement on pretrained zero-shot models such as CLIP.

1

Introduction

The use of pretrained models is perhaps the most significant recent shift in machine learning. Such
models can be used out-of-the-box, either to predict classes observed during pretraining (as in
ImageNet-trained ResNets [14]) or to perform zero-shot classification on any set of classes [32].
While this is exciting, label spaces are often so huge that models are unlikely to have seen even a
single point with a particular label. Without additional modification, pretrained models will simply
fail to reliably predict such classes. Instead, users turn to fine-tuning—which requires additional
labeled data and training cycles and so sacrifices much of the promise of zero-shot usage.
How can we adapt pretrained models to predict new classes, without fine-tuning or retraining? At first
glance, this is challenging: predictive signal comes from labeled training data. However, relational
information between the classes can be exploited to enable predicting a class even when there are no
examples with this label in the training set. Such relational data is commonly available, or can be
constructed with the help of knowledge bases, ontologies, or powerful foundation models [39].
How to best exploit relational structure remains unclear, with a number of key challenges: We might
wish to know what particular subset of classes is rich enough to enable predicting many (or all)
remaining labels. This is crucial in determining whether a training set is usable or, even with the aid
of structure, insufficient. It is also unclear how approaches that use relational information interact
with the statistical properties of learning, such as training sample complexity. Finally, performing
adaptation requires an efficient and scalable algorithm.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

