Active Bipartite Ranking

James Cheshire
Stephan Clemencon
Telecom ParisTech
first.last@telecom-paris.fr
Vincent Laurent
ENS Paris Saclay
first.last@ens-paris-saclay.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we develop an active learning framework for the bipartite ranking
problem. Motivated by numerous applications, ranging from supervised anomaly
detection to credit-scoring through the design of medical diagnosis support systems,
and usually formulated as the problem of optimizing (a scalar summary of) the
ROC curve, bipartite ranking has been the subject of much attention in the passive
context. Various dedicated algorithms have been recently proposed and studied
by the machine-learning community. In contrast, active bipartite ranking rule
is poorly documented in the literature. Due to its global nature, a strategy for
labeling sequentially data points that are difficult to rank w.r.t. to the others is
required. This learning task is much more complex than binary classification, for
which many active algorithms have been designed. It is the goal of this article to
provide a rigorous formulation of such a selective sampling approach. We propose
a dedicated algorithm, referred to as active-rank, which aims to minimise the
distance between the ROC curve of the ranking function built and the optimal one,
w.r.t. the sup norm. We show that, for a fixed confidence level ε and probability δ,
active-rank is PAC(ε, δ). In addition, we provide a problem dependent upper
bound on the expected sampling time of active-rank and also demonstrate a
problem dependent lower bound on the expected sampling time of any PAC(ε, δ)
algorithm. Beyond the theoretical analysis carried out, numerical results are
presented, providing strong empirical evidence of the performance of the algorithm
proposed, which compares favorably with more naive approaches.

1

Introduction

In bipartite ranking, the statistical framework is exactly the same as that in standard binary classification, the flagship problem in statistical learning theory. One observes n ≥ 1 independent copies
Dn = {(X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn )} of a generic random pair (X, Y ) with (unknown) distribution P ,
where Y is a binary random label, valued in {−1, +1} say, and X is a high dimensional random
vector, taking its values in X ⊂ Rd with d ≥ 1, that models some information hopefully useful to
predict Y . In contrast to binary classification, the goal pursued is of global (and not local) nature. It
is not to assign a label, positive or negative, to any new input observation X but to rank any new set
of (temporarily unlabeled) observations X1′ , . . . , Xn′ ′ by means of a (measurable) scoring function
s : X → R, so that those with positive label appear on top of the list (i.e. are those with the highest
scores) with high probability. More formally, the accuracy of any scoring rule can be evaluated
through the ROC curve criterion or its popular scalar summary, the AUC (standing for the Area Under the ROC Curve), and, as expected, optimal scoring functions w.r.t. these performance measures
can be shown to be increasing transforms of the posterior probability η(x) = P{Y = +1 | X = x},
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

