Memory Efficient Optimizers with 4-bit States

Bingrui Li1 , Jianfei Chen1† , Jun Zhu1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University
lbr22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {jianfeic, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Optimizer states are a major source of memory consumption for training neural
networks, limiting the maximum trainable model within given memory budget.
Compressing the optimizer states from 32-bit floating points to lower bitwidth
is promising to reduce the training memory footprint, while the current lowest
achievable bitwidth is 8-bit. In this work, we push optimizer states bitwidth
down to 4-bit through a detailed empirical analysis of first and second moments.
Specifically, we find that moments have complicated outlier patterns, that current
block-wise quantization cannot accurately approximate. We use a smaller block
size and propose to utilize both row-wise and column-wise information for better
quantization. We further identify a zero point problem of quantizing the second
moment, and solve this problem with a linear quantizer that excludes the zero point.
Our 4-bit optimizers are evaluated on a wide variety of benchmarks including
natural language understanding, machine translation, image classification, and
instruction tuning. On all the tasks our optimizers can achieve comparable accuracy
with their full-precision counterparts, while enjoying better memory efficiency.*

1

Introduction

Large-scale models with a massive amount of parameters [5, 9, 20, 22, 49, 58] have shown impressive
few-shot learning abilities on general tasks [52]. Despite being powerful, training these models is
challenging. Memory capacity is one of the main bottlenecks of training large-scale models. Modern
neural networks are typically trained with stateful optimizers such as Adam [26], which need to
maintain one or two optimizer states (i.e., first and second moments) per each parameter. As the
model size grows, the memory consumed by optimizer states can be a dominating factor of memory
consumption [40, 41].
There are several attempts to reduce optimizers’ memory consumption. Factorization [2, 8, 46] applies
low-rank approximation to optimizer states, delta tuning [18, 23, 24, 27, 28] avoids maintaining
optimizer states for most parameters by only tuning a small subset, and low-precision optimizers [15,
44] represent their states with low-precision numerical formats, which consume less memory.
Among these methods, low-precision optimizers are attractive due to their simplicity and wide
applicability. Dettmers et al. [15] propose an 8-bit optimizer with reparameterized embedding
layers (“stable embedding layers”) and a block-wise 8-bit dynamic exponential numerical format for
optimizer states. Their 8-bit optimizers achieve similar convergence to full-precision optimizers on
language modeling, image classification, machine translation, and language understanding tasks.
In this work, we push the required numerical precision of low-precision optimizers from 8 to 4-bit
through analyzing the patterns in the first and second moments and designing dedicated quantizers
* Code is available at https://github.com/thu-ml/low-bit-optimizers
†

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

