Calibration by Distribution Matching:
Trainable Kernel Calibration Metrics
Charles Marx∗
Stanford University
ctmarx@cs.stanford.edu

Sofian Zalouk∗
Stanford University
szalouk@stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Calibration ensures that probabilistic forecasts meaningfully capture uncertainty by
requiring that predicted probabilities align with empirical frequencies. However,
many existing calibration methods are specialized for post-hoc recalibration, which
can worsen the sharpness of forecasts. Drawing on the insight that calibration can
be viewed as a distribution matching task, we introduce kernel-based calibration
metrics that unify and generalize popular forms of calibration for both classification
and regression. These metrics admit differentiable sample estimates, making it easy
to incorporate a calibration objective into empirical risk minimization. Furthermore,
we provide intuitive mechanisms to tailor calibration metrics to a decision task, and
enforce accurate loss estimation and no regret decisions. Our empirical evaluation
demonstrates that employing these metrics as regularizers enhances calibration,
sharpness, and decision-making across a range of regression and classification
tasks, outperforming methods relying solely on post-hoc recalibration.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic forecasts are valuable tools for capturing uncertainty about an outcome of interest. In
practice, the exact outcome distribution is often impossible to recover [51], leading to overconfident
forecasts [15]. Calibration provides statistical guarantees on the forecasts, ensuring that the predicted
probabilities align with the true likelihood of events. For example, consider a weather forecast
that assigns an 80% probability of rain tomorrow. A well-calibrated forecast would imply that, on
average, it rains on 80% of the days with such predictions. By appropriately quantifying uncertainty,
calibration empowers decision-makers to efficiently allocate resources and mitigate risks, even when
the outcome distribution cannot be recovered exactly.
Many forms of calibration have been proposed in both classification [8, 21, 35] and regression
[42, 23, 53] to ensure that uncertainty estimates match true frequencies. From a methodological
perspective, the literature on enforcing calibration is fractured; many algorithms to enforce calibration
are specialized for a particular form of calibration [39, 29, 52, 10, 17] or are designed exclusively
for post-hoc calibration [27, 23]. Although post-hoc methods are effective at enforcing calibration,
they often lead to a degradation in the predictive power, i.e. sharpness, of the forecaster [26]. This
motivates the need for versatile metrics that can enforce various forms of calibration during training.
In this work, we introduce a unified framework wherein existing notions of calibration are presented
as distribution matching constraints. To enforce distribution matching, we use the Maximum Mean
Discrepancy (MMD), giving us unbiased estimates of miscalibration that are amenable to gradientbased optimization. We frame these metrics as regularizers and optimize them alongside proper
scoring rules. This allows us to enforce calibration while preserving sharpness.
∗

Equal Contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

