VidChapters-7M: Video Chapters at Scale

Antoine Yang† , Arsha Nagrani§ , Ivan Laptev† , Josef Sivic¶ , Cordelia Schmid†
¶

†
Inria Paris, DI ENS, CNRS, PSL Research University § VGG, University of Oxford
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech Technical University in Prague
https://antoyang.github.io/vidchapters.html

Abstract
Segmenting long videos into chapters enables users to quickly navigate to the information of their interest. This important topic has been understudied due to the lack
of publicly released datasets. To address this issue, we present VidChapters-7M, a
dataset of 817K user-chaptered videos including 7M chapters in total. VidChapters7M is automatically created from videos online in a scalable manner by scraping
user-annotated chapters and hence without any additional manual annotation. We
introduce the following three tasks based on this data. First, the video chapter generation task consists of temporally segmenting the video and generating a chapter
title for each segment. To further dissect the problem, we also define two variants of
this task: video chapter generation given ground-truth boundaries, which requires
generating a chapter title given an annotated video segment, and video chapter
grounding, which requires temporally localizing a chapter given its annotated title.
We benchmark both simple baselines and state-of-the-art video-language models
for these three tasks. We also show that pretraining on VidChapters-7M transfers
well to dense video captioning tasks in both zero-shot and finetuning settings,
largely improving the state of the art on the YouCook2 and ViTT benchmarks.
Finally, our experiments reveal that downstream performance scales well with the
size of the pretraining dataset. Our dataset, code, and models are publicly available
at https://antoyang.github.io/vidchapters.html.

Intro and new
shoes

Hiking Low Tatras
todays plan

Beautifull ascent
Low Tatras

New shoes, la
Sportiva x4

0:00

0:42

1:46

2:26

… Back to the campervan
9:58

Outro and
many thanks
12:10

Figure 1: A video with user-annotated chapters in VidChapters-7M: the video is temporally
segmented into chapters, which are annotated with a chapter title in free-form natural language.

1

Introduction

As online media consumption grows, the volume of video content available is increasing rapidly.
While searching for specific videos is already a challenging problem, searching within a long video is
an even less explored task. Manual navigation can often be time consuming, particularly for long
videos. A compelling solution for organizing content online is to segment long videos into chapters
(see Figure 1). Chapters are contiguous, non-overlapping segments, completely partitioning a video.
Each chapter is also labeled with a short description of the chapter content, enabling users to quickly
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

