Massively Multilingual Corpus of Sentiment Datasets
and Multi-faceted Sentiment Classification Benchmark
Łukasz Augustyniak
WUST (Wrocław University of Science and Technology)
lukasz.augustyniak@pwr.edu.pl
Marcin Gruza
Brand24 AI, WUST

Piotr Gramacki
Brand24 AI, WUST

Mikołaj Morzy
Poznań University of Technology

Szymon Woźniak
Brand24 AI

Krzysztof Rajda
Brand24 AI, WUST
Tomasz Kajdanowicz
WUST

Abstract
Despite impressive advancements in multilingual corpora collection and model
training, developing large-scale deployments of multilingual models still presents
a significant challenge. This is particularly true for language tasks that are culturedependent. One such example is the area of multilingual sentiment analysis,
where affective markers can be subtle and deeply ensconced in culture. This work
presents the most extensive open massively multilingual corpus of datasets for
training sentiment models. The corpus consists of 79 manually selected datasets
from over 350 datasets reported in the scientific literature based on strict quality
criteria. The corpus covers 27 languages representing 6 language families. Datasets
can be queried using several linguistic and functional features. In addition, we
present a multi-faceted sentiment classification benchmark summarizing hundreds
of experiments conducted on different base models, training objectives, dataset
collections, and fine-tuning strategies.

1

Introduction

Consider a hotel booking service that allows its customers to post reviews. You have found just the
perfect accommodation to stay for a couple of days with your family, but you browse through the
reviews section of the website to check the experiences of former guests. Suddenly, you encounter
a review in Polish: "hotel jak hotel, mogło być gorzej." This review has the following sentiment
scores1 : sneg = 0.44, sneu = 0.44, spos = 0.12. Intrigued by the ambiguity of scores, you
translate the review into English: "hotel like a hotel, all in all, it could have been worse," which
is scored as sneg = 0.80, sneu = 0.16, spos = 0.04. Apparently, the stereotypically pessimistic
Polish outlook on life gets lost in translation. The next review is written in Czech: "ok, ale nic
zajímavého" with scores sneg = 0.32, sneu = 0.54, spos = 0.14. After translating into English
("ok, but nothing interesting") the sentiment classification model scores the review as negative
(sneg = 0.50, sneu = 0.37, spos = 0.13). After your stay, you decide to add a very positive review
of the hotel ("it was a killer place to stay", sneg = 0.03, sneu = 0.05, spos = 0.92). You would be
very surprised to learn that the Czechs would be quite confused about your opinion ("to bylo vražedné
1

Sentiment
scores
in
this
paragraph
are
produced
cardiffnlp/twitter-xlm-roberta-base-sentiment model [9]

by

the

multilingual

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

