DAC-DETR: Divide the Attention Layers and Conquer

Zhengdong Hu1,2∗, Yifan Sun2 , Jingdong Wang2 , Yi Yang3 †
1
ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
2
Baidu Inc.
3
CCAI, College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
huzhengdongcs@gmail.com , sunyf15@tsinghua.org.cn ,
wangjingdong@baidu.com , yangyics@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper reveals a characteristic of DEtection Transformer (DETR) that negatively impacts its training efficacy, i.e., the cross-attention and self-attention layers
in DETR decoder have opposing impacts on the object queries (though both impacts
are important). Specifically, we observe the cross-attention tends to gather multiple
queries around the same object, while the self-attention disperses these queries far
away. To improve the training efficacy, we propose a Divide-And-Conquer DETR
(DAC-DETR) that separates out the cross-attention to avoid these competing objectives. During training, DAC-DETR employs an auxiliary decoder that focuses on
learning the cross-attention layers. The auxiliary decoder, while sharing all the other
parameters, has NO self-attention layers and employs one-to-many label assignment to improve the gathering effect. Experiments show that DAC-DETR brings
remarkable improvement over popular DETRs. For example, under the 12 epochs
training scheme on MS-COCO, DAC-DETR improves Deformable DETR (ResNet50) by +3.4AP and achieves 50.9 (ResNet-50) / 58.1 AP (Swin-Large) based on
some popular methods (i.e., DINO and an IoU-related loss). Our code will be made
available at https://github.com/huzhengdongcs/DAC-DETR.

1

Introduction

Though DEtection Transformers (DETRs) have already achieved great progress, their low training
efficacy problem remains a critical challenge. The research community has been paying great efforts
to locate the causes of this problem and to improve the training efficacy. For example, DN-DETR [15]
and DINO [42] find the one-to-one matching is prone to inconsistent optimization goals. In response,
they propose to accelerate DETR training with auxiliary denoising queries. Hybrid DETR [12]
and Group DETR [5] attribute the reason to the rare positive training queries and correspondingly
increase positive queries through additional one-to-many matching. Some other works [20, 1] notice
the misalignment between the predicted probability and position. They suppress such misalignment
through IoU-related loss functions and achieve improvement.
This paper, from another perspective, investigates this problem by rethinking the cooperation between
cross-attention and self-attention layers in the DETR decoder. We find during their cooperation, these
two attention types actually have some opposing impacts on the object queries. These two impacts
are both critical for DETR (as explained later), but their opposition impairs the training efficacy.
Specifically, we observe the cross-attention layers in DETR decoder tends to gather multiple queries
around a single object, while the self-attention disperses these queries far away from each other. The
above “gather ↔ disperse” phenomenon concerns not only the positional relationship (1st row in
Fig. 1), but also the feature distance (2nd row in Fig. 1 visualized by t-SNE [36]):
∗
†

Zhengdong Hu makes his part of work during internship in Baidu Inc.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

