On Proper Learnability between Average- and
Worst-case Robustness
Vinod Raman⇤
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
vkraman@umich.edu

Unique Subedi⇤
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
subedi@umich.edu

Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
Recently, Montasser et al. [2019] showed that finite VC dimension is not sufficient
for proper adversarially robust PAC learning. In light of this hardness, there is a
growing effort to study what type of relaxations to the adversarially robust PAC
learning setup can enable proper learnability. In this work, we initiate the study of
proper learning under relaxations of the adversarially robust loss. We give a family
of robust loss relaxations under which VC classes are properly PAC learnable with
sample complexity close to what one would require in the standard PAC learning
setup. On the other hand, we show that for an existing and natural relaxation of the
adversarially robust loss, finite VC dimension is not sufficient for proper learning.
Lastly, we give new generalization guarantees for the adversarially robust empirical
risk minimizer.

1

Introduction

As deep neural networks become increasingly ubiquitous, their susceptibility to test-time adversarial
attacks has become more and more apparent. Designing learning algorithms that are robust to these
test-time adversarial perturbations has garnered increasing attention by machine learning researchers
and practitioners alike. Prior work on adversarially robust learning has mainly focused on learnability
under the worst-case adversarially robust risk [Montasser et al., 2019, Attias et al., 2021, Cullina
et al., 2018],
"
#
RU (h; D) :=

E

(x,y)⇠D

sup

z2U (x)

{h(z) 6= y} ,

where U (x) ⇢ X is an arbitrary but fixed perturbation set (for example `p balls). In practice, worstcase robustness is commonly achieved via Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) of the adversarially
robust loss or some convex surrogate [Madry et al., 2017, Wong and Kolter, 2018, Raghunathan et al.,
2018, Bao et al., 2020]. However, a seminal result by Montasser et al. [2019] shows that any proper
learning rule, including ERM, even when trained on an arbitrarily large number of samples, may
not return a classifier with small adversarially robust risk. These high generalization gaps for the
adversarially robust loss have also been observed in practice [Schmidt et al., 2018]. Even worse,
empirical studies have shown that classifiers trained to achieve worst-case adversarial robustness
exhibit degraded nominal performance [Dobriban et al., 2020, Raghunathan et al., 2019, Su et al.,
2018, Tsipras et al., 2018, Yang et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2019, Robey et al., 2022].
In light of these difficulties, there has been a recent push to study when proper learning, and more
specifically, when learning via ERM is possible for achieving adversarial robustness. The ability to
achieve test-time robustness via proper learning rules is important from a practical standpoint. It
⇤

Equal contributions

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

