OpenAGI: When LLM Meets Domain Experts

Yingqiang Ge
Rutgers University

Wenyue Hua
Rutgers University

Kai Mei
Rutgers University

Jianchao Ji
Rutgers University

Juntao Tan
Rutgers University

Shuyuan Xu
Rutgers University

Zelong Li
Rutgers University

Yongfeng Zhang∗
Rutgers University

Abstract
Human Intelligence (HI) excels at combining basic skills to solve complex tasks.
This capability is vital for Artificial Intelligence (AI) and should be embedded in
comprehensive AI Agents, enabling them to harness expert models for complex
task-solving towards Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). Large Language Models
(LLMs) show promising learning and reasoning abilities, and can effectively use
external models, tools, plugins, or APIs to tackle complex problems. In this work,
we introduce OpenAGI, an open-source AGI research and development platform
designed for solving multi-step, real-world tasks. Specifically, OpenAGI uses a dual
strategy, integrating standard benchmark tasks for benchmarking and evaluation,
and open-ended tasks including more expandable models, tools, plugins, or APIs
for creative problem-solving. Tasks are presented as natural language queries to
the LLM, which then selects and executes appropriate models. We also propose a
Reinforcement Learning from Task Feedback (RLTF) mechanism that uses task
results to improve the LLM’s task-solving ability, which creates a self-improving
AI feedback loop. While we acknowledge that AGI is a broad and multifaceted
research challenge with no singularly defined solution path, the integration of LLMs
with domain-specific expert models, inspired by mirroring the blend of general and
specialized intelligence in humans, offers a promising approach towards AGI. We
are open-sourcing the OpenAGI project’s code, dataset, benchmarks, evaluation
methods, and the UI demo to foster community involvement in AGI advancement:
https://github.com/agiresearch/OpenAGI.

1

Introduction

The acquisition and reuse of skills is a fundamental aspect of human intelligence that enables the
formation of complex skills to address novel or intricate problems [19, 4, 57]. We posit that machine
intelligence should incorporate this capacity to synthesize various skills by composing them into
complex skills for complex task-solving. In computer science parlance, each skill is referred to as a
domain expert “model” – a reusable tool, module, network, plugin, or API with a defined function.
The domain expert models can be synthesized into a larger “plan” for performing more complex
tasks. The model synthesis process is adaptable to the input or task, such that for a given task, the
models are synthesized into the most suitable plan to address the task at hand. As a result, different
inputs or tasks may necessitate distinct synthesized models as a plan for task-solving.
Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have showcased exceptional learning and
reasoning capabilities, rendering them well-suited for selecting, synthesizing, and executing external
expert models to address complex tasks. These LLMs, such as GPT series [32, 2], LLaMA series
[45, 44] and T5 series [33, 8], have exhibited a profound understanding of natural language and the
∗

{yingqiang.ge,wenyue.hua,kai.mei,jianchao.ji,juntao.tan,shuyuan.xu,zelong.li,yongfeng.zhang}@rutgers.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

