Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking in Generative
Diffusion Models

1

Gabriel Raya1,2 Luca Ambrogioni3,4
Jheronimus Academy of Data Science 2 Tilburg University 3 Radboud University
4
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour
g.raya@jads.nl, l.ambrogioni@donders.ru.nl

Abstract
Generative diffusion models have recently emerged as a leading approach for
generating high-dimensional data. In this paper, we show that the dynamics of
these models exhibit a spontaneous symmetry breaking that divides the generative
dynamics into two distinct phases: 1) A linear steady-state dynamics around a
central fixed-point and 2) an attractor dynamics directed towards the data manifold.
These two “phases” are separated by the change in stability of the central fixedpoint, with the resulting window of instability being responsible for the diversity
of the generated samples. Using both theoretical and empirical evidence, we show
that an accurate simulation of the early dynamics does not significantly contribute
to the final generation, since early fluctuations are reverted to the central fixed point.
To leverage this insight, we propose a Gaussian late initialization scheme, which
significantly improves model performance, achieving up to 3x FID improvements
on fast samplers, while also increasing sample diversity (e.g., racial composition
of generated CelebA images). Our work offers a new way to understand the
generative dynamics of diffusion models that has the potential to bring about higher
performance and less biased fast-samplers.

1

Introduction

In recent years, generative diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015), also known as score-based
diffusion models, have demonstrated significant progress in image (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021),
sound (Chen et al., 2020; Kong et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023) and video generation (Ho et al., 2022;
Singer et al., 2022). These models have not only produced samples of exceptional quality, but also
demonstrated a comprehensive coverage of the data distribution. The generated samples exhibit
impressive diversity and minimal mode collapse, which are crucial characteristics of high-performing
generative models (Salimans et al., 2016; Lucic et al., 2018; Thanh-Tung and Tran, 2020). Diffusion
models are defined in terms of a stochastic dynamic that maps a simple, usually Gaussian, distribution
into the distribution of the data. In an intuitive sense, the dynamics of a generated sample passes from
a phase of equal potentiality, where any (synthetic) datum could be generated, to a denoising phase
where the (randomly) “selected” datum is fully denoised. As we shall see in the rest of this paper,
this can be interpreted as a form of spontaneous symmetry breaking. As stated by Gross (1996), “The
secret of nature is symmetry, but much of the texture of the world is due to mechanisms of symmetry
breaking.” Surprisingly, the concept of spontaneous symmetry breaking has not yet been examined
in the context of generative modeling. This is particularly noteworthy given the importance of
spontaneous symmetry breaking in nature, which accounts for the emergence of various phenomena
such as crystals (breaking translation invariance), magnetism (breaking rotation invariance), and
broken gauge symmetries, a common theme in contemporary theoretical physics.
The concept of spontaneous symmetry breaking is strongly connected with the theory of phase
transitions (Stanley, 1971; Donoghue et al., 2014). In high energy physics, experimental evidence of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

