Video Dynamics Prior: An Internal Learning
Approach for Robust Video Enhancements

Gaurav Shrivastava
University of Maryland, College Park
gauravsh@umd.edu

Ser-Nam Lim
University of Central Florida
sernam@ucf.edu

Abhinav Shrivastava
University of Maryland, College Park
abhinav@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel robust framework for low-level vision tasks,
including denoising, object removal, frame interpolation, and super-resolution,
that does not require any external training data corpus. Our proposed approach
directly learns the weights of neural modules by optimizing over the corrupted
test sequence, leveraging the spatio-temporal coherence and internal statistics of
videos. Furthermore, we introduce a novel spatial pyramid loss that leverages the
property of spatio-temporal patch recurrence in a video across the different scales
of the video. This loss enhances robustness to unstructured noise in both the spatial
and temporal domains. This further results in our framework being highly robust
to degradation in input frames and yields state-of-the-art results on downstream
tasks such as denoising, object removal, and frame interpolation. To validate the
effectiveness of our approach, we conduct qualitative and quantitative evaluations
on standard video datasets such as DAVIS, UCF-101, and VIMEO90K-T.1

1

Introduction

Recently, video enhancement [54, 42, 43, 1, 12, 18, 49, 32] and editing [56, 11, 24, 50] tasks have
attracted much attention in the computer vision community. Most of these tasks are ill-posed
problems, i.e., they do not have a unique solution. For example, enhancement tasks such as video
frame interpolation can have infinitely many plausible solutions. Therefore, the aim is to find a
visually realistic solution coherent in both the space and time domain for such tasks.
Priors play a critical role in finding reasonable solutions to these ill-posed problems by learning
spatio-temporal constraints. In recent years, deep learning has emerged as the most promising
technique [54, 13, 39, 38, 4, 2, 43, 49, 22] for leveraging data to create priors that enforce these
spatio-temporal constraints. However, the generalization of these data-driven priors mainly relies on
data distribution at training time.
In the current era of short video platforms such as TikTok, Instagram reels, YouTube shorts, and Snap,
millions of new artistic elements (e.g., new filters, trends, etc.) are introduced daily. This trend causes
substantial variations between the train and the test sets, which results in diminished effectiveness of
the learned prior. Moreover, frequent fine-tuning or frequent training to improve the efficacy of the
prior significantly hamper the scalability of such models.
1

Navigate to the webpage for video results.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

