UNSSOR: Unsupervised Neural Speech Separation by
Leveraging Over-determined Training Mixtures

Zhong-Qiu Wang and Shinji Watanabe
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
wang.zhongqiu41@gmail.com

Abstract
In reverberant conditions with multiple concurrent speakers, each microphone
acquires a mixture signal of multiple speakers at a different location. In overdetermined conditions where the microphones out-number speakers, we can narrow
down the solutions to speaker images and realize unsupervised speech separation
by leveraging each mixture signal as a constraint (i.e., the estimated speaker images
at a microphone should add up to the mixture). Equipped with this insight, we
propose UNSSOR, an algorithm for unsupervised neural speech separation by
leveraging over-determined training mixtures. At each training step, we feed an
input mixture to a deep neural network (DNN) to produce an intermediate estimate
for each speaker, linearly filter the estimates, and optimize a loss so that, at each
microphone, the filtered estimates of all the speakers can add up to the mixture
to satisfy the above constraint. We show that this loss can promote unsupervised
separation of speakers. The linear filters are computed in each sub-band based
on the mixture and DNN estimates through the forward convolutive prediction
(FCP) algorithm. To address the frequency permutation problem incurred by using
sub-band FCP, a loss term based on minimizing intra-source magnitude scattering is
proposed. Although UNSSOR requires over-determined training mixtures, we can
train DNNs to achieve under-determined separation (e.g., unsupervised monaural
speech separation). Evaluation results on two-speaker separation in reverberant
conditions show the effectiveness and potential of UNSSOR.

1

Introduction

In many machine learning and artificial intelligence applications, sensors, while recording, usually
capture a mixture of desired and undesired signals. One example is the cocktail party problem (or
speech separation) [1, 2], where, given a recorded mixture of the concurrent speech by multiple
speakers, the task is to separate the mixture to individual speaker signals. Speech separation [3] has
been dramatically advanced by deep learning, since deep clustering [4] and permutation invariant
training (PIT) [5] solved the label permutation problem. They (and their subsequent studies [6–26])
are based on supervised learning, requiring paired clean speech and its corrupted signal generated via
simulation, where clean speech is mixed with, for example, various noises and competing speakers
at diverse energy and reverberation levels in simulated rooms [3]. The clean speech can provide an
accurate, sample-level supervision for model training. Such simulated data, however, may not match
the distribution of real-recorded test data in the target domain, and the resulting supervised learning
based models would have generalization issues [27, 28]. How to train unsupervised neural speech
separation systems on unlabelled target-domain mixtures is hence an important problem to study.
Training unsupervised speech separation models directly on monaural mixtures is an ill-posed task [2],
since there is only one mixture signal observed but multiple speaker signals to reconstruct. The
separation model would lack an accurate supervision (or regularizer) to figure out what desired sound
objects (e.g., clean speaker signals) are, as there are infinite solutions where in each solution the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

