Uncovering Neural Scaling Laws
in Molecular Representation Learning

Dingshuo Chen1∗ Yanqiao Zhu2∗ Jieyu Zhang3 Yuanqi Du4
†
Zhixun Li5 Qiang Liu1 Shu Wu1 Liang Wang1
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
3
The Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington
4
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
5
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

# Primary contact: dingshuo.chen@cripac.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Molecular Representation Learning (MRL) has emerged as a powerful tool for
drug and materials discovery in a variety of tasks such as virtual screening and
inverse design. While there has been a surge of interest in advancing modelcentric techniques, the influence of both data quantity and quality on molecular
representations is not yet clearly understood within this field. In this paper, we delve
into the neural scaling behaviors of MRL from a data-centric viewpoint, examining
four key dimensions: (1) data modalities, (2) dataset splitting, (3) the role of
pre-training, and (4) model capacity. Our empirical studies confirm a consistent
power-law relationship between data volume and MRL performance across these
dimensions. Additionally, through detailed analysis, we identify potential avenues
for improving learning efficiency. To challenge these scaling laws, we adapt seven
popular data pruning strategies to molecular data and benchmark their performance.
Our findings underline the importance of data-centric MRL and highlight possible
directions for future research.

1

Introduction

The research enthusiasm for Molecular Representation Learning (MRL) is steadily increasing,
attributed to its potential in expediting drug and materials discovery processes compared with
conventional in vitro and in vivo experiments [1–4]. Within the context of MRL, the central objective
is to leverage specific featurizations, or modalities, of molecules in order to learn continuous vector
representations. These representations aim to capture comprehensive chemical semantics and exhibit
high expressiveness, thereby effectively addressing various downstream tasks [5–17].
A trend in the field is developing neural architectures and training strategies to improve the expressiveness of the learned representations. However, the influence of varying data scales on the
performance of MRL under different learning scenarios is yet to be fully understood. To fill this gap,
we draw attention to the following questions: What are the neural scaling behaviors of molecular
representation learning? Do they align with the previous scaling laws such as the power-law, established in other domains [18–20]? Beyond common research objects in neural scaling laws such
as the impact of pre-training and model parameter sizes [21, 18, 22], MRL further presents unique
∗
†

These authors made equal contribution to this research.
Corresponding author: Shu Wu (shu.wu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

