Statistical Guarantees for Variational Autoencoders
using PAC-Bayesian Theory

Sokhna Diarra Mbacke
Université Laval
sokhna-diarra.mbacke.1@ulaval.ca

Florence Clerc
McGill University
florence.clerc@mail.mcgill.ca

Pascal Germain
Université Laval
pascal.germain@ift.ulaval.ca

Abstract
Since their inception, Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) have become central in
machine learning. Despite their widespread use, numerous questions regarding
their theoretical properties remain open. Using PAC-Bayesian theory, this work
develops statistical guarantees for VAEs. First, we derive the first PAC-Bayesian
bound for posterior distributions conditioned on individual samples from the datagenerating distribution. Then, we utilize this result to develop generalization
guarantees for the VAE’s reconstruction loss, as well as upper bounds on the
distance between the input and the regenerated distributions. More importantly, we
provide upper bounds on the Wasserstein distance between the input distribution
and the distribution defined by the VAE’s generative model.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep generative models have exhibited tremendous empirical success. Two of
the most important families of generative models are Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al., 2014) and Variational Autoencoders (Kingma and Welling, 2014; Rezende et al.,
2014). GANs take an adversarial approach, whereas VAEs are based on maximum likelihood
estimation and variational inference. VAEs comprise two main components: an encoder which
parameterizes an approximation of the posterior distribution over the latent variables, and a decoder
which parameterizes the likelihood. In addition to generative modelling tasks such as image generation
(Vahdat and Kautz, 2020) and text generation (Bowman et al., 2016), VAEs have been successfully
applied to other topics such as semi-supervised learning (Kingma et al., 2014), anomaly detection
(An and Cho, 2015), and dimensionality reduction (Kaur et al., 2021). However, despite their
empirical success, the question of statistical guarantees for the performance of VAEs remains largely
open. Namely, how can one certify that VAEs generalize well, both in terms of reconstruction and
generation?
PAC-Bayesian theory (McAllester, 1999; Catoni, 2003) is an influential tool of statistical learning
theory dedicated to providing generalization bounds for machine learning models. PAC-Bayes has
been applied to a wide variety of problems such as classification (Germain et al., 2009; ParradoHernández et al., 2012), meta-learning (Amit and Meir, 2018), co-clustering (Seldin and Tishby,
2010), domain adaptation (Germain et al., 2020), and online learning (Haddouche and Guedj, 2022).
In recent years, PAC-Bayes has been used to derive non-vacuous generalization bounds for supervised
learning algorithms based on neural networks (Dziugaite and Roy, 2018; Pérez-Ortiz et al., 2021).
See Guedj (2019) and Alquier (2021) for excellent surveys.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

