Optimal Treatment Regimes for Proximal
Causal Learning

Tao Shen
National University of Singapore

Yifan Cui∗
Zhejiang University

Abstract
A common concern when a policymaker draws causal inferences from and makes
decisions based on observational data is that the measured covariates are insufficiently rich to account for all sources of confounding, i.e., the standard no confoundedness assumption fails to hold. The recently proposed proximal causal
inference framework shows that proxy variables that abound in real-life scenarios can be leveraged to identify causal effects and therefore facilitate decisionmaking. Building upon this line of work, we propose a novel optimal individualized treatment regime based on so-called outcome and treatment confounding
bridges. We then show that the value function of this new optimal treatment
regime is superior to that of existing ones in the literature. Theoretical guarantees, including identification, superiority, excess value bound, and consistency of
the estimated regime, are established. Furthermore, we demonstrate the proposed
optimal regime via numerical experiments and a real data application.

1

Introduction

Data-driven individualized decision-making has received tremendous attention nowadays due to its
applications in healthcare, economics, marketing, etc. A large branch of work has focused on maximizing the expected utility of implementing the estimated optimal policy over a target population based on randomized controlled trials or observational studies, e.g., Athey and Wager (2021);
Chakraborty and Moodie (2013); Jiang et al. (2019); Kitagawa and Tetenov (2018); Kosorok and
Laber (2019); Murphy (2003); Qian and Murphy (2011); Robins (1986, 1994, 1997); Tsiatis et al.
(2019); Wu et al. (2019); Zhao et al. (2012, 2019).
A critical assumption commonly made in these studies, known as unconfoundedness or exchangeability, precludes the existence of unmeasured confounding. Relying on an assumed ability of the
decision-maker to accurately measure covariates relevant to a variety of confounding mechanisms
present in a given observational study, causal effects, value functions, and other relevant quantities
can be nonparametrically identified. However, such an assumption might not always be realistic in
observational studies or randomized trials subject to non-compliance (Robins, 1994, 1997). Therefore, it is of great interest in recovering confounding mechanisms from measured covariates to infer
causal effects and facilitate decision-making. A prevailing strand of work has been devoted to using instrumental variable (Angrist et al., 1996; Imbens and Angrist, 1994) as a proxy variable in
dynamic treatment regimes and reinforcement learning settings (Cui, 2021; Cui and Tchetgen Tchetgen, 2021b,a; Han, 2023; Liao et al., 2021; Pu and Zhang, 2021; Qiu et al., 2021; Stensrud and
Sarvet, 2022).
Recently, Tchetgen Tchetgen et al. proposed the so-called proximal causal inference framework, a
formal potential outcome framework for proximal causal learning, which while explicitly acknowledging covariate measurements as imperfect proxies of confounding mechanisms, establishes causal
∗

Correspondence to Yifan Cui <cuiyf@zju.edu.cn>

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

