Towards Evaluating Transfer-based Attacks
Systematically, Practically, and Fairly

Qizhang Li1,2 , Yiwen Guo3∗, Wangmeng Zuo1 , Hao Chen4
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 Tencent Security Big Data Lab, 3 Independent Researcher, 4 UC Davis
{liqizhang95,guoyiwen89}@gmail.com wmzuo@hit.edu.cn chen@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
The adversarial vulnerability of deep neural networks (DNNs) has drawn great
attention due to the security risk of applying these models in real-world applications. Based on transferability of adversarial examples, an increasing number of
transfer-based methods have been developed to fool black-box DNN models whose
architecture and parameters are inaccessible. Although tremendous effort has been
exerted, there still lacks a standardized benchmark that could be taken advantage of
to compare these methods systematically, fairly, and practically. Our investigation
shows that the evaluation of some methods needs to be more reasonable and more
thorough to verify their effectiveness, to avoid, for example, unfair comparison
and insufficient consideration of possible substitute/victim models. Therefore, we
establish a transfer-based attack benchmark (TA-Bench) which implements 30+
methods. In this paper, we evaluate and compare them comprehensively on 25 popular substitute/victim models on ImageNet. New insights about the effectiveness of
these methods are gained and guidelines for future evaluations are provided. Code
at: https://github.com/qizhangli/TA-Bench.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated unprecedented success in various
applications. However, the success comes at a price: DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples
crafted by adding imperceptible perturbations to inputs (e.g., images). The existence of adversarial
examples poses a significant threat to the security and reliability of DNNs, especially in safety-critical
applications such as autonomous driving, biometrics, and medical image analysis.
There are many different ways of generating adversarial examples and performing attacks. Transferbased attacks, that are capability of compromising DNNs without having access to their network
architecture and parameters, have been widely studied over the past few years. To issue such transferbased attacks, an attacker first collects a substitute model or a set of substitute models, then computes
gradients on the substitute model(s) and perform optimization based on the gradients. Performance of
the attacks largely rely on the transferability of the generated adversarial examples. Over the years, a
large number of methods have been proposed to improve the adversarial transferability. The methods
innovate various aspects of the attack procedure, ranging from substitute model training [47, 78, 13,
27] to gradient computation (that modifies loss or forward/backward architectures given well-trained
substitute models) [77, 11, 20, 14, 65, 26, 60, 57, 61, 74, 21, 15, 74] to input augmentation [67, 7,
28, 58] and the optimizer that applies the gradients [6, 28, 59]. Some methods further propose to
train a generative model using additional data for obtaining transferable adversarial examples [35, 44,
75, 36, 69].
∗

Yiwen Guo leads the project and serves as the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

