Uncovering Meanings of Embeddings
via Partial Orthogonality
Yibo Jiang1 , Bryon Aragam2 , and Victor Veitch3,4
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago
2
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago
3
Department of Statistics, University of Chicago
4
Data Science Institute, University of Chicago

Abstract
Machine learning tools often rely on embedding text as vectors of real numbers.
In this paper, we study how the semantic structure of language is encoded in
the algebraic structure of such embeddings. Specifically, we look at a notion of
“semantic independence” capturing the idea that, e.g., “eggplant” and “tomato” are
independent given “vegetable”. Although such examples are intuitive, it is difficult
to formalize such a notion of semantic independence. The key observation here
is that any sensible formalization should obey a set of so-called independence
axioms, and thus any algebraic encoding of this structure should also obey these
axioms. This leads us naturally to use partial orthogonality as the relevant algebraic
structure. We develop theory and methods that allow us to demonstrate that partial
orthogonality does indeed capture semantic independence. Complementary to
this, we also introduce the concept of independence preserving embeddings where
embeddings preserve the conditional independence structures of a distribution, and
we prove the existence of such embeddings and approximations to them.

1

Introduction

This paper concerns the question of how semantic meaning is encoded in neural embeddings, such as
those produced by [Rad+21]. There is strong empirical evidence that these embeddings—vectors of
real numbers—capture the semantic meaning of the underlying text. For example, classical results
show that word embeddings can be used for analogical reasoning [e.g., Mik+13; PSM14], and such
embeddings are the backbone of modern generative AI systems [e.g., Ram+22; Bub+23; Sah+22;
Dev+18]. The high-level question we’re interested in is: How is the semantic structure of text encoded
in the algebraic structure of embeddings? In this paper, we provide evidence that the concept of
partial orthogonality plays a key role.
The first step is to identify the semantic structure of interest. Intuitively, words or phrases possess a
notion of semantic independence, which does not have to be statistical in nature. For example, the
word “eggplant” seems more similar to “tomato” than to “ennui”. Yet, if we were to “condition"
on the common property of “vegetable”, then “eggplant” and “tomato” should be “independent".
And, if we condition on both “vegetable” and “purple”, then “eggplant" may be “independent” of
all other words. However, it is difficult to formalize what is meant by “independent" and “condition
on" in these informal statements. Accordingly, it is hard to establish a formal definition of semantic
independence, and thus it is challenging to explore how this structure might be encoded algebraically!
The key observation in this paper is to recall that most reasonable concepts of “independence” adhere
to a common set of axioms similar to those defining probabilistic conditional independence. Formally,
this abstract idea is captured by the axioms of the so-called independence models [Lau96]. Thus, if
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

