Efficient Sampling of Stochastic Differential Equations
with Positive Semi-Definite Models
Anant Raj
Coordinated Science Laboraotry
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.
Inria, Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris, France.
anant.raj@inria.fr

Umut Şimşekli
Inria, CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris, France.
umut.simsekli@inria.fr

Alessandro Rudi
Inria, Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris, France.
alessandro.rudi@inria.fr

Abstract
This paper deals with the problem of efficient sampling from a stochastic differential equation, given the drift function and the diffusion matrix. The proposed approach leverages a recent model for probabilities [RC21] (the positive semi-definite
– PSD model) from which it is possible to obtain independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples at precision ε with a cost that is m2 d log(1/ε) where m
is the dimension of the model, d the dimension of the space. The proposed approach consists of: first, computing the PSD model that satisfies the Fokker-Planck
equation (or its fractional variant) associated with the SDE, up to error ε, and then
sampling from the resulting PSD model. Assuming some regularity of the FokkerPlanck solution (i.e. β-times differentiability plus some geometric condition on
its zeros) We obtain an algorithm that: (a) in the preparatory phase obtains a PSD
model with L2 distance ε from the solution of the equation, with a model of dimension m = ε−(d+1)/(β−2s) (log(1/ε))d+1 where 1/2 ≤ s ≤ 1 is the fractional
power to the Laplacian, and total computational complexity of O(m3.5 log(1/ε))
and then (b) for Fokker-Planck equation, it is able to produce i.i.d. samples with error ε in Wasserstein-1 distance, with a cost that is O(dε−2(d+1)/β−2 log(1/ε)2d+3 )
per sample. This means that, if the probability associated with the SDE is somewhat
regular, i.e. β ≥ 4d + 2, then the algorithm requires O(ε−0.88 log(1/ε)4.5d ) in
the preparatory phase, and O(ε−1/2 log(1/ε)2d+2 ) for each sample. Our results
suggest that as the true solution gets smoother, we can circumvent the curse of
dimensionality without requiring any sort of convexity.

1

Introduction

High dimensional stochastic differential equations (SDE) and their associated partial differential
equations (PDEs) arise often in various scientific and engineering applications such as control
systems, aviation, fluid dynamics, etc [LT00, HF08, Trö10]. Sampling from an SDE is an active
area of research. Generally, a direct approach like Langevin sampling [DMM19, DK19, CDJB20] is
commonly employed to sample from SDEs. However, an alternative approach involves approximating
the solution of the associated PDE in a form that enables easy sampling. In this paper, we focus on
the latter approach.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

