Understanding the Limitations of Deep Models for
Molecular property prediction: Insights and Solutions

Jun Xia∗, Lecheng Zhang∗, Xiao Zhu∗, Yue Liu, Zhangyang Gao,
Bozhen Hu, Cheng Tan, Jiangbin Zheng, Siyuan Li, Stan Z. Li†
School of Engineering, Westlake University
{xiajun, zhanglecheng, stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Molecular Property Prediction (MPP) is a crucial task in the AI-driven Drug
Discovery (AIDD) pipeline, which has recently gained considerable attention
thanks to advancements in deep learning. However, recent research has revealed
that deep models struggle to beat traditional non-deep ones on MPP. In this study,
we benchmark 12 representative models (3 non-deep models and 9 deep models)
on 15 molecule datasets. Through the most comprehensive study to date, we
make the following key observations: (i) Deep models are generally unable to
outperform non-deep ones; (ii) The failure of deep models on MPP cannot be
solely attributed to the small size of molecular datasets; (iii) In particular, some
traditional models including XGB and RF that use molecular fingerprints as inputs
tend to perform better than other competitors. Furthermore, we conduct extensive
empirical investigations into the unique patterns of molecule data and inductive
biases of various models underlying these phenomena. These findings stimulate us
to develop a simple-yet-effective feature mapping method for molecule data prior
to feeding them into deep models. Empirically, deep models equipped with this
mapping method can beat non-deep ones in most MoleculeNet datasets. Notably,
the effectiveness is further corroborated by extensive experiments on cutting-edge
dataset related to COVID-19 and activity cliff datasets.

1

Introduction

Molecular Property Prediction (MPP) is a critical task in computational drug discovery, aimed
at identifying molecules with desirable pharmacological and ADMET (absorption, distribution,
metabolism, excretion, and toxicity) properties. Machine learning models have been widely used
in this fast-growing field, with two types of models being commonly employed: traditional nondeep models and deep models. In non-deep models, molecules are fed into traditional machine
learning models such as random forest and support vector machines in the format of computed or
handcrafted molecular fingerprints [64]. The other group utilizes deep models to extract expressive
representations for molecules in a data-driven manner. Specifically, the Multi-Layer Perceptron
(MLP) could be applied to computed or handcrafted molecular fingerprints; Sequence-based neural
architectures including Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [43], 1D Convolutional Neural Networks
(1D CNNs) [22], and Transformers [25, 54] are exploited to encode molecules represented in
Simplified Molecular-Input Line-Entry System (SMILES) strings [71]. Additionally, molecules
can be naturally represented as graphs with atoms as nodes and bonds as edges, inspiring a line of
works to leverage such structured inductive bias for better molecular representations [20, 76, 79, 58].
The key advancements underneath these approaches are Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

