An Information-Theoretic Perspective on
Variance-Invariance-Covariance Regularization

Ravid Shwartz-Ziv∗
New York University

Randall Balestriero
Meta AI, FAIR

Tim G. J. Rudner
New York University

Kenji Kawaguchi
National University of Singapore

Yann LeCun
New York University & Meta AI, FAIR

Abstract
Variance-Invariance-Covariance Regularization (VICReg) is a self-supervised learning (SSL) method that has shown promising results on a variety of tasks. However,
the fundamental mechanisms underlying VICReg remain unexplored. In this paper,
we present an information-theoretic perspective on the VICReg objective. We
begin by deriving information-theoretic quantities for deterministic networks as an
alternative to unrealistic stochastic network assumptions. We then relate the optimization of the VICReg objective to mutual information optimization, highlighting
underlying assumptions and facilitating a constructive comparison with other SSL
algorithms and derive a generalization bound for VICReg, revealing its inherent
advantages for downstream tasks. Building on these results, we introduce a family
of SSL methods derived from information-theoretic principles that outperform
existing SSL techniques.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a promising approach to extracting meaningful representations by
optimizing a surrogate objective between inputs and self-generated signals. For example, VarianceInvariance-Covariance Regularization (VICReg) [7], a widely-used SSL algorithm employing a
de-correlation mechanism, circumvents learning trivial solutions by applying variance and covariance
regularization.
Once the surrogate objective is optimized, the pre-trained model can be used as a feature extractor
for a variety of downstream supervised tasks such as image classification, object detection, instance
segmentation, or pose estimation [15, 16, 48, 67]. Despite the promising results demonstrated by
SSL methods, the theoretical underpinnings explaining their efficacy continue to be the subject of
investigation [5, 42].
Information theory has proved a useful tool for improving our understanding of deep neural networks
(DNNs), having a significant impact on both applications in representation learning [3] and theoretical
explorations [60, 72]. However, applications of information-theoretic principles to SSL have made
unrealistic assumptions, making many existing information-theoretic approaches to SSL of limited
use. One such assumption is to assume that the DNN to be optimized is stochastic—an assumption
that is violated for the vast majority DNNs used in practice. For a comprehensive review on this topic,
refer to the work by Shwartz-Ziv and LeCun [62].
∗

Correspondence to: ravid.shwartz.ziv@nyu.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

