A Fast and Accurate Estimator for Large Scale Linear
Model via Data Averaging

Rui Wang
Center for Applied Statistics
and School of Statistics
Renmin University of China
Beijing 100872, China 446100240@qq.com
Panpan Yu
NavInfo
Beijing 100094, China
yupanpan@navinfo.com

Yanyan Ouyang
Center for Applied Statistics
and School of Statistics
Renmin University of China
Beijing 100872, China staoyyy@ruc.edu.cn
Wangli Xu
Center for Applied Statistics
and School of Statistics
Renmin University of China
Beijing 100872, China wlxu@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
This work is concerned with the estimation problem of linear model when the
sample size is extremely large and the data dimension can vary with the sample
size. In this setting, the least square estimator based on the full data is not feasible
with limited computational resources. Many existing methods for this problem are
based on the sketching technique which uses the sketched data to perform least
square estimation. We derive fine-grained lower bounds of the conditional mean
squared error for sketching methods. For sampling methods, our lower bound
provides an attainable optimal convergence rate. Our result implies that when the
dimension is large, there is hardly a sampling method can have a faster convergence
rate than the uniform sampling method. To achieve a better statistical performance,
we propose a new sketching method based on data averaging. The proposed
method reduces the original data to a few averaged observations. These averaged
observations still satisfy the linear model and are used to estimate the regression
coefficients. The asymptotic behavior of the proposed estimation procedure is
studied. Our theoretical results show that the proposed method can achieve a
faster convergence rate than the optimal convergence rate for sampling methods.
Theoretical and numerical results show that the proposed estimator has good
statistical performance as well as low computational cost.

1

Introduction

Linear regression model is one of the simplest and the most fundamental models in statistics and
machine learning. Suppose one collects independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) observations
p
{Zi , yi }N
i=1 , where Zi ∈ R is the vector of the predictors and yi ∈ R is the response. The linear
model assumes
yi = β0 + Zi⊤ β 1 + εi ,

i = 1, . . . , N,

p

(1)

where β0 ∈ R, β 1 ∈ R are the unknown coefficients and ε1 , . . . , εN are random variables represent⊤
⊤
⊤
ing noise. Let Xi = (1, Zi⊤ )⊤ , β = (β0 , β ⊤
1 ) , y = (y1 , . . . , yN ) and X = (X1 , . . . , XN ) . The
2
classical least square estimator equals arg minβ∈Rp+1 ∥y − Xβ∥ . If X has full column rank, the
PN
PN
least square estimator equals ( i=1 Xi Xi⊤ )−1 i=1 Xi yi and the direct computation costs O(N p2 )
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

