RoboHive: A Unified Framework for Robot Learning

Vikash Kumarικλγφ∗, Rutav Shahδ , Gaoyue Zhouγ ,Vincent Moensφ , Vittorio Caggianoφ ,
Jay Vakilφ , Abhishek Guptaλζι , Aravind Rajeswaranιλκζφ
U.Washingtonι , UC Berkeleyλ , CMUγ , UT Austinδ , OpenAIκ , GoogleAIζ , Meta-AIφ
https://sites.google.com/view/robohiveW

Abstract
We present RoboHive, a comprehensive software platform and ecosystem for research in the field of Robot Learning and Embodied Artificial Intelligence. Our
platform encompasses a diverse range of pre-existing and novel environments,
including dexterous manipulation with the Shadow Hand, whole-arm manipulation
tasks with Franka and Fetch robots, quadruped locomotion, among others. Included
environments are organized within and cover multiple domains such as hand manipulation, locomotion, multi-task, multi-agent, muscles, etc. In comparison to
prior works, RoboHive offers a streamlined and unified task interface taking dependency on only a minimal set of well-maintained packages, features tasks with high
physics fidelity and rich visual diversity, and supports common hardware drivers
for real-world deployment. The unified interface of RoboHive offers a convenient
and accessible abstraction for algorithmic research in imitation, reinforcement,
multi-task, and hierarchical learning. Furthermore, RoboHive includes expert
demonstrations and baseline results for most environments, providing a standard for
benchmarking and comparisons. Details: https://sites.google.com/view/robohiveW

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed unprecedented
breakthroughs in Artificial Intelligence (AI), particularly in the domains of game playing [1, 2],
protein folding [3], and language modeling [4].
Comparatively, the progress in robot learning
has been slow. This slower pace can partially
be attributed to Moravec’s paradox [5], which
posits that sensorimotor behaviors are intrinsically harder for AI agents than high-level cognitive tasks. Simultaneously, another crucial issue
demands our attention: a significant hindrance
also lies in the convoluted software frameworks
for robot learning and the lack of universally
recognized benchmarks. This increases the barrier for entry, limits rapid prototyping, and restricts the influx of ideas. Unlike fields such as
computer vision or natural language processing,
where benchmarks and datasets are standardized, the landscape of robotics remains more
fragmented.

Figure 1: A subset of RoboHive’s task-suites. [in clockwise order] Multi-Task Suite: Environments facilitating
multiple tasks at once. Arms Suite: Diverse arms (w/
grippers) exposed to tabletop manipulation tasks. Hand
Suite: Diverse hands exposed to tasks requiring dexterity. Locomotion Suite: Diverse collection of legged
locomotion tasks. Myo Suite: Task collections with
musculoskeletal agents. Deformable Suite: Tasks collection with deformable objects.

Addressing this gap, we introduce RoboHive, a
cohesive ecosystem tailored for robot learning. As a dual-function platform, RoboHive operates
as a benchmarking suite and a research tool. It delivers a plethora of environments, precise task
∗

Correspondence to vikashplus@gmail.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

