Data-Dependent Bounds for Online Portfolio Selection
Without Lipschitzness and Smoothness

Chung-En Tsai
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
National Taiwan University
CHUNGENTSAI @ NTU . EDU . TW
Ying-Ting Lin
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
National Taiwan University
R 08922060@ NTU . EDU . TW
Yen-Huan Li
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
Department of Mathematics
Center for Quantum Science and Engineering
National Taiwan University
YENHUAN . LI @ CSIE . NTU . EDU . TW

Abstract
This work introduces the first small-loss and gradual-variation regret bounds for
online portfolio selection, marking the first instances of data-dependent bounds for
online convex optimization with non-Lipschitz, non-smooth losses. The algorithms
we propose exhibit sublinear regret rates in the worst cases and achieve logarithmic
regrets when the data is “easy,” with per-round time almost linear in the number
of investment alternatives. The regret bounds are derived using novel smoothness
characterizations of the logarithmic loss, a local norm-based analysis of following
the regularized leader (FTRL) with self-concordant regularizers, which are not
necessarily barriers, and an implicit variant of optimistic FTRL with the log-barrier.

1

Introduction

Designing an optimal algorithm for online portfolio selection (OPS), with respect to both regret and
computational efficiency, has remained a significant open problem in online convex optimization for
over three decades1 . OPS models long-term investment as a multi-round game between two strategic
players—the market and the I NVESTOR—thereby avoiding the need for hard-to-verify probabilistic
models for the market. In addition to its implications for robust long-term investment, OPS is also a
generalization of probability forecasting and universal data compression [5].
The primary challenge in OPS stems from the absence of Lipschitzness and smoothness in the loss
functions. Consequently, standard online convex optimization algorithms do not directly apply. For
example, standard analyses of online mirror descent (OMD) and following the regularized leader
(FTRL) bound the regret by the sum of the norms of the gradients (see, e.g., the lecture notes by
1
Readers are referred to recent papers, such as those by Luo et al. [22], van Erven et al. [35], Mhammedi and
Rakhlin [24], Zimmert et al. [38], and Jézéquel et al. [17], for reviews on OPS.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

