Global Structure-Aware Diffusion Process for
Low-Light Image Enhancement

Jinhui Hou1 , Zhiyu Zhu1 , Junhui Hou1∗, Hui Liu2 , Huanqiang Zeng3 , and Hui Yuan4
1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 Caritas Institute of Higher Education
3
Huaqiao University, 4 Shandong University

Abstract
This paper studies a diffusion-based framework to address the low-light image
enhancement problem. To harness the capabilities of diffusion models, we delve
into this intricate process and advocate for the regularization of its inherent ODEtrajectory. To be specific, inspired by the recent research that low curvature
ODE-trajectory results in a stable and effective diffusion process, we formulate
a curvature regularization term anchored in the intrinsic non-local structures of
image data, i.e., global structure-aware regularization, which gradually facilitates
the preservation of complicated details and the augmentation of contrast during the
diffusion process. This incorporation mitigates the adverse effects of noise and artifacts resulting from the diffusion process, leading to a more precise and flexible enhancement. To additionally promote learning in challenging regions, we introduce
an uncertainty-guided regularization technique, which wisely relaxes constraints
on the most extreme regions of the image. Experimental evaluations reveal that the
proposed diffusion-based framework, complemented by rank-informed regularization, attains distinguished performance in low-light enhancement. The outcomes
indicate substantial advancements in image quality, noise suppression, and contrast
amplification in comparison with state-of-the-art methods. We believe this innovative approach will stimulate further exploration and advancement in low-light
image processing, with potential implications for other applications of diffusion
models. The code is publicly available at https://github.com/jinnh/GSAD.

1

Introduction

Low-light image enhancement (LLIE) aims to improve the visibility and contrast of the image
captured in poor lighting while preserving the natural-looking details, which contributes to many
downstream applications, such as object detection [15, 58] and semantic segmentation [62, 48].
Traditional works employ some techniques, such as histogram equalization [28], Retinex theory
[6, 23], and gamma correction [29], to correct the image illumination. In recent years, owing to
the powerful representational ability and large collections of data, a considerable number of deep
learning-based methods [53, 54, 63, 5, 21, 64, 43, 51, 40, 65] have been presented to significantly
improve the performance of low-light enhancement by learning the mapping between low-light
and normal-light images. Generally, most of the existing works tend to adopt pixel-wise objective
functions to optimize a deterministic relationship. Consequently, such regularization frequently
produces suboptimal reconstructions for indeterminate regions and poor local structures, resulting in
visibly lower reconstruction quality. Although the adversarial loss might mitigate this issue, these
methods necessitate careful training adjustments, which might lead to overfitting on specific features
or data distributions and even creating new content or artifacts. Recently, the popular diffusion
∗

Corresponding author (Email: jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk). Jinhui Hou and Zhiyu Zhu contributed to this
work equally.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

