Mode Connectivity in Auction Design

Christoph Hertrich∗
Department of Mathematics
London School of Economics and Political Science, UK
c.hertrich@lse.ac.uk
Yixin Tao
ITCS, Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, China
taoyixin@mail.shufe.edu.cn
László A. Végh
Department of Mathematics
London School of Economics and Political Science, UK
l.vegh@lse.ac.uk

Abstract
Optimal auction design is a fundamental problem in algorithmic game theory. This
problem is notoriously difficult already in very simple settings. Recent work in
differentiable economics showed that neural networks can efficiently learn known
optimal auction mechanisms and discover interesting new ones. In an attempt
to theoretically justify their empirical success, we focus on one of the first such
networks, RochetNet, and a generalized version for affine maximizer auctions.
We prove that they satisfy mode connectivity, i.e., locally optimal solutions are
connected by a simple, piecewise linear path such that every solution on the path
is almost as good as one of the two local optima. Mode connectivity has been
recently investigated as an intriguing empirical and theoretically justifiable property
of neural networks used for prediction problems. Our results give the first such
analysis in the context of differentiable economics, where neural networks are used
directly for solving non-convex optimization problems.

1

Introduction

Auction design is a core problem in mechanism design, with immense applications in electronic
commerce (such as sponsored search auctions) as well as in the public sector (such as spectrum
auctions). In a revenue maximizing auction, the auctioneer needs to design a mechanism to allocate
resources to buyers, and set prices in order to maximize the expected revenue. The buyers’ preferences
are private and they may behave strategically by misreporting them. For this reason, it is often
desirable to devise dominant strategy incentive compatible (DSIC) and individually rational (IR)
mechanisms. By definition, in a DSIC mechanism, it is a dominant strategy for the buyers to report
the true valuations; in an IR mechanism, each participating truthful buyer receives a nonnegative
payoff.
We focus on DSIC and IR mechanisms that maximize the expected revenue, assuming that the
buyers’ preferences are drawn from a distribution known to the auctioneer. A classical result of
∗

Moved to Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium, and Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Germany, after
submission of this article.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

