Diffusion Hyperfeatures: Searching Through Time
and Space for Semantic Correspondence
Grace Luo1

Lisa Dunlap1
1

Dong Huk Park1⇤

UC Berkeley

2

Aleksander Holynski1,2⇤

Trevor Darrell1⇤

Google Research

Abstract
Diffusion models have been shown to be capable of generating high-quality images,
suggesting that they could contain meaningful internal representations. Unfortunately, the feature maps that encode a diffusion model’s internal information
are spread not only over layers of the network, but also over diffusion timesteps,
making it challenging to extract useful descriptors. We propose Diffusion Hyperfeatures, a framework for consolidating multi-scale and multi-timestep feature maps
into per-pixel feature descriptors that can be used for downstream tasks. These
descriptors can be extracted for both synthetic and real images using the generation
and inversion processes. We evaluate the utility of our Diffusion Hyperfeatures
on the task of semantic keypoint correspondence: our method achieves superior
performance on the SPair-71k real image benchmark. We also demonstrate that
our method is flexible and transferable: our feature aggregation network trained on
the inversion features of real image pairs can be used on the generation features of
synthetic image pairs with unseen objects and compositions. Our code is available
at https://diffusion-hyperfeatures.github.io.

1

Introduction

Much of the recent progress in computer vision has been facilitated by representations learned by deep
models. Features from ConvNets [52, 5, 41, 39], Vision Transformers [9, 2], and GANs [45, 26] have
demonstrated great utility in a number of applications, even when compared to hand-crafted feature
descriptors [24, 7]. Recently, diffusion models have shown impressive results for image generation,
suggesting that they too contain rich internal representations that can be used for downstream tasks.
Existing works that use features from a diffusion model typically select a particular subset of layers
and timesteps that best model the properties needed for a given task (e.g., features for semantic-level
correspondence may be most prevalent in middle layers, whereas textural content may be at later
layers). This selection not only requires a laborious discovery process hand-crafted for a specific
task, but it also leaves behind potentially valuable information distributed across other features in the
diffusion process.
In this work, we propose a framework for consolidating all intermediate feature maps from the
diffusion process, which vary both over scale and time, into a single per-pixel descriptor which we
dub Diffusion Hyperfeatures. In practice, this consolidation happens through a feature aggregation
network that takes as input the collection of intermediate feature maps from the diffusion process
and produces as output a single descriptor map. This aggregation network is interpretable, as it
learns mixing weights to identify the most meaningful features for a given task (e.g., semantic
correspondence). Extracting Diffusion Hyperfeatures for a given image is as simple as performing
the diffusion process for that image (the generation process for synthetic images, and inversion for
real images) and feeding all the intermediate features to our aggregator network.
*

Equal advising contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

