Human-like Few-Shot Learning via
Bayesian Reasoning over Natural Language

Kevin Ellis
Cornell University
kellis@cornell.edu

Abstract
A core tension in models of concept learning is that the model must carefully
balance the tractability of inference against the expressivity of the hypothesis class.
Humans, however, can efficiently learn a broad range of concepts. We introduce a
model of inductive learning that seeks to be human-like in that sense. It implements
a Bayesian reasoning process where a language model first proposes candidate
hypotheses expressed in natural language, which are then re-weighed by a prior
and a likelihood. By estimating the prior from human data, we can predict human
judgments on learning problems involving numbers and sets, spanning concepts
that are generative, discriminative, propositional, and higher-order.

1

Introduction

Human learning is rapid and broad. Consider a child learning a new routine like ‘high-five’: given
just 1 or 2 examples, they can learn that move, and even generalize to variations like low-fives. Or
consider learning the basics of a game like Pacman, or an AI researcher learning a new technique
like ‘few-shot prompting’, or a mathematician extrapolating ‘1, 4, 16, 64, ...’. In each of these cases,
the relevant routine, rules, or concept can be learned from little data and only seconds to minutes
of experience. Furthermore, the space of possible concepts is effectively infinite, because concepts
can compose to yield more complex constructs like ‘high-five followed by a fist bump’. Thus a key
computational challenge is to understand how an intelligent system can acquire a wide range of new
concepts, given modest data, and granted a modest computational budget. Building AI systems that
can efficiently master many concepts is also practically valuable, because data-efficiency and broad
generalization remain some of the most salient gaps between human and machine intelligence [1].
Fundamentally, we are concerned with the problem of induction: Inferring a generalizable pattern,
rule, trend, or law from specific examples. A classic approach to induction is to start with a hypothesis
space of possible concepts, and then probabilistically infer which hypothesis most likely generated
the observed data using Bayes’ Rule. This Bayesian paradigm has proved widely applicable across
both cognitive science and artificial intelligence [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
On its own, however, the Bayesian paradigm leaves important questions unanswered. Acquiring
a broad range of possible concepts demands an expressive hypothesis space, but inference over
a rich space of concepts comes at steep computational cost. For increased expressivity, many
Bayesian models design hypothesis spaces that resemble a programming language [15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20]. Posterior inference then corresponds to constructing high-probability programs. Each of
these program-learning models requires a custom domain-specific programming language. Despite
confining themselves to a domain-specific language, these models still require specialized inference
machinery, such as heuristically-designed search moves [10], or exorbitant compute budgets [21].
Our goal is to build a model of humanlike concept learning that makes progress toward resolving the
tension between intractable inference and expressive hypothesis classes. We propose a new model
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

