On Robust Streaming for Learning with Experts:
Algorithms and Lower Bounds

David P. Woodruff
CMU
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Fred Zhang
UC Berkeley
z0@berkeley.edu

Samson Zhou
Texas A&M University
samsonzhou@gmail.com

Abstract
In the online learning with experts problem, an algorithm makes predictions about
an outcome on each of T days, given a set of n experts who make predictions on
each day. The algorithm is given feedback on the outcomes of each day, including
the cost of its prediction and the cost of the expert predictions, and the goal is
to make a prediction with the minimum cost, compared to the best expert in
hindsight. However, often the predictions made by experts or algorithms at some
time influence future outcomes, so that the input is adaptively generated.
In this paper, we study robust algorithms for the experts problem under memory constraints.We first
 2 that
 give a randomized algorithm that is robust to adaptive inputs

R T
n
e
√
uses O
space
for
regret
R
when
the
best
expert
makes
M
=
O
2n
log
R T
mistakes, thereby showing
 a smooth space-regret trade-off. We then show a space
e nM for any randomized algorithm that achieves regret R with
lower bound of Ω
RT
probability 1 − 2−Ω(T ) . Such an algorithm is useful for adaptive inputs, as the
failure probability is low enough to union bound over all computation paths. Our
result implies that the natural deterministic algorithm, which iterates through pools
of experts until each expert in the pool has erred, is optimal up to polylogarithmic
factors. Finally, we empirically demonstrate the benefit of using robust procedures
against a white-box adversary that has access to the internal state of the algorithm.

1

Introduction

Online learning with experts is a fundamental problem in sequential prediction. On each of T days,
an algorithm must make a prediction about an outcome, given a set of n experts who make predictions
on the outcome. The algorithm is then given feedback on the cost of its prediction and on the expert
predictions for the current day. In the discrete prediction with experts problem, the set of possible
predictions is restricted to a finite set, and the cost is 0 if the prediction is correct, and 1 otherwise.
More generally, we assume the costs are restricted to be in a range [0, ρ] for some fixed parameter
ρ > 0, with lower costs indicating better performance. This process continues for the T days, after
which the performance (total cost) of the algorithm is compared to the performance (total cost) of
the best performing expert. In particular, the goal for the online learning with experts problem is to
minimize the regret, which is the amortized difference between the total cost of the algorithm and the
total cost of the best performing expert, i.e., the expert that incurs the least overall cost.
A well-known folklore algorithm for handling the discrete prediction with experts problem is the
weighted majority algorithm [42]. The deterministic variant of the weighted majority algorithm
simply initializes “weights” for all experts to 1, down-weights any incorrect expert on a given day, and
selects the prediction supported by the largest weight of experts. The algorithm solves the discrete
prediction with experts problem with O (M + log n) total mistakes, where M is the number of
mistakes made by the best expert, thus achieving total regret O (M + log n). More generally, a large
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

