On student-teacher deviations in distillation:
does it pay to disobey?

Vaishnavh Nagarajan
Google Research
vaishnavh@google.com

Aditya Krishna Menon
Google Research
adityakmenon@google.com

Hossein Mobahi
Google Research
hmobahi@google.com

Srinadh Bhojanapalli
Google Research
bsrinadh@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research
sanjivk@google.com

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) has been widely used to improve the test accuracy
of a “student” network, by training it to mimic the soft probabilities of a trained
“teacher” network. Yet, it has been shown in recent work that, despite being trained
to fit the teacher’s probabilities, the student may not only significantly deviate from
the teacher probabilities, but may also outdo than the teacher in performance. Our
work aims to reconcile this seemingly paradoxical observation. Specifically, we
characterize the precise nature of the student-teacher deviations, and argue how
they can co-occur with better generalization. First, through experiments on image
and language data, we identify that these probability deviations correspond to the
student systematically exaggerating the confidence levels of the teacher. Next, we
theoretically and empirically establish another form of exaggeration in some simple
settings: KD exaggerates the implicit bias of gradient descent in converging faster
along the top eigendirections of the data. Finally, we tie these two observations
together: we demonstrate that the exaggerated bias of KD can simultaneously result
in both (a) the exaggeration of confidence and (b) the improved generalization of
the student, thus offering a resolution to the apparent paradox. Our analysis brings
existing theory and practice closer by considering the role of gradient descent
in KD and by demonstrating the exaggerated bias effect in both theoretical and
empirical settings.

1

Introduction

In knowledge distillation (KD) [6, 17], one trains a small “student” model to match the predicted
soft label distribution of a large “teacher” model, rather than the one-hot labels that the training data
originally came with. This has emerged as a highly effective model compression technique, and
has inspired an actively developing literature that has sought to explore applications of distillation
to various settings [41, 13, 52], design more effective variants [44, 3, 38, 5], and better understand
theoretically when and why distillation is effective [32, 40, 35, 2, 8, 34, 10, 43, 25, 14, 39].
On paper, distillation is intended to help by transferring the soft probabilities of the (one-hot loss
trained) teacher over to the student. Intuitively, we would desire this transfer to be perfect: the more
a student fails to match the teacher’s probabilities, the more we expect its performance to suffer.
After all, in the extreme case of a student that simply outputs uniformly random labels, the student’s
performance would be as poor as it can get.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

