Uncertainty Estimation for Safety-critical Scene
Segmentation via Fine-grained Reward Maximization

Hongzheng Yang1∗ , Cheng Chen2∗ , Yueyao Chen1 , Markus Scheppach3 , Hon Chi Yip1 , Qi Dou1†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Harvard Medical School & Massachusetts General Hospital
3
University Hospital of Augsburg

Abstract
Uncertainty estimation plays an important role for future reliable deployment of
deep segmentation models in safety-critical scenarios such as medical applications.
However, existing methods for uncertainty estimation have been limited by the
lack of explicit guidance for calibrating the prediction risk and model confidence.
In this work, we propose a novel fine-grained reward maximization (FGRM)
framework, to address uncertainty estimation by directly utilizing an uncertainty
metric related reward function with a reinforcement learning based model tuning
algorithm. This would benefit the model uncertainty estimation through direct
optimization guidance for model calibration. Specifically, our method designs a
new uncertainty estimation reward function using the calibration metric, which
is maximized to fine-tune an evidential learning pre-trained segmentation model
for calibrating prediction risk. Importantly, we innovate an effective fine-grained
parameter update scheme, which imposes fine-grained reward-weighting of each
network parameter according to the parameter importance quantified by the fisher
information matrix. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work exploring
reward optimization for model uncertainty estimation in safety-critical vision tasks.
The effectiveness of our method is demonstrated on two large safety-critical surgical
scene segmentation datasets under two different uncertainty estimation settings.
With real-time one forward pass at inference, our method outperforms state-ofthe-art methods by a clear margin on all the calibration metrics of uncertainty
estimation, while maintaining a high task accuracy for the segmentation results.
Code is available at https://github.com/med-air/FGRM.

1

Introduction

Reliable segmentation of safety-critical scene is an important task for a variety of real-world scenarios
such as autonomous driving [2, 3, 7, 40] and medical applications [19, 27, 29, 43]. It also plays
a fundamental role for higher-level cognitive assistance relying on machine learning, for example,
safety-critical soft tissue segmentation is essential for decision-making support towards autonomous
robotic surgery [35]. In this regard, tolerance on prediction risk is extremely low, and estimating
model uncertainty of the predicted result is equally as important as achieving a high task accuracy
itself, especially when the targetted objects exhibit ambiguous boundaries in the scene. Therefore, it
is inseparable to provide an estimation of the model uncertainty accompanied with the deterministic
network predictions that may introduce risks under safety-critical scenarios.
∗
†

Equal contributions (hzyang22@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, cchen101@mgh.harvard.edu)
Corresponding author (qidou@cuhk.edu.hk)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

