Fairness-guided Few-shot Prompting for Large
Language Models

Huan Ma1,2 , Changqing Zhang1∗, Yatao Bian2 , Lemao Liu2 , Zhirui Zhang2 ,
Peilin Zhao2 , Shu Zhang2 , Huazhu Fu3 , Qinghua Hu1 , Bingzhe Wu2∗
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
AI Lab, Tencent, Shenzhen, China
3
Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC),
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
1

zhanchangqing@tju.edu.cn; 2 bingzhewu@tencent.com

Abstract
Large language models have demonstrated surprising ability to perform in-context
learning, i.e., these models can be directly applied to solve numerous downstream
tasks by conditioning on a prompt constructed by a few input-output examples.
However, prior research has shown that in-context learning can suffer from high instability due to variations in training examples, example order, and prompt formats.
Therefore, the construction of an appropriate prompt is essential for improving
the performance of in-context learning. In this paper, we revisit this problem
from the view of predictive bias. Specifically, we introduce a metric to evaluate
the predictive bias of a fixed prompt against labels or a given attributes. Then
we empirically show that prompts with higher bias always lead to unsatisfactory
predictive quality. Based on this observation, we propose a novel search strategy
based on the greedy search to identify the near-optimal prompt for improving
the performance of in-context learning. We perform comprehensive experiments
with state-of-the-art mainstream models such as GPT-3 on various downstream
tasks. Our results indicate that our method can enhance the model’s in-context
learning performance in an effective and interpretable manner. Code is available at:
https://github.com/MaHuanAAA.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs), such as GPT-3 [1] and BLOOM [2], have demonstrated remarkable
ability in performing in-context learning (ICL) on downstream tasks. ICL refers to the process
of conditioning an LLM to solve various downstream tasks using prompts constructed from a few
demonstration input-output pairs [3] (i.e., few-shot prompting). Despite its impressive performance,
prior research has shown that ICL suffers from high instability due to variations in the choice of
in-context demonstrations, demonstration order, and prompt formats [4, 5]. Therefore, constructing
an appropriate prompt has been identified as a critical factor for improving the performance of ICL
[6].
Previous research studies this problem typically from two directions: (1) prompt tuning in the
embedding space [7, 8, 9, 10, 11], (2) prompt searching in the text space [4, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. The
key idea of prompt tuning is to inject task-specific embedding into hidden layers and then tune these
embeddings using gradient-based optimization [8, 15]. However, these methods require to modify the
original inference process of the model, which is impractical for the case of black-box LM services
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

