AR-D IFFUSION: Auto-Regressive Diffusion Model for
Text Generation
Tong Wu1∗ † , Zhihao Fan2∗† , Xiao Liu3 , Hai-Tao Zheng1,8‡, Yeyun Gong3‡ , Yelong Shen4 ,
Jian Jiao5 , Juntao Li6 , Zhongyu Wei2 , Jian Guo7‡ , Nan Duan3‡ , Weizhu Chen4‡
1
Shezhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, 2 Fudan University,
3
Microsoft Research Asia, 4 Microsoft Azure AI, 5 Microsoft,
6
Soochow University, 7 IDEA Research, 8 Pengcheng Laboratory
{yegong, yeshe, nanduan, wzchen}@microsoft.com,
zheng.haitao@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, guojian@idea.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models have gained significant attention in the realm of image generation
due to their exceptional performance. Their success has been recently expanded
to text generation via generating all tokens within a sequence concurrently. However, natural language exhibits a far more pronounced sequential dependency in
comparison to images, and the majority of existing language models are trained
with a left-to-right auto-regressive approach. To account for the inherent sequential characteristic of natural language, we introduce Auto-Regressive Diffusion
(AR-D IFFUSION). AR-D IFFUSION ensures that the generation of tokens on the
right depends on the generated ones on the left, a mechanism achieved through
employing a dynamic number of denoising steps that vary based on token position.
This results in tokens on the left undergoing fewer denoising steps than those on
the right, thereby enabling them to generate earlier and subsequently influence
the generation of tokens on the right. In a series of experiments on various text
generation tasks, including text summarization, machine translation, and common
sense generation, AR-D IFFUSION clearly demonstrated its superiority over existing
diffusion language models and that it can be 100× ∼ 600× faster when achieving
comparable results. Our code is available at this https URL.

1

Introduction

Text generation is a fundamental task within the field of natural language processing (NLP). Pretrained language models like GPT-4 [OpenAI, 2023], LLaMA [Touvron et al., 2023], and Alpaca
[Taori et al., 2023] have garnered significant attention with their ability to generate fluent and humanlike textual content. These models utilize the auto-regressive (AR) Transformer decoders [Vaswani
et al., 2017] to emit generated tokens one-by-one in sequential order from left to right. By leveraging
the power of position dependency, AR models are able to enhance the naturalness, coherence, and
adherence to human language conventions in the generated text [Brown et al., 2020].
Recent studies have shown the remarkable performance of diffusion models in image generation [Ho
et al., 2020], motivating researchers to extend diffusion to text generation [Li et al., 2022a, Gong
et al., 2022, Dieleman et al., 2022, Yuan et al., 2022, Ye et al., 2023]. By introducing timestep, these
methods progressively regulate the interpolation between the original tokens and Gaussian noise, then
iteratively denoise for text generation. At each timestep, the diffusion-based text generator predicts
∗

Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

