Can Language Models Teach Weaker Agents? Teacher
Explanations Improve Students via Personalization

Swarnadeep Saha
Peter Hase
Mohit Bansal
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{swarna, peter, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
A hallmark property of explainable AI models is the ability to teach other agents,
communicating knowledge of how to perform a task. While Large Language
Models (LLMs) perform complex reasoning by generating explanations for their
predictions, it is unclear whether they also make good teachers for weaker agents.
To address this, we consider a student-teacher framework between two LLM agents
and study if, when, and how the teacher should intervene with natural language
explanations to improve the student’s performance. Since communication is expensive, we define a budget such that the teacher only communicates explanations
for a fraction of the data, after which the student should perform well on its own.
We decompose the teaching problem along four axes: (1) if teacher’s test time intervention improve student predictions, (2) when it is worth explaining a data point,
(3) how the teacher should personalize explanations to better teach the student, and
(4) if teacher explanations also improve student performance on future unexplained
data. We first show that teacher LLMs can indeed intervene on student reasoning to
improve their performance. Next, inspired by the Theory of Mind abilities of effective teachers, we propose building two few-shot mental models of the student. The
first model defines an Intervention Function that simulates the utility of an intervention, allowing the teacher to intervene when this utility is the highest and improving
student performance at lower budgets. The second model enables the teacher to
personalize explanations for a particular student and outperform unpersonalized
teachers. We also demonstrate that in multi-turn interactions, teacher explanations
generalize and learning from explained data improves student performance on
future unexplained data. Finally, we also verify that misaligned teachers can lower
student performance to random chance by intentionally misleading them.1

1

Introduction

Teaching, or the ability to provide needed information in a way that is understood by others, is often
considered an important property of Explainable AI [1]. When AI models “teach” by providing
meaningful and interpretable explanations, it fosters transparency, warranted trust, and the ability
for humans to make informed decisions based on AI recommendations. One way the goodness of
an explanation can be judged is by its ability to communicate knowledge of how to solve a problem
to other agents [2, 3]. Explanations fulfill this purpose not only by being informative but also by
means of filling in specific gaps in the recipient agent’s knowledge. This is enabled by the explainer
having theory of mind (ToM), understanding what the recipient does not know [2], and being able
to personalize its explanations based on the recipient’s needs. Recent work has argued that LLMs
like GPT-3.5 now exhibit ToM, based on their ability to answer questions about mental states of
1

Code for all experiments: https://github.com/swarnaHub/ExplanationIntervention

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

