Optimizing Solution-Samplers for Combinatorial
Problems: The Landscape of Policy-Gradient Methods

Constantine Caramanis
UT Austin & Archimedes / Athena RC
constantine@utexas.edu
Alkis Kalavasis
Yale University
alvertos.kalavasis@yale.edu

Dimitris Fotakis
NTUA & Archimedes / Athena RC
fotakis@cs.ntua.gr
Vasilis Kontonis
UT Austin
vkonton@gmail.com

Christos Tzamos
UOA & Archimedes / Athena RC
tzamos@wisc.edu

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks and Reinforcement Learning methods have empirically
shown great promise in tackling challenging combinatorial problems. In those
methods a deep neural network is used as a solution generator which is then trained
by gradient-based methods (e.g., policy gradient) to successively obtain better
solution distributions. In this work we introduce a novel theoretical framework for
analyzing the effectiveness of such methods. We ask whether there exist generative
models that (i) are expressive enough to generate approximately optimal solutions;
(ii) have a tractable, i.e, polynomial in the size of the input, number of parameters;
(iii) their optimization landscape is benign in the sense that it does not contain
sub-optimal stationary points. Our main contribution is a positive answer to this
question. Our result holds for a broad class of combinatorial problems including
Max- and Min-Cut, Max-𝑘-CSP, Maximum-Weight-Bipartite-Matching, and the
Traveling Salesman Problem. As a byproduct of our analysis we introduce a novel
regularization process over vanilla gradient descent and provide theoretical and
experimental evidence that it helps address vanishing-gradient issues and escape
bad stationary points.

1

Introduction

Gradient descent has proven remarkably effective for diverse optimization problems in neural networks. From the early days of neural networks, this has motivated their use for combinatorial
optimization [HT85, Smi99, VFJ15, BPL+ 16]. More recently, an approach by [BPL+ 16], where a
neural network is used to generate (sample) solutions for the combinatorial problem. The parameters
of the neural network thus parameterize the space of distributions. This allows one to perform gradient
steps in this distribution space. In several interesting settings, including the Traveling Salesman Problem, they have shown that this approach works remarkably well. Given the widespread application but
also the notorious difficulty of combinatorial optimization [GLS12, PS98, S+ 03, Sch05, CLS+ 95],
approaches that provide a more general solution framework are appealing.
This is the point of departure of this paper. We investigate whether gradient descent can succeed in a
general setting that encompasses the problems studied in [BPL+ 16]. This requires a parameterization
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

