NeuralGF: Unsupervised Point Normal Estimation by
Learning Neural Gradient Function

Qing Li1

Huifang Feng2 Kanle Shi3 Yue Gao1 Yi Fang4
Yu-Shen Liu1∗ Zhizhong Han5
1
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
3
Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
4
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE
5
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
{leoqli, gaoyue, liuyushen}@tsinghua.edu.cn fenghuifang@stu.xmu.edu.cn
yfang@nyu.edu h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Normal estimation for 3D point clouds is a fundamental task in 3D geometry
processing. The state-of-the-art methods rely on priors of fitting local surfaces
learned from normal supervision. However, normal supervision in benchmarks
comes from synthetic shapes and is usually not available from real scans, thereby
limiting the learned priors of these methods. In addition, normal orientation
consistency across shapes remains difficult to achieve without a separate postprocessing procedure. To resolve these issues, we propose a novel method for
estimating oriented normals directly from point clouds without using ground truth
normals as supervision. We achieve this by introducing a new paradigm for learning
neural gradient functions, which encourages the neural network to fit the input
point clouds and yield unit-norm gradients at the points. Specifically, we introduce
loss functions to facilitate query points to iteratively reach the moving targets
and aggregate onto the approximated surface, thereby learning a global surface
representation of the data. Meanwhile, we incorporate gradients into the surface
approximation to measure the minimum signed deviation of queries, resulting in a
consistent gradient field associated with the surface. These techniques lead to our
deep unsupervised oriented normal estimator that is robust to noise, outliers and
density variations. Our excellent results on widely used benchmarks demonstrate
that our method can learn more accurate normals for both unoriented and oriented
normal estimation tasks than the latest methods. The source code and pre-trained
model are available at https://github.com/LeoQLi/NeuralGF.

1

Introduction

Normal vectors are one of the local descriptors of point clouds and can offer additional geometric
information for many downstream applications, such as denoising [70, 45, 44, 43], segmentation [63–
65] and registration [62, 68]. Moreover, some computer vision tasks require the normals to have
consistent orientations, i.e., oriented normals, such as graphics rendering [10, 21, 61] and surface
reconstruction [26, 31–33]. Therefore, point cloud normal estimation has been an important research
topic for a long time. However, progress in this area has plateaued for some time, until the recent introduction of deep learning. Currently, a growing body of work shows that performance improvements
can be achieved using data-driven approaches [24, 8, 40, 39], and these learning-based methods often
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

