Activity Grammars for Temporal Action Segmentation
Dayoung Gong∗

Joonseok Lee∗

Deunsol Jung

Suha Kwak

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)
{dayoung.gong, jameslee, deunsol.jung, suha.kwak, mscho}@postech.ac.kr
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/KARI

Abstract
Sequence prediction on temporal data requires the ability to understand compositional structures of multi-level semantics beyond individual and contextual
properties. The task of temporal action segmentation, which aims at translating an
untrimmed activity video into a sequence of action segments, remains challenging
for this reason. This paper addresses the problem by introducing an effective
activity grammar to guide neural predictions for temporal action segmentation. We
propose a novel grammar induction algorithm that extracts a powerful context-free
grammar from action sequence data. We also develop an efficient generalized
parser that transforms frame-level probability distributions into a reliable sequence
of actions according to the induced grammar with recursive rules. Our approach
can be combined with any neural network for temporal action segmentation to
enhance the sequence prediction and discover its compositional structure. Experimental results demonstrate that our method significantly improves temporal action
segmentation in terms of both performance and interpretability on two standard
benchmarks, Breakfast and 50 Salads.

1

Introduction

Human activities in videos do not proceed by accident; they are structured being subject to generative
rules imposed by the goal of activities, the properties of individual actions, the physical environment,
and so on. Comprehending such a compositional structure of multi-granular semantics in human
activity poses a significant challenge in video understanding research. The task of temporal action
segmentation, which aims at translating an untrimmed activity video into a sequence of action
segments, remains challenging due to the reason. The recent methods based on deep neural networks [25, 9, 45, 2, 15, 16, 1] have shown remarkable improvement in learning temporal relations of
actions in an implicit manner, but often face out-of-context errors that reveal the lack of capacity to
capture the intricate structures of human activity, and the scarcity of annotated data exacerbates the
issue in training. In this work, we address the problem by introducing an effective activity grammar
to guide neural predictions for temporal action segmentation.
Grammar is a natural and powerful way of explicitly representing the hierarchical structure of
languages [14] and can also be applied to express the structure of activities. Despite the extensive body
of grammar-based research for video understanding [23, 24, 33, 35, 32], none of these approaches
have successfully integrated recursive rules. Recursive rules are indispensable for expressing complex
and realistic structures found in action phrases and activities. To achieve this, we introduce a novel
activity grammar induction algorithm, Key-Action-based Recursive Induction (KARI), that extracts a
powerful probabilistic context-free grammar while capturing the characteristics of the activity. Since
an activity is composed of multiple actions, each activity exhibits a distinctive temporal structure
based on pivotal actions, setting it apart from other activities. The proposed grammar induction
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

