Described Object Detection: Liberating Object
Detection with Flexible Expressions

Chi Xie1† Zhao Zhang2† Yixuan Wu3 Feng Zhu2 Rui Zhao2 Shuang Liang1∗
1
Tongji University 2 Sensetime Research 3 Zhejiang University
chixie@tongji.edu.cn

zzhang@mail.nankai.edu.cn

shuangliang@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Detecting objects based on language information is a popular task that includes
Open-Vocabulary object Detection (OVD) and Referring Expression Comprehension (REC). In this paper, we advance them to a more practical setting called
Described Object Detection (DOD) by expanding category names to flexible language expressions for OVD and overcoming the limitation of REC only grounding
the pre-existing object. We establish the research foundation for DOD by constructing a Description Detection Dataset (D3 ). This dataset features flexible language
expressions, whether short category names or long descriptions, and annotating all
described objects on all images without omission. By evaluating previous SOTA
methods on D3 , we find some troublemakers that fail current REC, OVD, and
bi-functional methods. REC methods struggle with confidence scores, rejecting
negative instances, and multi-target scenarios, while OVD methods face constraints
with long and complex descriptions. Recent bi-functional methods also do not work
well on DOD due to their separated training procedures and inference strategies for
REC and OVD tasks. Building upon the aforementioned findings, we propose a
baseline that largely improves REC methods by reconstructing the training data
and introducing a binary classification sub-task, outperforming existing methods.
Data and code are available at this URL and related works are tracked in this repo.

1

Introduction

Detecting objects of interest within a scene using language is a pivotal area of focus. This field
encompasses two key tasks: Open-Vocabulary object Detection (OVD) [10, 11, 20, 29, 47, 48]
and Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) [21, 27, 24, 46, 52]. We present an intuitive
illustration of these two settings in Fig. 1. The first task, OVD, expands the scope of object detection
(OD) to any given short category name. However, these settings neglect the instances described by
intricate descriptions. The second task, REC, focuses on spatially locating one target described by
an expression and assumes the target must exist in the image. However, in real-world scenarios,
if the described objects do not exist in the image, REC algorithms output false-positive results.
Recent advancements have witnessed the joint training of bi-functional models, such as GroundingDINO [25] and UNINEXT [44], which involve both OVD and REC data. Notwithstanding, these
models still rely on separate training procedures and inference strategies for OVD and REC, and
evaluate these two tasks independently.
As shown in Fig. 1, a more practical detection algorithm should be able to detect any described
category, whether long or short, complex or simple, while discarding predictions in images where
targets are absent. In order to address this significant yet often overlooked scenario, we propose the
concept of Described Object Detection (DOD). Note that this setting is a superset of OVD and REC.
* Corresponding author.
†

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

