Optimal Transport-Guided Conditional
Score-Based Diffusion Model

1

Xiang Gu1 , Liwei Yang1 , Jian Sun ( )1,2,3 , Zongben Xu1,2,3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{xianggu,yangliwei}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn {jiansun,zbxu}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Conditional score-based diffusion model (SBDM) is for conditional generation
of target data with paired data as condition, and has achieved great success in
image translation. However, it requires the paired data as condition, and there
would be insufficient paired data provided in real-world applications. To tackle
the applications with partially paired or even unpaired dataset, we propose a novel
Optimal Transport-guided Conditional Score-based diffusion model (OTCS) in
this paper. We build the coupling relationship for the unpaired or partially paired
dataset based on L2 -regularized unsupervised or semi-supervised optimal transport,
respectively. Based on the coupling relationship, we develop the objective for
training the conditional score-based model for unpaired or partially paired settings,
which is based on a reformulation and generalization of the conditional SBDM
for paired setting. With the estimated coupling relationship, we effectively train
the conditional score-based model by designing a “resampling-by-compatibility”
strategy to choose the sampled data with high compatibility as guidance. Extensive experiments on unpaired super-resolution and semi-paired image-to-image
translation demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed OTCS model. From the
viewpoint of optimal transport, OTCS provides an approach to transport data across
distributions, which is a challenge for OT on large-scale datasets. We theoretically
prove that OTCS realizes the data transport in OT with a theoretical bound. Code
is available at https://github.com/XJTU-XGU/OTCS.

1

Introduction

Score-based diffusion models (SBDMs) [1–8] have gained much attention in data generation. SBDMs
perturb target data to a Gaussian noise by a diffusion process and learn the reverse process to transform
the noise back to the target data. The conditional SBDMs [2, 9–13] that are conditioned on class
labels, text, low-resolution images, etc., have shown great success in image generation and translation.
The condition data and target data in the conditional SBDMs [2, 9–13] are often paired. That is, we
are given a condition for each target sample in training, e.g., in the super-resolution [10, 14, 15], each
high-resolution image (target data) in training is paired with its corresponding low-resolution image
(condition). However, in real-world applications, there could not be sufficient paired training data, due
to the labeling burden. Therefore, it is important and valuable to develop SBDMs for applications with
only unpaired or partially paired training data, e.g., unpaired [16] or semi-paired [17] image-to-image
translation (I2I). Though there are several SBDM-based approaches [18–22] for unpaired I2I, the
score-based models in these approaches are often unconditioned, and the conditions are imposed in
inference by cycle consistency [21], designing the initial states [19, 22], or adding a guidance term to
the output of the unconditional score-based model [18, 20]. It is unclear how to train the conditional
score-based model with unpaired training dataset. For the task with a few paired and a large number
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

