Blockwise Parallel Transformers
for Large Context Models

Hao Liu
UC Berkeley
hao.liu@cs.berkeley.edu

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley
pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Transformers have emerged as the cornerstone of state-of-the-art natural language
processing models, showcasing exceptional performance across a wide range of AI
applications. However, the memory demands posed by the self-attention mechanism and the large feedforward network in Transformers limit their ability to handle
long sequences, thereby creating challenges for tasks involving multiple long sequences or long-term dependencies. We present a distinct approach, Blockwise
Parallel transformers (BPT), that leverages blockwise computation of self-attention
and feedforward network fusion to minimize memory costs. By processing longer
input sequences while maintaining memory efficiency, BPT enables training sequences 32 times longer than vanilla Transformers and up to 4 times longer than
previous memory-efficient methods. Extensive experiments on language modeling
and reinforcement learning tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of BPT in reducing
memory requirements and improving performance.

1

Introduction

Transformers [54] have become the backbone of many state-of-the-art natural language processing
models [15, 45, 5, 37]. They have demonstrated impressive performance across a wide range of
AI problems, including language modeling, machine translation, image captioning, and protein
folding [41, 49, 32, 45, 5, 47, 9]. Transformers achieve this success through their architecture design
that uses self-attention and position-wise feedforward mechanisms. These components facilitate the
efficient capture of long-range dependencies between input tokens, enabling scalability in terms of
context length and model size through highly parallel computations.
However, the memory requirements of Transformers limit their ability to handle long sequences,
which is necessary for many AI problems, such as high-resolution images, podcasts, code, or books
and especially those that involve multiple long sequences or long-term dependencies [10, 7, 41, 7, 36,
29, 49, 32, 1]. The quadratic self-attention and the large feed forward network of Transformers require
a large amount of memory, which makes it challenging to scale to longer input sequences. This
limitation has led to various techniques proposed to reduce the memory requirements of Transformers,
including sparse-approximation, low-rank approximation, and low precision approximation [see e.g.
53, 24, 22, 11, 25, 38, 56].
One distinct line of research does not rely on approximation but instead focuses on computing exact
self-attention with linear memory complexity. This approach leverages the observation that the
softmax matrix in self-attention can be computed without materializing the full matrix [39]. This
technique has led to the development of FlashAttention [14] and Memory Efficient Attention [44].
Both methods propose a blockwise computation of the self-attention softmax, demonstrating reduced
memory requirements.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

