Architecture Matters: Uncovering Implicit
Mechanisms in Graph Contrastive Learning

Xiaojun Guo1∗ Yifei Wang2∗ Zeming Wei2 Yisen Wang1, 3†
1
National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
With the prosperity of contrastive learning for visual representation learning (VCL),
it is also adapted to the graph domain and yields promising performance. However,
through a systematic study of various graph contrastive learning (GCL) methods,
we observe that some common phenomena among existing GCL methods that are
quite different from the original VCL methods, including 1) positive samples are
not a must for GCL; 2) negative samples are not necessary for graph classification,
neither for node classification when adopting specific normalization modules; 3)
data augmentations have much less influence on GCL, as simple domain-agnostic
augmentations (e.g., Gaussian noise) can also attain fairly good performance.
By uncovering how the implicit inductive bias of GNNs works in contrastive
learning, we theoretically provide insights into the above intriguing properties of
GCL. Rather than directly porting existing VCL methods to GCL, we advocate
for more attention toward the unique architecture of graph learning and consider
its implicit influence when designing GCL methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/PKU-ML/ArchitectureMattersGCL.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has emerged as a promising approach
towards utilizing abundant real-world data without costly human-annotated information [34, 9, 54, 35].
Among various SSL techniques, contrastive learning (CL) has established itself as the avant-garde
framework for self-supervised visual representation learning [5]. By pulling similar samples near
and pushing dissimilar samples far apart, contrastive learning is able to learn semantically expressive
representations and achieves huge success on multiple downstream tasks [5, 17, 4].
Inspired by the success of contrastive learning in the visual domain, contrastive learning is also
extensively explored on graph data and achieves competitive performance to supervised ones [40, 26,
65]. Despite technical varieties, most graph contrastive learning (GCL) methods share the same highlevel skeleton as visual contrastive learning (VCL). Generally speaking, GCL applies augmentations to
generate different views of the original graph, and learn node or graph representations by contrasting
positive and negative data pairs. Though some works argue that GCL requires domain-specific
designs for graph [29, 59, 10], the design of GCL generally obeys the same paradigm as VCL with
three key components: data augmentations, positive pairs for feature alignment, and negative pairs
for feature uniformity.
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

