Spatio-Angular Convolutions for Super-resolution in
Diffusion MRI
Matthew Lyon
University of Manchester
matthew.s.lyon@.manchester.ac.uk

Paul Armitage
University of Sheffield
p.armitage@sheffield.ac.uk

Mauricio A Álvarez
University of Manchester
mauricio.alvarezlopez@manchester.ac.uk

Abstract
Diffusion MRI (dMRI) is a widely used imaging modality, but requires long
scanning times to acquire high resolution datasets. By leveraging the unique
geometry present within this domain, we present a novel approach to dMRI angular
super-resolution that extends upon the parametric continuous convolution (PCConv)
framework. We introduce several additions to the operation including a Fourier
feature mapping, global coordinates, and domain specific context. Using this
framework, we build a fully parametric continuous convolution network (PCCNN)
and compare against existing models. We demonstrate the PCCNN performs
competitively while using significantly fewer parameters. Moreover, we show that
this formulation generalises well to clinically relevant downstream analyses such
as fixel-based analysis, and neurite orientation dispersion and density imaging.

1

Introduction

Diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (dMRI) is a clinical imaging modality that is routinely used to
diagnose white matter pathology within the human brain. Advancements in downstream analyses
using dMRI data continuously expand the diagnostic capabilities of the modality, but often require
high resolution data that is clinically infeasible to acquire [28]. However, recent research demonstrates
that deep learning can be used to predict high resolution images using low resolution dMRI data
[26, 44, 41], a technique known as super-resolution. These advancements therefore pave the way for
clinically accessible advanced dMRI analyses.
dMRI data can be represented using a non-Euclidean geometry. Specifically, a dMRI dataset consists
of a series of three-dimensional volumes where each volume measures the water diffusivity in a
given direction. Here, the direction is quantified by a 3D vector known as the ‘b-vector’, and is
sparsely sampled from a unit sphere. Each three-dimensional volume, however, is regularly sampled
in a discrete grid. Therefore, dMRI data has two distinct resolution types: spatial resolution which
denotes the regularly sampled grid size, and angular resolution which denotes the number of diffusion
directions. Despite this relatively unique geometry, most dMRI deep learning methods use operations
grounded in a Euclidean framework, such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [43, 44, 41].
This presents an opportunity as typical CNN architectures do not fully utilise the geometric properties
present in dMRI data. For example, implicit within the formulation of the CNN is the assumption
that data are densely and regularly sampled in a discrete manner. This is only true when considering
the three spatial dimensions of dMRI data, whilst the other dimensions would be more suited using
approaches like graph convolutional networks (GCNs) [46], spherical CNNs [7], and point cloud
CNNs [22]. Examples of approaches that develop geometrically motivated convolutions in the dMRI
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

