M IND 2W EB: Towards a Generalist Agent for the Web

Xiang Deng∗ Yu Gu Boyuan Zheng Shijie Chen
Samuel Stevens Boshi Wang Huan Sun∗ Yu Su∗
The Ohio State University
https://osu-nlp-group.github.io/Mind2Web

Abstract
We introduce M IND 2W EB, the first dataset for developing and evaluating generalist
agents for the web that can follow language instructions to complete complex tasks
on any website. Existing datasets for web agents either use simulated websites or
only cover a limited set of websites and tasks, thus not suitable for generalist web
agents. With over 2,000 open-ended tasks collected from 137 websites spanning
31 domains and crowdsourced action sequences for the tasks, M IND 2W EB provides three necessary ingredients for building generalist web agents: 1) diverse
domains, websites, and tasks, 2) use of real-world websites instead of simulated
and simplified ones, and 3) a broad spectrum of user interaction patterns. Based
on M IND 2W EB, we conduct an initial exploration of using large language models
(LLMs) for building generalist web agents. While the raw HTML of real-world websites are often too large to be fed to LLMs, we show that first filtering it with a small
LM significantly improves the effectiveness and efficiency of LLMs. Our solution
demonstrates a decent level of performance, even on websites or entire domains the
model has never seen before, but there is still a substantial room to improve towards
truly generalizable agents. We open-source our dataset, model implementation,
and trained models (https://osu-nlp-group.github.io/Mind2Web) to facilitate
further research on building a generalist agent for the web.

1

Introduction

The web now hosts billions of websites [7] that cover virtually every aspect of the digital world. In
this work, we seek to answer the question: How can we build a generalist agent for the web that,
given any website, can follow language instructions and carry out the corresponding tasks? Some
exemplar tasks for such an agent are shown in Figure 1. A generalist agent could make the web more
accessible, which is becoming increasingly difficult as modern websites provide increasingly more
functionalities that also increase their complexity and learning curve. On the other hand, such an agent
may also turn the entire web into an unprecedentedly powerful and versatile tool [23, 27] that can
enhance large language models (LLMs). For example, it may be used as a plugin for ChatGPT [24] to
directly acquire information and carry out actions on HTML websites, instead of only retrieving web
content through a retriever tool [8, 18] or relying on pre-defined APIs for each web service [34, 37].
A generalist agent for the web shall meet the following desiderata: First, it shall work on any website
on the Internet. Since it is infeasible to collect sufficient training data that covers all websites, this
requires the agent to be inherently generalizable to websites or even domains it has never seen before.
Second, it shall work on real-world websites, which can be dynamic, complex, and noisy. Most
modern websites are dynamic, generating and rendering different content in response to user actions.
This necessitates the agent to model each website as a partially-observable environment instead of
assuming full knowledge a priori. The agent should also not make strong simplifying assumptions
∗

Corresponding authors: {deng.595, sun.397, su.809}@osu.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

