Optimality of Message-Passing Architectures for
Sparse Graphs

Aseem Baranwal
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
aseem.baranwal@uwaterloo.ca
Kimon Fountoulakis
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
kimon.fountoulakis@uwaterloo.ca
Aukosh Jagannath
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science,
Department of Applied Mathematics,
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
a.jagannath@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
We study the node classification problem on feature-decorated graphs in the sparse
setting, i.e., when the expected degree of a node is O(1) in the number of nodes, in
the fixed-dimensional asymptotic regime, i.e., the dimension of the feature data is
fixed while the number of nodes is large. Such graphs are typically known to be
locally tree-like. We introduce a notion of Bayes optimality for node classification
tasks, called asymptotic local Bayes optimality, and compute the optimal classifier
according to this criterion for a fairly general statistical data model with arbitrary
distributions of the node features and edge connectivity. The optimal classifier is
implementable using a message-passing graph neural network architecture. We
then compute the generalization error of this classifier and compare its performance
against existing learning methods theoretically on a well-studied statistical model
with naturally identifiable signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) in the data. We find that
the optimal message-passing architecture interpolates between a standard MLP
in the regime of low graph signal and a typical convolution in the regime of high
graph signal. Furthermore, we prove a corresponding non-asymptotic result.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have rapidly emerged as a powerful tool for learning on graphstructured data, where along with features of the entities, there also exists a relational structure
among them. They have found numerous applications to a wide range of domains such as social
networks [Backstrom and Leskovec, 2011], recommendation systems [Ying et al., 2018, Hao et al.,
2020], chip design [Mirhoseini et al., 2021], bioinformatics [Scarselli et al., 2009, Zhang et al.,
2021], computer vision [Monti et al., 2017], quantum chemistry [Gilmer et al., 2017], statistical
physics [Battaglia et al., 2016, Bapst et al., 2020], and financial forensics [Zhang et al., 2017, Weber
et al., 2019]. Most of the success with these applications has been possible due to the advent of the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

