On the Importance of Exploration for
Generalization in Reinforcement Learning

Yiding Jiang∗
Carnegie Mellon University
yidingji@cs.cmu.edu

J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Roberta Raileanu
Meta AI Research
raileanu@meta.com

Abstract
Existing approaches for improving generalization in deep reinforcement learning (RL) have mostly focused on representation learning, neglecting RL-specific
aspects such as exploration. We hypothesize that the agent’s exploration strategy plays a key role in its ability to generalize to new environments. Through
a series of experiments in a tabular contextual MDP, we show that exploration
is helpful not only for efficiently finding the optimal policy for the training environments but also for acquiring knowledge that helps decision making in unseen
environments. Based on these observations, we propose E DE: Exploration via
Distributional Ensemble, a method that encourages the exploration of states with
high epistemic uncertainty through an ensemble of Q-value distributions. The
proposed algorithm is the first value-based approach to achieve strong performance
on both Procgen and Crafter, two benchmarks for generalization in RL with highdimensional observations. The open-sourced implementation can be found at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/ede.

1

Introduction

Current deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms struggle to generalize in contextual MDPs
(CMDPs) where agents are trained on a number of different environments that share a common
structure and tested on unseen environments from the same family [22, 112, 75], despite being
competitive in singleton Markov decision processes (MDPs) where agents are trained and tested
on the same environment [73, 43, 8]. This is particularly true for value-based methods [113] (i.e.,
methods that directly derive a policy from the value functions), where there has been little progress
on generalization relative to policy-optimization methods (i.e., methods that learn a parameterized
policy in addition to a value function) [26]. Most existing approaches for improving generalization in
CMDPs have treated this challenge as a pure representation learning problem, applying regularization
techniques which are commonly used in supervised deep learning [29, 21, 45, 61, 116, 60, 92].
However, these methods neglect the unique structure of reinforcement learning (RL), namely that
agents collect their own data by exploring their environments. This suggests that there may be other
avenues for improving generalization in RL beyond representation learning.
Exploration can help an agent gather more information about its environment, which can
improve its ability to generalize to new tasks or environments.
While this statement is seemingly intuitive, a formal and explicit connection has surprisingly not
been made outside of more niche sub-areas of RL (e.g., task-agnostic RL [123] or meta-RL [65]), nor
has there been a convincing empirical demonstration of this statement on common generalization
∗

Work done while interning at Meta AI Research.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

