BQ-NCO: Bisimulation Quotienting for Efficient
Neural Combinatorial Optimization

Darko Drakulic, Sofia Michel, Florian Mai∗, Arnaud Sors, Jean-Marc Andreoli
Naver Labs Europe
firstname.lastname@naverlabs.com

Abstract
Despite the success of neural-based combinatorial optimization methods for end-toend heuristic learning, out-of-distribution generalization remains a challenge. In
this paper, we present a novel formulation of Combinatorial Optimization Problems
(COPs) as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) that effectively leverages common
symmetries of COPs to improve out-of-distribution robustness. Starting from a
direct MDP formulation of a constructive method, we introduce a generic way to
reduce the state space, based on Bisimulation Quotienting (BQ) in MDPs. Then,
for COPs with a recursive nature, we specialize the bisimulation and show how
the reduced state exploits the symmetries of these problems and facilitates MDP
solving. Our approach is principled and we prove that an optimal policy for the
proposed BQ-MDP actually solves the associated COPs. We illustrate our approach
on five classical problems: the Euclidean and Asymmetric Traveling Salesman,
Capacitated Vehicle Routing, Orienteering and Knapsack Problems. Furthermore,
for each problem, we introduce a simple attention-based policy network for the BQMDPs, which we train by imitation of (near) optimal solutions of small instances
from a single distribution. We obtain new state-of-the-art results for the five COPs
on both synthetic and realistic benchmarks. Notably, in contrast to most existing
neural approaches, our learned policies show excellent generalization performance
to much larger instances than seen during training, without any additional search
procedure. Our code is available at: url.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial Optimization Problems (COPs) are crucial in many application domains such as
transportation, energy, logistics, etc. Because they are generally NP-hard [12], their resolution at
real-life scales is mainly done by problem-specific heuristics, which heavily rely on expert knowledge.
Neural combinatorial optimization (NCO) is a relatively recent line of research that focuses on using
deep neural networks to learn such heuristics from data, possibly exploiting regularities in problem
instances of interest [5, 9]. Among NCO methods, the so-called constructive approaches view the
process of building a solution incrementally as a sequential decision making problem, which can
naturally be modeled with Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). Although many previous works have
successfully used this strategy, the process of formulating an appropriate MDP (esp. the state and
action spaces) is usually specific to each problem (e.g. [28] for routing problems, [49] for jobshop
scheduling and [20] for bin packing). These design choices have a considerable impact when solving
the MDP. In particular, exploiting the COP’s symmetries can boost the efficiency and generalization
of neural solvers (e.g. [29, 24] leverage the symmetries of routing problems in Euclidean graphs).
In this paper, we present a generic and principled framework to cast any COP as an MDP and then
a way to account for common COPs’ symmetries to design a more efficient MDP. More precisely,
∗

IDIAP Research Institute, Work done during an internship at Naver Labs Europe

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

