Sample Efficient Reinforcement Learning in Mixed
Systems through Augmented Samples and Its
Applications to Queueing Networks

Honghao Wei
Washington State University
honghao.wei@wsu.edu

Xin Liu
ShanghaiTech University
liuxin7@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Weina Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
weinaw@cs.cmu.edu

Lei Ying
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
leiying@umich.edu

Abstract
This paper considers a class of reinforcement learning problems, which involve
systems with two types of states: stochastic and pseudo-stochastic. In such systems,
stochastic states follow a stochastic transition kernel while the transitions of pseudostochastic states are deterministic given the stochastic states/transitions. We refer to
such systems as mixed systems, which are widely used in various applications, including manufacturing systems, communication networks, and queueing networks.
We propose a sample efficient RL method that accelerates learning by generating
augmented data samples. The proposed algorithm is data-driven and learns the
policy from data samples from both real and augmented samples. This method
significantly improves learning by reducing the sample complexity such that the
dataset only needs to have sufficient coverage of the stochastic states. We analyze
the sample complexity of the proposed method underpFitted Qp
Iteration (FQI) and
demonstrate that the optimality gap decreases as Õ( 1/n + 1/m), where n is
the number of real samples and m is the number of augmented samples per real
sample. It is important to note that without augmented samples, the optimality
gap is Õ(1) due to insufficient data coverage of the pseudo-stochastic states. Our
experimental results on multiple queueing network applications confirm that the
proposed method indeed significantly accelerates learning in both deep Q-learning
and deep policy gradient.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have recently achieved superhuman performance in gaming,
such as AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2017), and AlphaStar (Vinyals et al., 2019), under the premise that vast
amounts of training data can be collected. However, collecting data in real-world could be expensive
and time-consuming applications such as clinical trials and autonomous driving, posing a significant
challenge to extending the success of RL to broader applications. In this paper, we are interested in
sample efficient algorithms for a class of problems in which environments (also called systems in this
paper) include both stochastic and deterministic transitions, resulting in two types of states: stochastic
states and pseudo-stochastic states. For example, in a queueing system, customers arrive and depart,
following certain stochastic processes, but the evolution of the queues given arrivals and departures
are deterministic. We call these kinds of systems mixed systems. Mixed systems are common in
various RL applications, including data centers, ride-sharing systems, and communication networks,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

