Estimating Causal Effects Identiﬁable from a
Combination of Observations and Experiments
Yonghan Jung1 , Iván Díaz2 , Jin Tian3 , and Elias Bareinboim4
1

Purdue University jung222@purdue.edu
New York University ivan.diaz@nyu.edu
3
Iowa State University jtian@iastate.edu
4
Columbia University eb@cs.columbia.edu
2

Abstract
Learning cause and effect relations is arguably one of the central challenges found
throughout the data sciences. Formally, determining whether a collection of observational and interventional distributions can be combined to learn a target causal
relation is known as the problem of generalized identiﬁcation (or g-identiﬁcation)
[Lee et al., 2019]. Although g-identiﬁcation has been well understood and solved
in theory, it turns out to be challenging to apply these results in practice, in particular when considering the estimation of the target distribution from ﬁnite samples.
In this paper, we develop a new, general estimator that exhibits multiply robustness properties for g-identiﬁable causal functionals. Speciﬁcally, we show that any
g-identiﬁable causal effect can be expressed as a function of generalized multioutcome sequential back-door adjustments that are amenable to estimation. We
then construct a corresponding estimator for the g-identiﬁcation expression that
exhibits robustness properties to bias. We analyze the asymptotic convergence
properties of the estimator. Finally, we illustrate the use of the proposed estimator
in experimental studies. Simulation results corroborate the theory.

1

Introduction

Performing causal inferences is a crucial aspect of scientiﬁc research with broad applications ranging
from the social sciences to economics, biology to medicine. It provides a set of principles and tools
to draw causal conclusions from a combination of observations and experiments. Two signiﬁcant
tasks in the realization of these inferences are causal effect identiﬁcation and estimation. Causal
effect identiﬁcation concerns determining the conditions under which one can infer the causal effect
P (Y = y|do(X = x)) (shortly, P (y|do(x))) of the treatment X = x on the outcome Y = y from a
combination of available data distributions and a causal graph depicting the data-generating process
[Pearl, 2000, Bareinboim and Pearl, 2016]. Causal effect estimation aims to develop an estimator
for the identiﬁed causal effect expression using a set of ﬁnite samples.
Recent advances in the literature on generalized causal effect identiﬁcation (g-identiﬁcation) have
developed algorithms that can identify causal effects by using a set of observational and experimental
distributions and a causal graph. The result is an expression of the causal effect as a function of
available observational and experimental distributions [Bareinboim and Pearl, 2012, Lee et al., 2019].
For concreteness, consider some practical scenarios that exemplify g-identiﬁcation.
Example 1. Many studies have investigated how a training program’s eligibility (X) affects future
salary (Y ) (e.g.,[Glynn and Kashin, 2017]). Actual registration in the program (Z) determines the
salary, and experimental studies have looked into how Z affects Y (e.g., [LaLonde, 1986]). Eligibility
is determined by past average income (W ), which is associated with both Z and Y . The causal
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

