Generative Neural Fields
by Mixtures of Neural Implicit Functions

Tackgeun You3

Mijeong Kim1

tackgeun.you@postech.ac.kr

mijeong.kim@snu.ac.kr

Jungtaek Kim4

Bohyung Han1,2

jungtaek.kim@pitt.edu

bhhan@snu.ac.kr

1

ECE & 2 IPAI, Seoul National University, South Korea
3
CSE, POSTECH, South Korea
4
University of Pittsburgh, USA

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to learning the generative neural fields represented by
linear combinations of implicit basis networks. Our algorithm learns basis networks
in the form of implicit neural representations and their coefficients in a latent
space by either conducting meta-learning or adopting auto-decoding paradigms.
The proposed method easily enlarges the capacity of generative neural fields by
increasing the number of basis networks while maintaining the size of a network
for inference to be small through their weighted model averaging. Consequently,
sampling instances using the model is efficient in terms of latency and memory
footprint. Moreover, we customize denoising diffusion probabilistic model for a
target task to sample latent mixture coefficients, which allows our final model to
generate unseen data effectively. Experiments show that our approach achieves
competitive generation performance on diverse benchmarks for images, voxel
data, and NeRF scenes without sophisticated designs for specific modalities and
domains.

1

Introduction

Implicit neural representation (INR) is a powerful and versatile tool for modeling complex and
diverse data signals in various modalities and domains, including audio [12], images [35], videos [40],
3D objects [28, 6], and natural scenes. INR expresses a data instance as a function mapping
from a continuous coordinate space to a signal magnitude space rather than using a conventional
representation on a discrete structured space. In particular, a representation with a continuous
coordinate allows us to query arbitrary points and retrieve their values, which is desirable for many
applications that only have accessibility to a subset of the target data in a limited resolution. INRs
replace the representations based on high-dimensional regular grids, such as videos [9] and 3D
scenes [25], with multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) with a relatively small number of parameters,
which effectively memorize scenes.
Generative neural fields aim to learn distributions of functions that represent data instances as a form
of neural field. They typically rely on INRs to sample their instances in various data modalities
and domains. The crux of generative neural fields lies in how to effectively identify and model
shared and instance-specific information. To this end, feature-wise linear modulation (FiLM) [29]
and hyper-network (HyperNet) [16] are common methods for modulating representations. FiLM
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

