CoDrug: Conformal Drug Property Prediction with
Density Estimation under Covariate Shift

Siddhartha Laghuvarapu
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
sl160@illinois.edu

Zhen Lin
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
zhenlin4@illinois.edu

Jimeng Sun
Department of Computer Science
Carle Illinois College of Medicine
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
jimeng@illinois.edu

Abstract
In drug discovery, it is vital to confirm the predictions of pharmaceutical properties
from computational models using costly wet-lab experiments. Hence, obtaining
reliable uncertainty estimates is crucial for prioritizing drug molecules for subsequent experimental validation. Conformal Prediction (CP) is a promising tool for
creating such prediction sets for molecular properties with a coverage guarantee.
However, the exchangeability assumption of CP is often challenged with covariate
shift in drug discovery tasks: Most datasets contain limited labeled data, which may
not be representative of the vast chemical space from which molecules are drawn.
To address this limitation, we propose a method called CoDrug that employs an
energy-based model leveraging both training data and unlabelled data, and Kernel
Density Estimation (KDE) to assess the densities of a molecule set. The estimated
densities are then used to weigh the molecule samples while building prediction
sets and rectifying for distribution shift. In extensive experiments involving realistic
distribution drifts in various small-molecule drug discovery tasks, we demonstrate
the ability of CoDrug to provide valid prediction sets and its utility in addressing
the distribution shift arising from de novo drug design models. On average, using
CoDrug can reduce the coverage gap by over 35% when compared to conformal
prediction sets not adjusted for covariate shift.

1

Introduction

Drug discovery is a challenging and complex task, with a high failure rate and limited understanding
of the chemical and biological processes involved. These contribute to making drug discovery an
extremely costly and time-consuming endeavor. Recently, advances in deep learning have aimed
to reduce the cost of drug discovery by proposing AI methods for developing accurate property
prediction models and De Novo drug design models:
• Property prediction models aim to aid the laborious and expensive stages of drug discovery by
building accurate supervised learning models that take in a drug representation as input and output
a target property [1, 2].
The code associated with the paper is available at https://github.com/siddharthal/CoDrug/
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

