First Order Stochastic Optimization
with Oblivious Noise
Ilias Diakonikolas
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Sushrut Karmalkar
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
skarmalkar@wisc.edu

Jongho Park
KRAFTON
jongho.park@krafton.com

Christos Tzamos
Department of Informatics
University of Athens
tzamos@wisc.edu

Abstract
We initiate the study of stochastic optimization with oblivious noise, broadly
generalizing the standard heavy-tailed noise setup. In our setting, in addition to
random observation noise, the stochastic gradient may be subject to independent
oblivious noise, which may not have bounded moments and is not necessarily
centered. Specifically, we assume access to a noisy oracle for the stochastic
gradient of f at x, which returns a vector ∇f (γ, x) + ξ, where γ is the bounded
variance observation noise and ξ is the oblivious noise that is independent of γ and
x. The only assumption we make on the oblivious noise ξ is that Pr[ξ = 0] ≥ α
for some α ∈ (0, 1). In this setting, it is not information-theoretically possible to
recover a single solution close to the target when the fraction of inliers α is less
than 1/2. Our main result is an efficient list-decodable learner that recovers a small
list of candidates, at least one of which is close to the true solution. On the other
hand, if α = 1 − ϵ, where 0 < ϵ < 1/2 is sufficiently small constant, the algorithm
recovers a single solution. Along the way, we develop a rejection-sampling-based
algorithm to perform noisy location estimation, which may be of independent
interest.

1

Introduction

A major challenge in modern machine learning systems is to perform inference in the presence of
outliers. Such problems appear in various contexts, such as analysis of real datasets with natural
outliers, e.g., in biology [Rosenberg et al., 2002, Paschou et al., 2010, Li et al., 2008], or neural
network training, where heavy-tailed behavior arises from stochastic gradient descent when the
batch size is small and when the step size is large [Hodgkinson and Mahoney, 2021, Gurbuzbalaban
et al., 2021]. In particular, when optimizing various neural networks, there exists strong empirical
evidence indicating that gradient noise frequently displays heavy-tailed behavior, often showing
characteristics of unbounded variance. This phenomenon has been observed for fully connected
and convolutional neural networks [Simsekli et al., 2019, Gurbuzbalaban and Hu, 2021] as well as
attention models [Zhang et al., 2020]. Hence, it is imperative to develop robust optimization methods
for machine learning in terms of both performance and security.
In this paper, we study robust first-order stochastic optimization under heavy-tailed noise, which
may not have any bounded moments. Specifically, given access to a noisy gradient oracle for f (x)
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

