Fine-Grained Cross-View Geo-Localization Using a
Correlation-Aware Homography Estimator

Xiaolong Wang∗,1 ,

Runsen Xu3 ,

Zuofan Cui1 ,

Zeyu Wan1 ,

Yu Zhang†,1,2

1

2

College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
Key Laboratory of Collaborative sensing and autonomous unmanned systems of Zhejiang Province
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach to fine-grained cross-view geolocalization. Our method aligns a warped ground image with a corresponding
GPS-tagged satellite image covering the same area using homography estimation.
We first employ a differentiable spherical transform, adhering to geometric principles, to accurately align the perspective of the ground image with the satellite
map. This transformation effectively places ground and aerial images in the same
view and on the same plane, reducing the task to an image alignment problem.
To address challenges such as occlusion, small overlapping range, and seasonal
variations, we propose a robust correlation-aware homography estimator to align
similar parts of the transformed ground image with the satellite image. Our method
achieves sub-pixel resolution and meter-level GPS accuracy by mapping the center
point of the transformed ground image to the satellite image using a homography
matrix and determining the orientation of the ground camera using a point above
the central axis. Operating at a speed of 30 FPS, our method outperforms stateof-the-art techniques, reducing the mean metric localization error by 21.3% and
32.4% in same-area and cross-area generalization tasks on the VIGOR benchmark,
respectively, and by 34.4% on the KITTI benchmark in same-area evaluation.

1

Introduction

Accurate localization of ground cameras is essential for various applications such as autonomous
driving, robot navigation, and geospatial data analysis. In crowded urban areas, cross-view localization using satellite images has proven to have great potential for correcting noisy GPS signals [3, 38]
and improving navigation accuracy [42, 13, 19]. In this paper, we consider the task of fine-grained
cross-view geo-localization, which estimates the 3-Dof pose of a ground camera, i.e., GPS location
and orientation (yaw), from a given ground-level query image and a geo-referenced aerial image.
Previous works on coarse cross-view localization [10, 16, 25, 11, 42, 37, 41] have achieved high
recall rates by formulating it as an image retrieval problem. However, the localization accuracy
obtained using this method is limited by the segmentation size of satellite image patches, resulting in
localization errors of tens of meters.
Recently, there has been a growing interest in fine-grained cross-view geo-localization, which assumes
the availability of the ground image and a corresponding GPS-labeled satellite image patch covering
the same area. Existing methods can be divided into two categories: those based on repeated sampling
[27, 24, 7, 26] and those employing descriptor candidates splitting from satellite image features
∗
†

Contact: xlking@zju.edu.cn. The Code is available at https://github.com/xlwangDev/HC-Net.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

