RevColV2: Exploring Disentangled Representations in
Masked Image Modeling

Qi Han∗
MEGVII Technology
Beijing, China
hqer@foxmail.com

Yuxuan Cai∗
MEGVII Technology
Beijing, China
larryx.tsai@gmail.com

Xiangyu Zhang†
MEGVII Technology
Beijing, China
zhangxiangyu@megvii.com

Abstract
Masked image modeling (MIM) has become a prevalent pre-training setup for
vision foundation models and attains promising performance. Despite its success,
existing MIM methods discard the decoder network during downstream applications, resulting in inconsistent representations between pre-training and fine-tuning
and can hamper downstream task performance. In this paper, we propose a new
architecture, RevColV2, which tackles this issue by keeping the entire autoencoder architecture during both pre-training and fine-tuning. The main body of
RevColV2 contains bottom-up columns and top-down columns, between which
information is reversibly propagated and gradually disentangled. Such design
enables our architecture with the nice property: maintaining disentangled low-level
and semantic information at the end of the network in MIM pre-training. Our
experimental results suggest that a foundation model with decoupled features can
achieve competitive performance across multiple downstream vision tasks such
as image classification, semantic segmentation and object detection. For example, after intermediate fine-tuning on ImageNet-22K dataset, RevColV2-L attains
88.4% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K classification and 58.6 mIoU on ADE20K
semantic segmentation. With extra teacher and large scale dataset, RevColv2-L
achieves 62.1 APbox on COCO detection and 60.4 mIoU on ADE20K semantic
segmentation.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained vision foundation models attract more attention in vision community [1, 2, 3, 4]. A
key component in pre-training is how to learn generalizable features which meet the demands of
various visual applications [5]. Typical series of methods focus on self-supervised learning, such as
contrastive learning [6, 7] and masked image modeling (MIM) [8, 9]. The latter obtains promising
results recently in most scenarios by learning occlusion invariant features [10], and becomes a
commonly used approach in vision pre-training especially for large models [11, 4, 12, 13].
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author. This work is supported by The National Key Research and Development Program of
China (No. 2017YFA0700800).
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

