Predict-then-Calibrate: A New Perspective of Robust
Contextual LP
Chunlin Sun∗,1 Linyu Liu∗,2 Xiaocheng Li3
1

Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
Imperial College Business School, Imperial College London

Abstract
Contextual optimization, also known as predict-then-optimize or prescriptive analytics, considers an optimization problem with the presence of covariates (context
or side information). The goal is to learn a prediction model (from the training data)
that predicts the objective function from the covariates, and then in the test phase,
solve the optimization problem with the covariates but without the observation
of the objective function. In this paper, we consider a risk-sensitive version of
the problem and propose a generic algorithm design paradigm called predict-thencalibrate. The idea is to first develop a prediction model without concern for the
downstream risk profile or robustness guarantee, and then utilize calibration (or
recalibration) methods to quantify the uncertainty of the prediction. While the
existing methods suffer from either a restricted choice of the prediction model or
strong assumptions on the underlying data, we show the disentangling of the prediction model and the calibration/uncertainty quantification has several advantages.
First, it imposes no restriction on the prediction model and thus fully unleashes
the potential of off-the-shelf machine learning methods. Second, the derivation of
the risk and robustness guarantee can be made independent of the choice of the
prediction model through a data-splitting idea. Third, our paradigm of predict-thencalibrate applies to both (risk-sensitive) robust and (risk-neutral) distributionally
robust optimization (DRO) formulations. Theoretically, it gives new generalization
bounds for the contextual LP problem and sheds light on the existing results of
DRO for contextual LP. Numerical experiments further reinforce the advantage of
the predict-then-calibrate paradigm in that an improvement on either the prediction
model or the calibration model will lead to a better final performance.

1

Introduction

Contextual linear programming (LP) considers the linear programming problem with the presence of
covariates, and it can be viewed as a prediction problem under a constrained optimization context
where the output of the prediction model serves as the objective of a downstream LP. The goal is
to develop a model (trained from past data) that prescribes a decision/solution for the downstream
LP problem using directly the covariates but without observation of the objective function. A
similar problem formulation was also studied as prescriptive analytics [Bertsimas and Kallus, 2020]
and predict-then-optimize Elmachtoub and Grigas [2022]. The existing literature mainly develops
two approaches for the problem: (i) end-to-end algorithms that map the covariates directly to
a recommended decision for the LP or (ii) two-step algorithms that first predict the unobserved
objective using the covariates and then solve the LP with the predicted objective. While the literature
has been largely focused on the risk-neutral objective, our paper considers the risk-sensitive/robust
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

