Comparing Apples to Oranges:
Learning Similarity Functions for Data Produced by
Different Distributions
Leonidas Tsepenekas
JPMorganChase AI Research
New York, USA
leonidas.tsepenekas@jpmchase.com
Freddy Lecue
JPMorganChase AI Research
New York, USA
freddy.lecue@jpmchase.com

Ivan Brugere
JPMorganChase AI Research
New York, USA
ivan.brugere@jpmchase.com
Daniele Maggazeni
JPMorganChase AI Research
London, UK
daniele.magazzeni@jpmorgan.com

Abstract
Similarity functions measure how comparable pairs of elements are, and play a key
role in a wide variety of applications, e.g., notions of Individual Fairness abiding
by the seminal paradigm of Dwork et al. [2012], as well as Clustering problems.
However, access to an accurate similarity function should not always be considered
guaranteed, and this point was even raised by Dwork et al. [2012]. For instance, it
is reasonable to assume that when the elements to be compared are produced by
different distributions, or in other words belong to different “demographic” groups,
knowledge of their true similarity might be very difficult to obtain. In this work, we
present an efficient sampling framework that learns these across-groups similarity
functions, using only a limited amount of experts’ feedback. We show analytical
results with rigorous theoretical bounds, and empirically validate our algorithms
via a large suite of experiments.

1

Introduction

Given a feature space I, a similarity function σ : I 2 7→ R≥0 measures how comparable any pair
of elements x, x′ ∈ I are. The function σ can also be interpreted as a distance function, where the
smaller σ(x, x′ ) is, the more similar x and x′ are. Such functions are crucially used in a variety of
AI/ML problems, and in each such case σ is assumed to be known.
The most prominent applications where similarity functions have a central role involve considerations
of individual fairness. Specifically, all such individual fairness paradigms stem from the the seminal
work of Dwork et al. [2012], in which fairness is defined as treating similar individuals similarly. In
more concrete terms, such paradigms interpret the aforementioned abstract definition of fairness as
guaranteeing that for every pair of individuals x and y, the difference in the quality of service x and y
receive (a.k.a. their received treatment) is upper bounded by their respective similarity value σ(x, y);
the more similar the individuals are, the less different their quality of service will be. Therefore,
any algorithm that needs to abide by such concepts of fairness, should always be able to access the
similarity score for every pair of individuals that are of interest.
Another family of applications where similarity functions are vital, involves Clustering problems. In
a clustering setting, e.g, the standard k-means task, the similarity function is interpreted as a distance
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

