Towards the Difficulty for a Deep Neural Network to
Learn Concepts of Different Complexities

Dongrui Liua∗

Huiqi Denga∗ Xu Chenga Qihan Rena Kangrui Wangb
Quanshi Zhanga †
a
Shanghai Jiao Tong University b University of Chicago

Abstract
This paper theoretically explains the intuition that simple concepts are more likely
to be learned by deep neural networks (DNNs) than complex concepts. In fact,
recent studies have observed [45, 27] and proved [47] the emergence of interactive
concepts in a DNN, i.e., it is proven that a DNN usually only encodes a small
number of interactive concepts, and can be considered to use their interaction
effects to compute the inference score. Each interactive concept is encoded by the
DNN to represent the collaboration between a set of input variables. Therefore,
in this study, we aim to theoretically explain that interactive concepts involving
more input variables (i.e., more complex concepts) are more difficult to learn. Our
finding clarifies the exact conceptual complexity that boosts the learning difficulty.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have exhibited superior performance in various tasks, but the reason
for their superior performance remains an open problem. To this end, many attempts have been made
to explain the representation capacity of DNNs from different perspectives. For example, Montufar
et al. [35] used the number of linear response regions in a DNN to evaluate the expressive power
of the DNN. Dinh et al. [13] and Petzka et al. [39] used the flatness of loss functions at minima to
explain the generalization power.
In this paper, we explore a fundamental yet not well-formulated problem in terms of the representation
capacity of DNNs, i.e., what types of concepts are easier to be learned by DNNs. However, the core
challenge of this problem is that researchers have not reached a consensus on how to define a concept
encoded by DNNs. Therefore, previous findings [5, 28, 34] that DNNs easily learn simple concepts
remain intuition or empirical observations, without a clear theoretical formulation and explanation.
Fortunately, Ren et al. [45], Li and Zhang [27] have observed and Ren et al. [47] have, for the first
time, mathematically proven that the emergence of interactive concepts is a common phenomenon
shared by different DNNs. I.e., it is proved that under some common conditions, a well-trained
DNN will encode just a small number of interactive concepts for inference. Specifically, the
interactive concept encoded by a DNN is defined as a Harsanyi interaction [18] in game theory,
which represents an AND relationship between input variables in a specific set S . For example, as
Figure 1(a) shows, the DNN encodes the co-appearance relationship between input variables (image
patches) x1 , x2 , and x3 to form the mouth concept S = {x1 , x2 , x3 }. Only when all three patches are
all present, the mouth concept is triggered, and adds a numerical effect I(S) to the inference score y .
The masking of any patches (e.g., x1 ) will break this AND/co-appearance relationship of the mouth
∗

Equal contribution
This research is done under the supervision of Dr. Quanshi Zhang. He is with the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, the John Hopcroft Center at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Correspondence
to: Quanshi Zhang <zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn>.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

