The emergence of clusters in self-attention dynamics
Borjan Geshkovski
MIT
borjan@mit.edu

Cyril Letrouit
MIT
letrouit@mit.edu

Yury Polyanskiy
MIT
yp@mit.edu

Philippe Rigollet
MIT
rigollet@mit.edu

Abstract
Viewing Transformers as interacting particle systems, we describe the geometry of
learned representations when the weights are not time-dependent. We show that
particles, representing tokens, tend to cluster toward particular limiting objects
as time tends to infinity. Cluster locations are determined by the initial tokens,
confirming context-awareness of representations learned by Transformers. Using
techniques from dynamical systems and partial differential equations, we show
that the type of limiting object that emerges depends on the spectrum of the
value matrix. Additionally, in the one-dimensional case we prove that the selfattention matrix converges to a low-rank Boolean matrix. The combination of
these results mathematically confirms the empirical observation made by Vaswani
et al. [VSP` 17] that leaders appear in a sequence of tokens when processed by
Transformers.

1

Introduction

The introduction of Transformers in 2017 [VSP` 17] marked a turning point in the AI revolution,
powering breakthroughs in natural language modeling and computer vision. With remarkable empirical success, Transformers enable large language models to compute very powerful representations
using the self-attention mechanism. Yet, little is known about the geometric structure of these
representations. As the size of these models grows at an astonishing rate, the need to understand their
inner workings is becoming a pressing scientific challenge. In this work, we make a first step in this
direction by describing the geometry of learned representations.
To provide a transparent presentation of our findings, we take a leaf out of the literature on continuoustime dynamics such as neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs) [CRBD18, Wei17, HR17]. By
viewing layers as a time variable, this formalism has emerged as a flexible mathematical framework
to implement and study ResNets [HZRS16a] as particular discrete-time versions of a parametrized
dynamics of the form
9xptq “ f✓ pxptqq,
t P r0, T s.
Here ✓ is the trained parameter of a neural network and f✓ is characterized by the precise architecture
of the ResNet1 . In turn, an input (e.g., an image) xp0q P Rd is mapped to its representation xpT q.
Unlike neural ODEs and ResNets, the representation map of Transformers is not solely a function
of an individual input xp0q P Rd but rather of a set/sequence px1 p0q, . . . , xn p0qq of n • 1 ddimensional tokens. These tokens then evolve in time by interacting with each other per the selfattention mechanism. Namely, following [SABP22], we view tokens as particles, and the transformer
dynamics as an interacting particle system of the form
n
ÿ
x9 i ptq “
Pij ptqV xj ptq,
t P r0, `8q,
(1)
j“1

1

A classical choice is ✓ “ pW, A, bq P Rdˆd ˆ Rdˆd ˆ Rd and f✓ pxq “ W pAx ` bq where
elementwise nonlinearity such as the ReLU ([HZRS16b]).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

is an

