RRHF: Rank Responses to Align Language Models
with Human Feedback
Hongyi Yuan12†∗ Zheng Yuan1∗ Chuanqi Tan1 Wei Wang1 Songfang Huang1 Fei Huang1
1
Alibaba DAMO Academy 2 Tsinghua University
{yuanzheng.yuanzhen,chuanqi.tcq}@alibaba-inc.com
yuanhy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) facilitates the alignment of
large language models with human preferences, significantly enhancing the quality
of interactions between humans and models. InstructGPT implements RLHF
through several stages, including Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), reward model
training, and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO). However, PPO is sensitive
to hyperparameters and requires multiple models in its standard implementation,
making it hard to train and scale up to larger parameter counts. In contrast, we
propose a novel learning paradigm called RRHF, which scores sampled responses
from different sources via a logarithm of conditional probabilities and learns to
align these probabilities with human preferences through ranking loss. RRHF can
leverage sampled responses from various sources including the model responses
from itself, other large language model responses, and human expert responses
to learn to rank them. RRHF only needs 1 to 2 models during tuning and can
efficiently align language models with human preferences robustly without complex
hyperparameter tuning. Additionally, RRHF can be considered an extension of SFT
and reward model training while being simpler than PPO in terms of coding, model
counts, and hyperparameters. We evaluate RRHF on the Helpful and Harmless
dataset, demonstrating comparable alignment performance with PPO by reward
model score and human labeling. Extensive experiments show that the performance
of RRHF is highly related to sampling quality which suggests RRHF is a best-of-n
learner. Codes are released at https://github.com/GanjinZero/RRHF.

1

Introduction

Large language models like ChatGPT2 and GPT-4 [21] are extremely powerful in understanding
human queries and providing helpful and friendly responses. Employing Reinforcement Learning
from Human Feedback (RLHF) [8, 42, 29] enables alignment of language model outputs with human
preferences. As implemented in Ouyang et al. [22], the paradigm of RLHF contains three main
steps, Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), reward model training, and Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO). Initially, they apply supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on the initial models to learn to follow
human instructions. Subsequently, a reward model is learned from the ranking of human preferences.
Finally, scores generated by the reward model are used to apply gradient policy in PPO to align
human preferences. PPO [28] is a strong reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm and is the key step
used in RLHF [22] to align human preferences. This PPO training step is powerful but complex.
It requires tuning a large number of hyperparameters for conservative parameter updating, reward
design, advantage estimation, etc. Besides, fine-tuning language models with PPO needs to store a
∗
2

Contributed equally. † Work done during internship at Alibaba DAMO Academy.
https://openai.com/blog/introducing-chatgpt-and-whisper-apis

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

