Class-Conditional Conformal Prediction
with Many Classes

Tiffany Ding
University of California, Berkeley
tiffany_ding@berkeley.edu

Anastasios N. Angelopoulos
University of California, Berkeley
angelopoulos@berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Stephen Bates
MIT
s_bates@mit.edu

Ryan J. Tibshirani
University of California, Berkeley
ryantibs@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Standard conformal prediction methods provide a marginal coverage guarantee,
which means that for a random test point, the conformal prediction set contains the
true label with a user-specified probability. In many classification problems, we
would like to obtain a stronger guarantee—that for test points of a specific class,
the prediction set contains the true label with the same user-chosen probability. For
the latter goal, existing conformal prediction methods do not work well when there
is a limited amount of labeled data per class, as is often the case in real applications
where the number of classes is large. We propose a method called clustered
conformal prediction that clusters together classes having “similar” conformal
scores and performs conformal prediction at the cluster level. Based on empirical
evaluation across four image data sets with many (up to 1000) classes, we find
that clustered conformal typically outperforms existing methods in terms of classconditional coverage and set size metrics.

1

Introduction

Consider a situation in which a doctor relies on a machine learning system that has been trained to
output a set of likely medical diagnoses based on CT images of the head. Suppose that the system
performs well on average and is able to produce prediction sets that contain the actual diagnosis with
at least 0.9 probability. Upon closer examination, however, the doctor discovers the algorithm only
predicts sets containing common and relatively benign conditions, such as {normal, concussion}, and
the sets never include less common but potentially fatal diseases, such as intracranial hemorrhage. In
this case, despite its high marginal (average) performance, the doctor would not want to use such an
algorithm because it may lead to patients missing out on receiving critical care. The core problem is
that even though the average performance of the algorithm is good, the performance for some classes
is quite poor.
Conformal prediction (Vovk et al., 2005) is a method for producing set-valued predictions that serves
as a wrapper around existing prediction systems, such as neural networks. Standard conformal
prediction takes a black-box prediction model, a calibration data set, and a new test example Xtest ∈
X with unknown label Ytest ∈ Y and creates a prediction set C(Xtest ) ⊆ Y that satisfies marginal
coverage:
P(Ytest ∈ C(Xtest )) ≥ 1 − α,
(1)
for a coverage level α ∈ [0, 1] chosen by the user. However, as the example above shows, the utility
of these prediction sets can be limited in some real applications. In classification, which we study in
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

