The Simplicity Bias in Multi-Task RNNs: Shared
Attractors, Reuse of Dynamics, and Geometric
Representation

Elia Turner
Department of Mathematics
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
eliaturner11@gmail.com
Omri Barak
Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Network Biology Research Laboratory
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
omri.barak@gmail.com

Abstract
How does a single interconnected neural population perform multiple tasks, each
with its own dynamical requirements? The relation between task requirements
and neural dynamics in Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) has been investigated
for single tasks. The forces shaping joint dynamics of multiple tasks, however,
are largely unexplored. In this work, we first construct a systematic framework
to study multiple tasks in RNNs, minimizing interference from input and output
correlations with the hidden representation. This allows us to reveal how RNNs
tend to share attractors and reuse dynamics, a tendency we define as the "simplicity
bias". We find that RNNs develop attractors sequentially during training, preferentially reusing existing dynamics and opting for simple solutions when possible.
This sequenced emergence and preferential reuse encapsulate the simplicity bias.
Through concrete examples, we demonstrate that new attractors primarily emerge
due to task demands or architectural constraints, illustrating a balance between
simplicity bias and external factors. We examine the geometry of joint representations within a single attractor, by constructing a family of tasks from a set of
functions. We show that the steepness of the associated functions controls their
alignment within the attractor. This arrangement again highlights the simplicity
bias, as points with similar input spacings undergo comparable transformations
to reach the shared attractor. Our findings propose compelling applications. The
geometry of shared attractors might allow us to infer the nature of unknown tasks.
Furthermore, the simplicity bias implies that without specific incentives, modularity
in RNNs may not spontaneously emerge, providing insights into the conditions
required for network specialization.

1

Introduction

Consider the hand motions of a basketball player in a single game – dribbling, passing, receiving,
and shooting. Each motion has its own dynamics, and yet all are orchestrated by the same area in the
motor cortex. How can a single interconnected neural population give rise to a myriad of different
actions? A recent body of work examined the link between task performance and neural dynamics by
thinking of populations of neurons, especially in more cognitive and motor areas [5], as dynamical
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

