Not All Neuro-Symbolic Concepts Are Created Equal:
Analysis and Mitigation of Reasoning Shortcuts

Emanuele Marconato
DISI and DI
University of Trento and University of Pisa
Trento, Italy
emanuele.marconato@unitn.it
Antonio Vergari
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK
avergari@exseed.ed.ac.uk

Stefano Teso
CIMeC and DISI
University of Trento
Trento, Italy
stefano.teso@unitn.it
Andrea Passerini
DISI
University of Trento
Trento, Italy
andrea.passerini@unitn.it

Abstract
Neuro-Symbolic (NeSy) predictive models hold the promise of improved compliance with given constraints, systematic generalization, and interpretability, as they
allow to infer labels that are consistent with some prior knowledge by reasoning
over high-level concepts extracted from sub-symbolic inputs. It was recently shown
that NeSy predictors are affected by reasoning shortcuts: they can attain high accuracy but by leveraging concepts with unintended semantics, thus coming short of
their promised advantages. Yet, a systematic characterization of reasoning shortcuts
and of potential mitigation strategies is missing. This work fills this gap by characterizing them as unintended optima of the learning objective and identifying four
key conditions behind their occurrence. Based on this, we derive several natural
mitigation strategies, and analyze their efficacy both theoretically and empirically.
Our analysis shows reasoning shortcuts are difficult to deal with, casting doubts on
the trustworthiness and interpretability of existing NeSy solutions.

1

Introduction

Neuro-Symbolic (NeSy) AI aims at improving the robustness and trustworthiness of neural networks
by integrating them with reasoning capabilities and prior knowledge [1, 2]. We focus on NeSy
predictors [3, 4], neural structured-output classifiers that infer one or more labels by reasoning over
high-level concepts extracted from sub-symbolic inputs, like images or text [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11].
They leverage reasoning techniques to encourage – or even guarantee – that their predictions comply
with domain-specific regulations and inference rules. As such, they hold the promise of improved
systematic generalization, modularity, and interpretability, in that learned concepts can be readily
reused in different NeSy tasks, as done for verification [12], and for explaining the model’s inference
process to stakeholders [13, 14, 15]. On paper, this makes NeSy predictors ideal for high-stakes
applications that require both transparency and fine-grained control over the model’s (in- and out-ofdistribution) behavior, such as medical diagnosis [16], robotics [17] and self-driving cars [18].
Much of the promise of these models relies on learned concepts being high quality. The general
consensus is that the prior knowledge constrains learned concepts to behave as expected [19] and
issues with them are often tackled heuristically [20]. It was recently shown that, however, NeSy
predictors can attain high accuracy by leveraging concepts with unintended semantics [21]. Following
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

