Constant Approximation for Individual Preference
Stable Clustering

Anders Aamand
MIT
aamand@mit.edu

Justin Y. Chen
MIT
justc@mit.edu

Pattara Sukprasert∗
Databricks
pat.sukprasert@databricks.com

Allen Li
MIT
cliu568@mit.edu

Sandeep Silwal
MIT
silwal@mit.edu

Ali Vakilian
TTIC
vakilian@ttic.edu

Fred Zhang
UC Berkeley
z0@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Individual preference (IP) stability, introduced by Ahmadi et al. (ICML 2022),
is a natural clustering objective inspired by stability and fairness constraints. A
clustering is α-IP stable if the average distance of every data point to its own
cluster is at most α times the average distance to any other cluster. Unfortunately,
determining if a dataset admits a 1-IP stable clustering is NP-Hard. Moreover,
before this work, it was unknown if an o(n)-IP stable clustering always exists, as
the prior state of the art only guaranteed an O(n)-IP stable clustering. We close this
gap in understanding and show that an O(1)-IP stable clustering always exists for
general metrics, and we give an efficient algorithm which outputs such a clustering.
We also introduce generalizations of IP stability beyond average distance and give
efficient near optimal algorithms in the cases where we consider the maximum and
minimum distances within and between clusters.

1

Introduction

In applications involving and affecting people, socioeconomic concepts such as game theory, stability,
and fairness are important considerations in algorithm design. Within this context, Ahmadi et al. [1]
(ICML 2022) introduced the notion of individual preference stability (IP stability) for clustering.
At a high-level, a clustering of an input dataset is called 1-IP stable if, for each individual point, its
average distance to any other cluster is larger than the average distance to its own cluster. Intuitively,
each individual prefers its own cluster to any other, and so the clustering is stable.
There are plenty of applications of clustering in which the utility of each individual in any cluster
is determined according to the other individuals who belong to the same cluster. For example, in
designing personalized medicine, the more similar the individuals in each cluster are, the more
effective medical decisions, interventions, and treatments can be made for each group of patients.
Similarly, stability guarantees are desired in designing personalized learning environments or marketing campaigns to ensure that no individual wants to deviate from their assigned cluster. Furthermore
the focus on individual utility in IP stability (a clustering is only stable if every individual is “happy”)
enforces a notion of individual fairness in clustering.
In addition to its natural connections to cluster stability, algorithmic fairness, and Nash equilibria,
IP stability is also algorithmically interesting in its own right. While clustering is well-studied with
respect to global objective functions (e.g. the objectives of centroid-based clustering such as k-means
∗

Significant part of the work was done while P.S. was a Ph.D. candidate at Northwestern University.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

