Scalarization for Multi-Task and
Multi-Domain Learning at Scale

Amélie Royer, Tijmen Blankevoort, Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi
Qualcomm AI Research∗
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{aroyer, tijmen, behtesha}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Training a single model on multiple input domains and/or output tasks allows for
compressing information from multiple sources into a unified backbone hence
improves model efficiency. It also enables potential positive knowledge transfer
across tasks/domains, leading to improved accuracy and data-efficient training.
However, optimizing such networks is a challenge, in particular due to discrepancies
between the different tasks or domains: Despite several hypotheses and solutions
proposed over the years, recent work has shown that uniform scalarization training,
i.e., simply minimizing the average of the task losses, yields on-par performance
with more costly SotA optimization methods. This raises the issue of how well
we understand the training dynamics of multi-task and multi-domain networks.
In this work, we first devise a large-scale unified analysis of multi-domain and
multi-task learning to better understand the dynamics of scalarization across varied
task/domain combinations and model sizes. Following these insights, we then
propose to leverage population-based training to efficiently search for the optimal
scalarization weights when dealing with a large number of tasks or domains.

1

Introduction

Learning a unified architecture that can handle multiple domains and/or tasks offers the potential for
improved computational efficiency, better generalization, and reduced training data requirements.
However, training such models proves a challenge: In particular, when the tasks or domains are
dissimilar, practitioners often observe that the learning of one task or domain interferes with the
learning of others. This phenomenon is commonly known as interference or negative transfer. How
to best resolve this interference is an open problem spanning numerous bodies of literature, such as
multi-task learning, domain adaptation and generalization, or multi-modal learning.
In fact, there is currently no unanimous understanding of what causes, or how to predict, task
interference in practice: For instance, classical generalization bounds on training from multiple
data sources [3, 48, 56, 44] involve a measure of distance between the respective tasks/domains
distributions, which can be intuitively thought of as a measure of interference. In more practical
applications, task clustering methods [65, 58, 16] propose various metrics to measure task affinity,
and train tasks with low affinity separately, with separate backbones, thereby circumventing the
interference issue at the architecture level. Finally, in the multi-task optimization (MTO) literature,
the prevailing view is that gradients from different tasks may point in conflicting directions and cause
interference, which has led to a line of work on reducing gradient conflicts by normalizing gradients
or losses statistics [37, 7, 25, 64]. While MTO have established a new state-of-the-art for training
multi-task models in the past few years, recent work [63, 30] shows that, surprisingly, minimizing
∗

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

