Object-Centric Slot Diffusion

Jindong Jiang
Rutgers University
jindong.jiang@rutgers.edu

Fei Deng
Rutgers University
fei.deng@rutgers.edu

Gautam Singh
Rutgers University
singh.gautam@rutgers.edu

Sungjin Ahn∗
KAIST
sungjin.ahn@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The recent success of transformer-based image generative models in object-centric
learning highlights the importance of powerful image generators for handling
complex scenes. However, despite the high expressiveness of diffusion models
in image generation, their integration into object-centric learning remains largely
unexplored in this domain. In this paper, we explore the feasibility and potential of
integrating diffusion models into object-centric learning and investigate the pros
and cons of this approach. We introduce Latent Slot Diffusion (LSD), a novel model
that serves dual purposes: it is the first object-centric learning model to replace
conventional slot decoders with a latent diffusion model conditioned on object slots,
and it is also the first unsupervised compositional conditional diffusion model that
operates without the need for supervised annotations like text. Through experiments
on various object-centric tasks, including the first application of the FFHQ dataset
in this field, we demonstrate that LSD significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
transformer-based decoders, particularly in more complex scenes, and exhibits
superior unsupervised compositional generation quality. In addition, we conduct a
preliminary investigation into the integration of pre-trained diffusion models in LSD
and demonstrate its effectiveness in real-world image segmentation and generation.
Project page is available at https://latentslotdiffusion.github.io

1

Introduction

The fundamental structure of the physical world is compositional and modular. While this structure
is naturally revealed in some data modalities like language in the form of tokens or words, in
other modalities such as images, it is elusive how one may discover this structure. However, this
representational compositionality and modularity is essential for various applications that require the
systematic manipulation of knowledge pieces to achieve high-level cognitive abilities. This includes
reasoning [46, 5], causal inference [68], and out-of-distribution generalization [2, 22].
Object-centric learning [27] aims to discover the latent compositional structure from unstructured
observation by learning to bind relevant features, thereby forming useful tokens in an unsupervised
way. For images, one of the most popular approaches is to auto-encode the image via the Slot
Attention [53] encoder. Slot Attention applies competitive spatial attention to partition the image into
separate local areas and then obtain a representation, called a slot, from each area. Then, a decoder
generates the image from the slots with the aim of minimizing the reconstruction error. Due to the
limited capacity and competition between slots, each slot is encouraged to capture a reusable and
compositional entity, such as an object.
∗

Correspondence to sungjin.ahn@kaist.ac.kr.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

