General Munchausen Reinforcement Learning with
Tsallis Kullback-Leibler Divergence

Lingwei Zhu
University of Alberta
lingwei4@ualberta.ca

Zheng Chen
Osaka University
chenz@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Matthew Schlegel
University of Alberta
mkschleg@ualberta.ca

Martha White
University of Alberta
CIFAR Canada AI Chair, Amii
whitem@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Many policy optimization approaches in reinforcement learning incorporate a
Kullback-Leilbler (KL) divergence to the previous policy, to prevent the policy
from changing too quickly. This idea was initially proposed in a seminal paper
on Conservative Policy Iteration, with approximations given by algorithms like
TRPO and Munchausen Value Iteration (MVI). We continue this line of work
by investigating a generalized KL divergence—called the Tsallis KL divergence.
Tsallis KL defined by the q-logarithm is a strict generalization, as q = 1 corresponds to the standard KL divergence; q > 1 provides a range of new options.
We characterize the types of policies learned under the Tsallis KL, and motivate
when q > 1 could be beneficial. To obtain a practical algorithm that incorporates
Tsallis KL regularization, we extend MVI, which is one of the simplest approaches
to incorporate KL regularization. We show that this generalized MVI(q) obtains
significant improvements over the standard MVI(q = 1) across 35 Atari games.

1

Introduction

There is ample theoretical evidence that it is useful to incorporate KL regularization into policy
optimization in reinforcement learning. The most basic approach is to regularize towards a uniform
policy, resulting in entropy regularization. More effective, however, is to regularize towards the
previous policy. By choosing KL regularization between consecutively updated policies, the optimal
policy becomes a softmax over a uniform average of the full history of action value estimates
[Vieillard et al., 2020a]. This averaging smooths out noise, allowing for better theoretical results
[Azar et al., 2012, Kozuno et al., 2019, Vieillard et al., 2020a, Kozuno et al., 2022].
Despite these theoretical benefits, there are some issues with using KL regularization in practice.
It is well-known that the uniform average is susceptible to outliers; this issue is inherent to KL
divergence [Futami et al., 2018]. In practice, heuristics such as assigning vanishing regularization
coefficients to some estimates have been implemented widely to increase robustness and accelerate
learning [Grau-Moya et al., 2019, Haarnoja et al., 2018, Kitamura et al., 2021]. However, theoretical
guarantees no longer hold for those heuristics [Vieillard et al., 2020a, Kozuno et al., 2022]. A natural
question is what alternatives we can consider to this KL divergence regularization, that allows us
to overcome some of these disadvantages while maintaining the benefits associate with restricting
aggressive policy changes and smoothing errors.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

