Disentanglement via Latent Quantization

Kyle Hsu† Will Dorrell‡ James C. R. Whittington†§ Jiajun Wu† Chelsea Finn†
†
Stanford University ‡ University College London § Oxford University
{kylehsu,jiajunwu,cbfinn}@cs.stanford.edu

{dorrellwec,jcrwhittington}@gmail.com

Abstract
In disentangled representation learning, a model is asked to tease apart a dataset’s
underlying sources of variation and represent them independently of one another.
Since the model is provided with no ground truth information about these sources,
inductive biases take a paramount role in enabling disentanglement. In this work,
we construct an inductive bias towards encoding to and decoding from an organized latent space. Concretely, we do this by (i) quantizing the latent space into
discrete code vectors with a separate learnable scalar codebook per dimension
and (ii) applying strong model regularization via an unusually high weight decay.
Intuitively, the latent space design forces the encoder to combinatorially construct
codes from a small number of distinct scalar values, which in turn enables the
decoder to assign a consistent meaning to each value. Regularization then serves
to drive the model towards this parsimonious strategy. We demonstrate the broad
applicability of this approach by adding it to both basic data-reconstructing (vanilla
autoencoder) and latent-reconstructing (InfoGAN) generative models. For reliable
evaluation, we also propose InfoMEC, a new set of metrics for disentanglement
that is cohesively grounded in information theory and fixes well-established shortcomings in previous metrics. Together with regularization, latent quantization
dramatically improves the modularity and explicitness of learned representations
on a representative suite of benchmark datasets. In particular, our quantized-latent
autoencoder (QLAE) consistently outperforms strong methods from prior work in
these key disentanglement properties without compromising data reconstruction.

??

v.s.
??

(a)

complex

(b)

simple

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1: Motivating observations and illustration of the inductive bias of latent quantization. The
mapping between true sources (c) and data (b) is simpler than most other possible generative
functions from unstructured spaces (a). To help recover the sources, we use quantized latent codes
(d)—continuous codes (dots) are mapped (via arrows) to their nearest discrete codes (black circles),
each of which is constructed combinatorially from per-dimension scalar codebooks (turquoise and
orange ticks). One way this design’s inductive bias manifests is in how the codes change from
previous values (grayed) as a result of codebook optimization: the combinatorially defined codes
move in lockstep, changing the quantized representations of many datapoints. In contrast, naively
quantizing into individual vector embeddings (e) would result in codebook optimization having a
comparatively local effect.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

