VLATTACK: Multimodal Adversarial Attacks on
Vision-Language Tasks via Pre-trained Models

Ziyi Yin1 Muchao Ye1 Tianrong Zhang1 Tianyu Du2
Jinguo Zhu3 Han Liu4 Jinghui Chen1 Ting Wang5 Fenglong Ma1∗
1
The Pennsylvania State University, 2 Zhejiang University,
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University, 4 Dalian University of Technology, 5 Stony Brook University
{ziyiyin, muchao, tbz5156, jcz5917, fenglong}@psu.edu
zjradty@zju.edu.cn, lechatelia@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
liu.han.dut@gmail.com, twang@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Vision-Language (VL) pre-trained models have shown their superiority on many
multimodal tasks. However, the adversarial robustness of such models has not
been fully explored. Existing approaches mainly focus on exploring the adversarial robustness under the white-box setting, which is unrealistic. In this paper, we
aim to investigate a new yet practical task to craft image and text perturbations
using pre-trained VL models to attack black-box fine-tuned models on different
downstream tasks. Towards this end, we propose VLATTACK2 to generate adversarial samples by fusing perturbations of images and texts from both singlemodal and multimodal levels. At the single-modal level, we propose a new blockwise similarity attack (BSA) strategy to learn image perturbations for disrupting
universal representations. Besides, we adopt an existing text attack strategy to
generate text perturbations independent of the image-modal attack. At the multimodal level, we design a novel iterative cross-search attack (ICSA) method to
update adversarial image-text pairs periodically, starting with the outputs from the
single-modal level. We conduct extensive experiments to attack five widely-used
VL pre-trained models for six tasks. Experimental results show that VLATTACK
achieves the highest attack success rates on all tasks compared with state-of-the-art
baselines, which reveals a blind spot in the deployment of pre-trained VL models.

1

Introduction

The recent success of vision-language (VL) pre-trained models on multimodal tasks have attracted
broad attention from both academics and industry [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. These models first learn
multimodal interactions by pre-training on the large-scale unlabeled image-text datasets and are
later fine-tuned with labeled pairs on different downstream VL tasks [8, 9, 10]. In many cases,
these pre-trained models have revealed more powerful cross-task learning capabilities compared to
training from scratch [11, 12]. Despite their remarkable performance, the adversarial robustness
of these VL models is still relatively unexplored.
Existing work [13, 14, 15, 16] conducting adversarial attacks in VL tasks is mainly under the whitebox setting, where the gradient information of fine-tuned models is accessible to attackers. However,
in a more realistic scenario, a malicious attacker may only be able to access the public pre-trained
models released through third parties. The attacker would not have any prior knowledge about the
∗
2

Corresponding author.
Source code can be found in the link https://github.com/ericyinyzy/VLAttack.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

