What functions can Graph Neural Networks compute on
random graphs? The role of Positional Encoding

Nicolas Keriven
CNRS, IRISA, Rennes, France
nicolas.keriven@cnrs.fr

Samuel Vaiter
CNRS, LJAD, Nice, France
samuel.vaiter@cnrs.fr

Abstract
We aim to deepen the theoretical understanding of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) on
large graphs, with a focus on their expressive power. Existing analyses relate this notion
to the graph isomorphism problem, which is mostly relevant for graphs of small sizes,
or studied graph classification or regression tasks, while prediction tasks on nodes
are far more relevant on large graphs. Recently, several works showed that, on very
general random graphs models, GNNs converge to certains functions as the number
of nodes grows. In this paper, we provide a more complete and intuitive description
of the function space generated by equivariant GNNs for node-tasks, through general
notions of convergence that encompass several previous examples. We emphasize
the role of input node features, and study the impact of node Positional Encodings
(PEs), a recent line of work that has been shown to yield state-of-the-art results in
practice. Through the study of several examples of PEs on large random graphs, we
extend previously known universality results to significantly more general models. Our
theoretical results hint at some normalization tricks, which is shown numerically to
have a positive impact on GNN generalization on synthetic and real data. Our proofs
contain new concentration inequalities of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Machine learning on graphs with Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [53, 5] is now a well-established
domain, with application fields ranging from combinatorial optimization [6] to recommender systems
[50, 11], physics [45, 1], chemistry [16], epidemiology [37], physical networks such as power grids
[41], and many more. Despite this, there is still much that is not properly understood about GNNs, both
empirically and theoretically, and their performances are not always consistent [52, 22], compared to
simple baselines in some cases. It is generally admitted that a better theoretical understanding of GNNs,
especially of their fundamental limitations, is necessary to design better models in the future.
Theoretical studies of GNNs have largely focused on their expressive power, kickstarted by a seminal
study [54] that relates their ability to distinguish non-isomorphic graphs to the historical Weisfeiler–
Lehman (WL) test [51]. Following this, many works have defined improved versions of GNNs to be
“more powerful than WL” [34, 35, 26, 49, 38], often by augmenting GNNs with various features, or
by implementing “higher-order” versions of the basic message-passing paradigm. Among the simplest
and most effective idea to “augment” GNNs is the use of Positional Encodings (PE) as input to the
GNN, inspired by the vocabulary of Transformers [48]. The idea is to equip nodes with carefully crafted
input features that would help break some of the indeterminancy in the subsequent message-passing
framework. In early works, unique and/or random node identifiers have been used [32, 47], but they
technically break the permutation-invariance/equivariance – consistency with a reordering of the nodes
in the graph – of the GNN. Most PEs in the current literature are based on eigenvectors of the adjacency
matrix or Laplacian of the graph [12, 13] (with recent variants to handle the sign/basis indeterminancy
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

