L AMBDA B EAM: Neural Program Search with
Higher-Order Functions and Lambdas

Kensen Shi
Google DeepMind
kshi@google.com

Hanjun Dai
Google DeepMind
hadai@google.com

Kevin Ellis
Cornell University
kellis@cornell.edu

Wen-Ding Li
Cornell University
wl678@cornell.edu

Charles Sutton
Google DeepMind
charlessutton@google.com

Abstract
Search is an important technique in program synthesis that allows for adaptive
strategies such as focusing on particular search directions based on execution
results. Several prior works have demonstrated that neural models are effective
at guiding program synthesis searches. However, a common drawback of those
approaches is the inability to handle iterative loops, higher-order functions, or
lambda functions, thus limiting prior neural searches from synthesizing longer
and more general programs. We address this gap by designing a search algorithm
called L AMBDA B EAM that can construct arbitrary lambda functions that compose
operations within a given DSL. We create semantic vector representations of the
execution behavior of the lambda functions and train a neural policy network to
choose which lambdas to construct during search, and pass them as arguments to
higher-order functions to perform looping computations. Our experiments show
that L AMBDA B EAM outperforms neural, symbolic, and LLM-based techniques in
an integer list manipulation domain.

1

Introduction

Program synthesis involves finding a program meeting a given specification of what the program
should do [21, 18]. When the specification is in the form of input/output examples, known as
programming by example (PBE), combinatorial search has been an especially popular technique [2,
30, 3, 32, 4, 27, 33]. Learning can also play a key role in PBE, because well-designed search
algorithms can learn to adapt to information collected during the ongoing search, such as execution
results or other analyses of candidate programs considered so far. This information can be used to
prune redundant parts of the search space or focus on parts deemed more promising. For example,
DeepCoder [3] and TF-Coder [32] use neural models to define a search space that is explored
by traditional non-neural search, while B USTLE [27], C ROSS B EAM [33], and Execution-Guided
Synthesis [7] use neural models to guide the search process itself. However, those prior works are
unable to generate programs with arbitrary looping computations, whether implemented via loop
control structures or through the use of higher-order functions with arbitrary lambda functions.1 Even
though large language models (and other sequence models) can output programs with loops and are
very effective at synthesizing programs from natural language [6], PBE demands a more systematic
search strategy that adapts to valuable information like execution results during the search.
1
DeepCoder [3] supports higher-order functions but only a small set of hardcoded lambda functions.
Execution-Guided Synthesis [7] supports variable-free while loops, but not loops with an iteration variable.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

