Object Reprojection Error (ORE): Camera pose
benchmarks from lightweight tracking annotations

Xingyu Chen1,∗ , Weiyao Wang1,∗ , Hao Tang1 , Matt Feiszli1
FAIR, Meta1 , Equal Technical Contribution∗
{xingyuchen, weiyaowang, haotang, mdf}@meta.com

Abstract
3D spatial understanding is highly valuable in the context of semantic modeling
of environments, agents, and their relationships. Semantic modeling approaches
employed on monocular video often ingest outputs from off-the-shelf SLAM/SfM
pipelines, which are anecdotally observed to perform poorly or fail completely
on some fraction of the videos of interest. These target videos may vary widely
in complexity of scenes, activities, camera trajectory, etc. Unfortunately, such
semantically-rich video data often comes with no ground-truth 3D information,
and in practice it is prohibitively costly or impossible to obtain ground truth
reconstructions or camera pose post-hoc.
This paper proposes a novel evaluation protocol, Object Reprojection Error (ORE)
to benchmark camera trajectories; ORE computes reprojection error for static
objects within the video and requires only lightweight object tracklet annotations.
These annotations are easy to gather on new or existing video, enabling ORE to
be calculated on essentially arbitrary datasets. We show that ORE maintains high
rank correlation with standard metrics based on ground truth. Leveraging ORE, we
source videos and annotations from Ego4D-EgoTracks, resulting in EgoStatic, a
large-scale diverse dataset for evaluating camera trajectories in-the-wild.

1

Introduction

Spatial understanding is a fundamental tool in human perception [49]. In computer vision, spatial
understanding tasks often come in the form of geometric reconstruction and localization [62, 76,
74], typically seeking precise camera localization and 3D scene maps. The focus is on metric
structure, not relations and objects. On the other hand, neurophysiology suggests human memory is
anchored in object-centric or allocentric coordinates [10, 88, 26, 32]. This interpretation suggests
a different granularity of spatial modeling and is relevant to applications in human-in-the-loop
settings, like augmented reality. For example, equipped with moderately-accurate object-level spatial
understanding, an AR assistant can give guidance to a human performing a task, describe object
locations and spatial relations, and infer user intention.
Indeed, localizing an agent relative to objects and environment has become foundational in many
recent approaches to semantic understanding, e.g. spatial semantic mapping [14, 34, 64, 77, 59, 79],
place categorization [83], 3D scene graph construction [4, 69, 70], spatial episodic memory [5, 45,
37, 6, 48, 65, 101], visual query [42, 43, 57, 98, 56], planning and guiding visual navigation (e.g.
for AR) [17, 2, 45, 15, 16], representation learning in egocentric vision [28, 50, 90, 60, 85], action
anticipation [44, 68, 66] and active object segmentation [89]. These methods use spatial information
at a higher semantic level; exact locations of pixels and cameras are less critical. They focus on
the spatial semantics and relations of objects and cameras. In practice however, these approaches
typically rely on careful 3D geometry, in the form of depth, camera trajectories and volumes, but
often discard much of the accuracy in favor of looser notions of proximity (e.g. [4, 14, 34]).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

