On the role of entanglement and statistics in learning

Srinivasan Arunachalam
IBM Quantum
Almaden Research Center
Srinivasan.Arunachalam@ibm.com

Vojtěch Havlíček
IBM Quantum
T.J. Watson Research Center
Vojtech.Havlicek@ibm.com

Louis Schatzki
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
louisms2@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this work we make progress in understanding the relationship between learning
models when given access to entangled measurements, separable measurements
and statistical measurements in the quantum statistical query (QSQ) model. To this
end we prove the following results
1. For learning Boolean concept classes, we show that the entangled and separable sample complexity are polynomially related.
2. We give a concept class that shows an exponential separation between quantum PAC learning with classification noise and QSQ learning. This proves
the “quantum analogue" of the seminal result of Blum et al. [1] that separates
classical SQ learning from classical PAC learning with classification noise.
3. The main technical contribution is to introduce a quantum statistical query
dimension (QSD), which we use to give lower bounds on the QSQ learning.
Using this, we prove exponential QSQ lower bounds for testing purity of
quantum states, shadow tomography, learning coset states for the Abelian
hidden subgroup problem, degree-2 functions, planted bi-clique states and
learning output states of Clifford circuits of depth polylog(n).
4. Using our QSQ lower bounds, we give an unconditional separation between
weak and strong error mitigation and prove lower bounds for learning distributions in the QSQ model. Prior works by Quek et al. [2], Hinsche et
al. [3] and Neitner et al. [4] proved the analogous results assuming diagonal
measurements and our work removes this assumption.

1

Introduction

In the last few decades, machine learning (ML) has emerged as one of the most successful parts of
artificial intelligence with wide-ranging applications in computer vision, image recognition, natural
language processing. More recently, ML has been used in popular applications such as AlphaGo
and Alpha zero (to play the games of Go and chess), chatGPT (to mimic a human conversation) and
Alphafold (for solving some hard instances of protein folding). Simultaneously, understanding the
power of quantum physics for ML has received much attention in the quantum computing community.
There have already been many theoretical proposals for quantum algorithms providing speedups for
practically relevant ML tasks such as clustering, recommendation systems, linear algebra, convex
optimization, SVMs, kernel-based methods, topological data analysis [5–14]. There are several
surveys dedicated to understanding the power of quantum methods for ML [15–18].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

