Variational Gaussian Processes For Linear Inverse
Problems
Thibault Randrianarisoa
Department of Decision Sciences
Bocconi University
via Roentgen 1, 20136, Milano, MI, Italy
thibault.randrianarisoa@unibocconi.it

Botond Szabo
Department of Decision Sciences
Bocconi University
via Roentgen 1, 20136, Milano, MI, Italy
botond.szabo@unibocconi.it

Abstract
By now Bayesian methods are routinely used in practice for solving inverse problems. In inverse problems the parameter or signal of interest is observed only
indirectly, as an image of a given map, and the observations are typically further
corrupted with noise. Bayes offers a natural way to regularize these problems via
the prior distribution and provides a probabilistic solution, quantifying the remaining uncertainty in the problem. However, the computational costs of standard,
sampling based Bayesian approaches can be overly large in such complex models.
Therefore, in practice variational Bayes is becoming increasingly popular. Nevertheless, the theoretical understanding of these methods is still relatively limited,
especially in context of inverse problems. In our analysis we investigate variational
Bayesian methods for Gaussian process priors to solve linear inverse problems. We
consider both mildly and severely ill-posed inverse problems and work with the
popular inducing variables variational Bayes approach proposed by Titsias [57].
We derive posterior contraction rates for the variational posterior in general settings
and show that the minimax estimation rate can be attained by correctly tunned
procedures. As specific examples we consider a collection of inverse problems
including the heat equation, Volterra operator and Radon transform and inducing
variable methods based on population and empirical spectral features.

1

Introduction

In inverse problems we only observe the object of interest (i.e. function or signal) indirectly, through a
transformation with respect to some given operator. Furthermore, the data is typically corrupted with
measurement error or noise. In practice the inverse problems are often ill-posed, i.e. the inverse of
the operator is not continuous. Based on the level of ill-posedness we distinguish mildly and severely
ill-posed cases. The ill-posedness of the problem prevents us from simply inverting the operator
as it would blow up the measurement errors in the model. Therefore, to overcome this problem,
regularization techniques are applied by introducing a penalty term in the maximum likelihood
approximation. Standard examples include generalized Tikhonov, total variation and Moore-Penrose
estimators, see for instance [4; 5; 9; 11; 18; 56] or a recent survey [3] on data-driven methods for
solving inverse problems
An increasingly popular approach to introduce regularity to the model is via the Bayesian paradigm,
see for instance [3; 7; 12; 29; 54] and references therein. Beside regularization, Bayesian methods
provide a probabilistic solution to the problem, which can be directly used to quantify the remaining
uncertainty of the approach. This is visualised by plotting credible sets, which are sets accumulating
prescribed percentage of the posterior mass. For computing the posterior typically MCMC algorithms
are used, however, these can scale poorly with increasing sample size due to the complex structure of
the likelihood. Therefore, in practice often alternative, approximation methods are used. Variational
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

