Autodecoding Latent 3D Diffusion Models

Evangelos Ntavelis∗
Computer Vision Lab
ETH Zurich
Zürich, Switzerland
entavelis@vision.ee.ethz.ch
Chaoyang Wang
CI2CV Lab
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
chaoyanw@cs.cmu.edu

Aliaksandr Siarohin
Creative Vision
Snap Inc.
Santa Monica, CA, USA
asiarohin@snapchat.com

Luc Van Gool
CVL, ETH Zurich, CH
PSI, KU Leuven, BE
INSAIT, Un. Sofia, BU
vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Kyle Olszewski
Creative Vision
Snap Inc.
Santa Monica, CA, USA
kolszewski@snap.com

Sergey Tulyakov
Creative Vision
Snap Inc.
Santa Monica, CA, USA
stulyakov@snapchat.com

Abstract
We present a novel approach to the generation of static and articulated 3D assets
that has a 3D autodecoder at its core. The 3D autodecoder framework embeds
properties learned from the target dataset in the latent space, which can then be
decoded into a volumetric representation for rendering view-consistent appearance
and geometry. We then identify the appropriate intermediate volumetric latent
space, and introduce robust normalization and de-normalization operations to
learn a 3D diffusion from 2D images or monocular videos of rigid or articulated
objects. Our approach is flexible enough to use either existing camera supervision
or no camera information at all – instead efficiently learning it during training.
Our evaluations demonstrate that our generation results outperform state-of-theart alternatives on various benchmark datasets and metrics, including multi-view
image datasets of synthetic objects, real in-the-wild videos of moving people, and
a large-scale, real video dataset of static objects.
Code & Visualizations: https://github.com/snap-research/3DVADER

1

Introduction

Photorealistic generation is undergoing a period that future scholars may well compare to the
enlightenment era. The improvements in quality, composition, stylization, resolution, scale, and
manipulation capabilities of images were unimaginable just over a year ago. The abundance of online
images, often enriched with text, labels, tags, and sometimes per-pixel segmentation, has significantly
accelerated such progress. The emergence and development of denoising diffusion probabilistic
models (DDPMs) [75, 77, 28] propelled these advances in image synthesis [53, 78, 80, 76, 17, 18,
63, 36, 86] and other domains, e.g. audio ([10, 20, 95]) and video ([24, 89, 82, 29, 25, 47]).
However, the world is 3D, consisting of static and dynamic objects. Its geometric and temporal
nature poses a major challenge for generative methods. First of all, the data we have consists
mainly of images and monocular videos. For some limited categories of objects, we have 3D
meshes with corresponding multi-view images or videos, often obtained using a tedious capturing
process or created manually by artists. Second, unlike CNNs, there is no widely accepted 3D or 4D
representation suitable for 3D geometry and appearance generation. As a result, with only a few
exceptions [74], most of the existing 3D generative methods are restricted to a narrow range of object
∗

Work done during internship at Creative Vision Team - Snap Inc

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

