Off-Policy Evaluation for Human Feedback

Qitong Gao∗

Ge Gao†

Juncheng Dong∗

Vahid Tarokh∗

Min Chi†

Miroslav Pajic∗

Abstract
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) is important for closing the gap between offline training and evaluation of reinforcement learning (RL), by estimating performance
and/or rank of target (evaluation) policies using offline trajectories only. It can
improve the safety and efficiency of data collection and policy testing procedures
in situations where online deployments are expensive, such as healthcare. However, existing OPE methods fall short in estimating human feedback (HF) signals,
as HF may be conditioned over multiple underlying factors and is only sparsely
available; as opposed to the agent-defined environmental rewards (used in policy
optimization), which are usually determined over parametric functions or distributions. Consequently, the nature of HF signals makes extrapolating accurate
OPE estimations to be challenging. To resolve this, we introduce an OPE for HF
(OPEHF) framework that revives existing OPE methods in order to accurately
evaluate the HF signals. Specifically, we develop an immediate human reward
(IHR) reconstruction approach, regularized by environmental knowledge distilled
in a latent space that captures the underlying dynamics of state transitions as well as
issuing HF signals. Our approach has been tested over two real-world experiments,
adaptive in-vivo neurostimulation and intelligent tutoring, as well as in a simulation
environment (visual Q&A). Results show that our approach significantly improves
the performance toward estimating HF signals accurately, compared to directly
applying (variants of) existing OPE methods.

1

Introduction

Off-policy evaluation (OPE) aims to estimate the performance of reinforcement learning (RL) policies
using only a fixed set of offline trajectories [61], i.e., without online deployments. It is considered to
be a critical step in closing the gap between offline RL training and evaluation, for environments and
systems where online data collection is expensive or unsafe. Specifically, OPE facilitates not only
offline evaluation of the safety and efficacy of the policies ahead of online deployment, but policy
selection as well; this allows one to maximize the efficiency when online data collection is possible,
by identifying and deploying the policies that are more likely to result in higher returns. OPE has
been used in various application domains including healthcare [68, 53, 23, 22], robotics [15, 18, 24],
intelligent tutoring [64, 45, 17], recommendation systems [50, 43].
The majority of existing OPE methods focus on evaluating the policies’ performance defined over the
environmental reward functions which are mainly designed for use in policy optimization (training).
However, as an increasing number of offline RL frameworks are developed for human-involved
systems [64, 45, 1, 48, 16], existing OPE methods lack the ability to estimate how human users
would evaluate the policies, e.g., ratings provided by patients (on a scale of 1-10) over the procedure
facilitated by automated surgical robots; as human feedback (HF) can be noisy and conditioned over
various confounders that could be difficult to be captured explicitly [53, 7, 44]. For example, patient
satisfaction over a specific diabetes therapy may vary across the cohort, depending on many subjective
∗
†

Duke University. Durham, NC, USA. Contact: {qitong.gao, miroslav.pajic}@duke.edu.
North Carolina State University. Raleigh, NC, USA.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

