Why think step by step? Reasoning emerges from the
locality of experience

Ben Prystawski
Department of Psychology
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
benpry@stanford.edu

Michael Y. Li
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
michaelyli@stanford.edu

Noah D. Goodman
Departments of Psychology and Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
ngoodman@stanford.edu

Abstract
Humans have a powerful and mysterious capacity to reason. Working through a set
of mental steps enables us to make inferences we would not be capable of making
directly even though we get no additional data from the world. Similarly, when
large language models generate intermediate steps (a chain of thought) before answering a question, they often produce better answers than they would directly. We
investigate why and how chain-of-thought reasoning is useful in language models,
testing the hypothesis that reasoning is effective when training data consists of overlapping local clusters of variables that influence each other strongly. These training
conditions enable the chaining of accurate local inferences to estimate relationships
between variables that were not seen together in training. We prove that there will
exist a “reasoning gap”, where reasoning through intermediate variables reduces
bias, for the simple case of an autoregressive density estimator trained on local
samples from a chain-structured probabilistic model. We then test our hypothesis
experimentally in more complex models, training an autoregressive language model
on samples from Bayes nets but only including a subset of variables in each sample.
We test language models’ ability to match conditional probabilities with and without intermediate reasoning steps, finding that intermediate steps are only helpful
when the training data is locally structured with respect to dependencies between
variables. The combination of locally structured observations and reasoning is
much more data-efficient than training on all variables. Our results illustrate how
the effectiveness of reasoning step by step is rooted in the local statistical structure
of the training data.

1

Introduction

The human mind is a ship – the immediate inferences we make from instinct keep us afloat, but
reason is the compass that brings us to the shore of wisdom. Many tasks that we find hard to do
immediately – solving math problems, planning vacations, understanding our relatives – become
much easier when we talk ourselves through a reflective reasoning process. Likewise, by considering
thought experiments or “intuition pumps” in science we can form strong beliefs – such as that the
rate at which an object falls should not depend on its mass – purely by thinking through a set of steps
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

