Training Private Models That Know
What They Don’t Know

Stephan Rabanser1,2∗, Anvith Thudi1,2 , Abhradeep Thakurta3 ,
Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham3 , Nicolas Papernot1,2
1
University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 Google DeepMind

Abstract
Training reliable deep learning models which avoid making overconfident but incorrect predictions is a longstanding challenge. This challenge is further exacerbated
when learning has to be differentially private: protection provided to sensitive data
comes at the price of injecting additional randomness into the learning process. In
this work, we conduct a thorough empirical investigation of selective classifiers—
that can abstain under uncertainty—under a differential privacy constraint. We find
that some popular selective prediction approaches are ineffective in a differentially
private setting because they increase the risk of privacy leakage. At the same
time, we identify that a recent approach that only uses checkpoints produced by
an off-the-shelf private learning algorithm stands out as particularly suitable under
DP. Further, we show that differential privacy does not just harm utility but also
degrades selective classification performance. To analyze this effect across privacy
levels, we propose a novel evaluation mechanism which isolates selective prediction
performance across model utility levels at full coverage. Our experimental results
show that recovering the performance level attainable by non-private models is
possible but comes at a considerable coverage cost as the privacy budget decreases.

1

Introduction

State of the art machine learning (ML) models are gaining rapid adoption in high-stakes application
scenarios such as healthcare [Challen et al., 2019, Mozannar and Sontag, 2020], finance [Vijh et al.,
2020], self-driving [Ghodsi et al., 2021], and law [Vieira et al., 2021]. However, major challenges
remain to be addressed to ensure trustworthy usage of these models. One major concern in sensitive
applications is to protect the privacy of the individuals whose data an ML model was trained on.
To prevent privacy attacks on ML models, (ε, δ) differential privacy (DP) [Dwork et al., 2014] has
emerged as the de-facto standard with widespread usage in both academic and industrial applications.
While the introduction of DP successfully protects against privacy attacks, it also limits model utility
in practice. For instance, the canonical algorithm for training models with DP, DP-SGD [Abadi et al.,
2016], clips the per-sample gradient norm and adds carefully calibrated noise. These training-time
adaptations frequently lead to degradation in predictive performance in practice. This is especially
a problem for datasets containing underrepresented subgroups whose accuracy has been shown to
degrade with stronger DP guarantees [Bagdasaryan et al., 2019]. Faced with this challenge, it is
therefore of vital importance to detect samples on which a DP model would predict incorrectly on.
One popular technique used to detect inputs that the model would misclassify with high probability
is given by the selective classification (SC) framework [Geifman and El-Yaniv, 2017]: by relying
on a model’s uncertainty in the correct prediction for an incoming data point, the point is either
accepted with the underlying model’s prediction, or rejected and potentially flagged for additional
∗

Correspondence to: stephan@cs.toronto.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

