Proportional Response: Contextual Bandits for Simple
and Cumulative Regret Minimization

Sanath Kumar Krishnamurthy
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
sanathsk@stanford.edu

Ruohan Zhan
Industrial Engineering and Decision Analytics
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
rhzhan@ust.hk

Susan Athey
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
athey@stanford.edu

Emma Brunskill
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
In many applications, e.g. in healthcare and e-commerce, the goal of a contextual
bandit may be to learn an optimal treatment assignment policy at the end of the
experiment. That is, to minimize simple regret. However, this objective remains
understudied. We propose a new family of computationally efficient bandit algorithms for the stochastic contextual bandit setting, where a tuning parameter
determines the weight placed on cumulative regret minimization (where we establish near-optimal minimax guarantees) versus simple regret minimization (where
we establish state-of-the-art guarantees). Our algorithms work with any function
class, are robust to model misspecification, and can be used in continuous arm settings. This flexibility comes from constructing and relying on “conformal arm sets"
(CASs). CASs provide a set of arms for every context, encompassing the contextspecific optimal arm with a certain probability across the context distribution. Our
positive results on simple and cumulative regret guarantees are contrasted with a
negative result, which shows that no algorithm can achieve instance-dependent simple regret guarantees while simultaneously achieving minimax optimal cumulative
regret guarantees.

1

Introduction

Learning and deploying personalized treatment assignment policies is crucial across domains such
as healthcare and e-commerce [29, 25]. Traditional randomized control trials (RCTs), while foundational for policy learning [4, 7], can be inefficient and costly [30]. This motivates the study of
adaptive sequential experimentation algorithms for the stochastic contextual bandit (CB) settings.
The algorithm interacts with a finite sequence of users drawn stochastically from a fixed but unknown
distribution. At each round, the algorithm receives a context (a user’s feature vector), selects an
action, and gets a corresponding reward. At the end of this adaptive experiment, the algorithm outputs
a learned policy (mapping between contexts and actions).
Our algorithms are designed with the dual objectives of minimizing simple regret and cumulative
regret. Simple regret quantifies the difference between the expected rewards achieved by the optimal
policy and the policy learned at the conclusion of the experimental process. In contrast, cumulative
regret encapsulates the summation of differences between the expected rewards generated by the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

