Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature for
Modern Neural Network Architectures
Runa Eschenhagen∗,1 Alexander Immer2,3 Richard E. Turner1
Frank Schneider4,5 Philipp Hennig4,5
2

1
University of Cambridge
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
4
University of Tübingen
5
Tübingen AI Center

Abstract
The core components of many modern neural network architectures, such as
transformers, convolutional, or graph neural networks, can be expressed as linear
layers with weight-sharing. Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature (K-FAC),
a second-order optimisation method, has shown promise to speed up neural network
training and thereby reduce computational costs. However, there is currently
no framework to apply it to generic architectures, specifically ones with linear
weight-sharing layers. In this work, we identify two different settings of linear
weight-sharing layers which motivate two flavours of K-FAC – expand and reduce.
We show that they are exact for deep linear networks with weight-sharing in their
respective setting. Notably, K-FAC-reduce is generally faster than K-FAC-expand,
which we leverage to speed up automatic hyperparameter selection via optimising
the marginal likelihood for a Wide ResNet. Finally, we observe little difference
between these two K-FAC variations when using them to train both a graph neural
network and a vision transformer. However, both variations are able to reach a fixed
validation metric target in 50-75% of the number of steps of a first-order reference
run, which translates into a comparable improvement in wall-clock time. This
highlights the potential of applying K-FAC to modern neural network architectures.

1

Introduction

One of the key driving forces behind the success of deep learning is arguably the development and
scaling of novel deep neural network (DNN) architectures like transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) or
graph neural networks (Battaglia et al., 2018; Scarselli et al., 2009). While the landscape of neural
network architectures seems vast, their core building blocks like attention, graph, recurrent, and
convolutional layers can be expressed as simple linear layers with weight-sharing. For example,
the weight-sharing can happen over a sequence of tokens, e.g. in language modelling, over image
patches, or by tying weights in the forward pass. The perspective of expressing the core neural
network operations as linear operations has been formalised in a different context with the Tensor
Programs framework (Yang, 2019), which develops a language to express arbitrary neural network
computations as a composition of simple matrix multiplications and coordinate-wise nonlinearities.
One downside of relying on increasing the scale of the models to achieve better performance is
the increased compute cost. To decrease these costs, we can try to improve the efficiency of the
optimisation algorithms, which motivates exploring second-order methods like Newton’s method and
natural gradient descent (Amari, 1998), which uses the Fisher information matrix, or short, the Fisher.
∗

Correspondence to: re393@cam.ac.uk.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

