A Unified Framework for Information-Theoretic
Generalization Bounds
Yifeng Chu
Maxim Raginsky
{ychu26,maxim}@illinois.edu∗

Abstract
This paper presents a general methodology for deriving information-theoretic generalization bounds for learning algorithms. The main technical tool is a probabilistic
decorrelation lemma based on a change of measure and a relaxation of Young’s
inequality in Lψp Orlicz spaces. Using the decorrelation lemma in combination
with other techniques, such as symmetrization, couplings, and chaining in the space
of probability measures, we obtain new upper bounds on the generalization error,
both in expectation and in high probability, and recover as special cases many of
the existing generalization bounds, including the ones based on mutual information,
conditional mutual information, stochastic chaining, and PAC-Bayes inequalities.
In addition, the Fernique–Talagrand upper bound on the expected supremum of a
subgaussian process emerges as a special case.

1

Introduction

The generalization error of a learning algorithm is a useful proxy for evaluating the performance of the
learned model on previously unseen data. Formally, it is defined as the expected (absolute) difference
between the population risk and the empirical risk of the hypothesis returned by the algorithm. One
of the classical methods for estimating the generalization error is via uniform convergence of various
empirical processes indexed by the hypothesis class [1, 2]. For example, in the analysis of Empirical
Risk Minimization, one can estimate the expected generalization error via Rademacher averages,
which can be bounded from above using chaining techniques [3].
However, the bounds based on uniform convergence are often too pessimistic and may even become
vacuous when the hypothesis space is extremely large, a typical situation with deep neural net models.
For this reason, it is preferable to obtain algorithm-dependent generalization bounds that take into
account the joint distribution of the training samples and of the output hypothesis. In this context,
one capitalizes on the intuition that the generalization ability of a learning algorithm should be
related to the amount of information the output hypothesis reveals about the training data. This idea,
which has origins in the work on PAC-Bayes methods [4, 5], is the basis of the growing literature on
information-theoretic generalization bounds, first proposed in [6] and further devoloped in [7–16]
and many other works.
In fact, it is possible to effectively combine the information-theoretic approach with the classical
framework based on various measures of complexity of the hypothesis class: One can use chaining
techniques to successively approximate the hypothesis class by simpler model classes, which can then
be analyzed using information-theoretic tools. This methodology, again originating in the PAC-Bayes
literature [17], has been developed recently in [18–21]. Our goal in this work is to develop these
ideas further by giving a unified framework for information-theoretic generalization bounds, from
which many of the existing results emerge as special cases.
∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of
Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

