Threshold KNN-Shapley: A Linear-Time and
Privacy-Friendly Approach to Data Valuation

Jiachen T. Wang⋆
Princeton University
tianhaowang@princeton.edu
Yu-Xiang Wang
UC Santa Barbara
yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Ruoxi Jia⋆
Virginia Tech
ruoxijia@vt.edu

Yuqing Zhu
UC Santa Barbara
yuqingzhu@ucsb.edu
Prateek Mittal
Princeton University
pmittal@princeton.edu

Abstract
Data valuation aims to quantify the usefulness of individual data sources in training
machine learning (ML) models, and is a critical aspect of data-centric ML research.
However, data valuation faces significant yet frequently overlooked privacy challenges despite its importance. This paper studies these challenges with a focus
on KNN-Shapley, one of the most practical data valuation methods nowadays.
We first emphasize the inherent privacy risks of KNN-Shapley, and demonstrate
the significant technical difficulties in adapting KNN-Shapley to accommodate
differential privacy (DP). To overcome these challenges, we introduce TKNNShapley, a refined variant of KNN-Shapley that is privacy-friendly, allowing for
straightforward modifications to incorporate DP guarantee (DP-TKNN-Shapley).
We show that DP-TKNN-Shapley has several advantages and offers a superior
privacy-utility tradeoff compared to naively privatized KNN-Shapley in discerning
data quality. Moreover, even non-private TKNN-Shapley achieves comparable
performance as KNN-Shapley. Overall, our findings suggest that TKNN-Shapley
is a promising alternative to KNN-Shapley, particularly for real-world applications
involving sensitive data.

1

Introduction

Data valuation is an emerging research area that seeks to measure the contribution of individual data
sources to the training of machine learning (ML) models. Data valuation is essential in data marketplaces for ensuring equitable compensation for data owners, and in explainable ML for identifying
influential training data. The importance of data valuation is underscored by the DASHBOARD
Act introduced in the U.S. Senate in 2019 [66], which mandates companies to provide users with an
assessment of their data’s economic value. Moreover, OpenAI’s Future Plan explicitly highlights “the
fair distribution of AI-generated benefits” as a key question moving forward [51].
Data Shapley. Inspired by cooperative game theory, [23, 30] initiated the study of using the Shapley
value as a principled approach for data valuation. The Shapley value [56] is a famous solution concept
from game theory for fairly assigning the total revenue to each player. In a typical scenario of data
valuation, training data points are collected from different sources, and the data owner of each training
data point can be regarded as “player” in a cooperative game. “Data Shapley” refers to the method of
using the Shapley value as the contribution measure for each data owner. Since its introduction, many
⋆

Correspondence to Jiachen T. Wang and Ruoxi Jia.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

