Rank-DETR for High Quality Object Detection

Yifan Pu1 ∗ Weicong Liang2♮∗ Yiduo Hao3♮∗ Yuhui Yuan4B
Yukang Yang4
Chao Zhang2
Han Hu4
Gao Huang1B
1
Tsinghua University 2 Peking University 3 University of Cambridge 4 Microsoft Research Asia
puyf23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liangweicong@stu.pku.edu.cn, yh463@cam.ac.uk,
yuhui.yuan@microsoft.com, gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Modern detection transformers (DETRs) use a set of object queries to predict a list
of bounding boxes, sort them by their classification confidence scores, and select
the top-ranked predictions as the final detection results for the given input image.
A highly performant object detector requires accurate ranking for the bounding box
predictions. For DETR-based detectors, the top-ranked bounding boxes suffer from
less accurate localization quality due to the misalignment between classification
scores and localization accuracy, thus impeding the construction of high-quality
detectors. In this work, we introduce a simple and highly performant DETR-based
object detector by proposing a series of rank-oriented designs, combinedly called
Rank-DETR. Our key contributions include: (i) a rank-oriented architecture design
that can prompt positive predictions and suppress the negative ones to ensure lower
false positive rates, as well as (ii) a rank-oriented loss function and matching cost
design that prioritizes predictions of more accurate localization accuracy during
ranking to boost the AP under high IoU thresholds. We apply our method to
improve the recent SOTA methods (e.g., H-DETR and DINO-DETR) and report
strong COCO object detection results when using different backbones such as
ResNet-50, Swin-T, and Swin-L, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach.
Code is available at https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/Rank-DETR.

1

Introduction

The landscape of modern object detection systems has undergone significant transformation since
the pioneering work DEtection TRansformer (DETR) [3]. Since DETR yielded impressive results in
object detection, numerous subsequent research works such as Deformable-DETR [78], DINO [75],
and H-DETR [30] have further advanced this field. Moreover, these DETR-based approaches have
been successfully extended to address various core visual recognition tasks, including instance /
panoptic segmentation [6, 38, 61, 69, 71, 35, 9, 8, 70], pose estimation [57, 36, 56], and multi-object
tracking [5, 47, 58]. The notable progress in these areas can be credited to ongoing advancements in
enhancing the DETR-based framework for improved object detection performance.
Considerable endeavors have been dedicated to advancing the performance of DETR-based methods
from various perspectives. These efforts include refining transformer encoder and decoder architectures [48, 74, 78, 2, 12, 78, 11, 40, 43] as well as redesigning of query formulations [63, 44, 34, 75].
While substantial research has been dedicated to developing accurate ranking mechanisms for dense
one-stage object detectors like FCOS [59] or ATSS [77], few studies have specifically investigated
this aspect for modern object detectors based on DETR. However, ranking mechanisms are vital in
enhancing the average precision performance, particularly under high IoU thresholds.
∗

Equal contribution. ♮ Interns at Microsoft Research Asia. B Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

