DASpeech: Directed Acyclic Transformer for
Fast and High-quality Speech-to-Speech Translation

Qingkai Fang1,2 , Yan Zhou1,2 , Yang Feng1,2∗
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICT/CAS)
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{fangqingkai21b,zhouyan23z,fengyang}@ict.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Direct speech-to-speech translation (S2ST) translates speech from one language
into another using a single model. However, due to the presence of linguistic and
acoustic diversity, the target speech follows a complex multimodal distribution,
posing challenges to achieving both high-quality translations and fast decoding
speeds for S2ST models. In this paper, we propose DASpeech, a non-autoregressive
direct S2ST model which realizes both fast and high-quality S2ST. To better capture
the complex distribution of the target speech, DASpeech adopts the two-pass
architecture to decompose the generation process into two steps, where a linguistic
decoder first generates the target text, and an acoustic decoder then generates the
target speech based on the hidden states of the linguistic decoder. Specifically, we
use the decoder of DA-Transformer as the linguistic decoder, and use FastSpeech
2 as the acoustic decoder. DA-Transformer models translations with a directed
acyclic graph (DAG). To consider all potential paths in the DAG during training, we
calculate the expected hidden states for each target token via dynamic programming,
and feed them into the acoustic decoder to predict the target mel-spectrogram.
During inference, we select the most probable path and take hidden states on
that path as input to the acoustic decoder. Experiments on the CVSS Fr→En
benchmark demonstrate that DASpeech can achieve comparable or even better
performance than the state-of-the-art S2ST model Translatotron 2, while preserving
up to 18.53× speedup compared to the autoregressive baseline. Compared with the
previous non-autoregressive S2ST model, DASpeech does not rely on knowledge
distillation and iterative decoding, achieving significant improvements in both
translation quality and decoding speed. Furthermore, DASpeech shows the ability
to preserve the speaker’s voice of the source speech during translation.23

1

Introduction

Direct speech-to-speech translation (S2ST) directly translates speech of the source language into the
target language, which can break the communication barriers between different language groups and
has broad application prospects. Traditional S2ST usually consists of cascaded automatic speech
recognition (ASR), machine translation (MT), and text-to-speech (TTS) models [1, 2]. In contrast,
direct S2ST achieves source-to-target speech conversion with a unified model [3], which can (1)
avoid error propagation across sub-models [4]; (2) reduce the decoding latency [5]; and (3) preserve
∗

Corresponding author: Yang Feng.
Audio samples are available at https://ictnlp.github.io/daspeech-demo/.
3
Code is publicly available at https://github.com/ictnlp/DASpeech.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

