High-dimensional Contextual Bandit Problem
without Sparsity

Junpei Komiyama
New York University
junpei@komiyama.info

Masaaki Imaizumi
The University of Tokyo / RIKEN Center for AIP
imaizumi@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
In this research, we investigate the high-dimensional linear contextual bandit problem where the number of features 𝑝 is greater than the budget 𝑇, or it may even
be infinite. Differing from the majority of previous works in this field, we do not
impose sparsity on the regression coefficients. Instead, we rely on recent findings on overparameterized models, which enables us to analyze the performance
of the minimum-norm interpolating estimator when data distributions have small
effective ranks. We propose an explore-then-commit (EtC) algorithm to address
this problem and examine its performance. Through our analysis, we derive the
optimal rate of the ETC algorithm in terms of 𝑇 and show that this rate can be
achieved by balancing exploration and exploitation. Moreover, we introduce an
adaptive explore-then-commit (AEtC) algorithm that adaptively finds the optimal
balance. We assess the performance of the proposed algorithms through a series
of simulations.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit problem [Robbins, 1952, Lai and Robbins, 1985] has been widely studied in
the field of sequential decision-making problems in uncertain environments, and it can be applied to a
variety of real-world scenarios. This problem involves an agent selecting one of 𝐾 arms in each round
and receiving a corresponding reward. The agent aims to maximize the cumulative reward over rounds
by using a clever algorithm that balances exploration and exploitation. In particular, a version of this
problem called the contextual bandit problem [Abe and Long, 1999, Li et al., 2010] has attracted
significant attention in the machine learning community. By observing the contexts associated with
the arms, the agent can choose the best arm as a function of the contexts. This extension enables us
to model many personalized machine learning scenarios, such as recommendation systems [Li et al.,
2010, Wang et al., 2022] and online advertising [Tang et al., 2013], and personalized treatments
[Chakraborty and Murphy, 2014].
Most of the papers about stochastic linear bandits assume that the number of features
𝑝 is moderate
√
[Li et al., 2010, Chu et al., 2011, Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011]. When 𝑝 = 𝑜( 𝑇) to the number of
rounds 𝑇, the model is identifiable, and the agent can choose the best arm for most rounds. However,
recent machine learning models desire to utilize an even larger number of features, and the theory
of bandit models under the identifiability assumption does not necessarily reflect the modern use of
machine learning. Several recent papers have overcome this limitation by considering sparse linear
bandit models [Wang et al., 2018, Kim and Paik, 2019, Bastani and Bayati, 2020, Hao et al., 2020,
Oh et al., 2021, Li et al., 2022, Jang et al., 2022]. Sparse linear bandit models accept a very large
number of features1 and suppress most of the coefficients by introducing the ℓ1 regularize.
1Typically, the number of feature 𝑝 can be exponential to the number of datapoints 𝑇.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

