Generalized Belief Transport

Junqi Wang
Department of Math & CS
Rutgers University
Newark, NJ, 07102
junqi.wang@rutgers.edu

Pei Wang
Department of Math & CS
Rutgers University
Newark, NJ, 07102
peiwang@rutgers.edu

Patrick Shafto
Department of Math & CS
Rutgers University
Newark, NJ, 07102
shafto@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Human learners have ability to adopt appropriate learning approaches depending
on constraints such as prior on the hypothesis, urgency of decision, and drift of the
environment. However, existing learning models are typically considered individually rather than in relation to one and other. To build agents that have the ability to
move between different modes of learning over time, it is important to understand
how learning models are related as points in a broader space of possibilities. We
introduce a mathematical framework, Generalized Belief Transport (GBT), that
unifies and generalizes prior models, including Bayesian inference, cooperative
communication and classification, as parameterizations of three learning constraints
within Unbalanced Optimal Transport (UOT). We visualize the space of learning
models encoded by GBT as a cube which includes classic learning models as
special points. We derive critical properties of this parameterized space including
proving continuity and differentiability which is the basis for model interpolation,
and study limiting behavior of the parameters, which allows attaching learning
models on the boundaries. Moreover, we investigate the long-run behavior of
GBT, explore convergence properties of models in GBT mathematical and computationally, document the ability to learn in the presence of distribution drift, and
formulate conjectures about general behavior. We conclude with open questions
and implications for more unified models of learning.
Learning and inference are subject to internal and external constraints. Internal constraints include
the availability of relevant prior knowledge. External constraints include the availability of time to
accumulate evidence versus the need make the best decision now or environmental non-stationarity.
Standard models of machine learning tend to view different constraints as different problems, which
impedes development of unified learning agents.
These internal and external constraints map onto classic dichotomies in machine learning. Availability
of prior knowledge maps onto the Frequentist-Bayesian dichotomy in which the latter uses prior
knowledge as a constraint on posterior beliefs, while the former does not. Within Bayesian theory, a
classic debate pertains to uninformative, or minimally informative, settings of priors [Jeffreys, 1946,
Robert et al., 2009]. Availability of time to accumulate evidence informs the use of generative versus
discriminative approaches [Ng and Jordan, 2001], and static or drift/dynamic models [Dagum et al.,
1992, Murphy, 2002]. Combining constraints on probability of beliefs and costs of data models
cooperative communication [Wang et al., 2020b].
Learning agents must interpolate between modes of reasoning as necessary given the constraints of
the moment. Imagine observing an agent behaving in an environment. As an observer, one may wish
to learn about the environment from the agent’s actions. However, any inferences depend on one’s
model of the agent and their constraints. How is the agent updating their beliefs? Do they have stable
goals, or are they changing over time? Perhaps the agent is selecting actions to communicate what
they know? In order to draw inferences over these possibilities, one must parameterize the space,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

