SlotDiffusion: Object-Centric
Generative Modeling with Diffusion Models

Ziyi Wu1,2 Jingyu Hu1,∗ Wuyue Lu1,∗ Igor Gilitschenski1,2 Animesh Garg1,2
1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute

Abstract
Object-centric learning aims to represent visual data with a set of object entities
(a.k.a. slots), providing structured representations that enable systematic generalization. Leveraging advanced architectures like Transformers, recent approaches have
made significant progress in unsupervised object discovery. In addition, slot-based
representations hold great potential for generative modeling, such as controllable
image generation and object manipulation in image editing. However, current
slot-based methods often produce blurry images and distorted objects, exhibiting
poor generative modeling capabilities. In this paper, we focus on improving slot-toimage decoding, a crucial aspect for high-quality visual generation. We introduce
SlotDiffusion – an object-centric Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) designed for both
image and video data. Thanks to the powerful modeling capacity of LDMs, SlotDiffusion surpasses previous slot models in unsupervised object segmentation and
visual generation across six datasets. Furthermore, our learned object features can
be utilized by existing object-centric dynamics models, improving video prediction
quality and downstream temporal reasoning tasks. Finally, we demonstrate the
scalability of SlotDiffusion to unconstrained real-world datasets such as PASCAL
VOC and COCO, when integrated with self-supervised pre-trained image encoders.
Additional results and details are available at our website.

1

Introduction

Humans perceive the world by identifying discrete concepts such as objects and events [88], which
serve as intermediate representations to support high-level reasoning and systematic generalization of
intelligence [24]. In contrast, modern deep learning models typically represent visual data with patchbased features [14, 28], disregarding the compositional structure of scenes. Inspired by the human
perception system, object-centric learning aims to discover the modular and causal structure of visual
inputs. This approach thus holds the potential to improve the generalizability and interpretability of
AI algorithms [50, 80]. For example, explicitly decomposing scenes into conceptual entities facilitates
visual reasoning [8, 12, 13] and causal inference [80, 109]. Also, capturing the compositional structure
of the world proves beneficial for both image generation [83, 90] and video prediction [100, 103].
However, unsupervised object-centric learning from raw perceptual input is challenging, as it requires
capturing the appearance, position, and motion of each object. Earlier attempts at this problem usually
bake in strong scene or object priors in their frameworks [19, 40, 55, 56], limiting their applicability
to synthetic datasets [5, 42]. Later works extend the Scaled Dot-Product Attention mechanism [94]
and introduce a general Slot Attention operation [60], which eliminates domain-specific priors. With
a simple input reconstruction objective, these models learn to segment objects from raw images [60]
and videos [46]. To date, state-of-the-art unsupervised slot models [83, 84] have shown promising
scene decomposition results on naturalistic data under specialized scenarios such as traffic videos.
Despite tremendous progress in object segmentation, the generative capability of slot-based methods
has been underexplored. For example, while the state-of-the-art object-centric model STEVE [84]
* Equal contribution
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

