Towards Better Dynamic Graph Learning:
New Architecture and Unified Library

Le Yu, Leilei Sun∗, Bowen Du, Weifeng Lv
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Beihang University
{yule,leileisun,dubowen,lwf}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose DyGFormer, a new Transformer-based architecture for dynamic graph
learning. DyGFormer is conceptually simple and only needs to learn from nodes’
historical first-hop interactions by: (i) a neighbor co-occurrence encoding scheme
that explores the correlations of the source node and destination node based on
their historical sequences; (ii) a patching technique that divides each sequence
into multiple patches and feeds them to Transformer, allowing the model to effectively and efficiently benefit from longer histories. We also introduce DyGLib,
a unified library with standard training pipelines, extensible coding interfaces,
and comprehensive evaluating protocols to promote reproducible, scalable, and
credible dynamic graph learning research. By performing exhaustive experiments
on thirteen datasets for dynamic link prediction and dynamic node classification
tasks, we find that DyGFormer achieves state-of-the-art performance on most of
the datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness in capturing nodes’ correlations and
long-term temporal dependencies. Moreover, some results of baselines are inconsistent with previous reports, which may be caused by their diverse but less rigorous
implementations, showing the importance of DyGLib. All the used resources are
publicly available at https://github.com/yule-BUAA/DyGLib.

1

Introduction

Dynamic graphs denote entities as nodes and represent their interactions as links with timestamps [26],
which can model many real-world scenarios such as social networks [28, 50, 2], user-item interaction
systems [31, 15, 71, 72, 70], traffic networks [67, 63, 19, 4, 69], and physical systems [24, 47, 43].
In recent years, representation learning on dynamic graphs has become a trending research topic
[26, 49, 65]. There are two main categories of existing methods: discrete-time [39, 17, 48, 11, 66]
and continuous-time [64, 45, 60, 51, 12]. In this paper, we focus on the latter approaches because
they are more flexible and effective than the formers and are being increasingly investigated.
Despite the rapid development of dynamic graph learning methods, they still suffer from two limitations. Firstly, most of them independently compute the temporal representations of nodes in an
interaction without exploiting nodes’ correlations, which are often indicative of future interactions.
Moreover, existing methods learn at the interaction level and thus only work for nodes with fewer
interactions. When nodes have longer histories, they require sampling strategies to truncate the interactions for feasible calculations of the computationally expensive modules like graph convolutions
[55, 64, 45, 36, 9, 59], temporal random walks [60, 25] and sequential models [57, 12]. Though
some approaches use memory networks [61, 53] to sequentially process interactions with affordable
computational costs [28, 55, 45, 36, 59, 35], they are faced with the vanishing/exploding gradients
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

