Generalized Logit Adjustment: Calibrating Fine-tuned
Models by Removing Label Bias in Foundation Models

Beier Zhu1
1

Kaihua Tang1

Qianru Sun2

Hanwang Zhang1

2
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore Management University
beier002@e.ntu.edu.sg, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Foundation models like CLIP allow zero-shot transfer on various tasks without
additional training data. Yet, the zero-shot performance is less competitive than a
fully supervised one. Thus, to enhance the performance, fine-tuning and ensembling
are also commonly adopted to better fit the downstream tasks. However, we argue
that such prior work has overlooked the inherent biases in foundation models.
Due to the highly imbalanced Web-scale training set, these foundation models are
inevitably skewed toward frequent semantics, and thus the subsequent fine-tuning
or ensembling is still biased. In this study, we systematically examine the biases in
foundation models and demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed Generalized Logit
Adjustment (GLA) method. Note that bias estimation in foundation models is
challenging, as most pre-train data cannot be explicitly accessed like in traditional
long-tailed classification tasks. To this end, GLA has an optimization-based bias
estimation approach for debiasing foundation models. As our work resolves a
fundamental flaw in the pre-training, the proposed GLA demonstrates significant
improvements across a diverse range of tasks: it achieves 1.5 pp accuracy gains
on ImageNet, a large average improvement (1.4-4.6 pp) on 11 few-shot datasets,
2.4 pp gains on long-tailed classification. Codes are in https://github.com/
BeierZhu/GLA.

1

Introduction

Thanks to the Web-scale data and self-supervised strategies, foundation models like CLIP [40] empower zero-shot transfer to a wide variety of domains [7, 1, 52]. However, the zero-shot performance
is still weak on several domain-specific tasks such as differentiating models of cars, species of flowers,
and variants of aircraft [40, 7]. Therefore, it is a common practice to improve the downstream
performance via supervised fine-tuning on labeled data, e.g., linear probing, prompt tuning [54, 55],
and end-to-end fine-tuning.
However, fine-tuned models are easily biased: they are adept in exploiting spurious correlations
that only hold on the downstream distribution [40, 39, 48, 55]. To improve the robustness, several
studies [48, 55, 56] propose to combine fine-tuned models with zero-shot models. For example,
WiSE-FT [48] ensembles the fine-tuned and zero-shot models in weight space and ProGrad [55] uses
zero-shot predictions to regularize the fine-tuning gradient. The underlying assumption lies in that
the zero-shot models are robust to distribution shifts [40], and their predictions are complementary to
those of fine-tuned models [48].
Despite these methods exhibiting performance gains on both in-distribution and out-of-distribution
evaluations, they all overlook the inherent bias originating from the foundation models. Specifically,
the Web-scale data for pre-training foundation models exhibit a highly skewed distribution due to
Zipf’s law of nature [42]. The resulting foundation models develop a biased decision boundary that
leads to a poor zero-shot performance on rare classes. As evidenced in Figure 1(a) and (b), the purple
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

