Graph-Structured Gaussian Processes for
Transferable Graph Learning

Jun Wu1 , Elizabeth Ainsworth1,2 , Andrew Leakey1 , Haixun Wang3 , Jingrui He1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
USDA ARS Global Change and Photosynthesis Research Unit
3
Instacart
{junwu3,ainswort,leakey,jingrui}@illinois.edu, {haixun}@gmail.com

Abstract
Transferable graph learning involves knowledge transferability from a source graph
to a relevant target graph. The major challenge of transferable graph learning
is the distribution shift between source and target graphs induced by individual
node attributes and complex graph structures. To solve this problem, in this paper,
we propose a generic graph-structured Gaussian process framework (GraphGP)
for adaptively transferring knowledge across graphs with either homophily or
heterophily assumptions. Specifically, GraphGP is derived from a novel graph
structure-aware neural network in the limit on the layer width. The generalization
analysis of GraphGP explicitly investigates the connection between knowledge
transferability and graph domain similarity. Extensive experiments on several
transferable graph learning benchmarks demonstrate the efficacy of GraphGP over
state-of-the-art Gaussian process baselines.

1

Introduction

Target

Source

Transfer learning [40, 54] aims at studying the
transfer of knowledge or information from a source
domain to a relevant target domain under distribution shifts. The knowledge transferability across
domains has been investigated from various aspects.
For example, [3, 15, 67] proposed to empirically
estimate the data-level domain discrepancy for measuring the transferability across graphs. [8, 49]
(a)
(b)
(c)
adopted adaptive Gaussian processes with trans- Figure 1: Illustration of transferable graph learnfer kernels, which formulated the task relatedness ing. (a) Samples are independently drawn. (b)
as a hyper-parameter for tuning. [22, 36, 63] in- Samples are connected in each domain, and
stead evaluated the transferability of a pre-trained both domains follow the homophily assumption.
source model in the target domain. However, most (c) Source and target domains follow different
existing works followed the IID assumption that graph structure assumptions.
samples are independent and identically distributed
in each domain. This might limit their capacities in understanding the knowledge transferability
across domains with non-IID data, e.g., cross-domain recommendation [55], cross-network role
identification [69], etc.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of transferable graph learning over non-IID graph data. The
challenge of transferable graph learning induced by the graph structure information can be explained
in Figure 1. It can be seen that Figure 1(a) provides source and target samples associated with
input features and output class labels (indicated by node colors). Suppose that source and target
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

