Two Sides of One Coin: the Limits of Untuned SGD
and the Power of Adaptive Methods

Junchi Yang∗
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
junchi.yang@inf.ethz.ch

Xiang Li∗
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
xiang.li@inf.ethz.ch

Ilyas Fatkhullin
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ilyas.fatkhullin@ai.ethz.ch

Niao He
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
The classical analysis of Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) with polynomially
√
decaying stepsize ηt = η/ t relies on well-tuned η depending on problem parameters such as Lipschitz smoothness constant, which is often unknown in practice.
In this work, we prove that SGD with arbitrary η > 0, referred to as untuned SGD,
e −1/4 ) in terms of gradient norm
still attains an order-optimal convergence rate O(T
for minimizing smooth objectives. Unfortunately, it comes at the expense of a
catastrophic exponential dependence on the smoothness constant, which we show
is unavoidable for this scheme even in the noiseless setting. We then examine
three families of adaptive methods — Normalized SGD (NSGD), AMSGrad, and
AdaGrad — unveiling their power in preventing such exponential dependency in
the absence of information about the smoothness parameter and boundedness of
stochastic gradients. Our results provide theoretical justification for the advantage
of adaptive methods over untuned SGD in alleviating the issue with large gradients.

1

Introduction

In this work, we study the stochastic optimization problem of the form:
min f (x) = Eξ∼P [F (x; ξ)] ,

x∈Rd

where P is an unknown probability distribution, and f : Rd → R is an ℓ-Lipschitz smooth function
and can be non-convex. In the context of machine learning, ξ typically represent an individual training
sample drawn from the data distribution P , and x denotes the weights of the model.
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), originating from the seminal work [58], performs the following
update iteratively:
xt+1 = xt − ηt ∇F (xt ; ξt ),

where ηt > 0 presents a positive stepsize, and ∇F (xt ; ξt ) is an unbiased stochastic gradient. SGD
has shown remarkable empirical success in many modern machine learning applications, e.g., [7, 62].
Its efficiency is usually attributed to its cheap per iteration cost and the ability to operate in an
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
∗

Equal contribution.

