A Partially Supervised Reinforcement Learning
Framework for Visual Active Search
Anindya Sarkar Nathan Jacobs Yevgeniy Vorobeychik
{anindya, jacobsn, yvorobeychik}@wustl.edu,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis

Abstract
Visual active search (VAS) has been proposed as a modeling framework in which
visual cues are used to guide exploration, with the goal of identifying regions of
interest in a large geospatial area. Its potential applications include identifying hot
spots of rare wildlife poaching activity, search-and-rescue scenarios, identifying
illegal trafficking of weapons, drugs, or people, and many others. State of the art
approaches to VAS include applications of deep reinforcement learning (DRL),
which yield end-to-end search policies, and traditional active search, which combines predictions with custom algorithmic approaches. While the DRL framework
has been shown to greatly outperform traditional active search in such domains, its
end-to-end nature does not make full use of supervised information attained either
during training, or during actual search, a significant limitation if search tasks differ
significantly from those in the training distribution. We propose an approach that
combines the strength of both DRL and conventional active search by decomposing
the search policy into a prediction module, which produces a geospatial distribution
of regions of interest based on task embedding and search history, and a search
module, which takes the predictions and search history as input and outputs the
search distribution. We develop a novel meta-learning approach for jointly learning
the resulting combined policy that can make effective use of supervised information
obtained both at training and decision time. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed representation and meta-learning frameworks significantly
outperform state of the art in visual active search on several problem domains.

1

Introduction

Consider a scenario where a child is abducted and law enforcement needs to scan across hundreds of
potential regions from a helicopter for a particular vehicle. An important strategy in such a search and
rescue portfolio is to obtain aerial imagery using drones that helps detect a target object of interest
(e.g., the abductor’s car) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The quality of the resulting photographs, however, is generally
somewhat poor, making the detection problem extremely difficult. Moreover, security officers can
only inspect relatively few small regions to confirm search and rescue activity, doing so sequentially.
We can distill some key generalizable structure from this scenario: given a broad area image (often
with a relatively low resolution), sequentially query small areas within it (e.g., by sending security
officers to the associated regions, on the ground) to identify as many target objects as possible. The
number of queries we can make is typically limited, for example, by budget or resource constraints.
Moreover, query results (e.g., detected search and rescue activity in a particular region) are highly
informative about the locations of target objects in other regions, for example, due to spatial
correlation. We refer to this general modeling framework as visual active search (VAS). Numerous
other scenarios share this broad structure, such as identification of drug or human trafficking sites,
anti-poaching enforcement activities, identifying landmarks, and many others. Sarkar et al. [6]
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

