Q-DM: An Efficient Low-bit Quantized Diffusion
Model
Yanjing Li1†‡ , Sheng Xu1† , Xianbin Cao1∗ , Xiao Sun2∗ , Baochang Zhang1,3, 4
1
Beihang University
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory
4
Nanchang Institute of Technology
{yanjingli, shengxu}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Denoising diffusion generative models are capable of generating high-quality data,
but suffers from the computation-costly generation process, due to a iterative noise
estimation using full-precision networks. As an intuitive solution, quantization
can significantly reduce the computational and memory consumption by lowbit parameters and operations. However, low-bit noise estimation networks in
diffusion models (DMs) remain unexplored yet and perform much worse than the
full-precision counterparts as observed in our experimental studies. In this paper,
we first identify that the bottlenecks of low-bit quantized DMs come from a large
distribution oscillation on activations and accumulated quantization error caused
by the multi-step denoising process. To address these issues, we first develop a
Timestep-aware Quantization (TaQ) method and a Noise-estimating Mimicking
(NeM) scheme for low-bit quantized DMs (Q-DM) to effectively eliminate such
oscillation and accumulated error respectively, leading to well-performed low-bit
DMs. In this way, we propose an efficient Q-DM to calculate low-bit DMs by
considering both training and inference process in the same framework. We evaluate
our methods on popular DDPM and DDIM models. Extensive experimental results
show that our method achieves a much better performance than the prior arts. For
example, the 4-bit Q-DM theoretically accelerates the 1000-step DDPM by 7.8×
and achieves a FID score of 5.17, on the unconditional CIFAR-10 dataset.

1

Introduction

Denoising diffusion models, also known as score-based generative models [10, 33, 35], have recently
shown remarkable success in various generative tasks such as images [10, 35, 22], audio [21],
video [31], and graphs [23]. These models have also demonstrated flexibility in downstream tasks,
making them attractive for tasks such as super-resolution [26, 7] and image-to-image translation [29].
Compared to Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8], historically considered state-of-theart, diffusion models have proven to be superior in terms of quality and diversity in most of these
tasks and applications. The process of diffusion models involves gradually transforming real data
into Gaussian noise, which is then reversed via a denoising process to generate real data [10, 40].
However, such denoising process is time-consuming and involves iterating a neural network for
noise estimation over thousands of timesteps, despite producing a significant amount of images.
Therefore, researchers are actively working on accelerating this generation process to reduce its long
iterative process and high inference cost for sample generation. To achieve this, one pipeline is to
† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.
‡ This work was done during her internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

