DeWave: Discrete EEG Waves Encoding for Brain
Dynamics to Text Translation
Yiqun Duan1⇤, Jinzhao Zhou1 , Zhen Wang2 , Yu-Kai Wang1 , Chin-Teng Lin1†
1
GrapheneX-UTS HAI Centre, Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute,
Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology
University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW 2007
2
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Camperdown NSW 2050
{yiqun.duan, jinzhao.zhou}@student.uts.edu.au,zwan4121@uni.sydney.edu.au
yukai.wang@uts.edu.au, chin-teng.Lin@uts.edu.au

Abstract
The translation of brain dynamics into natural language is pivotal for braincomputer interfaces (BCIs). With the swift advancement of large language models,
such as ChatGPT, the need to bridge the gap between the brain and languages
becomes increasingly pressing. Current methods, however, require eye-tracking
fixations or event markers to segment brain dynamics into word-level features,
which can restrict the practical application of these systems. To tackle these issues, we introduce a novel framework, DeWave, that integrates discrete encoding
sequences into open-vocabulary EEG-to-text translation tasks. DeWave uses a
quantized variational encoder to derive discrete codex encoding and align it with
pre-trained language models. This discrete codex representation brings forth two
advantages: 1) it realizes translation on raw waves without marker by introducing
text-EEG contrastive alignment training, and 2) it alleviates the interference caused
by individual differences in EEG waves through an invariant discrete codex with
or without markers. Our model surpasses the previous baseline (40.1 and 31.7) by
3.06% and 6.34%, respectively, achieving 41.35 BLEU-1 and 33.71 Rouge-F on
the ZuCo Dataset. This work is the first to facilitate the translation of entire EEG
signal periods without word-level order markers (e.g., eye fixations), scoring 20.5
BLEU-1 and 29.5 Rouge-1 on the ZuCo Dataset.
Ground
Truth

Bob attended the University of Texas at Austin where he graduated, Phi Beta
Kappa with a Bachelor’s degree in Latin American Studies in 1973, taking
only two and a half years to complete his work, and obtaining generally excellent grades.

Predict

was the University of California at Austin in where he studied in Beta Kappa
in a degree of degree in history American Studies in 1975. and a one classes a
half years to complete the degree. and was a excellent grades.

Figure 1: Overall illustration of translating EEG waves into text 2 through quantised encoding.

1

Introduction

Decoding brain states into comprehensible representations has long been a focal point of research [20,
38, 8, 54]. Electroencephalogram (EEG) signals are particularly favored by researchers due to
their non-invasive nature and ease of recording [31, 46]. Traditional EEG decoding techniques
⇤

2

is the first author, † is the corresponding author
This visualization still keeps teacher-forcing evaluation for a fair comparison with previous methods.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

