Grounding Neural Inference with
Satisfiability Modulo Theories
Zifan Wang⇤†
Center for AI Safety
zifan@safe.ai

Saranya Vijayakumar⇤
Carnegie Mellon University
saranyav@andrew.cmu.edu

Kaiji Lu†
Pinterest Inc.
Caleblu95@gmail.com

Vijay Ganesh
Somesh Jha
Matt Fredriskon‡
Georgia Institute of Technology University of Wisconsin-Madison Carnegie Mellon University
vganesh@gatech.edu
jha@cs.wisc.edu
mfredrik@cmu.edu

Abstract
Recent techniques that integrate solver layers into Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
have shown promise in bridging a long-standing gap between inductive learning
and symbolic reasoning techniques. In this paper we present a set of techniques
for integrating Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT) solvers into the forward
and backward passes of a deep network layer, called SMTLayer. Using this
approach, one can encode rich domain knowledge into the network in the form of
mathematical formulas. In the forward pass, the solver uses symbols produced by
prior layers, along with these formulas, to construct inferences; in the backward
pass, the solver informs updates to the network, driving it towards representations
that are compatible with the solver’s theory. Notably, the solver need not be
differentiable. We implement SMTLayer as a Pytorch module, and our empirical
results show that it leads to models that 1) require fewer training samples than
conventional models, 2) that have consistent performance against certain types of
covariate shift, and 3) that ultimately learn representations that are consistent with
symbolic knowledge, and thus naturally interpretable. Our code is available at
https://github.com/cmu-transparency/smt-layer

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently made significant strides, achieving surprising levels of
performance on tasks like question-answering [40], text summarization [27], and code generation [4,
21]. However, the ability of models that perform well on these benchmarks to consistently demonstrate
sound logical reasoning, even on tasks that may appear to be more simple and self-contained, remains
in question [6, 31, 39]. For example, a prediction market on whether GPT-4 will be able to consistently
solve “easy” Sudoku puzzles from the LA Times has remained open for several months at the time of
this writing, despite the prompt-tuning efforts of traders on the market [19].
One way to address this issue is to encode logical constraints that are essential for certain inference
tasks symbolically, making them available to the model either during training or inference. A
promising approach to this type of “neuro-symbolic” learning is to integrate solver layers into the
model [35, 34, 13, 18], both during training and inference. During training, the model must learn a
representation of the data that is compatible with the symbolic knowledge, and during inference this
⇤

Equal contribution.
Work done as a PhD student in Carnegie Mellon University.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

