Online (Multinomial) Logistic Bandit:
Improved Regret and Constant Computation Cost

Yu-Jie Zhang1 Masashi Sugiyama2,1
1
The University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan
2
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
This paper investigates the logistic bandit problem, a variant of the generalized
linear bandit model that utilizes a logistic model to depict the feedback from an
action. While most existing research focuses on the binary logistic bandit problem,
the multinomial case, which considers more than two possible feedback values,
offers increased practical relevance and adaptability for use in complex decisionmaking problems such as reinforcement learning. In this paper, we provide an
algorithm that enjoys both statistical and computational efficiency for the logistic
bandit problem. In the binary case, our method improves the state-of-the-art binary
logistic bandit method by reducing the per-round computation cost from O(log T )
to O(1) with respect to the time horizon T , while still preserving the minimax
optimal guarantee up to logarithmic factors. In the multinomial
case, with K + 1
√
potential feedback values, our algorithm achieves an e
O(K T ) regret bound√with
O(1) computational cost per round. The result not only improves the e
O(K κT )
bound for the best-known tractable algorithm—where the large constant κ increases
exponentially with the diameter of the parameter domain—but also reduces the
O(T ) computational complexity demanded by the previous method.

1

Introduction

The stochastic linear bandit (SLB) [1, 2, 3] problem is a natural generalization of the classic stochastic
multi-armed bandit problem [4] by incorporating side information into the decision-making process.
In the SLB problem, a linear model is used to characterize the relationship between the reward
rt ∈ R and the learner’s action xt ∈ X ⊆ Rd , whereas such an assumption is not always satisfied
in real-world applications. Consequently, various models have been developed to account for the
non-linear reward, including the generalized linear bandit (GLB) model [5] and kernelized bandit
model [6]. The logistic bandit is a specific kind of GLB model by connecting the learner’s ddimensional action and the reward with a logistic model. Most existing work focuses on the binary
case [7, 8, 9, 10]. The reward rt ∈ {0, 1} exhibits a binary value and the probability is modeled
by Pr[rt = 1 | xt ] = σ(w∗⊤ xt ), where σ(z) = 1/(1 + exp(−z)) is a non-linear link function and
w∗ ∈ W ⊆ Rd is an unknown parameter. Compared to the SLB model, the logistic bandit model
provides a more precise representation for a wide range of real-world application problems, where
feedback exhibits discrete behavior. Moreover, from a theoretical perspective, it also serves as a basic
setting for understanding the impact of non-linearity of the reward on the decision-making process.
In this paper, we investigate a more general multinomial logistic bandit (MLogB) problem [11], in
which the learner’s action xt results in feedback yt that could have K + 1 possible outcome values.
The probability of each outcome is characterized with a logistic model (the formal definition is
provided in Section 2.1). The MLogB model is of more practical interest compared to the binary
case. For example, in the real-world application such as online advertising, there could be multiple
possible feedback from customers, including “buy now”, “add to cart”, “view related item”, and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

