Percentile Criterion Optimization in Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Elita A. Lobo
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts Amherst
elobo@umass.edu

Cyrus Cousins
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts Amherst
cbcousins@umass.edu

Yair Zick
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts Amherst
yzick@umass.edu

Marek Petrik
Department of Computer Science
University of New Hampshire
mpetrik@cs.unh.edu

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, robust policies for high-stakes decision-making problems with limited data are usually computed by optimizing the percentile criterion.
The percentile criterion is approximately solved by constructing an ambiguity set
that contains the true model with high probability and optimizing the policy for the
worst model in the set. Since the percentile criterion is non-convex, constructing
ambiguity sets is often challenging. Existing work uses Bayesian credible regions
as ambiguity sets, but they are often unnecessarily large and result in learning overly
conservative policies. To overcome these shortcomings, we propose a novel Valueat-Risk based dynamic programming algorithm to optimize the percentile criterion
without explicitly constructing any ambiguity sets. Our theoretical and empirical
results show that our algorithm implicitly constructs much smaller ambiguity sets
and learns less conservative robust policies.

1

Introduction

Batch Reinforcement Learning (Batch RL) [26] is popularly used for solving sequential decisionmaking problems using limited data. These algorithms are crucial in high-stakes domains where
exploration is either infeasible or expensive, and policies must be learned from limited data. In
model-based Batch RL algorithms, transition probabilities are learned from the data as well. Due to
insufficient data, these transition probabilities are often imprecise. Errors in transition probabilities
can accumulate, resulting in low-performing policies that fail when deployed.
To account for the uncertainty in transition probabilities, prior work uses Bayesian models [10, 13,
27, 40, 45, 47] to model uncertainty and optimize the policy to maximize the returns corresponding
to the worst α-percentile transition probability model. These policies guarantee that the true expected
returns will be at least as large as the optimal returns with high confidence. This technique is
commonly referred to as the percentile-criterion optimization. Unfortunately, the percentile criterion
is NP-hard to optimize. Thus, current work uses Robust Markov Decision Processes (RMDPs)
to optimize a lower bound on the percentile criterion. An RMDP takes as input an ambiguity set
(uncertainty set) that contains the true transition probability model with high confidence and finds a
policy that maximizes the returns of the worst model in the ambiguity set.
Since the percentile criterion is non-convex, constructing ambiguity sets itself is a challenging
problem. Existing work uses Bayesian credible regions (BCR) [40] as ambiguity sets. However, these
ambiguity sets are often unnecessarily large [15, 40] and result in learning conservative robust policies.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

