Data-Driven Network Neuroscience: On Data
Collection and Benchmark
Jiaxing Xu1∗, Yunhan Yang2∗, David Tse Jung Huang2∗, Sophi Shilpa Gururajapathy1∗,
Yiping Ke1 , Miao Qiao2 , Alan Wang3,4,5 , Haribalan Kumar6,7 , Josh McGeown7†, Eryn Kwon3,7†
partially for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative‡
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
School of Computer Science, The University of Auckland, New Zealand
3
Auckland Bioengineering Institute, The University of Auckland, New Zealand
4
Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, The University of Auckland, New Zealand
5
Centre for Brain Research, The University of Auckland, New Zealand
6
General Electric Healthcare Magnetic Resonance, Australia & New Zealand
7
Mātai Medical Research Institute, Tairāwhiti-Gisborne, New Zealand
{jiaxing003, sophi.sg, ypke}@ntu.edu.sg; {h.kumar, j.mcgeown}@matai.org.nz
{yunhan.yang,dtj.huang, miao.qiao, alan.wang, e.kwon}@auckland.ac.nz

Abstract
This paper presents a comprehensive and quality collection of functional human
brain network data for potential research in the intersection of neuroscience, machine learning, and graph analytics. Anatomical and functional MRI images have
been used to understand the functional connectivity of the human brain and are
particularly important in identifying underlying neurodegenerative conditions such
as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and Autism. Recently, the study of the brain in the
form of brain networks using machine learning and graph analytics has become
increasingly popular, especially to predict the early onset of these conditions. A
brain network, represented as a graph, retains rich structural and positional information that traditional examination methods are unable to capture. However, the lack
of publicly accessible brain network data prevents researchers from data-driven
explorations. One of the main difficulties lies in the complicated domain-specific
preprocessing steps and the exhaustive computation required to convert the data
from MRI images into brain networks. We bridge this gap by collecting a large
amount of MRI images from public databases and a private source, working with
domain experts to make sensible design choices, and preprocessing the MRI images to produce a collection of brain network datasets. The datasets originate
from 6 different sources, cover 4 brain conditions, and consist of a total of 2,702
subjects. We test our graph datasets on 12 machine learning models to provide
baselines and validate the data quality on a recent graph analysis model. To
lower the barrier to entry and promote the research in this interdisciplinary field,
we release our brain network data and complete preprocessing details including
codes at https://doi.org/10.17608/k6.auckland.21397377 and https:
//github.com/brainnetuoa/data_driven_network_neuroscience.
∗

Equal contribution
Contribution was made exclusively to the data collection and community engagement of the Mātai dataset.
‡
Part of the data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the
design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in the analysis or writing
of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at: http://adni.loni.usc.edu/
wp-content/uploads/how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List.pdf
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

