Joint Learning of Label and Environment Causal
Independence for Graph Out-of-Distribution
Generalization
Shurui Gui, Meng Liu, Xiner Li, Youzhi Luo, Shuiwang Ji
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
{shurui.gui,mengliu,lxe,yzluo,sji}@tamu.edu

Abstract
We tackle the problem of graph out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization. Existing
graph OOD algorithms either rely on restricted assumptions or fail to exploit environment information in training data. In this work, we propose to simultaneously
incorporate label and environment causal independence (LECI) to fully make use
of label and environment information, thereby addressing the challenges faced by
prior methods on identifying causal and invariant subgraphs. We further develop
an adversarial training strategy to jointly optimize these two properties for causal
subgraph discovery with theoretical guarantees. Extensive experiments and analysis show that LECI significantly outperforms prior methods on both synthetic and
real-world datasets, establishing LECI as a practical and effective solution for graph
OOD generalization. Our code is available at https://github.com/divelab/LECI.

1

Introduction

Graph learning methods have been increasingly used for many diverse tasks, such as drug discovery [1], social network analysis [2], and physics simulation [3]. One of the major challenges in graph
learning is out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization, where the training and test data are typically
from different distributions, resulting in significant performance degradation when deploying models
to new environments. Despite several recent efforts [4–7] have been made to tackle the OOD problem
on graph tasks, their performances are often not satisfactory due to the complicated distribution shifts
on graph topology and the violations of their assumptions or premises in reality. In addition, while
environment-based methods have shown success in traditional OOD fields [8, 9], they cannot perform
favorably on graphs [10]. Several existing graph environment-centered methods [11–13] aim to infer
environment labels for graph tasks, however, most methods utilize the pre-collected environment
labels in a manner similar to traditional environment-based techniques [9, 14, 15], rather than exploiting them in a unique and specific way tailored for graphs. Therefore, the potential exploitation of
environment information in graph OOD tasks remains limited (Sec. 2.2). Although annotating or
extracting environment labels requires additional cost, it has been proved that generalization without
extra information is theoretically impossible [16] (Appx. B.2). This is analogous to the impossibility
of inferring or approximating causal effects without counterfactual/intervened distributions [17, 18].
In this paper, we propose a novel learning strategy to incorporate label and environment causal
independence (LECI) for tackling the graph OOD problem. Enforcing such independence properties
can help exploit environment information and alleviate the challenging issue of graph topology
shifts. Specifically, our contributions are summarized below. (1) We identify the current causal
subgraph discovery challenges and propose to solve them by introducing label and environment
causal independence. We further present a practical solution, an adversarial learning strategy, to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

