Wasserstein distributional robustness of neural
networks
Xingjian Bai
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
xingjian.bai@sjc.ox.ac.uk

Guangyi He
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford, UK
guangyihe2002@outlook.com

Yifan Jiang
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford, UK
yifan.jiang@maths.ox.ac.uk

Jan Obłój˚
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford, UK
jan.obloj@maths.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep neural networks are known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks (AA). For
an image recognition task, this means that a small perturbation of the original can
result in the image being misclassified. Design of such attacks as well as methods
of adversarial training against them are subject of intense research. We re-cast
the problem using techniques of Wasserstein distributionally robust optimization
(DRO) and obtain novel contributions leveraging recent insights from DRO sensitivity analysis. We consider a set of distributional threat models. Unlike the traditional
pointwise attacks, which assume a uniform bound on perturbation of each input
data point, distributional threat models allow attackers to perturb inputs in a nonuniform way. We link these more general attacks with questions of out-of-sample
performance and Knightian uncertainty. To evaluate the distributional robustness of
neural networks, we propose a first-order AA algorithm and its multistep version.
Our attack algorithms include Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) and Projected
Gradient Descent (PGD) as special cases. Furthermore, we provide a new asymptotic estimate of the adversarial accuracy against distributional threat models. The
bound is fast to compute and first-order accurate, offering new insights even for the
pointwise AA. It also naturally yields out-of-sample performance guarantees. We
conduct numerical experiments on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, ImageNet datasets using DNNs on RobustBench to illustrate our theoretical results. Our code is available
at https://github.com/JanObloj/W-DRO-Adversarial-Methods.

1

Introduction

Model uncertainty is a ubiquitous phenomenon across different fields of science. In decision theory
and economics, it is often referred to as the Knightian uncertainty (Knight, 1921), or the unknown
unknowns, to distinguish it from the risk which stems from the randomness embedded by design
in the scientific process, see Hansen and Marinacci (2016) for an overview. Transcribing to the
context of data science, risk refers to the randomness embedded in a training by design, e.g., through
random initialization, drop-outs etc., and uncertainty encompasses the extent to which the dataset
is an adequate description of reality. Robustness, the ability to perform well under uncertainty,
thus relates to several themes in ML including adversarial attacks, out-of-sample performance and
˚

Corresponding author. www.maths.ox.ac.uk/people/jan.obloj

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

