What Makes Data Suitable for a Locally Connected
Neural Network? A Necessary and Sufficient
Condition Based on Quantum Entanglement

Yotam Alexander* , Nimrod De La Vega* , Noam Razin, Nadav Cohen
Tel Aviv University
{yotama,nimrodd,noamrazin}@mail.tau.ac.il, cohennadav@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
The question of what makes a data distribution suitable for deep learning is a fundamental open problem. Focusing on locally connected neural networks (a prevalent
family of architectures that includes convolutional and recurrent neural networks as
well as local self-attention models), we address this problem by adopting theoretical
tools from quantum physics. Our main theoretical result states that a certain locally
connected neural network is capable of accurate prediction over a data distribution
if and only if the data distribution admits low quantum entanglement under certain
canonical partitions of features. As a practical application of this result, we derive a
preprocessing method for enhancing the suitability of a data distribution to locally
connected neural networks. Experiments with widespread models over various
datasets demonstrate our findings. We hope that our use of quantum entanglement
will encourage further adoption of tools from physics for formally reasoning about
the relation between deep learning and real-world data.1

1

Introduction

Deep learning is delivering unprecedented performance when applied to data modalities involving
images, text and audio. On the other hand, it is known both theoretically and empirically [53, 1] that
there exist data distributions over which deep learning utterly fails. The question of what makes a
data distribution suitable for deep learning is a fundamental open problem in the field.
A prevalent family of deep learning architectures is that of locally connected neural networks. It
includes, among others: (i) convolutional neural networks, which dominate the area of computer
vision; (ii) recurrent neural networks, which were the most common architecture for sequence
(e.g. text and audio) processing, and are experiencing a resurgence by virtue of S4 models [26]; and
(iii) local variants of self-attention neural networks [46]. Conventional wisdom postulates that data
distributions suitable for locally connected neural networks are those exhibiting a “local nature,”
and there have been attempts to formalize this intuition [66, 28, 15]. However, to the best of our
knowledge, there are no characterizations providing necessary and sufficient conditions for a data
distribution to be suitable to a locally connected neural network.
A seemingly distinct scientific discipline tying distributions and computational models is quantum
physics. There, distributions of interest are described by tensors, and the associated computational
models are tensor networks. While there is shortage in formal tools for assessing the suitability of
data distributions to deep learning architectures, there exists a widely accepted theory that allows for
assessing the suitability of tensors to tensor networks. The theory is based on the notion of quantum
*

Equal contribution
Due to lack of space, a significant portion of the paper is deferred to the appendices. We refer the reader
to [2] for a self-contained version of the text.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

