High-dimensional Asymptotics of
Denoising Autoencoders

Hugo Cui
Statistical Physics of Computation Lab
Department of Physics
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
hugo.cui@epfl.ch

Lenka Zdeborová
Statistical Physics of Computation Lab
Department of Physics
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

Abstract
We address the problem of denoising data from a Gaussian mixture using a twolayer non-linear autoencoder with tied weights and a skip connection. We consider
the high-dimensional limit where the number of training samples and the input dimension jointly tend to infinity while the number of hidden units remains bounded.
We provide closed-form expressions for the denoising mean-squared test error.
Building on this result, we quantitatively characterize the advantage of the considered architecture over the autoencoder without the skip connection that relates
closely to principal component analysis. We further show that our results accurately
capture the learning curves on a range of real data sets.

1

Introduction

Machine learning techniques have a long history of success in denoising tasks. The recent breakthrough of diffusion-based generation [1, 2] has further revived the interest in denoising networks,
demonstrating how they can also be leveraged, beyond denoising, for generative tasks. However, this
rapidly expanding range of applications stands in sharp contrast to the relatively scarce theoretical understanding of denoising neural networks, even for the simplest instance thereof – namely Denoising
Auto Encoders (DAEs) [3].
Theoretical studies of autoencoders have hitherto almost exclusively focused on data compression
tasks using Reconstruction Auto Encoders (RAEs), where the goal is to learn a concise latent
representation of the data. A majority of this body of work addresses linear autoencoders [4, 5, 6, 7].
The authors of [8, 9] analyze the gradient-based training of non-linear autoencoders with online
stochastic gradient descent or in population, thus implicitly assuming the availability of an infinite
number of training samples. Furthermore, two-layer RAEs were shown to learn to essentially
perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [10, 11, 12], i.e. to learn a linear model. Ref. [13]
shows that this is also true for infinite-width architectures. Learning in DAEs has been the object
of theoretical investigations only in the linear case [14], while the case of non-linear DAEs remains
theoretically largely unexplored.
Main contributions– The present work considers the problem of denoising data sampled from a
Gaussian mixture by learning a two-layer DAE with a skip connection and tied weights via empirical
risk minimization. Throughout the manuscript, we consider the high-dimensional limit where the
number of training samples n and the dimension d are large (n, d → ∞) while remaining comparable,
i.e. α ≡ n/d = Θ(1). Our main contributions are:
• Leveraging the replica method, we provide sharp, closed-form formulae for the mean
squared denoising test error (MSE) for DAEs, as a function of the sample complexity α and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

