PrimDiffusion: Volumetric Primitives Diffusion
for 3D Human Generation
Zhaoxi Chen1

Fangzhou Hong1 Haiyi Mei2 Guangcong Wang1
Lei Yang2 Ziwei Liu1,B
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Sensetime Research
{zhaoxi001, fangzhou001, guangcong.wang, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
{meihaiyi, yanglei}@sensetime.com

Abstract
We present PrimDiffusion, the first diffusion-based framework for 3D human
generation. Devising diffusion models for 3D human generation is difficult due to
the intensive computational cost of 3D representations and the articulated topology
of 3D humans. To tackle these challenges, our key insight is operating the denoising diffusion process directly on a set of volumetric primitives, which models the
human body as a number of small volumes with radiance and kinematic information. This volumetric primitives representation marries the capacity of volumetric
representations with the efficiency of primitive-based rendering. Our PrimDiffusion
framework has three appealing properties: 1) compact and expressive parameter
space for the diffusion model, 2) flexible 3D representation that incorporates human
prior, and 3) decoder-free rendering for efficient novel-view and novel-pose synthesis. Extensive experiments validate that PrimDiffusion outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in 3D human generation. Notably, compared to GAN-based methods,
our PrimDiffusion supports real-time rendering of high-quality 3D humans at a
resolution of 512 × 512 once the denoising process is done. We also demonstrate
the flexibility of our framework on training-free conditional generation such as
texture transfer and 3D inpainting.

1

Introduction

Generating 3D humans with high-resolution and 3D consistency is a central research focus in
computer vision and graphics. It has wide-ranging applications in virtual reality, telepresence, and
the film industry. These applications are becoming increasingly important as technology advances
and the demand for realistic virtual experiences grows. Consequently, a flexible and high-quality 3D
human generation system possesses not only immense scientific merit but also practical relevance.
For a high-quality and versatile 3D human generative model, we argue that there are two key factors:
1) high-capacity generative modeling, and 2) efficient 3D human representation. Recent advances
in 3D-aware generative models [5, 18, 35, 37] have made significant progress. By learning from
2D images using generative adversarial networks (GAN) [14], these methods can synthesize images
across different viewpoints in a 3D-aware manner. However, their results still leave significant
gaps w.r.t. rendering quality, resolution, and inference speed. Besides, these GAN-based methods
often require task-specific adaptations to be conditioned on a particular task, limiting their scope of
application. Meanwhile, diffusion-based models [17, 51] have recently surpassed GANs on generative
tasks with unprecedented quality, suggesting their great potential in 3D generation. Several recent
works [1, 33, 57] have made initial attempts to generate 3D rigid objects based on the diffusion model.
Nevertheless, how to integrate the denoising and diffusion processes into a generation framework of
articulated 3D humans remains an open problem.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

