SSL4EO-L:
Datasets and Foundation Models for Landsat Imagery

Adam J. Stewart1 , Nils Lehmann2 , Isaac A. Corley3 , Yi Wang2, 4 , Yi-Chia Chang1 ,
Nassim Ait Ali Braham2, 4 , Shradha Sehgal1 , Caleb Robinson5 , Arindam Banerjee1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2 Technical University of Munich,
3
University of Texas at San Antonio, 4 German Aerospace Center,
5
Microsoft AI for Good Research Lab

Abstract
The Landsat program is the longest-running Earth observation program in history,
with 50+ years of data acquisition by 8 satellites. The multispectral imagery captured by sensors onboard these satellites is critical for a wide range of scientific
fields. Despite the increasing popularity of deep learning and remote sensing,
the majority of researchers still use decision trees and random forests for Landsat image analysis due to the prevalence of small labeled datasets and lack of
foundation models. In this paper, we introduce SSL4EO-L, the first ever dataset
designed for Self-Supervised Learning for Earth Observation for the Landsat family of satellites (including 3 sensors and 2 product levels) and the largest Landsat
dataset in history (5M image patches). Additionally, we modernize and re-release
the L7 Irish and L8 Biome cloud detection datasets, and introduce the first ML
benchmark datasets for Landsats 4–5 TM and Landsat 7 ETM+ SR. Finally, we
pre-train the first foundation models for Landsat imagery using SSL4EO-L and
evaluate their performance on multiple semantic segmentation tasks. All datasets
and model weights are available via the TorchGeo1 library, making reproducibility
and experimentation easy, and enabling scientific advancements in the burgeoning
field of remote sensing for a multitude of downstream applications.

1

Introduction

On July 23rd , 1972, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) launched Landsat 1. Designed by Virginia T. Norwood, the Multispectral Scanner (MSS) onboard Landsats 1–5
provided invaluable measurements of the Earth’s surface in both the visible and infrared spectra.
Although she passed away earlier this year, her legacy as “The Mother of Landsat” lives on, as the
Landsat program has become the longest-running Earth observation program in history [1].
The Landsat satellite program stretches over 50 years and includes 9 generations of satellites, each
with its own set of sensors. Landsats 1–3 carried the Return Beam Vidicon (RBV), an RGB analog
camera [2]. However, its lower number of spectral bands and electrical issues meant it was rarely
used for research purposes. Instead, the Multispectral Scanner (MSS) onboard Landsats 1–5 was the
primary scientific instrument, with a line-scanning and rotating mirror-based camera [3]. Landsats
4–5 also included the Thematic Mapper (TM), with a greater number of spectral bands (from 4 to 7)
and finer spatial resolution (from 80 m to 30 m) [4]. Although it failed to reach orbit and eventually
crashed down to Earth, Landsat 6 would have carried the Enhanced Thematic Mapper (ETM), which
added a 15 m resolution panchromatic band. Landsat 7 carried the Enhanced Thematic Mapper Plus
1

https://github.com/microsoft/torchgeo

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

