Meta-Learning Adversarial Bandit Algorithms

Mikhail Khodak∗
Carnegie Mellon University
khodak@cmu.edu
Maria-Florina Balcan
CMU

Ilya Osadchiy∗
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
osadchiy.ilya@gmail.com
Kfir Y. Levy
Technion

Ron Meir
Technion

Keegan Harris
CMU

Zhiwei Steven Wu
CMU

Abstract
We study online meta-learning with bandit feedback, with the goal of improving
performance across multiple tasks if they are similar according to some natural
similarity measure. As the first to target the adversarial online-within-online
partial-information setting, we design meta-algorithms that combine outer learners
to simultaneously tune the initialization and other hyperparameters of an inner
learner for two important cases: multi-armed bandits (MAB) and bandit linear
optimization (BLO). For MAB, the meta-learners initialize and set hyperparameters
of the Tsallis-entropy generalization of Exp3, with the task-averaged regret
improving if the entropy of the optima-in-hindsight is small. For BLO, we learn
to initialize and tune online mirror descent (OMD) with self-concordant barrier
regularizers, showing that task-averaged regret varies directly with an action spacedependent measure they induce. Our guarantees rely on proving that unregularized
follow-the-leader combined with two levels of low-dimensional hyperparameter
tuning is enough to learn a sequence of affine functions of non-Lipschitz and
sometimes non-convex Bregman divergences bounding the regret of OMD.

1

Introduction

Learning-to-learn [51] is an important area of research that studies how to improve the performance
of a learning algorithm by meta-learning its parameters—e.g. initializations, step-sizes, and/or
representations—across many similar tasks. The goal is to encode information from previous tasks
in order to achieve better performance on future ones. Meta-learning has seen a great deal of
experimental work [24, 49], practical impact [21, 29], and theoretical effort [11, 18, 22, 45, 20].
One important setting is online-within-online meta-learning [19, 31], where the learner performs a
sequence of tasks, each of which has a sequence of rounds. Past work has studied the full-information
setting, where the loss for every arm is revealed after each round. This assumption is not realistic in
many applications, e.g. recommender systems and experimental design, where often partial or bandit
feedback—only the loss of the action taken—is revealed. Such feedback can be stochastic, e.g. the
losses are i.i.d. from some distribution, or adversarial, i.e. chosen by an adversary. We establish the
first formal guarantees for online-within-online meta-learning with adversarial bandit feedback.
As with past full-information meta-learning results, our goal when faced with a sequence of bandit
tasks will be to achieve low regret on average across them. Specifically, our task-averaged regret
should (a) be no worse than that of algorithms for the single-task setting, e.g. if the tasks are not very
similar, and should (b) be much better on tasks that are closely related, e.g. if the same small set of
arms do well on all of them. We show that a natural way to achieve both is to initialize and tune online
mirror descent (OMD), an algorithm associted with a strictly convex regularizer whose hyperparam∗

Denotes equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

