Learning Reliable Logical Rules with SATNet

1

Zhaoyu Li1,2 , Jinpei Guo4 , Yuhe Jiang1 , Xujie Si1,2,3
University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 Mila, 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong Univeristy
{zhaoyu, six}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Bridging logical reasoning and deep learning is crucial for advanced AI systems.
In this work, we present a new framework that addresses this goal by generating
interpretable and verifiable logical rules through differentiable learning, without
relying on pre-specified logical structures. Our approach builds upon SATNet, a
differentiable MaxSAT solver that learns the underlying rules from input-output
examples. Despite its efficacy, the learned weights in SATNet are not straightforwardly interpretable, failing to produce human-readable rules. To address this,
we propose a novel specification method called “maximum equality”, which enables the interchangeability between the learned weights of SATNet and a set of
propositional logical rules in weighted MaxSAT form. With the decoded weighted
MaxSAT formula, we further introduce several effective verification techniques to
validate it against the ground truth rules. Experiments on stream transformations
and Sudoku problems show that our decoded rules are highly reliable: using exact
solvers on them could achieve 100% accuracy, whereas the original SATNet fails
to give correct solutions in many cases. Furthermore, we formally verify that our
decoded logical rules are functionally equivalent to the ground truth ones.

1

Introduction

Logical reasoning is a fundamental cognitive skill that empowers humans to organize knowledge
in a structured form, reason about relationships between different pieces of information, and draw
inferences based on logical rules and constraints. In recent years, there has been a growing research
interest in integrating advanced deep learning systems with the ability of logical reasoning [9, 10,
23, 32]. A notable outcome in this field is SATNet [32], a differentiable MaxSAT solver based on
a low-rank semidefinite programming (SDP) approach. SATNet utilizes a learnable matrix S to
capture the underlying structure of logical rules and dynamically adjusts its weight from input-output
examples. This innovative design enables SATNet to learn sophisticated logical rules, such as the
parity function and Sudoku puzzles.
Despite the promising results of SATNet, the interpretability of its learned weights remains unclear.
This limitation arises from the fact that the clause matrix S learned by SATNet is not ternary1 ,
preventing its explicit interpretation as a set of logical rules as originally motivated [33]. Consequently,
this poses a challenge to the wider adoption of SATNet in real-world applications that require
transparent decision-making processes.
To address this limitation, we present a new framework that extracts a set of interpretable logical rules
from the learned weights in SATNet. We first demonstrate that merely rounding S to a ternary matrix
is insufficient for interpretation and then show empirical and theoretical evidence that S may fail
to capture the underlying logical rules in certain cases. Instead of directly decoding S, we propose
utilizing the matrix C = S T S to derive explicit logical rules, based on the SDP formulation in
1
In SATNet’s original formulation, it assumes the S matrix can only consist of 1, −1, and 0 elements to
represent the logical formula in MaxSAT form. However, after training, S is continuous rather than ternary.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

