Black-box Backdoor Defense via
Zero-shot Image Purification

Yucheng Shi1 Mengnan Du2 Xuansheng Wu1 Zihan Guan1 Jin Sun1 Ninghao Liu1∗
1

School of Computing, University of Georgia
Department of Data Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology
{yucheng.shi, xuansheng.wu, zihan.guan, jinsun, ninghao.liu}@uga.edu
mengnan.du@njit.edu
2

Abstract
Backdoor attacks inject poisoned samples into the training data, resulting in the
misclassification of the poisoned input during a model’s deployment. Defending
against such attacks is challenging, especially for real-world black-box models
where only query access is permitted. In this paper, we propose a novel defense
framework against backdoor attacks through Zero-shot Image Purification (ZIP).
Our framework can be applied to poisoned models without requiring internal
information about the model or any prior knowledge of the clean/poisoned samples.
Our defense framework involves two steps. First, we apply a linear transformation
(e.g., blurring) on the poisoned image to destroy the backdoor pattern. Then, we use
a pre-trained diffusion model to recover the missing semantic information removed
by the transformation. In particular, we design a new reverse process by using the
transformed image to guide the generation of high-fidelity purified images, which
works in zero-shot settings. We evaluate our ZIP framework on multiple datasets
with different types of attacks. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of
our ZIP framework compared to state-of-the-art backdoor defense baselines. We
believe that our results will provide valuable insights for future defense methods for
black-box models. Our code is available at https://github.com/sycny/ZIP.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has been increasingly integrated into real-world applications such as healthcare [45],
finance [28] and computer vision [66]. Despite great success, machine learning models are susceptible
to adversaries such as backdoor attacks [15, 8, 43, 54, 17], which compromises model security and
reliability. Backdoor attacks can manipulate a model’s behavior by injecting malicious samples
into the training data or altering the model’s weights. Although many defense strategies have
been proposed to mitigate backdoor attacks, most of them require access to the model’s internal
structure and poisoned training data [32]. Deploying these defenses is challenging in real-world
black-box scenarios, where defenders do not have access to verify or audit the inner workings of the
model [18, 19]. For example, many developers and end-users now prefer using machine learning as a
service (MLaaS), relying on models provided by third-party vendors for their applications. However,
these models may contain backdoors, and due to copyright concerns, the services typically operate in
a black-box setting with query-only access. In such scenarios, detecting and mitigating backdoor
attacks is very difficult.
Currently, there are only a few backdoor defense methods that work in black-box settings. They can
be categorized into two types: detecting-based and purification-based. Detecting-based methods [65,
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

