Ambient Diffusion:
Learning Clean Distributions from Corrupted Data

Giannis Daras
UT Austin
giannisdaras@utexas.edu

Kulin Shah
UT Austin
kulinshah@utexas.edu

Aravind Gollakota
Alexandros G. Dimakis
Apple
UT Austin
aravindg@cs.utexas.edu dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Yuval Dagan
UC Berkeley
yuvald@berkeley.edu
Adam Klivans
UT Austin
klivans@utexas.edu

Abstract
We present the first diffusion-based framework that can learn an unknown distribution using only highly-corrupted samples. This problem arises in scientific
applications where access to uncorrupted samples is impossible or expensive to
acquire. Another benefit of our approach is the ability to train generative models
that are less likely to memorize any individual training sample, since they never
observe clean training data. Our main idea is to introduce additional measurement
distortion during the diffusion process and require the model to predict the original
corrupted image from the further corrupted image. We prove that our method
leads to models that learn the conditional expectation of the full uncorrupted image
given this additional measurement corruption. This holds for any corruption process that satisfies some technical conditions (and in particular includes inpainting
and compressed sensing). We train models on standard benchmarks (CelebA,
CIFAR-10 and AFHQ) and show that we can learn the distribution even when all
the training samples have 90% of their pixels missing. We also show that we can
finetune foundation models on small corrupted datasets (e.g. MRI scans with block
corruptions) and learn the clean distribution without memorizing the training set.

1

Introduction

Diffusion generative models [54, 23, 57] are emerging as versatile and powerful frameworks for
learning high-dimensional distributions and solving inverse problems [34, 11, 36, 28]. Numerous
recent developments [58, 30] have led to text conditional foundation models like Dalle-2 [45], Latent
Diffusion [50] and Imagen [52] with an incredible performance in general image domains. Training
these models requires access to high-quality datasets which may be expensive or impossible to obtain.
For example, direct images of black holes cannot be observed [12, 19] and high quality MRI images
require long scanning times, causing patient discomfort and motion artifacts [28].
Recently, Carlini et al. [8], Somepalli et al. [55], and Jagielski et al. [27] showed that diffusion models
can memorize examples from their training set. Further, an adversary can extract dataset samples
given only query access to the model, leading to privacy, security and copyright concerns. For many
applications, we may want to learn the distribution but not individual training images e.g. we might
want to learn the distribution of X-ray scans but not memorize images of specific patient scans from
the dataset. Hence, we may want to introduce corruption as a design choice. We show that it is
possible to train diffusions that learn a distribution of clean data by only observing highly corrupted
samples.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

