Sample Complexity of Goal-Conditioned Hierarchical
Reinforcement Learning

Arnaud Robert
Brain & Behaviour Lab
Dept. of Computing
Imperial College London, UK
a.robert20@imperial.ac.uk

Ciara Pike-Burke
Dept. of Mathematics
Imperial College London, UK
c.pike-burke@imperial.ac.uk

A. Aldo Faisal
Brain & Behaviour Lab
Depts. of Computing & Bioengineering
Imperial College London, UK
Chair in Digital Health & Data Science
University of Bayreuth, Germany
a.faisal@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) algorithms can perform planning at
multiple levels of abstraction. Empirical results have shown that state or temporal
abstractions might significantly improve the sample efficiency of algorithms. Yet,
we still do not have a complete understanding of the basis of those efficiency
gains, nor any theoretically-grounded design rules. In this paper, we derive a lower
bound on the sample complexity for the considered class of goal-conditioned HRL
algorithms. The proposed lower bound empowers us to quantify the benefits of
hierarchical decomposition and leads to the design of a simple Q-learning-type
algorithm that leverages hierarchical decompositions. We empirically validate our
theoretical findings by investigating the sample complexity of the proposed hierarchical algorithm on a spectrum of tasks (hierarchical n-rooms, Gymnasium’s Taxi).
The hierarchical n-rooms tasks were designed to allow us to dial their complexity
over multiple orders of magnitude. Our theory and algorithmic findings provide
a step towards answering the foundational question of quantifying the improvement hierarchical decomposition offers over monolithic solutions in reinforcement
learning.

1

Motivation

Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) [27, 8, 9, 4] leverages the hierarchical decomposition
of a problem to build algorithms that are more sample efficient. While there is significant empirical
evidence that hierarchical implementations can drastically improve the sample efficiency of Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms [20, 21, 29, 8], there are also cases where temporal abstraction
worsens the empirical sample complexity [16]. Therefore, a natural question to ask is: when does
HRL lead to improved sample complexity, and how much of an improvement can it provide?
Theoretical work on sample-complexity bound in Machine Learning has been integral to the development of the field. Moreover, theoretical results (e.g. [7, 18, 3, 15, 26]) often uncover interesting
principles useful for improving algorithm design. For example, the Q-learning algorithm analysed in
[15] improved our understanding of exploration strategies in model-free RL and the policy gradient
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

