Dynamic Regret of Adversarial Linear Mixture MDPs

Long-Fei Li, Peng Zhao, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{lilf, zhaop, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning in episodic inhomogeneous MDPs with adversarial full-information rewards and the unknown transition kernel. We consider
the linear mixture MDPs whose transition kernel is a linear mixture model and
choose the dynamic regret as the performance measure. Denote by d the dimension of the feature mapping, H the length of each episode, K the number of
episodes,
measure, we propose
a novel algorithm that enjoys
√ PT the non-stationary
p

e d2 H 3 K + H 4 (K + PT )(1 + PT ) dynamic regret under the condition
an O
that PT is known, which improves previously best-known dynamic regret for adversarial
adversarial tabular MDPs. We also establish
√ linear mixture
p MDP and 
an Ω d2 H 3 K + HK(H + PT ) lower bound, indicating our algorithm is
optimal in K and PT . Furthermore, when the non-stationary measure PT is unknown, we design an online √
ensemble algorithm
with a meta-base structure, which
p

e d2 H 3 K + H 4 (K + PT )(1 + PT ) + H 2 S 2 dyis proved to achieve an O
T
namic regret and here ST is the expected switching number of the best base-learner.
The result can be optimal under certain regimes.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims to learn a policy that maximizes the cumulative reward through
interacting with the environment, which has achieved tremendous successes in various fields, including games [1, 2], robotic control [3, 4], and dialogue generation [5, 6]. In reinforcement learning, the
Markov Decision Process (MDP) [7] is the most widely used model to describe the environment.
Traditional MDPs assume that the reward functions are stochastic and the number of actions and
states is small. However, in many real-world applications, the reward functions may be adversarially
changing and the state and action spaces are large or even infinite. Previous work studies these
two problems separately. To deal with the adversarial reward functions, Even-Dar et al. [8] first
consider learning adversarial MDPs with known transition
and full-information reward feedback.
√
They propose the MDP-E algorithm that enjoys e
O( τ 3 T ) regret, where τ is the mixing time and
T is the number of steps. There is a line of subsequent work studying adversarial MDPs [9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16], which studies various settings depending on whether the transition kernel
is known, and whether the feedback is full-information or bandit. To overcome the large state and
action space issue, a widely used method is linear function approximation, which reparameterizes
the value function as a linear function over some feature mapping that maps the state and action to
a low-dimensional space. Amongst these work, linear MDPs [17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23] and linear
mixture MDPs [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31] are two of the most popular MDP models with linear
function
approximation. In particular, He et al. [23] and Zhou et al. [31] attain the minimax optimal
√
e
O( d2 H 3 K) regret for linear MDPs and linear mixture MDPs with stochastic rewards respectively.
Recent studies try to combine two lines of work to establish the theoretical foundation of adversarial
MDPs with large state and action space. In particular, Cai et al. [32] study adversarial linear mixture
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

