Zero-shot causal learning

Hamed Nilforoshan∗1 Michael Moor∗1 Yusuf Roohani2 Yining Chen1
Anja Šurina3 Michihiro Yasunaga1 Sara Oblak4 Jure Leskovec1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University
3
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Ljubljana

Correspondence to: hamedn@cs.stanford.edu, mdmoor@cs.stanford.edu, jure@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Predicting how different interventions will causally affect a specific individual is
important in a variety of domains such as personalized medicine, public policy,
and online marketing. There are a large number of methods to predict the effect
of an existing intervention based on historical data from individuals who received
it. However, in many settings it is important to predict the effects of novel interventions (e.g., a newly invented drug), which these methods do not address. Here,
we consider zero-shot causal learning: predicting the personalized effects of a
novel intervention. We propose CaML, a causal meta-learning framework which
formulates the personalized prediction of each intervention’s effect as a task. CaML
trains a single meta-model across thousands of tasks, each constructed by sampling
an intervention, its recipients, and its nonrecipients. By leveraging both intervention information (e.g., a drug’s attributes) and individual features (e.g., a patient’s
history), CaML is able to predict the personalized effects of novel interventions that
do not exist at the time of training. Experimental results on real world datasets in
large-scale medical claims and cell-line perturbations demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach. Most strikingly, CaML’s zero-shot predictions outperform even
strong baselines trained directly on data from the test interventions.

1

Introduction

Personalized predictions about how an intervention will causally affect a specific individual are
important across many high impact applications in the physical, life, and social sciences. For instance,
consider a doctor deciding whether or not to prescribe a drug to a patient. Depending on the patient,
the same drug could either (a) cure the disease, (b) have no effect, or (c) elicit a life-threatening
adverse reaction. Predicting which effect the drug will have for each patient could revolutionize
healthcare by enabling personalized treatments for each patient.
The causal inference literature formalizes this problem as conditional average treatment effects
(CATE) estimation, in which the goal is to predict the effect of an intervention, conditioned on
patient characteristics (X). When natural experiment data is available, consisting of individuals who
already did and did not receive an intervention, a variety of CATE estimators exist to accomplish this
task [1, 3, 16, 23, 30, 34, 44, 55, 36, 70]. These methods can then predict the effect of an existing
intervention (W ) on a new individual (X ′ ).
However, in many real-world applications natural experiment data is entirely unavailable, and yet
CATE estimation is critical. For instance, when new drugs are discovered, or new government policies
∗

Equal contribution. Code is available at: https://github.com/snap-stanford/caml/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

