Efficient Activation Function Optimization
through Surrogate Modeling

Garrett Bingham∗
The University of Texas at Austin
and Cognizant AI Labs
San Francisco, CA 94105
garrett@gjb.ai

Risto Miikkulainen
The University of Texas at Austin
and Cognizant AI Labs
San Francisco, CA 94105
risto@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Carefully designed activation functions can improve the performance of neural
networks in many machine learning tasks. However, it is difficult for humans
to construct optimal activation functions, and current activation function search
algorithms are prohibitively expensive. This paper aims to improve the state
of the art through three steps: First, the benchmark datasets Act-Bench-CNN,
Act-Bench-ResNet, and Act-Bench-ViT were created by training convolutional,
residual, and vision transformer architectures from scratch with 2,913 systematically generated activation functions. Second, a characterization of the benchmark
space was developed, leading to a new surrogate-based method for optimization.
More specifically, the spectrum of the Fisher information matrix associated with
the model’s predictive distribution at initialization and the activation function’s
output distribution were found to be highly predictive of performance. Third, the
surrogate was used to discover improved activation functions in several real-world
tasks, with a surprising finding: a sigmoidal design that outperformed all other
activation functions was discovered, challenging the status quo of always using
rectifier nonlinearities in deep learning. Each of these steps is a contribution in its
own right; together they serve as a practical and theoretical foundation for further
research on activation function optimization.

1

Introduction

Activation functions are an important choice in neural network design [2, 46]. In order to realize the
benefits of good activation functions, researchers often design new functions based on characteristics
like smoothness, groundedness, monotonicity, and limit behavior. While these properties have proven
useful, humans are ultimately limited by design biases and by the relatively small number of functions
they can consider. On the other hand, automated search methods can evaluate thousands of unique
functions, and as a result, often discover better activation functions than those designed by humans.
However, such approaches do not usually have a theoretical justification, and instead focus only on
performance. This limitation results in computationally inefficient ad hoc algorithms that may miss
good solutions and may not scale to large models and datasets.
This paper addresses these drawbacks in a data-driven way through three steps. First, in order to
provide a foundation for theory and algorithm development, convolutional, residual, and vision
transformer based architectures were trained from scratch with 2,913 different activation functions,
resulting in three activation function benchmark datasets: Act-Bench-CNN, Act-Bench-ResNet,
∗

GB is currently a research scientist at Google DeepMind. AQuaSurF code is available at https://
github.com/cognizant-ai-labs/aquasurf, and the benchmark datasets are at https://github.com/
cognizant-ai-labs/act-bench.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

