CSOT: Curriculum and Structure-Aware Optimal
Transport for Learning with Noisy Labels

Wanxing Chang1
2

Ye Shi1,2

Jingya Wang1,2∗

1
ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging

{changwx,shiye,wangjingya}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning with noisy labels (LNL) poses a signiﬁcant challenge in training a wellgeneralized model while avoiding overﬁtting to corrupted labels. Recent advances
have achieved impressive performance by identifying clean labels and correcting
corrupted labels for training. However, the current approaches rely heavily on
the models predictions and evaluate each sample independently without considering either the global or local structure of the sample distribution. These limitations typically result in a suboptimal solution for the identiﬁcation and correction processes, which eventually leads to models overﬁtting to incorrect labels. In this paper, we propose a novel optimal transport (OT) formulation, called
Curriculum and Structure-aware Optimal Transport (CSOT). CSOT concurrently
considers the inter- and intra-distribution structure of the samples to construct a
robust denoising and relabeling allocator. During the training process, the allocator incrementally assigns reliable labels to a fraction of the samples with the
highest conﬁdence. These labels have both global discriminability and local coherence. Notably, CSOT is a new OT formulation with a nonconvex objective
function and curriculum constraints, so it is not directly compatible with classical OT solvers. Here, we develop a lightspeed computational method that involves a scaling iteration within a generalized conditional gradient framework
to solve CSOT efﬁciently. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
of our method over the current state-of-the-arts in LNL. Code is available at
https://github.com/changwxx/CSOT-for-LNL.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have signiﬁcantly boosted performance in various computer vision
tasks, including image classiﬁcation [33], object detection [61], and semantic segmentation [32].
However, the remarkable performance of deep learning algorithms heavily relies on large-scale highquality human annotations, which are extremely expensive and time-consuming to obtain. Alternatively, mining large-scale labeled data based on a web search and user tags [49, 37] can provide a
cost-effective way to collect labels, but this approach inevitably introduces noisy labels. Since DNNs
can so easily overﬁt to noisy labels [4, 79], such label noise can signiﬁcantly degrade performance,
giving rise to a challenging task: learning with noisy labels (LNL) [50, 52, 46].
Numerous strategies have been proposed to mitigate the negative impact of noisy labels, including
loss correction based on transition matrix estimation [35], re-weighting [60], label correction [76]
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

