FAST: a Fused and Accurate Shrinkage Tree for
Heterogeneous Treatment Effects Estimation
Jia Gu∗1,2 , Caizhi Tang∗2 , Han Yan3 , Qing Cui2 , Longfei Li2 , and Jun Zhou†2
1

Center for Statistical Science, Peking University
2
Ant Group
3
Guanghua School of Management, Peking University
gujia@pku.edu.cn, caizhi.tcz@antgroup.com, hanyan@stu.pku.edu.cn, {cuiqing.cq, longyao.llf,
jun.zhoujun}@antgroup.com

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel strategy for estimating the heterogeneous treatment
effect called the Fused and Accurate Shrinkage Tree (FAST). Our approach utilizes
both trial and observational data to improve the accuracy and robustness of the
estimator. Inspired by the concept of shrinkage estimation in statistics, we develop
an optimal weighting scheme and a corresponding estimator that balances the
unbiased estimator based on the trial data with the potentially biased estimator
based on the observational data. Specifically, combined with tree-based techniques,
we introduce a new split criterion that utilizes both trial data and observational
data to more accurately estimate the treatment effect. Furthermore, we confirm the
consistency of our proposed tree-based estimator and demonstrate the effectiveness
of our criterion in reducing prediction error through theoretical analysis. The
advantageous finite sample performance of the FAST and its ensemble version
over existing methods is demonstrated via simulations and real data analysis.

1

Introduction

Causal effects are the magnitude of the response of an effect variable (also called outcome) caused
by the effect variable (also called treatment), which is a fundamental and essential issue in the field
of casual inference (Imbens and Rubin, 2016). And the heterogeneous treatment effect (abbr. HTE)
is usually used to characterize the heterogeneity of causal effects across different subgroups of the
population. In recent years, heterogeneous treatment effect estimation has been successfully applied
in various fields such as epidemiology, medicine, and social sciences (Glass et al., 2013; Kosorok and
Laber, 2019; Turney and Wildeman, 2015; Taddy et al., 2016).
In general, the causal problems can be studied through both experimental studies (also known
as randomized control trials, RCTs) and observational studies. Experimental studies are widely
regarded as the gold standard for assessing causal effects since the randomization process eliminates
the possibility of confounding bias. However, large-scale RCTs can be challenging due to issues
related to cost, time, and ethics (Edwards et al., 1999). On the other hand, observational data
are often readily available with an adequate sample size. Under certain fairly strong assumptions,
such as unconfoundedness assumption, there is a rich literature regarding the estimation of HTE in
observational studies, such as tree-based methods (Athey and Imbens, 2016; Wager and Athey, 2018;
Athey et al., 2019; Hahn et al., 2020), boosting (Powers et al., 2017), meta learners (Künzel et al.,
*
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

