Accelerating Reinforcement Learning with
Value-Conditional State Entropy Exploration

Dongyoung Kim
KAIST

Jinwoo Shin
KAIST

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley

Younggyo Seo∗
KAIST

Abstract
A promising technique for exploration is to maximize the entropy of visited state
distribution, i.e., state entropy, by encouraging uniform coverage of visited state
space. While it has been effective for an unsupervised setup, it tends to struggle in
a supervised setup with a task reward, where an agent prefers to visit high-value
states to exploit the task reward. Such a preference can cause an imbalance between
the distributions of high-value states and low-value states, which biases exploration
towards low-value state regions as a result of the state entropy increasing when
the distribution becomes more uniform. This issue is exacerbated when high-value
states are narrowly distributed within the state space, making it difficult for the
agent to complete the tasks. In this paper, we present a novel exploration technique
that maximizes the value-conditional state entropy, which separately estimates
the state entropies that are conditioned on the value estimates of each state, then
maximizes their average. By only considering the visited states with similar value
estimates for computing the intrinsic bonus, our method prevents the distribution
of low-value states from affecting exploration around high-value states, and vice
versa. We demonstrate that the proposed alternative to the state entropy baseline
significantly accelerates various reinforcement learning algorithms across a variety
of tasks within MiniGrid, DeepMind Control Suite, and Meta-World benchmarks.
Source code is available at https://sites.google.com/view/rl-vcse.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in exploration techniques have enabled us to train strong reinforcement learning (RL)
agents with fewer environment interactions. Notable techniques include injecting noise into action or
parameter spaces (Sehnke et al., 2010; Rückstiess et al., 2010; Wawrzynski, 2015; Lillicrap et al.,
2016; Fortunato et al., 2018) and using visitation counts (Thrun, 1992b; Bellemare et al., 2016; Sutton
& Barto, 2018; Burda et al., 2019) or errors from predictive models (Stadie et al., 2015; Pathak et al.,
2017, 2019; Sekar et al., 2020) as an intrinsic reward. In particular, a recently developed approach that
maximizes the entropy of visited state distribution has emerged as a promising exploration technique
(Hazan et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2019; Mutti et al., 2021) for unsupervised RL, where the agent aims to
learn useful behaviors without any task reward (Liu & Abbeel, 2021a,b; Yarats et al., 2021b).
The idea to maximize the state entropy has also been utilized in a supervised setup where the task
reward is available from environments to improve the sample-efficiency of RL algorithms (Tao et al.,
2020; Seo et al., 2021; Nedergaard & Cook, 2022; Yuan et al., 2022). Notably, Seo et al. (2021) have
shown that maximizing the sum of task reward and intrinsic reward based on a state entropy estimate
can accelerate RL training. However, in this supervised setup, we point out that this approach often
suffers from an imbalance between the distributions of high-value and low-value states, which occurs
as an agent prefers to visit high-value states for exploiting the task reward. Because state entropy
increases when the distribution becomes more uniform, low-value states get to receive a higher
∗

Now at Dyson Robot Learning Lab. Correspondence to younggyo.seo@dyson.com.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

