Eliciting User Preferences for Personalized
Multi-Objective Decision Making through
Comparative Feedback

Han Shao
TTIC
han@ttic.edu

Lee Cohen
TTIC
leecohencs@gmail.com

Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University and Google Research
mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Aadirupa Saha
TTIC
aadirupa@ttic.edu

Avrim Blum
TTIC
avrim@ttic.edu
Matthew R. Walter
TTIC
mwalter@ttic.edu

Abstract
In this work, we propose a multi-objective decision making framework that accommodates different user preferences over objectives, where preferences are learned
via policy comparisons. Our model consists of a known Markov decision process
with a vector-valued reward function, with each user having an unknown preference vector that expresses the relative importance of each objective. The goal is
to efficiently compute a near-optimal policy for a given user. We consider two
user feedback models. We first address the case where a user is provided with two
policies and returns their preferred policy as feedback. We then move to a different
user feedback model, where a user is instead provided with two small weighted
sets of representative trajectories and selects the preferred one. In both cases, we
suggest an algorithm that finds a nearly optimal policy for the user using a number
of comparison queries that scales quasilinearly in the number of objectives.

1

Introduction

Many real-world decision making problems involve optimizing over multiple objectives. For example,
when designing an investment portfolio, one’s investment strategy requires trading off maximizing
expected gain with minimizing risk. When using Google Maps for navigation, people are concerned
about various factors such as the worst and average estimated arrival time, traffic conditions, road surface conditions (e.g., whether or not it is paved), and the scenery along the way. As the advancement
of technology gives rise to personalized machine learning (McAuley, 2022), in this paper, we design
efficient algorithms for personalized multi-objective decision making.
While prior works have concentrated on approximating the Pareto-optimal solution set1 (see Hayes
et al. (2022) and Roijers et al. (2013) for surveys), we aim to find the optimal personalized policy for a
user that reflects their unknown preferences over k objectives. Since the preferences are unknown, we
need to elicit users’ preferences by requesting feedback on selected policies. The problem of eliciting
preferences has been studied in Wang et al. (2022) using a strong query model that provides stochastic
feedback on the quality of a single policy. In contrast, our work focuses on a more natural and intuitive
query model, comparison queries, which query the user’s preference over two selected policies, e.g.,
‘do you prefer a policy which minimizes average estimated arrival time or policy which minimizes the
number of turns?’. Our goal is to find the optimal personalized policy using as few queries as possible.
1

The Pareto-optimal solution set contains a optimal personalized policy for every possible user preference.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

