Large Language Models Are
Zero-Shot Time Series Forecasters
Nate Gruver⇤
NYU

Marc Finzi⇤
CMU

Shikai Qiu⇤
NYU

Andrew Gordon Wilson
NYU

Abstract
By encoding time series as a string of numerical digits, we can frame time series
forecasting as next-token prediction in text. Developing this approach, we find that
large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 and LLaMA-2 can surprisingly zeroshot extrapolate time series at a level comparable to or exceeding the performance
of purpose-built time series models trained on the downstream tasks. To facilitate
this performance, we propose procedures for effectively tokenizing time series data
and converting discrete distributions over tokens into highly flexible densities over
continuous values. We argue the success of LLMs for time series stems from their
ability to naturally represent multimodal distributions, in conjunction with biases
for simplicity, and repetition, which align with the salient features in many time
series, such as repeated seasonal trends. We also show how LLMs can naturally
handle missing data without imputation through non-numerical text, accommodate
textual side information, and answer questions to help explain predictions. While
we find that increasing model size generally improves performance on time series,
we show GPT-4 can perform worse than GPT-3 because of how it tokenizes
numbers, and poor uncertainty calibration, which is likely the result of alignment
interventions such as RLHF.

1

Introduction

Despite similarities with other sequence modeling problems, such as text, audio, or video, time series
has two particularly challenging properties. Unlike video or audio, which typically have consistent
input scales and sampling rates, aggregated time series datasets often comprise sequences from
radically different sources, sometimes with missing values. Moreover, common applications of
time series forecasting, such as weather or financial data, require extrapolating from observations
that contain a tiny fraction of the possible information, making accurate point predictions nearly
impossible and uncertainty estimation especially important. While large-scale pretraining has become
a key element of training large neural networks in vision and text, enabling performance to scale
directly with data availability, pretraining is not typically used for time series modeling, where there is
no consensus unsupervised objective and large, cohesive pretraining datasets are not readily available.
Consequently, simple time series methods (e.g. ARIMA [8], and linear models [52]) often outperform
deep learning methods on popular benchmarks [24].
In this paper, we demonstrate how large language models (LLM) can naturally bridge the gap
between the simple biases of traditional methods and the complex representational learning and
generative abilities of modern deep learning. In particular, we introduce an exceedingly simple
method, LLMT IME2 , to apply pretrained LLMs for continuous time series prediction problems,
illustrated at a high level in Figure 1. At its core, this method represents the time series as a string
of numerical digits, and views time series forecasting as next-token prediction in text, unlocking
⇤

2

Equal contribution
https://github.com/ngruver/llmtime

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

