Structured Voronoi Sampling

Afra Amini1
Li Du2
Ryan Cotterell1
1
2
ETH Zürich
Johns Hopkins University
{afra.amini, ryan.cotterell}@inf.ethz.ch
leodu@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
Gradient-based sampling algorithms have demonstrated their effectiveness in text
generation, especially in the context of controlled text generation. However, there
exists a lack of theoretically grounded and principled approaches for this task.
In this paper, we take an important step toward building a principled approach
for sampling from language models with gradient-based methods. We use
discrete distributions given by language models to define densities and develop an
algorithm based on Hamiltonian Monte Carlo to sample from them. We name our
gradient-based technique Structured Voronoi Sampling (SVS). In an experimental
setup where the reference distribution is known, we show that the empirical
distribution of SVS samples is closer to the reference distribution compared to
alternative sampling schemes. Furthermore, in a controlled generation task, SVS is
able to generate fluent and diverse samples while following the control targets
significantly better than other methods.
https://github.com/AfraAmini/svs

1

Introduction

Gradient-based sampling algorithms such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo [HMC; 32] and Langevin
dynamics [46] are widely used in Bayesian inference due to their efficiency in drawing samples
from high-dimensional space [4]. Such algorithms construct a Markov Chain that has the desired
distribution as its stationary distribution and use the gradient information of this distribution to
efficiently navigate the state space. Additionally, gradient-based sampling schemes have recently been
deployed in computer vision to generate high-quality images from state-of-the-art models [13, 43],
and are a popular choice for tasks such as image synthesis [5] and image-to-image translation [40].
In natural language processing, there have been several attempts to apply gradient-based sampling
techniques to sampling text from neural language models [21, 23, 38]. The motivation behind this
approach to text generation is to sample from energy-based probabilistic models, where the normalization factor is not tractable. One such case is in controlled text generation, where energy functions are
usually defined as a linear combination of LM probabilities and the probability of satisfying a set of
predefined constraints [21, 23, 38]. In contrast to computer vision, however, applying gradient-based
sampling schemes to text generation is nuanced as text, in contrast to images, is discrete.
Upon closer inspection, none of the proposed algorithms actually defines a valid Markov Chain Monte
Carlo [MCMC; 12, 29] scheme that will draw samples from the model in the limit. For instance, Qin
et al. [38] relax the language model from a distribution over strings to a distribution over logits. While
the relaxation does transform the language model into a continuous distribution, it introduces bias.
Kumar et al. [M U C O L A; 21] take a different approach. They derive a constrained gradient-based
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

