Training on Foveated Images Improves Robustness to
Adversarial Attacks
Muhammad A. Shah
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
mshah1@cmu.edu

Aqsa Kashaf ∗
ByteDance
San Jose, CA 95110
akashaf@cmu.edu

Bhiksha Raj
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
bhiksha@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks
– subtle, perceptually indistinguishable perturbations of inputs that change the
response of the model. We hypothesize that an important contributor to the robustness of human visual perception is constant exposure to low-fidelity visual stimuli
in our peripheral vision. To investigate this hypothesis, we develop R-Blur, an
image transform that simulates the loss in fidelity of peripheral vision by blurring
the image and reducing its color saturation based on the distance from a given
fixation point. We show that compared to DNNs trained on the original images,
DNNs trained on images transformed by R-Blur are substantially more robust to
adversarial attacks, as well as other, non-adversarial, corruptions, achieving up to
25% higher accuracy on perturbed data2 .

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are exceptionally adept at many computer vision tasks and have
emerged as one of the best models of the biological neurons involved in visual object recognition [1, 2].
However, their lack of robustness to subtle image perturbations that humans are largely invariant
[3, 4, 5] to has raised questions about their reliability in real-world scenarios. Of these perturbations,
perhaps the most alarming are adversarial attacks, which are specially crafted distortions that can
change the response of DNNs when added to their inputs [3, 6] but are either imperceptible to humans
or perceptually irrelevant enough to be ignored by them.
While several defenses have been proposed over the years to defend DNNs against adversarial attacks,
only a few of them have sought inspiration from biological perception, which, perhaps axiomatically,
is one of the most robust perceptual systems in existence. Instead, most methods seek to teach DNNs
to be robust to adversarial attacks by exposing them to adversarially perturbed images [7, 8, 9] or
random noise [10, 11, 12] during training. While this approach is highly effective in making DNNs
robust to the types of perturbations used during training, the robustness often does not generalize to
other types of perturbations [13, 14, 15]. In contrast, biologically-inspired defenses seek to make
DNNs robust by integrating into them biological mechanisms that would bring their behavior more in
line with human/animal vision [16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22]. As these defenses do not require DNNs to
be trained on any particular type of perturbation, they yield models that, like humans, are robust to
a variety of perturbations [18] in addition to adversarial attacks. For this reason, and in light of the
evidence indicating a positive correlation between biological alignment and adversarial robustness
[18, 23], we believe biologically inspired defenses are more promising in the long run.
∗
2

work done while at Carnegie Mellon University
The code for R-Blur is available at https://github.com/ahmedshah1494/RBlur

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

