LIMA: Less Is More for Alignment

Chunting Zhou𝜇∗
Yuning Mao𝜇

Pengfei Liu𝜋∗

Xuezhe Ma𝜆

Gargi Ghosh𝜇

Puxin Xu𝜇

Avia Efrat𝜏

Mike Lewis𝜇

Srini Iyer𝜇

Ping Yu𝜇

Lili Yu𝜇

Luke Zettlemoyer𝜇

Jiao Sun𝜆
Susan Zhang𝜇

Omer Levy𝜇

𝜇 Meta AI
𝜋 Carnegie Mellon University

𝜆 University of Southern California
𝜏 Tel Aviv University

Abstract
Large language models are trained in two stages: (1) unsupervised pretraining from
raw text, to learn general-purpose representations, and (2) large scale instruction
tuning and reinforcement learning, to better align to end tasks and user preferences.
We measure the relative importance of these two stages by training LIMA, a 65B
parameter LLaMa language model fine-tuned with the standard supervised loss on
only 1,000 carefully curated prompts and responses, without any reinforcement
learning or human preference modeling. LIMA demonstrates remarkably strong
performance, learning to follow specific response formats from only a handful of
examples in the training data, including complex queries that range from planning
trip itineraries to speculating about alternate history. Moreover, the model tends
to generalize well to unseen tasks that did not appear in the training data. In a
controlled human study, responses from LIMA are either equivalent or strictly
preferred to GPT-4 in 43% of cases; this statistic is as high as 58% when compared
to Bard and 65% versus DaVinci003, which was trained with human feedback.
Taken together, these results strongly suggest that almost all knowledge in large
language models is learned during pretraining, and only limited instruction tuning
data is necessary to teach models to produce high quality output.

1

Introduction

Language models are pretrained to predict the next token at an incredible scale, allowing them to
learn general-purpose representations that can be transferred to nearly any language understanding
or generation task. To enable this transfer, various methods for aligning language models have thus
been proposed, primarily focusing on instruction tuning [Mishra et al., 2021, Wei et al., 2022a, Sanh
et al., 2022] over large multi-million-example datasets [Chung et al., 2022, Beeching et al., 2023,
Köpf et al., 2023], and more recently reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [Bai
et al., 2022a, Ouyang et al., 2022], collected over millions of interactions with human annotators.
Existing alignment methods require significant amounts of compute and specialized data to achieve
ChatGPT-level performance. However, we demonstrate that, given a strong pretrained language
model, remarkably strong performance can be achieved by simply fine-tuning on 1,000 carefully
curated training examples.
We hypothesize that alignment can be a simple process where the model learns the style or format for
interacting with users, to expose the knowledge and capabilities that were already acquired during
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

