From Tempered to Benign Overfitting
in ReLU Neural Networks
Guy Kornowski
Weizmann Institute of Science
guy.kornowski@weizmann.ac.il

Gilad Yehudai
Weizmann Institute of Science
gilad.yehudai@weizmann.ac.il

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Overparameterized neural networks (NNs) are observed to generalize well even
when trained to perfectly fit noisy data. This phenomenon motivated a large
body of work on “benign overfitting”, where interpolating predictors achieve nearoptimal performance. Recently, it was conjectured and empirically observed that
the behavior of NNs is often better described as “tempered overfitting”, where
the performance is non-optimal yet also non-trivial, and degrades as a function
of the noise level. However, a theoretical justification of this claim for non-linear
NNs has been lacking so far. In this work, we provide several results that aim
at bridging these complementing views. We study a simple classification setting
with 2-layer ReLU NNs, and prove that under various assumptions, the type of
overfitting transitions from tempered in the extreme case of one-dimensional data,
to benign in high dimensions. Thus, we show that the input dimension has a crucial
role on the overfitting profile in this setting, which we also validate empirically for
intermediate dimensions. Overall, our results shed light on the intricate connections
between the dimension, sample size, architecture and training algorithm on the one
hand, and the type of resulting overfitting on the other hand.

1

Introduction

Overparameterized neural networks (NNs) are observed to generalize well even when trained to
perfectly fit noisy data. Although quite standard in deep learning, the so-called interpolation learning
regime challenges classical statistical wisdom regarding overfitting, and has attracted much attention
in recent years.
In particular, the phenomenon commonly referred to as “benign overfitting” [Bartlett et al., 2020]
describes a situation in which a learning method overfits, in the sense that it achieves zero training
error over inherently noisy samples, yet it is able to achieve near-optimal accuracy with respect to
the underlying distribution. So far, much of the theoretical work studying this phenomenon focused
on linear (or kernel) regression problems using the squared loss, with some works extending this to
classification problems. However, there is naturally much interest in gradually pushing this research
towards neural networks. For example, Frei et al. [2023] recently showed that the implicit bias of
gradient-based training algorithms towards margin maximization, as established in a series of works
throughout the past few years, leads to benign overfitting of leaky ReLU networks in high dimensions
(see discussion of related work below).
Recently, Mallinar et al. [2022] suggested a more nuanced view, coining the notion of “tempered”
overfitting. An interpolating learning method is said to overfit in a tempered manner if its error (with
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

