One Fits All:
Power General Time Series Analysis by Pretrained LM

Tian Zhou∗ Peisong Niu∗ Xue Wang∗ Liang Sun Rong Jin†
{tian.zt,niupeisong.nps,xue.w,liang.sun,jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Although we have witnessed great success of pre-trained models in natural language
processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV), limited progress has been made for
general time series analysis. Unlike NLP and CV where a unified model can be
used to perform different tasks, specially designed approach still dominates in each
time series analysis task such as classification, anomaly detection, forecasting, and
few-shot learning. The main challenge that blocks the development of pre-trained
model for time series analysis is the lack of a large amount of data for training.
In this work, we address this challenge by leveraging language or CV models,
pre-trained from billions of tokens, for time series analysis. Specifically, we refrain
from altering the self-attention and feedforward layers of the residual blocks in the
pre-trained language or image model. This model, known as the Frozen Pretrained
Transformer (FPT), is evaluated through fine-tuning on all major types of tasks
involving time series. Our results demonstrate that pre-trained models on natural
language or images can lead to a comparable or state-of-the-art performance in
all main time series analysis tasks, as illustrated in Figure 1. We also found both
theoretically and empirically that the self-attention module behaviors similarly
to principle component analysis (PCA), an observation that helps explains how
transformer bridges the domain gap and a crucial step towards understanding
the universality of a pre-trained transformer. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/DAMO-DI-ML/One_Fits_All.

1

Introduction

Time series analysis is a fundamental problem Hyndman & Athanasopoulos (2021) that has played an
important role in many real-world applications Wen et al. (2022), such as retail sales forecasting Böse
et al. (2017); Courty & Li (1999) , imputation of missing data for economic time series Friedman
(1962) anomaly detection for industrial maintenance Gao et al. (2020), and classification of time
series from various domain Ismail Fawaz et al. (2019). Numerous statistical and machine learning
methods have been developed for time series analysis in the past. Inspired by its great success
in natural language processing and computer vision Vaswani et al. (2017); Devlin et al. (2019);
Dosovitskiy et al. (2021); Rao et al. (2021), transformer has been introduced to various time series
tasks with promising results Wen et al. (2023), especially for time series forecasting Lim et al. (2021);
Zhou et al. (2022, 2021); Wu et al. (2021); Nie et al. (2022).
We have recently witnessed the rapid development of foundation models in NLP. The key idea is to
pre-train a large language model from billions of tokens to facilitate model training for downstream
tasks, particularly when we have a few, sometimes even zero, labeled instances. Another advantage of
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

