Learning to Taste

: A Multimodal Wine Dataset

Thoranna Bender
Simon Moe Sørensen
Alireza Kashani
K. Eldjarn Hjorleifsson
Grethe Hyldig
Søren Hauberg
Serge Belongie
Frederik Warburg
Technical University of Denmark Vivino
California Institute of Technology University of Copenhagen

Abstract
We present WineSensed, a large multimodal wine dataset for studying the relations
between visual perception, language, and flavor. The dataset encompasses 897k images of wine labels and 824k reviews of wines curated from the Vivino platform. It
has over 350k unique bottlings, annotated with year, region, rating, alcohol percentage, price, and grape composition. We obtained fine-grained flavor annotations on
a subset by conducting a wine-tasting experiment with 256 participants who were
asked to rank wines based on their similarity in flavor, resulting in more than 5k
pairwise flavor distances. We propose a low-dimensional concept embedding algorithm that combines human experience with automatic machine similarity kernels.
We demonstrate that this shared concept embedding space improves upon separate
embedding spaces for coarse flavor classification (alcohol percentage, country,
grape, price, rating) and aligns with the intricate human perception of flavor.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

13

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

1

Introduction

Vision, language, audio, touch, smell, and taste are sensory inputs that ground humans in a shared
representation, which enables us to interact, converse, and create. Recent advances in multimodal
learning have shown that combining diverse modalities in a shared representation leads to useful and
better-grounded models [Girdhar et al., 2023, Chen et al., 2023]. Inspired by recent progress, we
propose to add flavor to the list of modalities used to learn shared representations.
As a first step towards modeling flavor, we focus on wine since (1) wines have been studied for
centuries, (2) their flavors have been carefully categorized, and (3) classification systems exist to
ensure that flavor is near-consistent across bottles of the same unique bottling.
We bridge the gap between the machine learning and food science communities by presenting
WineSensed, a multimodal wine dataset that consists of images, user reviews, and flavor annotations.
Our motivation is twofold. On one hand, internet photos and user reviews are a scalable source of
data, offering abundant, diverse, and easily accessible insights into wine qualities. On the other hand,
human flavor annotations, while not as scalable, provide a more direct and granular understanding of
the wines’ flavor profile. By combining these resources, we aim to capture the best of both worlds,
yielding a richer, more intricate dataset.
We organized a large sensory study to obtain human-annotated flavor profiles of the wines. The study
applies the “Napping” methodology [Pagès, 2005], which is commonly used to conduct consumer
surveys [Kim et al., 2013, Ribeiro et al., 2020]. In this study, 256 participants annotated their
perceived taste similarities of various wines. In Fig. 1, the “human kernel” illustrates how participants
Submitted to the 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets
and Benchmarks. Do not distribute.

