Diffused Task-Agnostic Milestone Planner

Mineui Hong, Minjae Kang, and Songhwai Oh
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and ASRI
Seoul National University
mineui.hong@rllab.snu.ac.kr, minjae.kang@rllab.snu.ac.kr, songhwai@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Addressing decision-making problems using sequence modeling to predict future
trajectories shows promising results in recent years. In this paper, we take a
step further to leverage the sequence predictive method in wider areas such as
long-term planning, vision-based control, and multi-task decision-making. To
this end, we propose a method to utilize a diffusion-based generative sequence
model to plan a series of milestones in a latent space and to have an agent to
follow the milestones to accomplish a given task. The proposed method can
learn control-relevant, low-dimensional latent representations of milestones, which
makes it possible to efficiently perform long-term planning and vision-based control.
Furthermore, our approach exploits generation flexibility of the diffusion model,
which makes it possible to plan diverse trajectories for multi-task decision-making.
We demonstrate the proposed method across offline reinforcement learning (RL)
benchmarks and an visual manipulation environment. The results show that our
approach outperforms offline RL methods in solving long-horizon, sparse-reward
tasks and multi-task problems, while also achieving the state-of-the-art performance
on the most challenging vision-based manipulation benchmark.

1

Introduction

Developing a general-purpose agent that can handle a variety of decision-making problems is a
long-standing challenge in the field of artificial intelligence. In recent years, there has been a growing
interest in using offline reinforcement learning (RL) to tackle this problem [48, 35, 49]. One of the
main advantages of offline RL is its ability to leverage the data comprised of multiple sub-tasks by
stitching together the relevant transitions to perform a new and more complex task [8]. This property
of offline RL allows an agent to learn diverse behaviors demonstrated by a human or other robots
performing similar tasks. In order to stitch the task-relevant sub-trajectories from the undirected
multi-task data, the majority of the offline RL methods rely on temporal difference learning which
measures the value of the policy by bootstrapping the approximated value functions. However, despite
the successes in the online setting which allows an agent to actively collect data [30, 37, 14], the
bootstrapping method often causes instability in offline learning. To address this problem, the offline
RL methods require special treatments such as using batch-constrained policies [11, 32, 25] and
penalizing the value of out-of-distribution samples [26]. Nevertheless, these methods often show
unstable results depending on the how hyperparameters are tuned [9, 20].
To overcome the instability and tuning complexity of the offline RL methods, bootstrapping-free
methods that directly predict the future trajectories are also presented in recent studies [3, 20, 21, 1].
These methods, called sequence modeling methods, utilize the generative sequence models to predict
future states and actions conditioned on the goal state or the sum of rewards along the trajectory. In
particular, Janner et al. [21] and Ajay et al. [1] propose the methods to predict future trajectories
using the denosing diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM), which have strengths in stitching the
task relevant sub-trajectories from offline data and generating feasible trajectories under various
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

