Better with Less: A Data-Active Perspective on
Pre-Training Graph Neural Networks

Jiarong Xu1∗ , Renhong Huang2 , Xin Jiang3 , Yuxuan Cao2
Carl Yang4 , Chunping Wang5 , Yang Yang2
1
Fudan University, 2 Zhejiang University, 3 Lehigh University
4
Emory University, 5 Finvolution Group
jiarongxu@fudan.edu.cn, {renh2, caoyx, yangya}@zju.edu.cn
xjiang@lehigh.edu, j.carlyang@emory.edu, wangchunping02@xinye.com

Abstract
Pre-training on graph neural networks (GNNs) aims to learn transferable knowledge
for downstream tasks with unlabeled data, and it has recently become an active
research area. The success of graph pre-training models is often attributed to the
massive amount of input data. In this paper, however, we identify the curse of big
data phenomenon in graph pre-training: more training data do not necessarily lead
to better downstream performance. Motivated by this observation, we propose
a better-with-less framework for graph pre-training: fewer, but carefully chosen
data are fed into a GNN model to enhance pre-training. The proposed pre-training
pipeline is called the data-active graph pre-training (APT) framework, and is
composed of a graph selector and a pre-training model. The graph selector chooses
the most representative and instructive data points based on the inherent properties
of graphs as well as predictive uncertainty. The proposed predictive uncertainty,
as feedback from the pre-training model, measures the confidence level of the
model in the data. When fed with the chosen data, on the other hand, the pretraining model grasps an initial understanding of the new, unseen data, and at
the same time attempts to remember the knowledge learned from previous data.
Therefore, the integration and interaction between these two components form a
unified framework (APT), in which graph pre-training is performed in a progressive
and iterative way. Experiment results show that the proposed APT is able to obtain
an efficient pre-training model with fewer training data and better downstream
performance.

1

Introduction

Pre-training Graph neural networks (GNNs) shows great potential to be an attractive and competitive
strategy for learning from graph data without costly labels [29, 50]. Recent advancements have
been made in developing various graph pre-training strategies, which aim to capture transferable
patterns from a diverse set of unlabeled graph data [22, 30, 31, 40, 44, 60, 76, 77]. Very often, the
success of a graph pre-training model is attributed to the massive amount of unlabeled training data,
a well-established consensus for pre-training in computer vision [12, 19, 26] and natural language
processing [11, 45].
In view of this, contemporary research almost has no controversy on the following issue: Is a massive
amount of input data really necessary, or even beneficial, for pre-training GNNs? Yet, two simple
experiments regarding the number of training samples (and graph datasets) seem to doubt the positive
* Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

