Optimal Convergence Rate for Exact Policy Mirror
Descent in Discounted Markov Decision Processes
Emmeran Johnson
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
emmeran.johnson17@imperial.ac.uk

Ciara Pike-Burke
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
c.pike-burke@imperial.ac.uk

Patrick Rebeschini
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
patrick.rebeschini@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Policy Mirror Descent (PMD) is a general family of algorithms that covers a wide
range of novel and fundamental methods in reinforcement learning. Motivated
by the instability of policy iteration (PI) with inexact policy evaluation, PMD
algorithmically regularises the policy improvement step of PI. With exact policy
evaluation, PI is known to converge linearly with a rate given by the discount factor
γ of a Markov Decision Process. In this work, we bridge the gap between PI and
PMD with exact policy evaluation and show that the dimension-free γ-rate of PI
can be achieved by the general family of unregularised PMD algorithms under
an adaptive step-size. We show that both the rate and step-size are unimprovable
for PMD: we provide matching lower bounds that demonstrate that the γ-rate is
optimal for PMD methods as well as PI, and that the adaptive step-size is necessary
for PMD to achieve it. Our work is the first to relate PMD to rate-optimality and
step-size necessity. Our study of the convergence of PMD avoids the use of the
performance difference lemma, which leads to a direct analysis of independent
interest. We also extend the analysis to the inexact setting and establish the first
dimension-optimal sample complexity for unregularised PMD under a generative
model, improving upon the best-known result.

1

Introduction

The problem of finding an optimal policy in tabular discounted Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
was classically solved using dynamic programming approaches such as policy iteration (PI) and
value iteration (VI) [29, 35]. These methods are well understood theoretically and are guaranteed to
converge linearly to the optimal policy in the tabular setting with a rate equal to the discount factor γ
of the MDP [9]. Recently, increased interest has been devoted to the study of policy-gradient (PG)
approaches based on optimising a parameterised policy with respect to an objective [36, 23, 20].
Given their popularity, it is of interest to better understand PG methods and determine if their
guarantees match those of classical algorithms in tabular MDPs. Among the recent works focused on
understanding these methods in the tabular setting, [38] study a general family of algorithms known
as Policy Mirror Descent (PMD). PMD algorithmically regularises the policy improvement step of PI
and as such can be seen as a version of regularised PI, without actually regularising the objective
of interest. It is also viewed as a policy-gradient method through its connection to mirror descent
[8]. Linear convergence of PMD was established by [38], though their rate depends on an instance37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

