Partial Multi-Label Learning with Probabilistic
Graphical Disambiguation

Jun-Yi Hang, Min-Ling Zhang∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University),
Ministry of Education, China
{hangjy, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
In partial multi-label learning (PML), each training example is associated with a set
of candidate labels, among which only some labels are valid. As a common strategy
to tackle PML problem, disambiguation aims to recover the ground-truth labeling information from such inaccurate annotations. However, existing approaches
mainly rely on heuristics or ad-hoc rules to disambiguate candidate labels, which
may not be universal enough in complicated real-world scenarios. To provide a
principled way for disambiguation, we make a first attempt to explore the probabilistic graphical model for PML problem, where a directed graph is tailored to
infer latent ground-truth labeling information from the generative process of partial
multi-label data. Under the framework of stochastic gradient variational Bayes,
a unified variational lower bound is derived for this graphical model, which is
further relaxed probabilistically so that the desired prediction model can be induced
with simultaneously identified ground-truth labeling information. Comprehensive
experiments on multiple synthetic and real-world data sets show that our approach
outperforms the state-of-the-art counterparts.

1

Introduction

Partial multi-label learning aims to induce a multi-label predictor from inaccurately annotated
examples, where a set of candidate labels is assigned to each training example but only some of
these candidate ones are valid. The problem of PML naturally arises in many real-world applications
[39, 51, 52, 20]. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, the data collected from the crowdsourcing
platform is inevitable to contain inaccurate supervision information due to potential unreliable
annotators, where invalid labels exist in the set of candidate labels.
Formally, let X = Rd denote the input space and Y = {l1 , l2 , . . . , lt } denote the label space with t
class labels. A partial multi-label example is denoted as (x, S), where x ∈ X is its feature vector and
S ⊆ Y is its set of candidate labels. As a basic assumption of PML, the ground-truth labels reside in
the candidate label set, i.e. Y ⊆ S, and are concealed from the learning algorithm. Given a partial
multi-label data set D = {(xi , Si )|1 ≤ i ≤ m}, the goal of PML is to derive a multi-label predictor
h : X → 2Y which can accurately predict all the ground-truth labels for an unseen instance.
A straightforward strategy for tackling the problem of PML is to simply treat all the candidate labels
as valid ones and then apply off-the-shelf multi-label learning approaches [50, 23] to induce the
predictor. This naïve strategy is obviously suboptimal as the learning process will be significantly
misled by the noisy labels in the candidate label set.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

