AdaPlanner: Adaptive Planning from Feedback with
Language Models

Haotian Sun1∗, Yuchen Zhuang1∗, Lingkai Kong1 , Bo Dai1 , Chao Zhang1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology
{haotian.sun, yczhuang, lkkong, chaozhang}@gatech.edu, bodai@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have recently demonstrated the potential in acting
as autonomous agents for sequential decision-making tasks. However, most existing methods either take actions greedily without planning or rely on static plans that
are not adaptable to environmental feedback. Consequently, the sequential decisionmaking performance of LLM agents degenerates with problem complexity and plan
horizons increase. We propose a closed-loop approach, AdaPlanner, which allows
the LLM agent to refine its self-generated plan adaptively in response to environmental feedback. In AdaPlanner, the LLM agent adaptively refines its plan from
feedback with both in-plan and out-of-plan refinement strategies. To mitigate hallucination, we develop a code-style LLM prompt structure that facilitates plan generation across a variety of tasks, environments, and agent capabilities. Furthermore,
we propose a skill discovery mechanism that leverages successful plans as few-shot
exemplars, enabling the agent to plan and refine with fewer task demonstrations.
Our experiments in the ALFWorld and MiniWoB++ environments demonstrate that
AdaPlanner outperforms state-of-the-art baselines by 3.73% and 4.11% while utilizing 2x and 600x fewer samples, respectively. The implementation of AdaPlanner
is available at https://github.com/haotiansun14/AdaPlanner.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have recently emerged as versatile autonomous agents for sequential decision-making in grounded environments. Traditional decision-making methodologies like
Reinforcement Learning (RL) require extensive task-specific training data and often lack the ability
to generalize across tasks and environments. In contrast, LLMs are pre-trained on massive and
diverse textual data, which gives them extensive world knowledge and the ability to reason over the
knowledge. This makes them highly versatile and able to handle complex, real-world scenarios that
may involve multiple steps of planning and decision-making.
Existing methods that leverage LLMs as autonomous agents for decision-making can be briefly
categorized into two groups (Table 1): open-loop systems and closed-loop systems. Open-loop
methods [24, 27, 5, 18, 12, 17, 16] rely on pre-determined plans to accomplish the desired task without
any feedback adaptation mechanism. On the other hand, closed-loop systems [25, 6, 8, 22, 9, 19, 23]
incorporate environment feedback to continuously monitor system behaviors and make refinements
and adjustments of the plans accordingly, which therefore is more flexible.
However, both existing open-loop and closed-loop LLM agents have inherent drawbacks. Open-loop
systems are computationally cheap and simple; however, they do not consider feedback from the
environment and stick to the initial plan, which lack of adaptability, and, thus, can easily generate
suboptimal plans. On the other hand, most existing closed-loop methods generate a fixed plan
and only update their executing actions upon environment feedback. This causes them to make
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

