Evaluating Robustness and Uncertainty of Graph
Models Under Structural Distributional Shifts
Gleb Bazhenov∗
HSE University, Yandex Research
Andrey Malinin†
Isomorphic Labs

Denis Kuznedelev
Yandex Research, Skoltech

Artem Babenko
Yandex Research, HSE University

Liudmila Prokhorenkova
Yandex Research

Abstract
In reliable decision-making systems based on machine learning, models have to be
robust to distributional shifts or provide the uncertainty of their predictions. In nodelevel problems of graph learning, distributional shifts can be especially complex
since the samples are interdependent. To evaluate the performance of graph models,
it is important to test them on diverse and meaningful distributional shifts. However,
most graph benchmarks considering distributional shifts for node-level problems
focus mainly on node features, while structural properties are also essential for
graph problems. In this work, we propose a general approach for inducing diverse
distributional shifts based on graph structure. We use this approach to create data
splits according to several structural node properties: popularity, locality, and
density. In our experiments, we thoroughly evaluate the proposed distributional
shifts and show that they can be quite challenging for existing graph models. We
also reveal that simple models often outperform more sophisticated methods on the
considered structural shifts. Finally, our experiments provide evidence that there is
a trade-off between the quality of learned representations for the base classification
task under structural distributional shift and the ability to separate the nodes from
different distributions using these representations.

1

Introduction

Recently, much effort has been put into creating decision-making systems based on machine learning
for various high-risk applications, such as financial operations, medical diagnostics, autonomous
driving, etc. These systems should comprise several important properties that allow users to rely on
their predictions. One such property is robustness, the ability of an underlying model to cope with
distributional shifts when the features of test inputs become different from those encountered in the
training phase. At the same time, if a model is unable to maintain high performance on a shifted input,
it should signal the potential problems by providing some measure of uncertainty. These properties
are especially difficult to satisfy in the node-level prediction tasks on graph data since the elements
are interdependent, and thus the distributional shifts may be even more complex than for the classic
setup with i.i.d. samples.
To evaluate graph models in the node-level problems, it is important to test them under diverse,
complex, and meaningful distributional shifts. Unfortunately, most existing graph datasets split
the nodes into train and test parts uniformly at random. Rare exceptions include the Open Graph
Benchmark (OGB) [12] that creates more challenging non-random data splits by dividing the nodes
∗
†

Correspondence to gv-bazhenov@yandex-team.ru
Work done while at Yandex Research

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

