SQ Lower Bounds for Non-Gaussian Component
Analysis with Weaker Assumptions

Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane
University of California, San Diego
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Lisheng Ren
University of Wisconsin-Madison
lren29@wisc.edu

Yuxin Sun
University of Wisconsin-Madison
yxsun@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the complexity of Non-Gaussian Component Analysis (NGCA) in the
Statistical Query (SQ) model. Prior work developed a general methodology to
prove SQ lower bounds for this task that have been applicable to a wide range of
contexts. In particular, it was known that for any univariate distribution A satisfying certain conditions, distinguishing between a standard multivariate Gaussian
and a distribution that behaves like A in a random hidden direction and like a standard Gaussian in the orthogonal complement, is SQ-hard. The required conditions
were that (1) A matches many low-order moments with the standard univariate
Gaussian, and (2) the chi-squared norm of A with respect to the standard Gaussian is finite. While the moment-matching condition is necessary for hardness, the
chi-squared condition was only required for technical reasons. In this work, we
establish that the latter condition is indeed not necessary. In particular, we prove
near-optimal SQ lower bounds for NGCA under the moment-matching condition
only. Our result naturally generalizes to the setting of a hidden subspace. Leveraging our general SQ lower bound, we obtain near-optimal SQ lower bounds for a
range of concrete estimation tasks where existing techniques provide sub-optimal
or even vacuous guarantees.

1

Introduction

Non-Gaussian Component Analysis (NGCA) is a statistical estimation task first considered in the
signal processing literature [BKS+ 06]. As the name suggests, the objective is to find a non-gaussian
direction (or, more generally, low-dimensional subspace) in a high-dimensional dataset. Since its introduction, the NGCA problem has been studied in a range of works from an algorithmic standpoint;
see [TV18, GS19] and references therein. Here we explore this problem from a hardness perspective in the Statistical Query (SQ) model. Before we motivate and state our results, we require basic
background on the SQ model.
SQ Model SQ algorithms are a class of algorithms that are allowed to query expectations of
bounded functions on the underlying distribution through the SQ oracle rather than directly access samples. The model was introduced by Kearns [Kea98] as a natural restriction of the PAC
model [Val84] in the context of learning Boolean functions. Since then, the SQ model has been
extensively studied in a range of settings, including unsupervised learning [Fel16]. The class of SQ
algorithms is broad and captures a range of known algorithmic techniques in machine learning in37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

