STORM: Efficient Stochastic Transformer based
World Models for Reinforcement Learning

Weipu Zhang, Gang Wang∗, Jian Sun, Yetian Yuan
National Key Lab of Autonomous Intelligent Unmanned Systems, Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing Institute of Technology Chongqing Innovation Center
zhangwp.bit@gmail.com, {gangwang,sunjian,ytyuan}@bit.edu.cn
Gao Huang
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University
gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, model-based reinforcement learning algorithms have demonstrated remarkable efficacy in visual input environments. These approaches begin by constructing a parameterized simulation world model of the real environment through
self-supervised learning. By leveraging the imagination of the world model, the
agent’s policy is enhanced without the constraints of sampling from the real environment. The performance of these algorithms heavily relies on the sequence
modeling and generation capabilities of the world model. However, constructing a
perfectly accurate model of a complex unknown environment is nearly impossible.
Discrepancies between the model and reality may cause the agent to pursue virtual
goals, resulting in subpar performance in the real environment. Introducing random
noise into model-based reinforcement learning has been proven beneficial. In this
work, we introduce Stochastic Transformer-based wORld Model (STORM), an
efficient world model architecture that combines the strong sequence modeling and
generation capabilities of Transformers with the stochastic nature of variational
autoencoders. STORM achieves a mean human performance of 126.7% on the
Atari 100k benchmark, setting a new record among state-of-the-art methods that
do not employ lookahead search techniques. Moreover, training an agent with 1.85
hours of real-time interaction experience on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090
graphics card requires only 4.3 hours, showcasing improved efficiency compared
to previous methodologies.
We release our code at https://github.com/weipu-zhang/STORM.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has exhibited remarkable success across diverse domains. However, its widespread application in real-world environments is hindered by the substantial number
of interactions with the environment required for achieving such success. This limitation becomes
particularly challenging when dealing with broader real-world settings in e.g., unmanned and manufacturing systems [1, 2] that lack adjustable speed simulation tools. Consequently, improving the
sample efficiency has emerged as a key challenge for DRL algorithms.
Popular DRL methods, including Rainbow [3] and PPO [4], suffer from low sample efficiency due to
two primary reasons. Firstly, the estimation of the value function proves to be a challenging task. This
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

