Cheaply Estimating Inference Efficiency Metrics for
Autoregressive Transformer Models

Deepak Narayanan∗
NVIDIA

Keshav Santhanam
Stanford University

Peter Henderson
Stanford University

dnarayanan@nvidia.com

keshav2@cs.stanford.edu

phend@cs.stanford.edu

Rishi Bommasani
Stanford University

Tony Lee
Stanford University

Percy Liang
Stanford University

nlprishi@stanford.edu

tonyhlee@stanford.edu

pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are highly capable but also computationally expensive. Characterizing the fundamental tradeoff between inference efficiency
and model capabilities is thus important, but requires an efficiency metric that is
comparable across models from different providers. Unfortunately, raw runtimes
measured through black-box APIs do not satisfy this property: model providers
can implement software and hardware optimizations orthogonal to the model, and
shared infrastructure introduces performance contention. We propose a new metric for inference efficiency called idealized runtime, that puts models on equal
footing as though they were served on uniform hardware and software without
performance contention, and a cost model to efficiently estimate this metric for
autoregressive Transformer models. We also propose variants of the idealized
runtime that incorporate the number and type of accelerators needed to serve
the model. Using these metrics, we compare ten LLMs developed in 2022 to
provide the first analysis of inference efficiency-capability tradeoffs; we make
several observations from this analysis, including the fact that the superior inference runtime performance of certain APIs is often a byproduct of optimizations
within the API rather than the underlying model. Our code is open sourced at
https://github.com/stanford-crfm/helm-efficiency.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs; Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021; Lieber et al.,
2021; Smith et al., 2022; Black et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023) have grown
in size by almost four orders of magnitude in recent years, achieving state-of-the-art accuracy on
traditional tasks like question answering and summarization (Zellers et al., 2019; Hendrycks et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2023). LLMs display many exciting new capabilities as well, like reasoning
about the physical world (Bisk et al., 2020), solving math problems (Cobbe et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2023), and generating code (Chen et al., 2021), to name a few. To capitalize on these capabilities,
several organizations offer access to LLMs through black-box APIs (OpenAI; AI21; Cohere) and
many companies are deploying LLM-powered products at scale like ChatGPT, Bing, jasper.ai and
Github Copilot (Reuters; Microsoft; Scale VP).
When building models, both users and developers must balance the benefits of new capabilities against
the costs of scale. Recent efforts have begun to systematically evaluate and compare the downstream
∗

Work done while author was at Microsoft Research.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

