On Sparse Modern Hopfield Model
Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu†
Chenwei Xu†

Donglin Yang†
Bo-Yu Chen‡

Dennis Wu†

Han Liu†♮

†

Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 USA
‡
Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
♮
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 USA
{jhu, dlyang, hibb, cxu}@u.northwestern.edu
b12202023@ntu.edu.tw, hanliu@northwestern.edu

Abstract
We introduce the sparse modern Hopfield model as a sparse extension of the modern Hopfield model. Like its dense counterpart, the sparse modern Hopfield model
equips a memory-retrieval dynamics whose one-step approximation corresponds to
the sparse attention mechanism. Theoretically, our key contribution is a principled
derivation of a closed-form sparse Hopfield energy using the convex conjugate of
the sparse entropic regularizer. Building upon this, we derive the sparse memory
retrieval dynamics from the sparse energy function and show its one-step approximation is equivalent to the sparse-structured attention. Importantly, we provide a
sparsity-dependent memory retrieval error bound which is provably tighter than
its dense analog. The conditions for the benefits of sparsity to arise are therefore
identified and discussed. In addition, we show that the sparse modern Hopfield
model maintains the robust theoretical properties of its dense counterpart, including
rapid fixed point convergence and exponential memory capacity. Empirically, we
use both synthetic and real-world datasets to demonstrate that the sparse Hopfield
model outperforms its dense counterpart in many situations.

1

Introduction

We address the computational challenges of modern Hopfield models by introducing a sparse Hopfield
model. Our sparse continuous Hopfield model equips a memory-retrieval dynamics that aligns with the
sparse-structured attention mechanism. By establishing a connection to sparse attention, the proposed
model not only offers a theoretically-grounded energy-based model for associative memory but also
enables robust representation learning and seamless integration with deep learning architectures. This
approach serves as an initial attempt of pushing the correspondence1 between Hopfield models and
attention mechanism [Ramsauer et al., 2021] toward sparse region, both theoretically and empirically,
resulting in data-dependent sparsity for meaningful and robust pattern representations, and a focus on
the most relevant information for each specific instance.
Hopfield models are classic associative memory models for both biological and artificial neural
networks [Hopfield, 1982, 1984]. These models are designed to store and retrieve memory patterns.
They achieve these by embedding the memories in the energy landscape of a physical system (e.g.,
the Ising model in [Hopfield, 1982, Peretto and Niez, 1986]; see Figure 3 for a visualization), where
each memory corresponds to a local minimum. When a query is presented, the model initiates
energy-minimizing retrieval dynamics at the query, which then navigate the energy landscape to find
the nearest local minimum, effectively retrieving the memory most similar to the query.
Code is available at GitHub; future updates are on arXiv. [Version: Novermber, 28, 2023]
While this equivalence only holds when the retrieval dynamics is applied exactly once, as originally shown
in [Ramsauer et al., 2021] and later emphasized in [Krotov and Hopfield, 2021], it allows us to view modern
Hopfield models as generalized attentions with additional functionalities and hence opens new avenues for
Hopfield-based architecture designs. See Appendix C for more discussions.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

