A Tale of Two Features: Stable Diffusion Complements
DINO for Zero-Shot Semantic Correspondence

Junyi Zhang1
Charles Herrmann2
Junhwa Hur2
Luisa F. Polanía2
2
2
Varun Jampani
Deqing Sun
Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2

Google Research

3

UC Merced

https://sd-complements-dino.github.io

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models have made significant advances in generating and
editing high-quality images. As a result, numerous approaches have explored
the ability of diffusion model features to understand and process single images
for downstream tasks, e.g., classification, semantic segmentation, and stylization.
However, significantly less is known about what these features reveal across multiple, different images and objects. In this work, we exploit Stable Diffusion (SD)
features for semantic and dense correspondence and discover that with simple postprocessing, SD features can perform quantitatively similar to SOTA representations.
Interestingly, our analysis reveals that SD features have very different properties
compared to existing representation learning features, such as the recently released
DINOv2: while DINOv2 provides sparse but accurate matches, SD features provide
high-quality spatial information but sometimes inaccurate semantic matches. We
demonstrate that a simple fusion of the two features works surprisingly well, and a
zero-shot evaluation via nearest neighbor search on the fused features provides a
significant performance gain over state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets,
e.g., SPair-71k, PF-Pascal, and TSS. We also show that these correspondences
enable high-quality object swapping without task-specific fine-tuning.

1

Introduction

Recent findings from text-to-image diffusion models [44, 48, 50] have attracted increasing attention
to analyze and understand their internal representations for a single image. Due to the text-to-image
diffusion model’s ability to effectively connect a text prompt to the content in the images, they
should be able to understand what an image contains and were recently shown in [11, 31] to be
effective classifiers. Furthermore, since these models can generate specific scenes and have some
degree of control over the layout and placement of objects [72], they should be able to localize
objects and were shown in [68] to be effective for semantic segmentation. In addition, several other
methods [12, 17, 27, 65] focus on accessing and editing features for downstream tasks such as
stylization and image editing.
However, these approaches have almost exclusively examined the properties of text-to-image diffusion
features on a single image; significantly less is known about how these features relate across multiple,
different images and objects. Simply put, in Stable Diffusion, how similar are the features of a cat
to the features of a dog? In this paper, we focus on understanding how features in different images
relate to one another by examining Stable Diffusion (SD) features through the lens of semantic
correspondences, a classical vision task that aims to connect similar pixels in two or more images.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

