Sampling from Gaussian Process Posteriors
using Stochastic Gradient Descent

Jihao Andreas Lin∗1, 2
Javier Antorán∗1
Shreyas Padhy∗1
3
1
David Janz
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
Alexander Terenin1, 4
1
2
University of Cambridge
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
3
4
University of Alberta
Cornell University

Abstract
Gaussian processes are a powerful framework for quantifying uncertainty and for
sequential decision-making but are limited by the requirement of solving linear systems. In general, this has a cubic cost in dataset size and is sensitive to conditioning.
We explore stochastic gradient algorithms as a computationally efficient method of
approximately solving these linear systems: we develop low-variance optimization
objectives for sampling from the posterior and extend these to inducing points.
Counterintuitively, stochastic gradient descent often produces accurate predictions,
even in cases where it does not converge quickly to the optimum. We explain
this through a spectral characterization of the implicit bias from non-convergence.
We show that stochastic gradient descent produces predictive distributions close
to the true posterior both in regions with sufficient data coverage, and in regions
sufficiently far away from the data. Experimentally, stochastic gradient descent
achieves state-of-the-art performance on sufficiently large-scale or ill-conditioned
regression tasks. Its uncertainty estimates match the performance of significantly
more expensive baselines on a large-scale Bayesian optimization task.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) provide a comprehensive framework for learning unknown functions in an
uncertainty-aware manner. This often makes Gaussian processes the model of choice for sequential
decision-making, achieving state-of-the-art performance in tasks such as optimizing molecules in
computational chemistry settings [21] and automated hyperparameter tuning [39, 24].
The main limitations of Gaussian processes is that their computational cost is cubic in the training
dataset size. Significant research efforts have been directed at addressing this limitation resulting in
two key classes of scalable inference methods: (i) inducing point methods [43, 23], which approximate
the GP posterior, and (ii) conjugate gradient methods [20, 19, 4], which approximate the computation
needed to obtain the GP posterior. Note that in structured settings, such as geospatial learning in low
dimensions, specialized techniques are available [49, 48, 15]. Throughout this work, we focus on the
generic setting, where scalability limitations are as of yet unresolved.
In recent years, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has emerged as the leading technique for training
machine learning models at scale [37, 42], in both deep learning and related settings like kernel
methods [14] and Bayesian modeling [29]. While the principles behind the effectiveness of SGD
are not yet fully understood, empirically, SGD often leads to good predictive performance—even
when it does not fully converge. The latter is the default regime in deep learning, and has motivated
researchers to study implicit biases and related properties of SGD [6, 52].
∗
Equal contribution, order chosen randomly.
Code available at: HTTPS :// GITHUB . COM / CAMBRIDGE - MLG / SGD - GP.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

