WildfireSpreadTS: A dataset of multi-modal time
series for wildfire spread prediction

Sebastian Gerard, Yu Zhao, Josephine Sullivan
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
11428 Stockholm, Sweden
{sgerard, zhao2, sullivan}@kth.se

Abstract
We present a multi-temporal, multi-modal remote-sensing dataset for predicting
how active wildfires will spread at a resolution of 24 hours. The dataset consists of 13 607 images across 607 fire events in the United States from January
2018 to October 2021. For each fire event, the dataset contains a full time series of daily observations, containing detected active fires and variables related
to fuel, topography and weather conditions. The dataset is challenging due to:
a) its inputs being multi-temporal, b) the high number of 23 multi-modal input
channels, c) highly imbalanced labels and d) noisy labels, due to smoke, clouds,
and inaccuracies in the active fire detection. The underlying complexity of the
physical processes adds to these challenges. Compared to existing public datasets
in this area, W ILDFIRE S PREAD TS allows for multi-temporal modeling of spreading wildfires, due to its time series structure. Furthermore, we provide additional
input modalities and a high spatial resolution of 375m for the active fire maps.
We publish this dataset to encourage further research on this important task with
multi-temporal, noise-resistant or generative methods, uncertainty estimation or
advanced optimization techniques that deal with the high-dimensional input space.

1

Introduction

With progressing climate change, the risk and severity of wildfires is expected to increase Shukla
et al., 2019. Current active fire products Wooster et al., 2021, that monitor such wildfires, use
satellite-based observations to detect the current locations of wildfires, but do not predict their future
spread. Regarding the use of modern deep learning in this field, much of the existing research focuses
on detection, too. This includes work on early detection and continuous mapping of active fires Zhao
et al., 2022, as well as the detection of burned areas Ban et al., 2020. To go beyond detection and
predict future fires, several datasets Sayad et al., 2019; Tavakkoli Piralilou et al., 2022; Prapas et al.,
2021; Prapas et al., 2022; Kondylatos et al., 2022 have recently been published to estimate fire risk.
However, to fight an ongoing fire, predictions should be conditioned on the already existing fire, and
have a high temporal resolution. While some research exists in this area (see section 3), the topic
of predicting the future spread of active fires is still under-explored and most existing papers do
not publish the data they use. This lack of public datasets makes it harder for researchers who are
unfamiliar with the acquisition of remote sensing data to contribute their knowledge and skills. By
releasing W ILDFIRE S PREAD TS, we want to help bridge this gap.
For a fire to burn, three components are required: fuel, oxygen, and heat. How quickly and in
which direction the fire spreads is governed by fuel conditions, wind, and topography. Relevant fuel
conditions include the type and amount of fuel, as well as its humidity. This dataset is a combination
of existing data products that capture different aspects of all of these features, as well as the active fire
masks indicating the fire’s location. To determine the location of active fire, we use the VIIRS active
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

