Causal Interpretation of Self-Attention
in Pre-Trained Transformers
Raanan Y. Rohekar
Intel Labs

Yaniv Gurwicz
Intel Labs

Shami Nisimov
Intel Labs

raanan.yehezkel@intel.com

yaniv.gurwicz@intel.com

shami.nisimov@intel.com

Abstract
We propose a causal interpretation of self-attention in the Transformer neural
network architecture. We interpret self-attention as a mechanism that estimates
a structural equation model for a given input sequence of symbols (tokens). The
structural equation model can be interpreted, in turn, as a causal structure over
the input symbols under the specific context of the input sequence. Importantly,
this interpretation remains valid in the presence of latent confounders. Following
this interpretation, we estimate conditional independence relations between input
symbols by calculating partial correlations between their corresponding representations in the deepest attention layer. This enables learning the causal structure
over an input sequence using existing constraint-based algorithms. In this sense,
existing pre-trained Transformers can be utilized for zero-shot causal-discovery.
We demonstrate this method by providing causal explanations for the outcomes of
Transformers in two tasks: sentiment classification (NLP) and recommendation.

1

Introduction

Causality plays an important role in many sciences such as epidemiology, social sciences, and finance
(25; 34). Understanding the underlying causal mechanisms is crucial for tasks such as explaining a
phenomenon, predicting, and decision making. An automated discovery of causal structures from
observed data alone is an important problem in artificial intelligence. It is particularity challenging
when latent confounders may exist. One family of algorithms (35; 7; 8; 46; 30), called constraintbased, recovers in the large sample limit an equivalence class of the true underlying graph. However,
they require a statistical test to be provided. The statistical test is often sensitive to small sample
size, and in some cases it is not clear which statistical test is suitable for the data. Moreover, these
method assume that data samples are generated from a single causal graph, and are designed to
learn a single equivalence class. There are cases where data samples may be generated by different
causal mechanisms and it is not clear how to learn the correct causal graph for each data sample.
For example, decision process may be different among humans. Data collected about their actions
may not be represented by a single causal graph. This is the case for recommender systems that are
required to provide a personalized recommendation for a user, based on her past actions. In addition,
it is desirable that such automated systems will provide a tangible explanation to why the specific
recommendation was given.
Recently, deep neural networks, based on the Transformer architecture (39) have been shown to
achieve state-of-the-art accuracy in domains such as natural language processing (9; 3; 45), vision
(10; 19), and recommender systems (36; 18). The Transformer is based on the attention mechanism,
where it calculates context-dependent weights for a given input (32). Given an input consisting of
a sequence of symbols (tokens), the Transformer is able to capture complex dependencies, but it is
unclear how they are represented in the Transformer nor how to extract them.
∗

All authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

