Learning Layer-wise Equivariances
Automatically using Gradients
Tycho F.A. van der Ouderaa1

Alexander Immer2,3

Mark van der Wilk1,4

1

Department of Computing, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom

Abstract
Convolutions encode equivariance symmetries into neural networks leading to
better generalisation performance. However, symmetries provide fixed hard constraints on the functions a network can represent, need to be specified in advance,
and can not be adapted. Our goal is to allow flexible symmetry constraints that
can automatically be learned from data using gradients. Learning symmetry and
associated weight connectivity structures from scratch is difficult for two reasons.
First, it requires efficient and flexible parameterisations of layer-wise equivariances. Secondly, symmetries act as constraints and are therefore not encouraged
by training losses measuring data fit. To overcome these challenges, we improve
parameterisations of soft equivariance and learn the amount of equivariance in
layers by optimising the marginal likelihood, estimated using differentiable Laplace
approximations. The objective balances data fit and model complexity enabling
layer-wise symmetry discovery in deep networks. We demonstrate the ability to automatically learn layer-wise equivariances on image classification tasks, achieving
equivalent or improved performance over baselines with hard-coded symmetry.

1

Introduction

Symmetry constraints, such as layer-wise equivariances of convolutional layers, allow neural networks
to generalise efficiently [Cohen and Welling, 2016]. However, it is not always clear which symmetries
to use and how much they should be enforced. In digit recognition, some rotational robustness
is desirable, but strict invariance may make 6’s and 9’s indistinguishable. Similarly, translation
equivariance prevents rate coding of relevant positional information [Sabour et al., 2017]. We propose
a method to automatically learn the type and amount of layer-wise equivariances from training data.
To do so, we relax symmetries building upon recent literature on approximate equivariance, including
residual pathways [Finzi et al., 2021a] and non-stationary filters [van der Ouderaa et al., 2022], effectively allowing controllable interpolation between strict equivariance or less constrained functions. To
remain practical, we propose extensions to keep the parameter count similar to classic convolutions.
Allowing for differentiable selection between equivariances alone is not enough, as symmetries act as
constraints and are therefore not encouraged by training losses that measure data fit, as noted in van der
Ouderaa and van der Wilk [2021], Immer et al. [2021]. Search over many continuous hyperparameters
with cross-validation is infeasible, relying on expensive retraining, hold-out validation data and does
not leverage gradients. Instead, we follow Bayesian model selection through differentiable Laplace
approximations to learn layer-wise equivariances from training data in a single training procedure.
We demonstrate automatically learning layer-wise symmetry structure on image classification tasks.
To do so, we improve upon existing parameterisations of differentiable equivariance and derive
corresponding Kronecker-factored Laplace approximations to the marginal likelihood. On image
classification, we show that our method automatically learns convolutional structure in early layers
and achieves similar or improved performance compared to architectures with hard-coded symmetry.
Code accompanying this paper is available at https://github.com/tychovdo/ella
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

