Color Equivariant Convolutional Networks

Attila Lengyel Ombretta Strafforello Robert-Jan Bruintjes
Alexander Gielisse Jan van Gemert
Computer Vision Lab
Delft University of Technology
Delft, The Netherlands

Abstract
Color is a crucial visual cue readily exploited by Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) for object recognition. However, CNNs struggle if there is data imbalance
between color variations introduced by accidental recording conditions. Color
invariance addresses this issue but does so at the cost of removing all color information, which sacrifices discriminative power. In this paper, we propose Color
Equivariant Convolutions (CEConvs), a novel deep learning building block that
enables shape feature sharing across the color spectrum while retaining important
color information. We extend the notion of equivariance from geometric to photometric transformations by incorporating parameter sharing over hue-shifts in a
neural network. We demonstrate the benefits of CEConvs in terms of downstream
performance to various tasks and improved robustness to color changes, including
train-test distribution shifts. Our approach can be seamlessly integrated into existing architectures, such as ResNets, and offers a promising solution for addressing
color-based domain shifts in CNNs.

1

Introduction

Color is a powerful cue for visual object recognition. Trichromatic color vision in primates may
have developed to aid the detection of ripe fruits against a background of green foliage [38, 45].
The benefit of color vision here is two-fold: not only does color information improve foregroundbackground segmentation by rendering foreground objects more salient, color also allows diagnostics,
e.g. identifying the type (orange) and ripeness (green) where color is an intrinsic property facilitating
recognition [3], as illustrated in Fig. 1a. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) too exploit color
information by learning color selective features that respond differently based on the presence or
absence of a particular color in the input [42].
Unwanted color variations, however, can be introduced by accidental scene recording conditions such
as illumination changes [29, 48], or by low color-diagnostic objects occurring in a variety of colors,
making color no longer a discriminative feature but rather an undesired source of variation in the data.
Given a sufficiently large training set that encompasses all possible color variations, a CNN learns to
become robust by learning color invariant and equivariant features from the available data [36, 37].
However, due to the long tail of the real world it is almost impossible to collect balanced training
data for all scenarios. This naturally leads to color distribution shifts between training and test time,
and an imbalance in the training data where less frequently occurring colors are underrepresented.
As CNNs often fail to generalize to out-of-distribution test samples, this can have significant impact
on many real-world applications, e.g. a model trained mostly on red cars may struggle to recognize
the exact same car in blue.
Color invariance addresses this issue through features that are by design invariant to color changes
and therefore generalize better under appearance variations [14, 17]. However, color invariance
comes at the loss of discriminative power as valuable color information is removed from the model’s
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

