Approximately Equivariant Graph Networks

Ningyuan (Teresa) Huang
Johns Hopkins University
nhuang19@jhu.edu

Ron Levie
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
levieron@technion.ac.il

Soledad Villar
Johns Hopkins University
svillar3@jhu.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are commonly described as being permutation
equivariant with respect to node relabeling in the graph. This symmetry of GNNs
is often compared to the translation equivariance of Euclidean convolution neural
networks (CNNs). However, these two symmetries are fundamentally different: The
translation equivariance of CNNs corresponds to symmetries of the fixed domain
acting on the image signals (sometimes known as active symmetries), whereas
in GNNs any permutation acts on both the graph signals and the graph domain
(sometimes described as passive symmetries). In this work, we focus on the active
symmetries of GNNs, by considering a learning setting where signals are supported
on a fixed graph. In this case, the natural symmetries of GNNs are the automorphisms of the graph. Since real-world graphs tend to be asymmetric, we relax the
notion of symmetries by formalizing approximate symmetries via graph coarsening.
We present a bias-variance formula that quantifies the tradeoff between the loss in
expressivity and the gain in the regularity of the learned estimator, depending on
the chosen symmetry group. To illustrate our approach, we conduct extensive experiments on image inpainting, traffic flow prediction, and human pose estimation
with different choices of symmetries. We show theoretically and empirically that
the best generalization performance can be achieved by choosing a suitably larger
group than the graph automorphism, but smaller than the permutation group.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are popular tools to learn functions on graphs. They are commonly
designed to be permutation equivariant since the node ordering can be arbitrary (in the matrix
representation of a graph). Permutation equivariance serves as a strong geometric prior and allows
GNNs to generalize well [1–3]. Yet in many applications, the node ordering across different graphs
is matched or fixed a priori, such as a time series of social networks where the nodes identify the
same users, or a set of skeleton graphs where the nodes represent the same joints. In such settings,
the natural symmetries arise from graph automorphisms, which effectively only act on the graph
signals; This is inherently different from the standard equivariance in GNNs that concerns all possible
permutations acting on both the signals and the graph domain. A permutation of both the graph
and the graph signal can be seen as a change of coordinates since it does not change the object it
represents, just the way to express it. This parallels the passive symmetries in physics, where physical
observables are independent of the coordinate system one uses to express them [4, 5]. In contrast, a
permutation of the graph signal on a fixed graph potentially transforms the object itself, not only its
representation. This parallels the active symmetries in physics, where the coordinate system (in this
case, the graph or domain) is fixed but a group transformation on the signal results in a predictable
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

