OpenMask3D:
Open-Vocabulary 3D Instance Segmentation
Ayça Takmaz1∗

Elisabetta Fedele1∗

Robert W. Sumner1

Marc Pollefeys1,2

Federico Tombari3

Francis Engelmann1,3

1

ETH Zürich

2

Microsoft

3

Google

openmask3d.github.io

“footrest”

“side table with a flower vase on it"

“angel”

Figure 1: Open-Vocabulary 3D Instance Segmentation. Given a 3D scene (top) and free-form user queries
(bottom), our OpenMask3D segments object instances and scene parts described by the open-vocabulary queries.

Abstract
We introduce the task of open-vocabulary 3D instance segmentation. Current
approaches for 3D instance segmentation can typically only recognize object categories from a pre-defined closed set of classes that are annotated in the training
datasets. This results in important limitations for real-world applications where one
might need to perform tasks guided by novel, open-vocabulary queries related to a
wide variety of objects. Recently, open-vocabulary 3D scene understanding methods have emerged to address this problem by learning queryable features for each
point in the scene. While such a representation can be directly employed to perform
semantic segmentation, existing methods cannot separate multiple object instances.
In this work, we address this limitation, and propose OpenMask3D, which is a
zero-shot approach for open-vocabulary 3D instance segmentation. Guided by
predicted class-agnostic 3D instance masks, our model aggregates per-mask features via multi-view fusion of CLIP-based image embeddings. Experiments and
ablation studies on ScanNet200 and Replica show that OpenMask3D outperforms
other open-vocabulary methods, especially on the long-tail distribution. Qualitative
experiments further showcase OpenMask3D’s ability to segment object properties
based on free-form queries describing geometry, affordances, and materials.

1

Introduction

3D instance segmentation, which is the task of predicting 3D object instance masks along with
their object categories, has many crucial applications in fields such as robotics and augmented
reality. Due to its significance, 3D instance segmentation has been receiving a growing amount of
attention in recent years. Despite the remarkable progress made in 3D instance segmentation methods
[8, 9, 39, 58, 77, 78], it is noteworthy that these methods operate under a closed-set paradigm, where
the set of object categories is limited and closely tied to the datasets used during training.
We argue that there are two key problems with closed-vocabulary 3D instance segmentation. First,
these approaches are limited in their ability to understand a scene beyond the object categories
seen during training. Despite the significant success of 3D instance segmentation approaches from
recent years, these closed-vocabulary approaches may fail to recognize and correctly classify novel
objects. One of the main advantages of open-vocabulary approaches, is their ability to zero-shot learn
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

