Diversifying Spatial-Temporal Perception
for Video Domain Generalization
Kun-Yu Lin1∗

Jia-Run Du1∗
Yipeng Gao1
Jiaming Zhou1
1,2†
Wei-Shi Zheng
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{linky5,dujr6,gaoyp23,zhoujm55}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Video domain generalization aims to learn generalizable video classification models
for unseen target domains by training in a source domain. A critical challenge of
video domain generalization is to defend against the heavy reliance on domainspecific cues extracted from the source domain when recognizing target videos. To
this end, we propose to perceive diverse spatial-temporal cues in videos, aiming to
discover potential domain-invariant cues in addition to domain-specific cues. We
contribute a novel model named Spatial-Temporal Diversification Network (STDN),
which improves the diversity from both space and time dimensions of video data.
First, our STDN proposes to discover various types of spatial cues within individual
frames by spatial grouping. Then, our STDN proposes to explicitly model spatialtemporal dependencies between video contents at multiple space-time scales by
spatial-temporal relation modeling. Extensive experiments on three benchmarks of
different types demonstrate the effectiveness and versatility of our approach.

1

Introduction

Recently, advanced deep network architectures have achieved competitive results for video classification [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], leading to wide applications in surveillance systems, sport analysis, health
monitoring, etc [9, 10, 11]. However, existing video classification models rely on the i.i.d. assumption,
i.e., training and test videos are independently and identically distributed. This assumption would be
easily violated, since models often face unfamiliar scenarios in real-world applications. For example,
a housework robot will work in a new house, and a surveillance system will encounter illumination
change caused by camera viewpoint or weather [12, 13, 14]. Holding such an assumption, the
performance of video classification models would drop significantly in unfamiliar test scenarios.
To alleviate the above problem, our work studies the video domain generalization task, which aims
to learn a video classification model that is generalizable in unseen target domains by training in
a source domain [15, 16]. In this task, videos from the source and target domains follow different
distributions though with an identical label space. For example, as shown in Figure 1, humans in the
source domain play basketball shooting on indoor basketball courts while those in the target domain
play outdoors. Different from the video domain adaptation task with available unlabeled target videos
for training [17, 18, 19, 20], video domain generalization can only access the source domain during
training, which is much more challenging but more practical.
∗
†

Equal contributions
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

