Discovering Hierarchical Achievements in
Reinforcement Learning via Contrastive Learning

Seungyong Moon1 , Junyoung Yeom1 , Bumsoo Park2 , Hyun Oh Song1∗
1
Seoul National University, 2 KRAFTON
{symoon11,yeomjy,hyunoh}@mllab.snu.ac.kr
bumsoo.park96@krafton.com

Abstract
Discovering achievements with a hierarchical structure in procedurally generated
environments presents a significant challenge. This requires an agent to possess a
broad range of abilities, including generalization and long-term reasoning. Many
prior methods have been built upon model-based or hierarchical approaches, with
the belief that an explicit module for long-term planning would be advantageous for
learning hierarchical dependencies. However, these methods demand an excessive
number of environment interactions or large model sizes, limiting their practicality.
In this work, we demonstrate that proximal policy optimization (PPO), a simple yet
versatile model-free algorithm, outperforms previous methods when optimized with
recent implementation practices. Moreover, we find that the PPO agent can predict
the next achievement to be unlocked to some extent, albeit with limited confidence.
Based on this observation, we introduce a novel contrastive learning method, called
achievement distillation, which strengthens the agent’s ability to predict the next
achievement. Our method exhibits a strong capacity for discovering hierarchical
achievements and shows state-of-the-art performance on the challenging Crafter
environment in a sample-efficient manner while utilizing fewer model parameters.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has recently achieved remarkable successes in solving challenging
decision-making problems, including video games, board games, and robotic controls [31, 42, 18, 36].
However, these advancements are often restricted to a single deterministic environment with a narrow
set of tasks. To successfully deploy RL agents in real-world scenarios, which are constantly changing
and open-ended, they should generalize well to new unseen situations and acquire reusable skills for
solving increasingly complex tasks via long-term reasoning. Unfortunately, many existing algorithms
exhibit limitations in learning these abilities and tend to memorize action sequences rather than truly
understand the underlying structures of the environments [28, 24].
To assess the abilities of agents in generalization and long-term reasoning, we focus on the problem of
discovering hierarchical achievements in procedurally generated environments with high-dimensional
image observations. In each episode, an agent navigates a previously unseen environment and receives
a sparse reward upon accomplishing a novel subtask labeled as an achievement. Importantly, each
achievement is semantically meaningful and can be reused to complete more complex achievements.
Such a setting inherently demands strong generalization and long-term reasoning from the agent.
Previous work on this problem has mainly relied on model-based or hierarchical approaches, which
involve explicit modules for long-term planning. Model-based methods employ a latent world model
that predicts future states and rewards for learning long-term dependencies [20, 21, 1, 45]. While
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

