Faster Differentially Private Convex Optimization
via Second-Order Methods
Arun Ganesh
Google Research

Mahdi Haghifam∗
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute

Thomas Steinke
Google DeepMind

Abhradeep Thakurta
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Differentially private (stochastic) gradient descent is the workhorse of DP private
machine learning in both the convex and non-convex settings. Without privacy
constraints, second-order methods, like Newton’s method, converge faster than
first-order methods like gradient descent. In this work, we investigate the prospect
of using the second-order information from the loss function to accelerate DP
convex optimization. We first develop a private variant of the regularized cubic
Newton method of Nesterov and Polyak [NP06], and show that for the class
of strongly convex loss functions, our algorithm has quadratic convergence and
achieves the optimal excess loss. We then design a practical second-order DP
algorithm for the unconstrained logistic regression problem. We theoretically and
empirically study the performance of our algorithm. Empirical results show our
algorithm consistently achieves the best excess loss compared to other baselines
and is 10-40× faster than DP-GD/DP-SGD for challenging datasets.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning tasks reduce to a convex optimization problem. More precisely, given a
dataset Sn = (z1 , . . . , zn ) ∈ Z n , a closed, convex set W ⊆ Rd , and a loss function f : W × Z → R
such that, for every
in w, our goal is to compute an approximation
 z ∈ Z, f (w, z)Pis a convex function

1
to arg minw∈W `(w, Sn ) , n i∈[n] f (w, zi ) . In this paper, we are interested in the problem
of designing optimization algorithms in the scenario that the dataset Sn contains private information.
Differential privacy (DP) [DMNS06] is a formal standard for privacy-preserving data analysis that
provides a framework for ensuring that the output of an analysis on the data does not leak this
private information. This problem is known as private convex optimization: Design an algorithm
A : Z n → W that is both DP and ensures low excess loss , `(A(Sn ), Sn ) − minw∈W `(w, Sn ).
The predominant algorithm for private convex optimization is DP (stochastic) gradient descent
(DP-GD/DP-SGD). This is a first-order iterative method. I.e., we start with an initial value w0
and iteratively update it using the gradient of the loss ∇wt `(wt , Sn ) following the update rule
wt+1 = wt −η ·(∇wt `(wt ,Sn )+ξt ), where η > 0 is a constant and ξt is Gaussian noise to ensure
privacy. The number of√
iterations T also determines the amount of noise at each iteration, i.e., the scale
of ξt is proportional to T due to the composition of DP. Note that we assume k∇wt `(wt , Sn )k ≤ 1.
One of the major drawbacks of DP-(S)GD is slow convergence. The choice of (η, T ) exhibits a
tradeoff in terms of the excess loss: if η · T is small, the algorithm cannot
reach the optimal solution;
√
on the other hand, the magnitude of noise at each
iteration
is
η
·
T
,
which
cannot be too large.
√
Therefore, to maximize η · T and minimize η · T , implementations of DP-(S)GD err on the side of
∗

This work was carried out while the author was an intern at Google Research, Brain Team.
m.haghifam@northeastern.edu, {arunganesh, steinke, athakurta}@google.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

