HeadSculpt: Crafting 3D Head Avatars with Text
Xiao Han1,4∗
Jiankang Deng3

Yukang Cao2∗
Yi-Zhe Song1,4

Kai Han2
Tao Xiang1,4†

Xiatian Zhu1,5
Kwan-Yee K. Wong2†

1

4

University of Surrey 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Imperial College London
5
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on AI
Surrey Institute for People-Centred AI

Abstract
Recently, text-guided 3D generative methods have made remarkable advancements
in producing high-quality textures and geometry, capitalizing on the proliferation of
large vision-language and image diffusion models. However, existing methods still
struggle to create high-fidelity 3D head avatars in two aspects: (1) They rely mostly
on a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model whilst missing the necessary 3D
awareness and head priors. This makes them prone to inconsistency and geometric
distortions in the generated avatars. (2) They fall short in fine-grained editing. This
is primarily due to the inherited limitations from the pre-trained 2D image diffusion
models, which become more pronounced when it comes to 3D head avatars. In
this work, we address these challenges by introducing a versatile coarse-to-fine
pipeline dubbed HeadSculpt for crafting (i.e., generating and editing) 3D head
avatars from textual prompts. Specifically, we first equip the diffusion model
with 3D awareness by leveraging landmark-based control and a learned textual
embedding representing the back view appearance of heads, enabling 3D-consistent
head avatar generations. We further propose a novel identity-aware editing score
distillation strategy to optimize a textured mesh with a high-resolution differentiable
rendering technique. This enables identity preservation while following the editing
instruction. We showcase HeadSculpt’s superior fidelity and editing capabilities
through comprehensive experiments and comparisons with existing methods. ‡

1

Introduction

Modeling 3D head avatars underpins a wide range of emerging applications (e.g., digital telepresence,
game character creation, and AR/VR). Historically, the creation of intricate and detailed 3D head
avatars demanded considerable time and expertise in art and engineering. With the advent of deep
learning, existing works [87, 28, 33, 72, 8, 38, 15] have shown promising results on the reconstruction
of 3D human heads from monocular images or videos. However, these methods remain restricted
to head appearance contained in their training data which is often limited in size, resulting in the
inability to generalize to new appearance beyond the training data. This constraint calls for the need
of more flexible and generalizable methods for 3D head modeling.
Recently, vision-language models (e.g., CLIP [55]) and diffusion models (e.g., Stable Diffusion [69,
61, 59]) have attracted increasing interest. These progresses have led to the emergence of text-to-3D
generative models [34, 62, 44, 27] which create 3D content in a self-supervised manner. Notably,
DreamFusion [54] introduces a score distillation sampling (SDS) strategy that leverages a pre-trained
image diffusion model to compute the noise-level loss from the textual description, unlocking the
potential to optimize differentiable 3D scenes (e.g., neural radiance field [45], tetrahedral mesh [66],
texture [58, 9], or point cloud [50]) with 2D diffusion prior only. Subsequent research efforts [43, 6,
∗

Equal contributions

†

Corresponding authors

‡

Webpage: https://brandonhan.uk/HeadSculpt

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

