TensorNet: Cartesian Tensor Representations for
Efficient Learning of Molecular Potentials

Guillem Simeon
Computational Science Laboratory
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
guillem.simeon@gmail.com

Gianni De Fabritiis
Computational Science Laboratory
Icrea, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Acellera
g.defabritiis@gmail.com

Abstract
The development of efficient machine learning models for molecular systems
representation is becoming crucial in scientific research. We introduce TensorNet, an innovative O(3)-equivariant message-passing neural network architecture
that leverages Cartesian tensor representations. By using Cartesian tensor atomic
embeddings, feature mixing is simplified through matrix product operations. Furthermore, the cost-effective decomposition of these tensors into rotation group
irreducible representations allows for the separate processing of scalars, vectors,
and tensors when necessary. Compared to higher-rank spherical tensor models,
TensorNet demonstrates state-of-the-art performance with significantly fewer parameters. For small molecule potential energies, this can be achieved even with
a single interaction layer. As a result of all these properties, the model’s computational cost is substantially decreased. Moreover, the accurate prediction of
vector and tensor molecular quantities on top of potential energies and forces is
possible. In summary, TensorNet’s framework opens up a new space for the design
of state-of-the-art equivariant models.

1

Introduction

Interatomic potential modeling using neural networks is an emerging research area that holds great
promise for revolutionizing molecular simulation and drug discovery pipelines [1; 2; 3; 4]. The
conventional trade-off between accuracy and computational cost can be bypassed by training models
on highly precise data [5; 6; 7; 8]. Current state-of-the-art methodologies rely on equivariant
graph neural networks (GNNs) [9; 10] and message-passing neural network (MPNNs) frameworks
[11; 12], where internal atomic representations incorporate well-defined transformation properties
characteristic of physical systems. The integration of equivariant features into neural network
interatomic potentials has led to remarkable improvements in accuracy, particularly when using
higher-rank irreducible representations of the orthogonal group O(3)—which encompasses reflections
and rotations in 3D space—in the form of spherical tensors [13; 14]. Although lower-rank Cartesian
representations (scalars and vectors) have been employed [15; 16], their success has been limited
compared to state-of-the-art spherical models [17; 18; 19]. MPNNs typically necessitate a substantial
number of message-passing iterations, and models based on irreducible representations are generally
computationally demanding due to the need to compute tensor products, even though some successful
alternative has been put forward [20].
The pursuit of computationally efficient approaches for incorporating higher-rank equivariance
is essential. In this paper, we introduce a novel O(3)-equivariant architecture that advances the
integration of Cartesian representations by utilizing Cartesian rank-2 tensors, represented as 3x3
matrices. We demonstrate that this method achieves state-of-the-art performance comparable to
higher-rank spherical models while having a reduced computational cost. This efficiency is realized
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

