The ToMCAT Dataset
Adarsh Pyarelal1 , Eric Duong2 , Caleb Jones Shibu2 , Paulo Soares2 , Savannah Boyd3 ,
Payal Khosla4 , Valeria Pfeifer3 , Diheng Zhang3 , Eric Andrews3 , Rick Champlin1 ,
Vincent Raymond5 , Meghavarshini Krishnaswamy6 , Clayton Morrison1 ,
Emily Butler4 , Kobus Barnard2
1 School of Information, 2 Department of Computer Science, 3 Department of Psychology,
4 Norton School of Human Ecology, 5 Lum AI, 6 Department of Linguistics
University of Arizona
adarsh@arizona.edu
https://tomcat.ivilab.org

Abstract
We present a rich, multimodal dataset consisting of data from 40 teams of three humans conducting simulated urban search-and-rescue (SAR) missions in a Minecraftbased testbed, collected for the Theory of Mind-based Cognitive Architecture for
Teams (ToMCAT) project. Modalities include two kinds of brain scan data—
functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) and electroencephalography (EEG),
as well as skin conductance, heart rate, eye tracking, face images, spoken dialog
audio data with automatic speech recognition (ASR) transcriptions, game screenshots, gameplay data, game performance data, demographic data, and self-report
questionnaires. Each team undergoes up to six consecutive phases: three behavioral
tasks, one mission training session, and two collaborative SAR missions. This
dataset will support studying a large variety of research questions on topics including teamwork, coordination, plan recognition, affective computing, physiological
linkage, entrainment, and dialog understanding. We provide an initial public release
of the de-identified data, along with analyses illustrating the utility of this dataset
to both computer scientists and social scientists.

1

Introduction

Teams of the future will increasingly involve humans and AI agents working together as trusted
partners, leveraging their complementary skills to achieve shared goals. The efficacy of AI teammates
will be enhanced if they are able to understand the beliefs, desires, and intentions of their human
teammates, i.e., if they have a machine theory of mind (MToM) [1, 2]. However, this capability
alone is not sufficient—they will need to understand the interpersonal dynamics between their human
teammates, that is, they will need a machine theory of teams. A natural first step for constructing a
(computational) theory of teams is to draw upon the vast amount of existing literature on teamwork
in purely human teams. However, as Roberts et al. [3] note, significant additional work is needed to
extend existing models of teamwork to human-machine teams.
We present the ToMCAT (Theory of Mind-based Cognitive Architecture for Teams) dataset—a rich,
multimodal dataset developed to significantly advance our understanding of teaming in both purely
human and hybrid human-machine teams. The dataset contains data from experiments in which teams
of three humans (and optionally, an AI advisor) execute complex collaborative tasks—specifically,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

