Kernelized Cumulants: Beyond Kernel Mean
Embeddings

1

Patric Bonnier1∗ Harald Oberhauser 1 Zoltán Szabó2
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford 2 Department of Statistics, London School of Economics
bonnier,oberhauser@maths.ox.ac.uk
z.szabo@lse.ac.uk

Abstract
In Rd , it is well-known that cumulants provide an alternative to moments that can
achieve the same goals with numerous benefits such as lower variance estimators.
In this paper we extend cumulants to reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS)
using tools from tensor algebras and show that they are computationally tractable
by a kernel trick. These kernelized cumulants provide a new set of all-purpose
statistics; the classical maximum mean discrepancy and Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion arise as the degree one objects in our general construction. We
argue both theoretically and empirically (on synthetic, environmental, and traffic
data analysis) that going beyond degree one has several advantages and can be
achieved with the same computational complexity and minimal overhead in our
experiments.

Keywords: kernel, cumulant, mean embedding, Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion, kernel
Lancaster interaction, kernel Streitberg interaction, maximum mean discrepancy, maximum variance
discrepancy

1

Introduction

The moments of a random variable are arguably the most popular all-purpose statistic. However,
cumulants are often more favorable statistics than moments. For example, if µm := E[X m ] denotes
the moments of a real-valued random variable X, then µ2 = µ21 + Var(X) and hence the variance
that directly measures the fluctuation around the mean is a much better statistic for scale than the
second moment µ2 , see Appendix A. Cumulants provide a systematic way to only record the parts of
the moment sequence that are not already captured by lower-order moments. While the moment and
cumulant sequences (µm )m and (κm )m carry the same information, cumulants have several desirable
properties that generalize to Rd -valued random variables (McCullagh, 2018). Among these properties
of cumulants, the ones that are important for our paper is that they can characterize distributions and
statistical (in)dependence.
Kernel embeddings. Mean and covariance arise naturally in the context of kernel-enriched domains.
Kernel techniques (Schölkopf and Smola, 2002; Steinwart and Christmann, 2008; Saitoh and Sawano,
2016) provide a principled and powerful approach for lifting data points to a so-called reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS; Aronszajn 1950). Considering the mean of this feature – referred to as
kernel mean embedding (KME; Berlinet and Thomas-Agnan 2004; Smola et al. 2007) – also enables
one to represent probability measures, and to induce a semi-metric referred to as maximum mean
discrepancy (MMD; Smola et al. 2007; Gretton et al. 2012) and an independence measure called the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

