Neural Polarizer: A Lightweight and Effective
Backdoor Defense via Purifying Poisoned Features

Mingli Zhu1∗ Shaokui Wei1∗ Hongyuan Zha1,2 Baoyuan Wu1†
1
School of Data Science,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China
2
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, China

Abstract
Recent studies have demonstrated the susceptibility of deep neural networks to
backdoor attacks. Given a backdoored model, its prediction of a poisoned sample with trigger will be dominated by the trigger information, though trigger
information and benign information coexist. Inspired by the mechanism of the
optical polarizer that a polarizer could pass light waves with particular polarizations while filtering light waves with other polarizations, we propose a novel
backdoor defense method by inserting a learnable neural polarizer into the backdoored model as an intermediate layer, in order to purify the poisoned sample
via filtering trigger information while maintaining benign information. The neural polarizer is instantiated as one lightweight linear transformation layer, which
is learned through solving a well designed bi-level optimization problem, based
on a limited clean dataset. Compared to other fine-tuning-based defense methods which often adjust all parameters of the backdoored model, the proposed
method only needs to learn one additional layer, such that it is more efficient
and requires less clean data. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
and efficiency of our method in removing backdoors across various neural network architectures and datasets, especially in the case of very limited clean data.
Codes are available at https://github.com/SCLBD/BackdoorBench (PyTorch) and
https://github.com/JulieCarlon/NPD-MindSpore (MindSpore).

1

Introduction

Several studies have revealed the vulnerabilities of deep neural networks (DNNs) to various types of
attacks [15, 17, 21, 22, 40], of which backdoor attacks [6, 9, 11, 36] are attracting increasing attention.
In backdoor attacks, the adversary could produce a backdoored DNN model through manipulating the
training dataset [5, 24] or the training process [20, 29], such that the backdoored model predicts any
poisoned sample with particular triggers to the predetermined target label, while behaves normally
on benign samples. Backdoor attacks can arise from various sources, such as training based on a
poisoned dataset, or utilizing third-party platforms for model training, or downloading backdoored
models from untrusted third-party providers. These scenarios significantly elevate the threat of
backdoor attacks to DNNs’ applications, and meanwhile highlight the importance of defending
against backdoor attacks.
Several seminal backdoor defense methods have been developed, mainly including 1) in-training
approaches, which aim to train a secure model based on a poisoned dataset through well-designed
training algorithms or objective functions, such as DBD [14] and D-ST [4]. 2) post-training approaches, which aim to mitigate the backdoor effect from a backdoored model through adjusting the
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponds to Baoyuan Wu (wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

