Efficient Data Subset Selection to Generalize Training
Across Models: Transductive and Inductive Networks
Eeshaan Jain§ , Tushar Nandy§ , Gaurav Aggarwal† ,
Ashish Tendulkar† , Rishabh Iyer∗ and Abir De§
§
IIT Bombay, † Google, ∗ UT Dallas
{eeshaan,tnandy,abir}@cse.iitb.ac.in,
{gauravaggarwal,ashishvt}@google.com, rishabh.iyer@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Existing subset selection methods for efficient learning predominantly employ
discrete combinatorial and model-specific approaches which lack generalizability.
For an unseen architecture, one cannot use the subset chosen for a different model.
To tackle this problem, we propose S UB S EL N ET, a trainable subset selection
framework, that generalizes across architectures. Here, we first introduce an
attention-based neural gadget that leverages the graph structure of architectures and
acts as a surrogate to trained deep neural networks for quick model prediction. Then,
we use these predictions to build subset samplers. This naturally provides us two
variants of S UB S EL N ET. The first variant is transductive (called as TransductiveS UB S EL N ET) which computes the subset separately for each model by solving
a small optimization problem. Such an optimization is still super fast, thanks to
the replacement of explicit model training by the model approximator. The second
variant is inductive (called as Inductive-S UB S EL N ET) which computes the subset
using a trained subset selector, without any optimization. Our experiments show
that our model outperforms several methods across several real datasets.

1

Introduction

In the last decade, neural networks have drastically enhanced the performance of state-of-the-art ML
models. However, they often demand massive data to train, which renders them heavily contingent on
the availability of high-performance computing machineries such as GPUs and RAM. Such resources
entail heavy energy consumption, excessive CO2 emission, and maintenance cost.
Driven by this challenge, a recent body of work focuses on suitably selecting a subset of instances so
that the model can be trained quickly using lightweight computing infrastructure [4, 23, 51, 32, 54, 37,
18–21, 36]. However, these methods are not generalizable across architectures— the subset selected
by such a method is tailored to train only one specific architecture and thus need not be optimal
for training another architecture. Hence, to select data subsets for a new architecture, they need to
be run from scratch. However, these methods rely heavily on discrete combinatorial algorithms,
which impose significant barriers against scaling them for multiple unseen architectures. Appendix C
contains further details about related work.
1.1

Our contributions

Responding to the above limitations, we develop S UB S EL N ET, a trainable subset selection framework.
Specifically, we make the following contributions.
Novel framework on subset selection that generalizes across models. S UB S EL N ET is a subset
selector that generalizes across architectures. Given a dataset, once S UB S EL N ET is trained on a set
of model architectures, it can quickly select a small optimal training subset for any unseen (test)
architecture, without any explicit training of this test model. S UB S EL N ET is a non-adaptive method
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

