Hierarchical Vector Quantized Transformer for
Multi-class Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
Ruiying Lu1† , YuJie Wu2† , Long Tian2* , Dongsheng Wang3
Bo Chen3 , Xiyang Liu2 , Ruimin Hu1
School of Cyber Engineering1 , Software Engineering Institute2
National Key Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing3
Xidian University
{luruiying,tianlong}@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised image Anomaly Detection (UAD) aims to learn robust and discriminative representations of normal samples. While separate solutions per class endow
expensive computation and limited generalizability, this paper focuses on building a unified framework for multiple classes. Under such a challenging setting,
popular reconstruction-based networks with continuous latent representation assumption always suffer from the "identical shortcut" issue, where both normal and
abnormal samples can be well recovered and difficult to distinguish. To address
this pivotal issue, we propose a hierarchical vector quantized prototype-oriented
Transformer under a probabilistic framework. First, instead of learning the continuous representations, we preserve the typical normal patterns as discrete iconic
prototypes, and confirm the importance of Vector Quantization in preventing the
model from falling into the shortcut. The vector quantized iconic prototypes are
integrated into the Transformer for reconstruction, such that the abnormal data
point is flipped to a normal data point. Second, we investigate an exquisite hierarchical framework to relieve the codebook collapse issue and replenish frail
normal patterns. Third, a prototype-oriented optimal transport method is proposed
to better regulate the prototypes and hierarchically evaluate the abnormal score.
By evaluating on MVTec-AD and VisA datasets, our model surpasses the state-ofthe-art alternatives and possesses good interpretability. The code is available at
https://github.com/RuiyingLu/HVQ-Trans.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection is an essential task with increasingly wide applications in various areas, such as
video surveillance [1], industrial inspection [2], and medical image analysis [3]. Due to the scarcity
of anomalous samples, the unsupervised anomaly detection [4–7] methods gain wide attention by
modeling the distribution of normal data only, and then identify the samples deviates from the normal
profile as anomalies. Common approaches follow the one-for-one scheme [8, 9] by training separate
models for different classes of objects, which is time-memory-consuming for real application and
uncongenial to the object class with large intra-class diversity. Recently, a newly emerging one-for-all
scheme [10] tries to use a unified model to detect anomalies from all the different object classes
without any fine-tuning. Modeling high-dimensional data is notoriously challenging, and the problem
becomes even more difficult to capture the multi-class distribution in a unified model precisely.
†Equal Contribution
* Corresponding Author
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

