Fair Adaptive Experiments

Waverly Wei
Division of Biostatistics
University of California, Berkeley
linqing_wei@berkeley.edu

Xinwei Ma
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
x1ma@ucsd.edu

Jingshen Wang ∗
Division of Biostatistics
University of California, Berkeley
jingshenwang@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Randomized experiments have been the gold standard for assessing the effectiveness of a treatment, policy, or intervention, spanning various fields, including social
sciences, biomedical studies, and e-commerce. The classical complete randomization approach assigns treatments based on a pre-specified probability and may lead
to inefficient use of data. Adaptive experiments improve upon complete randomization by sequentially learning and updating treatment assignment probabilities using
accrued evidence during the experiment. Hence, they can help achieve efficient data
use and higher estimation efficiency. However, their application can also raise fairness and equity concerns, as assignment probabilities may vary drastically across
groups of participants. Furthermore, when treatment is expected to be extremely
beneficial to certain groups of participants, it is more appropriate to expose many
of these participants to favorable treatment. In response to these challenges, we
propose a fair adaptive experiment strategy that simultaneously enhances data use
efficiency, achieves an “envy-free” treatment assignment guarantee, and improves
the overall welfare of participants. An important feature of our proposed strategy is
that we do not impose parametric modeling assumptions on the outcome variables,
making it more versatile and applicable to a wider array of applications. Through
our theoretical investigation, we characterize the convergence rate of the estimated
treatment effects and the associated standard deviations at the group level and further prove that our adaptive treatment assignment algorithm, despite not having a
closed-form expression, approaches the optimal allocation rule asymptotically. Our
proof strategy takes into account the fact that the allocation decisions in our design
depend on sequentially accumulated data, which poses a significant challenge in
characterizing the properties and conducting statistical inference of our method.
We further provide simulation evidence and two synthetic data studies to showcase
the performance of our fair adaptive experiment strategy.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation and contribution

Randomized experiments are considered gold standards for evaluating the effectiveness of public
policies, medical treatments, or advertising strategies [32, 34, 35]. They involve randomly assigning
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

