Quantifying & Modeling Multimodal Interactions:
An Information Decomposition Framework

Paul Pu Liang1 , Yun Cheng1,2 , Xiang Fan1,3 , Chun Kai Ling1,8 , Suzanne Nie1 ,
Richard J. Chen4,5 , Zihao Deng6 , Nicholas Allen7 , Randy Auerbach8 , Faisal Mahmood4,5 ,
Ruslan Salakhutdinov1 , Louis-Philippe Morency1
1
2
CMU, Princeton University, 3 UW, 4 Harvard Medical School, 5 Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
6
University of Pennsylvania, 7 University of Oregon, 8 Columbia University
pliang@cs.cmu.edu, yc6206@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
The recent explosion of interest in multimodal applications has resulted in a wide
selection of datasets and methods for representing and integrating information from
different modalities. Despite these empirical advances, there remain fundamental
research questions: How can we quantify the interactions that are necessary to
solve a multimodal task? Subsequently, what are the most suitable multimodal
models to capture these interactions? To answer these questions, we propose an
information-theoretic approach to quantify the degree of redundancy, uniqueness,
and synergy relating input modalities with an output task. We term these three
measures as the PID statistics of a multimodal distribution (or PID for short), and
introduce two new estimators for these PID statistics that scale to high-dimensional
distributions. To validate PID estimation, we conduct extensive experiments on
both synthetic datasets where the PID is known and on large-scale multimodal
benchmarks where PID estimations are compared with human annotations. Finally,
we demonstrate their usefulness in (1) quantifying interactions within multimodal
datasets, (2) quantifying interactions captured by multimodal models, (3) principled
approaches for model selection, and (4) three real-world case studies engaging with
domain experts in pathology, mood prediction, and robotic perception where our
framework helps to recommend strong multimodal models for each application.

1

Introduction

A core challenge in machine learning lies in capturing the interactions between multiple input
modalities. Learning different types of multimodal interactions is often quoted as motivation for
many successful multimodal modeling paradigms, such as contrastive learning to capture redundancy [54, 82], modality-specific representations to retain unique information [100], as well as tensors
and multiplicative interactions to learn higher-order interactions [52, 58, 115]. However, several
fundamental research questions remain: How can we quantify the interactions that are necessary to
solve a multimodal task? Subsequently, what are the most suitable multimodal models to capture
these interactions? This paper aims to formalize these questions by proposing an approach to quantify
the nature (i.e., which type) and degree (i.e., the amount) of modality interactions, a fundamental
principle underpinning our understanding of multimodal datasets and models [62].
By bringing together two previously disjoint research fields of Partial Information Decomposition
(PID) in information theory [13, 41, 108] and multimodal machine learning [9, 62], we provide
precise definitions categorizing interactions into redundancy, uniqueness, and synergy. Redundancy
quantifies information shared between modalities, uniqueness quantifies the information present in
only one of the modalities, and synergy quantifies the emergence of new information not previously
present in either modality. A key aspect of these four measures is that they not only quantify
interactions between modalities, but also how they relate to a downstream task. Figure 1 shows
a depiction of these four measures, which we refer to as PID statistics. Leveraging insights from
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

