Spectral Evolution and Invariance in Linear-width
Neural Networks
Zhichao Wang
University of California San Diego
zhw036@ucsd.edu

Andrew Engel
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
andrew.engel@pnnl.gov

Anand Sarwate
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
ads221@soe.rutgers.edu

Ioana Dumitriu
University of California San Diego
idumitriu@ucsd.edu

Tony Chiang
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
University of Washington
University of Texas at El Paso
tony.chiang@pnnl.gov

Abstract
We investigate the spectral properties of linear-width feed-forward neural networks,
where the sample size is asymptotically proportional to network width. Empirically,
we show that the spectra of weight in this high dimensional regime are invariant
when trained by gradient descent for small constant learning rates; we provide a
theoretical justification for this observation and prove the invariance of the bulk
spectra for both conjugate and neural tangent kernels. We demonstrate similar
characteristics when training with stochastic gradient descent with small learning
rates. When the learning rate is large, we exhibit the emergence of an outlier whose
corresponding eigenvector is aligned with the training data structure. We also show
that after adaptive gradient training, where a lower test error and feature learning
emerge, both weight and kernel matrices exhibit heavy tail behavior. Simple examples are provided to explain when heavy tails can have better generalizations. We
exhibit different spectral properties such as invariant bulk, spike, and heavy-tailed
distribution from a two-layer neural network using different training strategies, and
then correlate them to the feature learning. Analogous phenomena also appear
when we train conventional neural networks with real-world data. We conclude
that monitoring the evolution of the spectra during training is an essential step
toward understanding the training dynamics and feature learning.

1

Introduction

Deep learning theory has made insightful connections between the behavior of neural networks (NNs)
and kernel machines through asymptotic analyses of the so-called kernel regime [65, 83, 48, 40, 12,
4, 84]. When the neural network (NN) is infinitely wide, the behavior of NN coincides with a kernel
machine, and the training process, as well as the generalization performance of this ultra-wide NN,
can be fully described. The performance of finite-width NNs, however, does not correspond to this
theory, as NNs optimized with gradient-based methods perform better than infinitely wide networks
in many circumstances [47, 38, 34, 51, 25, 32, 76, 42]. This gap heavily relies on the task complexity,
data distribution, architecture of the NN and the training strategy [31]. We consider a more realistic
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

