ResoNet: Noise-Trained Physics-Informed MRI
Off-Resonance Correction
Alfredo De Goyeneche1 , Shreya Ramachandran1 , Ke Wang1 , Ekin Karasan1 ,
Joseph Cheng2 , Stella X. Yu1,3 , Michael Lustig1
1
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
2
Radiology, Stanford University
3
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan
{adg, shreyar, kewang, ekinkarasan, stellayu, lustig}@berkeley.edu
jycheng@stanford.edu, stellayu@umich.edu

Abstract
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a powerful medical imaging modality
that offers diagnostic information without harmful ionizing radiation. Unlike
optical imaging, MRI sequentially samples the spatial Fourier domain (k-space)
of the image. Measurements are collected in multiple shots, or readouts, and in
each shot, data along a smooth trajectory is sampled. Conventional MRI data
acquisition relies on sampling k-space row-by-row in short intervals, which is
slow and inefficient. More efficient, non-Cartesian sampling trajectories (e.g.,
Spirals) use longer data readout intervals, but are more susceptible to magnetic field
inhomogeneities, leading to off-resonance artifacts. Spiral trajectories cause offresonance blurring in the image, and the mathematics of this blurring resembles that
of optical blurring, where magnetic field variation corresponds to depth and readout
duration to aperture size. Off-resonance blurring is a system issue with a physicsbased, accurate forward model. We present a physics-informed deep learning
framework for off-resonance correction in MRI, which is trained exclusively on
synthetic, noise-like data with representative marginal statistics. Our approach
allows for fat/water separation and is compatible with parallel imaging acceleration.
Through end-to-end training using synthetic randomized data (i.e., noise-like
images, coil sensitivities, field maps), we train the network to reverse off-resonance
effects across diverse anatomies and contrasts without retraining. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach through results on phantom and in-vivo data. This
work has the potential to facilitate the clinical adoption of non-Cartesian sampling
trajectories, enabling efficient, rapid, and motion-robust MRI scans. Code is
publicly available at: https://github.com/mikgroup/ResoNet

1

Introduction

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a powerful medical imaging modality that enables the
acquisition of diagnostic information of soft tissue without harmful ionizing radiation. MRI visualizes
hydrogen spins, mostly in water and lipids that are subjected to a very strong yet homogeneous
magnetic field. When spins are excited, they emit a signal at a frequency proportional to the magnetic
field present. Spatial encoding is possible by applying additional so-called gradient fields, which
vary linearly in space and result in a Fourier relationship between the position of the spins and the
frequency spectrum of the acquired signal. Since position is mapped to frequency, any additional
magnetic field inhomogeneities will result in incorrect mapping and lead to image distortions and
undesired artifacts. Magnetic field inhomogeneity can occur due to magnetic susceptibility differences
between air and tissue, such as near the sinuses and ear canals in the head or near the lungs and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

