Latent Exploration for Reinforcement Learning

Alberto Silvio Chiappa
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
alberto.chiappa@epfl.ch
Ann Zixiang Huang
Mila, EPFL
zixiang.huang@mail.mcgill.ca

Alessandro Marin Vargas
EPFL
alessandro.marinvargas@epfl.ch
Alexander Mathis
EPFL
alexander.mathis@epfl.ch

Abstract
In Reinforcement Learning, agents learn policies by exploring and interacting with
the environment. Due to the curse of dimensionality, learning policies that map
high-dimensional sensory input to motor output is particularly challenging. During
training, state of the art methods (SAC, PPO, etc.) explore the environment by
perturbing the actuation with independent Gaussian noise. While this unstructured exploration has proven successful in numerous tasks, it can be suboptimal
for overactuated systems. When multiple actuators, such as motors or muscles,
drive behavior, uncorrelated perturbations risk diminishing each other’s effect,
or modifying the behavior in a task-irrelevant way. While solutions to introduce
time correlation across action perturbations exist, introducing correlation across
actuators has been largely ignored. Here, we propose LATent TIme-Correlated
Exploration (Lattice), a method to inject temporally-correlated noise into the latent
state of the policy network, which can be seamlessly integrated with on- and offpolicy algorithms. We demonstrate that the noisy actions generated by perturbing
the network’s activations can be modeled as a multivariate Gaussian distribution
with a full covariance matrix. In the PyBullet locomotion tasks, Lattice-SAC
achieves state of the art results, and reaches 18% higher reward than unstructured
exploration in the Humanoid environment. In the musculoskeletal control environments of MyoSuite, Lattice-PPO achieves higher reward in most reaching and
object manipulation tasks, while also finding more energy-efficient policies with
reductions of 20-60%. Overall, we demonstrate the effectiveness of structured
action noise in time and actuator space for complex motor control tasks. The code
is available at: https://github.com/amathislab/lattice.

1

Introduction

Effectively exploring the environment while learning the policy is key to the success of Reinforcement
Learning (RL) algorithms. Typically, exploration is attained by using a non-deterministic policy to
collect experience, so that the random component of the action selection process allows the agent to
visit states that would have not been reached with a deterministic policy. In on-policy algorithms,
such as A3C [1] and PPO [2], the policy network parametrizes a probability distribution, usually an
independent multivariate Gaussian, from which actions are sampled. In off-policy algorithms, such
as DQN [3], DDPG [4] and SAC [5], the policy used to collect experience can be different from the
one learned to maximize the cumulative reward, which leaves more freedom in the selection of an
exploration strategy. The standard approach in off-policy RL consists in perturbing the policy by
introducing randomness (e.g., ϵ-greedy exploration in environments with a discrete action space and
Gaussian noise in environments with a continuous action space). In the past years, many notable
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

