Distance-Restricted Folklore Weisfeiler-Leman GNNs
with Provable Cycle Counting Power

Junru Zhou1 Jiarui Feng2 Xiyuan Wang1 Muhan Zhang1
1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
Department of CSE, Washington University in St. Louis
zml72062@stu.pku.edu.cn, feng.jiarui@wustl.edu,
{wangxiyuan,muhan}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The ability of graph neural networks (GNNs) to count certain graph substructures,
especially cycles, is important for the success of GNNs on a wide range of tasks.
It has been recently used as a popular metric for evaluating the expressive power
of GNNs. Many of the proposed GNN models with provable cycle counting
power are based on subgraph GNNs, i.e., extracting a bag of subgraphs from
the input graph, generating representations for each subgraph, and using them to
augment the representation of the input graph. However, those methods require
heavy preprocessing, and suffer from high time and memory costs. In this paper,
we overcome the aforementioned limitations of subgraph GNNs by proposing a
novel class of GNNs—d-Distance-Restricted FWL(2) GNNs, or d-DRFWL(2)
GNNs, based on the well-known FWL(2) algorithm. As a heuristic method for
graph isomorphism testing, FWL(2) colors all node pairs in a graph and performs
message passing among those node pairs. In order to balance the expressive power
and complexity, d-DRFWL(2) GNNs simplify FWL(2) by restricting the range
of message passing to node pairs whose mutual distances are at most d. This
way, d-DRFWL(2) GNNs exploit graph sparsity while avoiding the expensive
subgraph extraction operations in subgraph GNNs, making both the time and space
complexity lower. We theoretically investigate both the discriminative power and
the cycle counting power of d-DRFWL(2) GNNs. Our most important finding is
that d-DRFWL(2) GNNs have provably strong cycle counting power even with
d = 2: they can count all 3, 4, 5, 6-cycles. Since 6-cycles (e.g., benzene rings) are
ubiquitous in organic molecules, being able to detect and count them is crucial for
achieving robust and generalizable performance on molecular tasks. Experiments
on both synthetic datasets and molecular datasets verify our theory. To the best of
our knowledge, 2-DRFWL(2) GNN is the most efficient GNN model to date (both
theoretically and empirically) that can count up to 6-cycles.

1

Introduction

Graphs are important data structures suitable for representing relational or structural data. As a
powerful tool to learn node-level, link-level or graph-level representations for graph-structured data,
graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable successes on a wide range of tasks [54, 61].
Among the various GNN models, Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) [27, 36, 50, 55] are
a widely adopted class of GNNs. However, the expressive power of MPNNs has been shown to be
upper-bounded by the Weisfeiler-Leman test [55]. More importantly, MPNNs even fail to detect
some simple substructures (e.g., 3, 4-cycles) [33], thus losing great structural information in graphs.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

