p-value Adjustment for Monotonous, Unbiased, and
Fast Clustering Comparison

Kai Klede1 Thomas Altstidl1 Dario Zanca1 Björn Eskofier1,2
1
Machine Learning and Data Analytics (MaD) Lab
Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg
2
Translational Digital Health Group
Institute of AI for Health, Helmholtz Zentrum München
{kai.klede; thomas.r.altstidl; dario.zanca; bjoern.eskofier}@fau.de

Abstract
Popular metrics for clustering comparison, like the Adjusted Rand Index and the
Adjusted Mutual Information, are type II biased. The Standardized Mutual Information removes this bias but suffers from counterintuitive non-monotonicity
and poor computational efficiency. We introduce the p-value adjusted Rand Index
(PMI2 ), the first cluster comparison method that is type II unbiased and provably
monotonous. The PMI2 has fast approximations that outperform the Standardized
Mutual information. We demonstrate its unbiased clustering selection, approximation quality, and runtime efficiency on synthetic benchmarks. In experiments on
image and social network datasets, we show how the PMI2 can help practitioners
choose better clustering and community detection algorithms.

1

Introduction

Clustering is fundamental to unsupervised learning, and practitioners can choose from many algorithms to partition a dataset into homogeneous clusters. Therefore it is common to annotate parts of
an otherwise unlabeled dataset and select the clustering algorithm that best reproduces the annotations
[1]. A good selection crucially depends on the clustering comparison method, like the Mutual
Information (MI) [25] or the Rand Index (RI) [39]. The importance of the comparison method further
increases with the advent of deep learning methods for applications such as community detection,
in which they serve as components of loss functions during network training [10, 12, 33]. Some
use cases admit multiple clustering solutions [23, 38], and clustering comparison can help identify
qualitatively different clustering solutions for a single dataset. Other applications of clustering
comparison include categorical feature selection or consensus clustering [5, 17].
The MI and RI are biased towards clusterings with particular cluster size distributions [19] (type I
bias). For example, the MI favors larger clusters for any reference clustering [24]. The Adjusted
Rand Index (ARI) [11] and Adjusted Mutual Information (AMI) [25] achieve a constant baseline
value by subtracting the expected value under random permutation of the cluster labels. However,
they still exhibit a bias when multiple clusterings are compared via a fixed ground truth (type II bias)
[29], as opposed to comparing two random clusterings with each other. This type II scenario typically
arises when selecting the best algorithm for a given task on a labeled subset of the data.
Romano et al. [30] showed via the Tsallis entropy, that the AMI and ARI are special cases of generalized information-theoretic clustering comparison measures AMIq and proposed standardization to
resolve both types of biases. However, the runtime for standardization generally exhibits a substantial
time complexity of O(N 3 kA max(kA , kB )) [30], where N represents the number of data points
and kA and kB denote the respective number of clusters. This complexity is prohibitive for many
applications [15]. Gösgens et al. [9] found that the Standardized Mutual Information (SMI) does not
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

