A Reduction-based Framework for Sequential
Decision Making with Delayed Feedback

Yunchang Yang1∗ Han Zhong1∗ Tianhao Wu2∗ Bin Liu3 Liwei Wang1,4 Simon S. Du5
1
Center for Data Science, Peking University
2
University of California, Berkeley 3 Zhejiang Lab
4
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
5
University of Washington

Abstract
We study stochastic delayed feedback in general sequential decision-making problems, which include bandits, single-agent Markov decision processes (MDPs), and
Markov games (MGs). We propose a novel reduction-based framework, which
turns any multi-batched algorithm for sequential decision making with instantaneous feedback into a sample-efficient algorithm that can handle stochastic delays
in sequential decision-making problems. By plugging different multi-batched algorithms into our framework, we provide several examples demonstrating that our
framework not only matches or improves existing results for bandits, tabular MDPs,
and tabular MGs, but also provides the first line of studies on delays in sequential
decision making with function approximation. In summary, we provide a complete
set of sharp results for single-agent and multi-agent sequential decision-making
problems with delayed feedback.

1

Introduction

Delayed feedback is a common and fundamental problem in sequential decision making (Sutton
and Barto, 2018; Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020; Zhang et al., 2021a). Taking the recommendation
system as an example, delayed feedback is an inherent part of this problem. Specifically, the learner
adjusts her recommendation after receiving users’ feedback, which may take a random delay after the
recommendation is issued. More examples include but are not limited to robotics (Mahmood et al.,
2018) and video steaming (Changuel et al., 2012). Furthermore, the delayed feedback issue is more
serious in multi-agent systems (Chen et al., 2020) since observing the actions of other agents’ may
happen with a varying delay.
Although handling delayed feedback is a prominent challenge in practice, the theoretical understanding of delays in sequential decision making is limited. Even assuming the delays are stochastic
(delays are sampled from a fixed distribution), the nearly minimax optimal result is only obtained by
works on multi-armed bandits and contextual bandits (Agarwal and Duchi, 2011; Dudik et al., 2011;
Joulani et al., 2013; Vernade et al., 2020, 2017; Gael et al., 2020). For more complex problems such
as linear bandits (Lancewicki et al., 2021) and tabular reinforcement learning (RL) (Howson et al.,
2022), the results are suboptimal. Meanwhile, to the best of our knowledge, there are no theoretical
guarantees in RL with function approximation and multi-agent RL settings. Hence, we focus on
stochastic delays and aim to answer the following two questions in this work:
1. Can we provide sharper regret bounds for basic models such as linear bandits and tabular RL?
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to Yunchang Yang ⟨yangyc@pku.edu.cn⟩ and Han Zhong
⟨hanzhong@stu.pku.edu.cn⟩.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

