Policy Optimization for
Continuous Reinforcement Learning

Hanyang Zhao
Columbia University
hz2684@columbia.edu

Wenpin Tang
Columbia University
wt2319@columbia.edu

David D. Yao
Columbia University
yao@columbia.edu

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning (RL) in the setting of continuous time and space,
for an infinite horizon with a discounted objective and the underlying dynamics
driven by a stochastic differential equation. Built upon recent advances in the
continuous approach to RL, we develop a notion of occupation time (specifically
for a discounted objective), and show how it can be effectively used to derive
performance-difference and local-approximation formulas. We further extend these
results to illustrate their applications in the PG (policy gradient) and TRPO/PPO
(trust region policy optimization/ proximal policy optimization) methods, which
have been familiar and powerful tools in the discrete RL setting but under-developed
in continuous RL. Through numerical experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness and advantages of our approach.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL, [52]) has been successfully applied to wide-ranging domains in the
past decade, including achieving superhuman performance in games like Atari and Go [35, 48,
49], enhancing Large Language Models using human feedback [8, 10], and showing potentials
in improving traditional model-based decisions in healthcare, inventory management, and finance
[9, 30, 33]. Most existing works, including all references cited above, are formulated and solved as
discrete-time sequential optimization problems such as Markov decision processes (MDPs, [42]). Yet
in many applications, agents may need to monitor and interact with the random environment at an
ultra-high frequency (e.g., autonomous driving, robot navigation, and high-frequency stock trading),
which calls for a continuous-time/space approach.
Recent years have witnessed a fast growing body of research that has extended the frontiers of continuous RL in several important directions including, for instance, modeling the noise or randomness in
the environment dynamics as following a stochastic differential equation (SDE), and incorporating an
entropy-based regularizer into the objective function [58] to facilitate the exploration-exploitation
tradeoff; designing model-free methods and algorithms, along with applications to portfolio optimization [18, 20, 21, 22]; studying regret bounds [5, 54], and so forth.
In this paper, we continue the above trend in continuous RL, focusing on an infinite horizon formulation with a discounted objective and the underlying dynamics driven by an SDE [24, 39]. We are
specifically motivated by the following two questions.
P∞
(Q1) The visitation frequency in MDP (with a discounted objective) is defined as: ρ(s) = t=0 γ t ·
P(Yt = s), where {Yt } is a Markov chain with state space S := {s}, and γ ∈ (0, 1) is a discount
factor. It plays an important role in many RL algorithms for MDP. So, a natural question is, what is
the continuous counterpart of ρ(s)?
(Q2) For continuous RL, how can we characterize the difference in performance between two
policies? In particular, can we derive performance-difference formulas similar to those in the MDP
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

