Conditional score-based diffusion models for
Bayesian inference in infinite dimensions

Lorenzo Baldassari
University of Basel

Ali Siahkoohi
Rice University

Josselin Garnier
Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris

lorenzo.baldassari@unibas.ch

alisk@rice.edu

josselin.garnier@polytechnique.edu

Knut Sølna
University of California Irvine

Maarten V. de Hoop
Rice University

ksolna@math.uci.edu

mvd2@rice.edu

Abstract
Since their initial introduction, score-based diffusion models (SDMs) have been successfully applied to solve a variety of linear inverse problems in finite-dimensional
vector spaces due to their ability to efficiently approximate the posterior distribution. However, using SDMs for inverse problems in infinite-dimensional function
spaces has only been addressed recently, primarily through methods that learn
the unconditional score. While this approach is advantageous for some inverse
problems, it is mostly heuristic and involves numerous computationally costly forward operator evaluations during posterior sampling. To address these limitations,
we propose a theoretically grounded method for sampling from the posterior of
infinite-dimensional Bayesian linear inverse problems based on amortized conditional SDMs. In particular, we prove that one of the most successful approaches for
estimating the conditional score in finite dimensions—the conditional denoising
estimator—can also be applied in infinite dimensions. A significant part of our
analysis is dedicated to demonstrating that extending infinite-dimensional SDMs
to the conditional setting requires careful consideration, as the conditional score
typically blows up for small times, contrarily to the unconditional score. We
conclude by presenting stylized and large-scale numerical examples that validate
our approach, offer additional insights, and demonstrate that our method enables
large-scale, discretization-invariant Bayesian inference.

1

Introduction

Inverse problems seek to estimate unknown parameters using noisy observations or measurements.
One of the main challenges is that they are often ill-posed. A problem is ill-posed if there are no
solutions, or there are many (two or more) solutions, or the solution is unstable in relation to small
errors in the observations [1]. A common approach to transform the original ill-posed problem into a
well-posed one is to formulate it as a least-squares optimization problem that minimizes the difference
between observed and predicted data. However, minimization of the data misfit alone negatively
impacts the quality of the obtained solution due to the presence of noise in the data and the inherent
nullspace of the forward operator [2, 3]. Casting the inverse problem into a Bayesian probabilistic
framework allows, instead, for a full characterization of all the possible solutions [4–6]. The Bayesian
approach consists of putting a prior probability distribution describing uncertainty in the parameters
of interest, and finding the posterior distribution over these parameters [7]. The prior must be chosen
appropriately in order to mitigate the ill-posedness of the problem and facilitate computation of the
posterior. By adopting the Bayesian formulation, rather than finding one single solution to the inverse
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

