MAViL: Masked Audio-Video Learners
Po-Yao Huang1 Vasu Sharma1 Hu Xu1 Chaitanya Ryali1 Haoqi Fan1 Yanghao Li1
Shang-Wen Li1 Gargi Ghosh1 Jitendra Malik1,2 Christoph Feichtenhofer1
1

FAIR, Meta

2

University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
We present Masked Audio-Video Learners (MAViL) to learn audio-visual representations with three complementary forms of self-supervision: (1) reconstructing
masked raw audio and video inputs, (2) intra-modal and inter-modal contrastive
learning with masking, and (3) self-training to predict aligned and contextualized audio-video representations learned from the first two objectives. Empirically, MAViL achieves state-of-the-art audio-video classification performance
on AudioSet (53.3 mAP) and VGGSound (67.1% accuracy), surpassing recent
self-supervised models and supervised models that utilize external labeled data.
Notably, pre-training with MAViL not only enhances performance in multimodal
classification and retrieval tasks, but it also improves the representations of each
modality in isolation, without relying on information from the other modality
during uni-modal fine-tuning or inference. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/MAViL.

1

Introduction

We study self-supervised learning (SSL) from audio and video, two rich, heterogeneous, yet closely
related modalities of human perception. There are two primary forms of self-supervision commonly
used: reconstruction and contrastive learning. By reconstructing masked text tokens on large-scale
corpora, BERT [20] pre-training has achieved groundbreaking results in various NLP tasks. Masked
autoencoders (MAEs) have recently emerged as powerful tools for learning uni-modal representations
in various modalities such as image [37], video [27], and audio [41]. They employ an asymmetric
encoder-decoder architecture with a substantial portion of encoder inputs being masked, resulting in
efficient uni-modal SSL. Additionally, contrastive learning has been widely used to learn coordinated
multimodal representations for image-text [75, 93] and audio-visual [67, 71] tasks.
In this work, we develop a novel approach that integrates MAE and contrastive learning to enhance
audio-video representation learning for both audio-video and audio-only tasks. This integration
poses unique challenges under the multimodal paradigm, necessitating meticulous model design to
effectively manage diverse multimodal inputs in MAE, while also adapting contrastive learning to
accommodate masking of the majority of inputs for efficiency. Our method, Masked Audio-Video
Learners (MAViL), comprises a pair of encoders to encode audio and video, a fusion encoder, and
distinct decoders tailored for reconstructing raw inputs or contextualized representations in each
modality (as illustrated in Fig. 1). We design MAViL with three types of objectives outlined next.
Firstly, we extend uni-modal MAE to multimodal and utilize a fusion encoder to exchange information
from all modalities. MAViL reconstructs raw inputs that has been removed under a high masking
ratio (e.g. 80%). With this, it learns complementary audio-video representations by reconstructing a
single modality input, with the supplementary context from the other. Secondly, we adapt contrastive
learning [34, 85], with the majority of uni-modal inputs being masked, to learn an aligned audio-video
latent space efficiently. MAViL employs two types contrastive objectives: (i) An inter-modal contrast
that brings together paired video and audio clips from the same video and contrasts them with other
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

