Schema-learning and rebinding as mechanisms of
in-context learning and emergence

Sivaramakrishnan Swaminathan Antoine Dedieu Rajkumar Vasudeva Raju
Murray Shanahan Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla Dileep George
Google DeepMind
{sivark,adedieu,rajvraju,mshanahan,lazarogredilla,dileepgeorge}@google.com

Abstract
In-context learning (ICL) is one of the most powerful and most unexpected capabilities to emerge in recent transformer-based large language models (LLMs). Yet the
mechanisms that underlie it are poorly understood. In this paper, we demonstrate
that comparable ICL capabilities can be acquired by an alternative sequence prediction learning method, namely clone-structured causal graphs (CSCGs). A key
property of CSCGs is that, unlike transformer-based LLMs, they are interpretable,
which considerably simplifies the task of explaining how ICL works. We show that
ICL in CSCG uses a combination of (a) learning template (schema) circuits for
pattern completion, (b) retrieving relevant templates in a context-sensitive manner,
and (c) rebinding novel tokens to appropriate slots in the templates. We go on
to marshall evidence for the hypothesis that similar mechanisms underlie ICL in
LLMs. For example, we find that, with CSCGs as with LLMs, different capabilities
emerge at different levels of overparameterization, suggesting that overparameterization helps in learning more complex template (schema) circuits. By showing
how ICL can be achieved with small models and datasets, we open up a path to
novel architectures, and take a vital step towards a more general understanding of
the mechanics behind this important capability.

1

Introduction

In a pre-trained sequence model, in-context learning (ICL), or few-shot prompting, is the ability to
learn a new task from a small set of examples presented within the context (the prompt) at inference
time. Surprisingly, large language models (LLMs) trained on sufficient data exhibit ICL, even
though they are trained only with the objective of next token prediction [1, 2]. A good deal of the
ongoing excitement surrounding LLMs arises from this unexpected capacity, since it dramatically
enlarges their set of potential applications. Ongoing attempts to understand this capability take
a variety of forms, including higher-level normative accounts using Bayesian inference [3], and
mechanistic explanations involving implicit gradient descent [4] or induction heads [5]. Despite this,
the mechanisms that underlie ICL in LLMs remain somewhat mysterious.
We take an alternative approach, studying a sequence-learning model called a clone-structured causal
graph (CSCG) [6, 7] to reveal the conditions that drive ICL. We show that ICL can be explained as a
combination of (a) learning template circuits for pattern completion, (b) retrieving relevant templates
in a context-sensitive manner, and (c) rebinding of novel tokens to appropriate slots in templates
[8]. Unlike n-gram models, CSCGs allow transitive generalization in the latent space: they assign
semantically sensible non-zero probabilities to sequences never seen during training to ensure that the
contexts (prompts) used for retrieval are not pure memorizations. In addition, the binding of novel
tokens to slots in learned templates allows the same structural knowledge to be applied to entirely
novel inputs. We hypothesize how similar mechanisms could exist in transformer-based LLMs. By
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

