Density of States Prediction of Crystalline Materials
via Prompt-guided Multi-Modal Transformer

Namkyeong Lee1† , Heewoong Noh1† , Sungwon Kim1 ,
Dongmin Hyun2 , Gyoung S. Na3 , Chanyoung Park1∗
1
2
3
KAIST
Yahoo Research
KRICT
{namkyeong96,heewoongnoh,swkim,cy.park}@kaist.ac.kr
dhyun@yahooinc.com, ngs0@krict.re.kr

Abstract
The density of states (DOS) is a spectral property of crystalline materials, which
provides fundamental insights into various characteristics of the materials. While
previous works mainly focus on obtaining high-quality representations of crystalline materials for DOS prediction, we focus on predicting the DOS from the
obtained representations by reflecting the nature of DOS: DOS determines the
general distribution of states as a function of energy. That is, DOS is not solely
determined by the crystalline material but also by the energy levels, which has
been neglected in previous works. In this paper, we propose to integrate heterogeneous information obtained from the crystalline materials and the energies
via a multi-modal transformer, thereby modeling the complex relationships between the atoms in the crystalline materials and various energy levels for DOS
prediction. Moreover, we propose to utilize prompts to guide the model to learn
the crystal structural system-specific interactions between crystalline materials
and energies. Extensive experiments on two types of DOS, i.e., Phonon DOS
and Electron DOS, with various real-world scenarios demonstrate the superiority of DOSTransformer. The source code for DOSTransformer is available
at https://github.com/HeewoongNoh/DOSTransformer.

1

Introduction

Along with recent advances in machine learning (ML) for scientific discovery, ML models have
rapidly been adopted in computational materials science thanks to the abundant experimental
and computational data in the field. Most ML models developed in computational materials
science to date have been focused on crystalline materials property consisting of single-valued
quantities [29], e.g., band gap energy [31, 69], formation energy [3, 56], and Fermi energy [61].
Single-valued Property
On the other hand, spectral properties are ubiquitous in
3.34 eV
Gap
materials science, characterizing various properties of crys- Crystalline Material Band
Formation Energy -2.299 eV/atom
Energy Above Hull 0.057 eV/atom
talline materials, e.g., X-ray absorption, dielectric function,
Spectral Property
and electronic density of states [29] (Figure 1).
Electron DOS

DOS

The density of states (DOS), which is the main focus of
this paper, is a spectral property that provides fundamental
insights on various characteristics of crystalline materials,
𝐒𝐛𝐏𝐎𝟒
even enabling direct computation of single-valued propEnergy (eV)
erties [17]. For example, DOS is utilized as a feature of
materials for analyzing the underlying reasons for changes Figure 1: A crystal structure and various
types of its properties.
∗

Corresponding author.

†

These authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

