Improving the Privacy and Practicality of Objective
Perturbation for Differentially Private Linear
Learners
Rachel Redberg
UC Santa Barbara

Antti Koskela
Nokia Bell Labs

Yu-Xiang Wang
UC Santa Barbara

Abstract
In the arena of privacy-preserving machine learning, differentially private stochastic
gradient descent (DP-SGD) has outstripped the objective perturbation mechanism
in popularity and interest. Though unrivaled in versatility, DP-SGD requires a
non-trivial privacy overhead (for privately tuning the model’s hyperparameters) and
a computational complexity which might be extravagant for simple models such
as linear and logistic regression. This paper revamps the objective perturbation
mechanism with tighter privacy analyses and new computational tools that boost
it to perform competitively with DP-SGD on unconstrained convex generalized
linear problems.

1

Introduction

The rise of deep neural networks has transformed the study of differentially private learning no less
than any other area of machine learning. Differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD)
(Song et al., 2013; Bassily et al., 2014; Abadi et al., 2016) has thus gained widespread appeal as a
versatile framework for privately training deep learning models.
How does DP-SGD fare on simpler models such as linear and logistic regression? The verdict is
unclear. Clearly an algorithm capable of privately optimizing non-convex functions represented by
millions of parameters is up to the computational task of fitting a linear model. A more pressing
concern is that DP-SGD is up to too much. Look, for example, at the algorithm’s computational
complexity: DP-SGD requires O(n2 ) steps to achieve the optimal excess risk bounds for DP convex
empirical risk minimization (Bassily et al., 2014).
DP-SGD furthermore takes after its non-private counterpart in sensitivity to hyperparameters. A
poor choice of learning rate or batch size, for instance, could lead to suboptimal performance or
slow convergence. There are well-established procedures for hyperparameter optimization that
typically involve evaluating the performance of the model trained using different sets of candidate
hyperparameters. But with privacy constraints, there is a catch: tuning hyperparameters requires
multiple passes over the training dataset and thereby constitutes a privacy cost.
At best, existing work tends to circumvent this obstacle by optimistically assuming the availability
of a public auxiliary dataset for hyperparameter tuning. More often the procedure for private
hyperparameter selection is left largely to the reader’s imagination. Only recently have Liu & Talwar
(2019) and subsequently Papernot & Steinke (2022) studied how to obtain tighter privacy loss bounds
for this task beyond standard composition theorems.
In the meantime, objective perturbation (Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Kifer et al., 2012) has been to some
extent shelved as a historical curiosity. Sifting through the literature, we find that opinions are divided:
some tout objective perturbation as "[o]ne of the most effective algorithms for differentially private
learning and optimization" (Neel et al., 2020), whereas other works (Wang et al., 2017) dismiss
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

