MultiVENT:
Multilingual Videos of Events
with Aligned Natural Text

Kate Sanders*

David Etter*
Reno Kriz*
Benjamin Van Durme
Johns Hopkins University
Human Language Technology Center of Excellence
{ksande25, detter2, rkriz1, vandurme}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Everyday news coverage has shifted from traditional broadcasts towards a wide
range of presentation formats such as first-hand, unedited video footage. Datasets
that reflect the diverse array of multimodal, multilingual news sources available
online could be used to teach models to benefit from this shift, but existing news
video datasets focus on traditional news broadcasts produced for English-speaking
audiences. We address this limitation by constructing MultiVENT, a dataset of
multilingual, event-centric videos grounded in text documents across five target
languages. MultiVENT includes both news broadcast videos and non-professional
event footage, which we use to analyze the state of online news videos and how
they can be leveraged to build robust, factually accurate models. Finally, we
provide a model for complex, multilingual video retrieval to serve as a baseline for
information retrieval using MultiVENT.

1

Introduction

Information dissemination for current events has traditionally consisted of professionally collected
and produced materials, leading to large collections of well-written news articles and high-quality
videos. As a result, such materials form the basis for significant prior work in content analysis and
retrieval [54, 20, 2, 15, 50]. Meanwhile, a high volume of event-centric content today is generated by
non-professionals, such as on-the-scene witnesses to events who hastily capture videos and upload
them to the internet without further editing. We propose that this contemporary landscape of news
content can be leveraged by models to produce a more comprehensive understanding of events. News
agencies have adapted to this shift, often collecting and incorporating this online content into official
broadcasts, but news video datasets still do not typically address this new domain of event coverage.
In addition to focusing on traditional news sources, existing news video datasets predominantly
consider content produced in English. This is consistent with common practices in video dataset
collection: Collected videos and captions are recorded in English, and when multilinguality is
considered, it is achieved by directly translating captions and transcripts [48, 22, 40, 19]. Because this
data is originally produced for English speaking audiences, these multilingual datasets can contain
unwanted content biases like "translationese" [6, 21]. As event-centric video content produced in
other languages makes up a large portion of news videos online, we argue that including organic,
multilingual content is necessary for a diverse and perspective-agnostic sampling of event coverage.
With these ideas in mind, we present MultiVENT, a dataset of Multilingual Videos of Events
with aligned Natural Text that contains 2,396 diverse, event-centric videos and text descriptions
*

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

