Deep Reinforcement Learning with Plasticity Injection

Evgenii Nikishin∗ Junhyuk Oh Georg Ostrovski Clare Lyle
Razvan Pascanu Will Dabney André Barreto
DeepMind

Abstract
A growing body of evidence suggests that neural networks employed in deep
reinforcement learning (RL) gradually lose their plasticity, the ability to learn from
new data; however, the analysis and mitigation of this phenomenon is hampered by
the complex relationship between plasticity, exploration, and performance in RL.
This paper introduces plasticity injection, a minimalistic intervention that increases
the network plasticity without changing the number of trainable parameters or
biasing the predictions. The applications of this intervention are two-fold: first,
as a diagnostic tool — if injection increases the performance, we may conclude
that an agent’s network was losing its plasticity. This tool allows us to identify
a subset of Atari environments where the lack of plasticity causes performance
plateaus, motivating future studies on understanding and combating plasticity loss.
Second, plasticity injection can be used to improve the computational efficiency of
RL training if the agent has to re-learn from scratch due to exhausted plasticity or
by growing the agent’s network dynamically without compromising performance.
The results on Atari show that plasticity injection attains stronger performance
compared to alternative methods while being computationally efficient.

1

Introduction

“You cannot teach an old dog new tricks” an old proverb says. While the common wisdom is not
necessarily a source of absolute truth, neuroscientists recognized a long time ago that biological agents
indeed gradually lose adaptability with age [Livingston, 1966]. This phenomenon is referred to as loss
of plasticity in brains [Nelson, 1999, Mateos-Aparicio and Rodríguez-Moreno, 2019] and happens
for multiple reasons, including natural degradation of neurons and their connections [Mahncke et al.,
2006, Kolb and Gibb, 2011].
Since the biological causes of loss of plasticity do not apply to artificial agents, in principle there is no
reason to expect that this phenomenon also happens in the context of machine learning. Surprisingly,
several recent works show that reinforcement learning (RL) agents that use neural networks may
gradually lose the ability to learn from new experiences [Dohare et al., 2021, Lyle et al., 2022,
Nikishin et al., 2022].
The precise mechanisms causing loss of plasticity in RL are not well understood. The problem is
particularly challenging to study in this context because performance in RL is influenced by many
factors. For example, an agent without plasticity issues may still struggle to learn if it fails to properly
explore the environment [Taïga et al., 2019]. Past literature focused on using and controlling proxy
measures of plasticity such as the number of saturated rectified linear units [Nair and Hinton, 2010]
and feature rank [Kumar et al., 2021], but it is unclear how well these measures manage to capture
the underlying phenomenon [Gulcehre et al., 2022].
This paper complements past evidence about the existence of plasticity loss in deep RL and introduces
plasticity injection, an intervention that augments plasticity of the agent’s neural network. The
∗

Work done during the internship; currently at Mila, Université de Montréal.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

