QuinNet: Efficiently Incorporating Quintuple
Interactions into Geometric Deep Learning Force
Fields
Zun Wang
Microsoft Research AI4Science
Beijing, China, 100084
zunwang@microsoft.com

Guoqing Liu
Microsoft Research AI4Science
Beijing, China, 100084

Yichi Zhou
Microsoft Research AI4Science
Beijing, China, 100084

Tong Wang
Microsoft Research AI4Science
Beijing, China, 100084

Bin Shao
Microsoft Research AI4Science
Beijing, China, 100084
binshao@microsoft.com

Abstract
Machine learning force fields (MLFFs) have instigated a groundbreaking shift in
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations across a wide range of fields, such as physics,
chemistry, biology, and materials science. Incorporating higher order many-body
interactions can enhance the expressiveness and accuracy of models. Recent models
have achieved this by explicitly including up to four-body interactions. However,
five-body interactions, which have relevance in various fields, are still challenging
to incorporate efficiently into MLFFs. In this work, we propose the quintuple
network (QuinNet), an end-to-end graph neural network that efficiently expresses
many-body interactions up to five-body interactions with ab initio accuracy. By
analyzing the topology of diverse many-body interactions, we design the model
architecture to efficiently and explicitly represent these interactions. We evaluate
QuinNet on public datasets of small molecules, such as MD17 and its revised
version, and show that it is compatible with other state-of-the-art models on these
benchmarks. Moreover, QuinNet surpasses many leading models on larger and
more complex molecular systems, such as MD22 and Chignolin, without increasing
the computational complexity. We also use QuinNet as a force field for molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations to demonstrate its accuracy and stability, and conduct
an ablation study to elucidate the significance of five-body interactions. We open
source our implementation at https://github.com/Zun-Wang/QuinNet.

1

Introduction

Machine learning force fields (MLFFs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] have brought about a transformative shift in
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations across diverse fields, including physics, chemistry, biology,
and material science. MLFFs enable superior accuracy and reliability by leveraging ab initio and
experimental data to learn interatomic interactions, while simultaneously keeping the low cost of
empirical force fields. As a result, MLFFs provide a powerful tool for accurately modeling molecular
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

