Coherent Soft Imitation Learning

Joe Watson∗†‡

Sandy H. Huang§

§
Google DeepMind
London, United Kingdom

†
TU Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany

{shhuang,heess}@google.com

joe@robot-learning.de

Nicolas Heess§
‡

Systems AI for Robot Learning
German Research Center for AI
dfki.de

Abstract
Imitation learning methods seek to learn from an expert either through behavioral cloning (BC) for the policy or inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) for the
reward. Such methods enable agents to learn complex tasks from humans that
are difficult to capture with hand-designed reward functions. Choosing between
BC or IRL for imitation depends on the quality and state-action coverage of the
demonstrations, as well as additional access to the Markov decision process. Hybrid strategies that combine BC and IRL are rare, as initial policy optimization
against inaccurate rewards diminishes the benefit of pretraining the policy with
BC. This work derives an imitation method that captures the strengths of both
BC and IRL. In the entropy-regularized (‘soft’) reinforcement learning setting,
we show that the behavioral-cloned policy can be used as both a shaped reward
and a critic hypothesis space by inverting the regularized policy update. This
coherency facilitates fine-tuning cloned policies using the reward estimate and
additional interactions with the environment. Our approach conveniently achieves
imitation learning through initial behavioral cloning and subsequent refinement
via RL with online or offline data sources. The simplicity of the approach enables
graceful scaling to high-dimensional and vision-based tasks, with stable learning
and minimal hyperparameter tuning, in contrast to adversarial approaches. For the
open-source implementation and simulation results, see joemwatson.github.io/csil.
Classifier

Ours

s

s

s

a

Reward

Figure 1: By using regression rather than classification, our approach infers a shaped reward from
expert data for this contextual bandit problem, whereas classifiers require additional non-expert data
and may struggle to resolve the difference between expert ( ) and non-expert ( ) samples.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) methods [1] provide algorithms for learning skills from expert demonstrations
in domains such as robotics [2], either through direct mimicry (behavioral cloning, BC [3]) or inferring
the latent reward (inverse reinforcement learning, IRL [4–6]) assuming a Markov decision process
(MDP) [7, 8]. While BC is straightforward to implement, it is susceptible to covariate shift during
evaluation [9]. IRL overcomes this problem but tackles the more complex task of jointly learning
∗

Corresponding author. Work done during an internship at Google DeepMind.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

