Modality-Agnostic Self-Supervised Learning with
Meta-Learned Masked Auto-Encoder
Huiwon JangA∗ Jihoon TackA∗ Daewon ChoiB Jongheon JeongA Jinwoo ShinA
A
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) B Korea University
{huiwoen0516, jihoontack}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Despite its practical importance across a wide range of modalities, recent advances
in self-supervised learning (SSL) have been primarily focused on a few wellcurated domains, e.g., vision and language, often relying on their domain-specific
knowledge. For example, Masked Auto-Encoder (MAE) has become one of the
popular architectures in these domains, but less has explored its potential in other
modalities. In this paper, we develop MAE as a unified, modality-agnostic SSL
framework. In turn, we argue meta-learning as a key to interpreting MAE as a
modality-agnostic learner, and propose enhancements to MAE from the motivation
to jointly improve its SSL across diverse modalities, coined MetaMAE as a result.
Our key idea is to view the mask reconstruction of MAE as a meta-learning task:
masked tokens are predicted by adapting the Transformer meta-learner through the
amortization of unmasked tokens. Based on this novel interpretation, we propose
to integrate two advanced meta-learning techniques. First, we adapt the amortized
latent of the Transformer encoder using gradient-based meta-learning to enhance
the reconstruction. Then, we maximize the alignment between amortized and
adapted latents through task contrastive learning which guides the Transformer
encoder to better encode the task-specific knowledge. Our experiment demonstrates the superiority of MetaMAE in the modality-agnostic SSL benchmark
(called DABS), significantly outperforming prior baselines. Code is available at
https://github.com/alinlab/MetaMAE.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL), i.e., learning without human supervision, recently has demonstrated
substantial success across fields including, computer vision [32, 11, 29, 47, 33, 5, 102], natural
language processing (NLP) [18, 49, 55, 70], and speech recognition [2, 38, 39]. The efficacy of SSL
is derived by extracting transferable knowledge from unlabeled datasets, a feature that manifests
significant utility for various downstream tasks such as classification and segmentation. As a result,
SSL has become an indispensable technique in real-world applications (for instance, industrial
contexts like medical imaging [26]), not only improving the performance on new datasets but also
reducing a significant amount of computations and costs, e.g., expert annotation poses significant
costs [68, 16]. However, despite the importance of SSL in such fields, recent advancements have been
predominantly focused on specific domains (e.g., images and NLP) where the majority of existing
SSL frameworks on such domains require modality-specific knowledge, thereby constraining the
applicability and scalability of previous works across new modalities.
To tackle this issue, we draw attention to the recent success of the Masked Auto-Encoder (MAE)
framework [33], which eliminates the need for modality-specific inductive biases. Initially presented
as a generative model [91, 67], the MAE models the network to reconstruct the original input
∗

Equal contributions

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

