Contextual Bandits and Imitation Learning with
Preference-Based Active Queries
Ayush Sekhari∗
MIT
sekhari@mit.edu

Karthik Sridharan
Cornell University
ks999@cornell.edu

Wen Sun
Cornell University
ws455@cornell.edu

Runzhe Wu
Cornell University
rw646@cornell.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of contextual bandits and imitation learning, where
the learner lacks direct knowledge of the executed action’s reward. Instead, the
learner can actively request the expert at each round to compare two actions and
receive noisy preference feedback. The learner’s objective is two-fold: to minimize
regret associated with the executed actions, while simultaneously, minimizing the
number of comparison queries made to the expert. In this paper, we assume
that the learner has access to a function class that can represent the expert’s
preference model under appropriate link functions and present an algorithm that
leverages an online regression oracle with respect to this function class. For the
contextual bandit setting, our algorithm achieves
a regret bound that combines
√
the best of both worlds, scaling as O(min{ T , d/∆}), where T represents the
number of interactions, d represents the eluder dimension of the function class, and
∆ represents the minimum preference of the optimal action over any suboptimal
action under all contexts. Our algorithm does not require the knowledge of ∆, and
the obtained regret bound is comparable to what can be achieved in the standard
contextual bandits setting where the learner observes reward signals at each round.
Additionally, our algorithm makes only O(min{T, d2 /∆2 }) queries to the expert.
We then extend our algorithm to the imitation learning setting, where the agent
engages with an unknown environment in episodes of length H, and provide
similar guarantees regarding regret and query complexity. Interestingly, with
preference-based feedback, our imitation learning algorithm can learn a policy
outperforming a sub-optimal expert, matching the result from interactive imitation
learning algorithms [Ross and Bagnell, 2014] that require access to the expert’s
actions and also reward signals.

1

Introduction

Human feedback for training machine learning models has been widely used in scenarios including
robotics [Ross et al., 2011, 2013, Jain et al., 2015, Laskey et al., 2016, Christiano et al., 2017] and
natural language processing [Stiennon et al., 2020, Ouyang et al., 2022]. By integrating human
feedback into the training process, these prior works provide techniques to align machine-learning
models with human intention and enable high-quality human-machine interaction (e.g., ChatGPT).
∗

Authors are listed in alphabetical order of their last names.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

