Online Inventory Problems: Beyond the i.i.d. Setting
with Online Convex Optimization

Massil Hihat1,2 , Stéphane Gaïffas1,2 , Guillaume Garrigos1,2 , Simon Bussy1
1
LOPF, Califrais’ Machine Learning Lab, Paris, France
2
Université Paris Cité and Sorbonne Université, CNRS,
Laboratoire de Probabilités, Statistique et Modélisation, Paris, France
{hihat, stephane.gaiffas, garrigos}@lpsm.paris, simon.bussy@califrais.fr

Abstract
We study multi-product inventory control problems where a manager makes sequential replenishment decisions based on partial historical information in order
to minimize its cumulative losses. Our motivation is to consider general demands, losses and dynamics to go beyond standard models which usually rely on
newsvendor-type losses, fixed dynamics, and unrealistic i.i.d. demand assumptions.
We propose MaxCOSD, an online algorithm that has provable guarantees even for
problems with non-i.i.d. demands and stateful dynamics, including for instance perishability. We consider what we call non-degeneracy assumptions on the demand
process, and argue that they are necessary to allow learning.

1

Introduction

An inventory control problem is a problem faced by an inventory manager that must decide how
much goods to order at each time period to meet demand for its products. The manager’s decision is
driven by the will to minimize a certain regret, which often penalizes missed sales and storage costs.
It is a standard problem in operations research and operations management, and the reader unfamiliar
with the topic can find a precise description of this problem in Section 2.
The classical literature of inventory management focuses on optimizing an inventory system with
complete knowledge of its parameters: we know in advance the demands, or the distribution they
will be drawn from. Many efforts have been put into characterizing the optimal ordering policies,
and providing efficient algorithms to find them. See e.g. the Economic Order Quantity model [7],
the Dynamic Lot-Size model [30] or the newsvendor model [1]. Nevertheless, in many applications,
the parameters of the inventory system are unknown. In this case, the manager faces a joint learning
and optimization problem that is typically framed as a sequential decision making problem: the
manager bases its replenishment decisions on data that are collected over time, such as past demands
(observable demand case) or past sales (censored demand case). The early attempts to solve these
online inventory problems employed various techniques and provided only weak guarantees or no
guarantees at all [23, 4, 6, 12].
With the recent advances in online learning frameworks such as online convex optimization (OCO),
bandits, or learning with expert advice, the literature of learning algorithms for inventory problems
took a great leap forward. There is currently a growing body of research aiming at solving various
online inventory problems while providing strong theoretical guarantees in the form of regret bounds
[9, 13, 24, 3, 34, 25, 35, 15, 32, 33, 31].
However, these works rely on mathematically convenient but unrealistic assumptions. The most
common one being that the demands are assumed to be independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
across time, which rules out correlations and nonstationarities that are common in real-world scenarios.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

