DiffKendall: A Novel Approach for Few-Shot Learning
with Differentiable Kendall’s Rank Correlation
Kaipeng Zheng1
1

Huishuai Zhang2

Weiran Huang1,†

Qing Yuan Research Institute, SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Microsoft Research Asia

kaipengm2@gmail.com, huzhang@microsoft.com, weiran.huang@outlook.com

Abstract
Few-shot learning aims to adapt models trained on the base dataset to novel tasks
where the categories were not seen by the model before. This often leads to a relatively concentrated distribution of feature values across channels on novel classes,
posing challenges in determining channel importance for novel tasks. Standard
few-shot learning methods employ geometric similarity metrics such as cosine
similarity and negative Euclidean distance to gauge the semantic relatedness between two features. However, features with high geometric similarities may carry
distinct semantics, especially in the context of few-shot learning. In this paper,
we demonstrate that the importance ranking of feature channels is a more reliable
indicator for few-shot learning than geometric similarity metrics. We observe
that replacing the geometric similarity metric with Kendall’s rank correlation only
during inference is able to improve the performance of few-shot learning across
a wide range of methods and datasets with different domains. Furthermore, we
propose a carefully designed differentiable loss for meta-training to address the
non-differentiability issue of Kendall’s rank correlation. By replacing geometric
similarity with differentiable Kendall’s rank correlation, our method can integrate
with numerous existing few-shot approaches and is ready for integrating with future
state-of-the-art methods that rely on geometric similarity metrics. Extensive experiments validate the efficacy of the rank-correlation-based approach, showcasing a
significant improvement in few-shot learning.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in various domains. However, obtaining an adequate
amount of labeled data is essential for attaining good performance. In many real-world scenarios,
obtaining sufficient labeled data can be exceedingly challenging and laborious. This makes it a major
bottleneck in applying deep learning models in real-world applications. In contrast, humans are able
to quickly adapt to novel tasks by leveraging prior knowledge and experience, with only a very small
number of samples. As a result, few-shot learning has received increasing attention recently.
The goal of few-shot learning is to adapt models trained on the base dataset to novel tasks where only
a few labeled data are available. Previous works mainly focus on classification tasks and have been
extensively devoted to metric-learning-based methods [1, 2, 3, 4]. In particular, they learn enhanced
embeddings of novel samples by sampling tasks with a similar structure to the novel task from a
sufficiently labeled base dataset for training. Geometric similarity metrics, such as negative Euclidean
distance [1] and cosine similarity [4, 5, 6, 7], are commonly utilized to determine the semantic
†

Correspondence to Weiran Huang.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

