Gaussian Partial Information Decomposition: Bias
Correction and Application to High-dimensional Data

Praveen Venkatesh1,2,* , Corbett Bennett1 , Sam Gale1 , Tamina K. Ramirez3 ,
Greggory Heller4 , Séverine Durand1 , Shawn Olsen1 , Stefan Mihalas1,†
1
Allen Institute; 2 University of Washington; 3 Columbia University;
4
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
*
praveen.venkatesh@alleninstitute.org; † stefanm@alleninstitute.org

Abstract
Recent advances in neuroscientific experimental techniques have enabled us to
simultaneously record the activity of thousands of neurons across multiple brain
regions. This has led to a growing need for computational tools capable of analyzing
how task-relevant information is represented and communicated between several
brain regions. Partial information decompositions (PIDs) have emerged as one such
tool, quantifying how much unique, redundant and synergistic information two or
more brain regions carry about a task-relevant message. However, computing PIDs
is computationally challenging in practice, and statistical issues such as the bias and
variance of estimates remain largely unexplored. In this paper, we propose a new
method for efficiently computing and estimating a PID definition on multivariate
Gaussian distributions. We show empirically that our method satisfies an intuitive
additivity property, and recovers the ground truth in a battery of canonical examples,
even at high dimensionality. We also propose and evaluate, for the first time, a
method to correct the bias in PID estimates at finite sample sizes. Finally, we
demonstrate that our Gaussian PID effectively characterizes inter-areal interactions
in the mouse brain, revealing higher redundancy between visual areas when a
stimulus is behaviorally relevant.

1

Introduction

Neuroscientific experiments are increasingly collecting large-scale datasets with simultaneous recordings of multiple brain regions with single-unit resolution [1–3]. These experimental advances call
for new computational tools that can allow us to probe how multiple brain regions jointly process
relevant information in a behaving animal.
Partial Information Decompositions (PIDs) offer a new method for studying how different brain
regions carry task-relevant information: they provide measures to quantify the amount of unique,
redundant and synergistic information that one region has with respect to another. The information
itself could pertain to task-relevant variables such as stimuli, behavioral responses, or information
contained in a third region. For example, we may be interested in how much information about a
stimulus is communicated or shared (i.e., redundantly present) between two brain regions over time.
Or, we might be interested in the extent to which one region’s activity uniquely explains that of
another, while excluding information corresponding to spontaneous behaviors.
Ideas such as redundancy and synergy have a long history in neuroscience, having been proposed for
understanding noise correlations [4] and to understand differences in encoding complexity between
different brain regions [5]. PIDs have also been suggested for quantifying how much sensory
information is used to execute behaviors [6] and for tracking stimulus-dependent information flows
between brain regions [7, 8]. Outside of neuroscience, PID has been used to understand interactions
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

