LMC: Large Model Collaboration with
Cross-assessment for Training-Free Open-Set Object
Recognition

Haoxuan Qu ∗
SUTD
Singapore
haoxuan_qu@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

Xiaofei Hui *
SUTD
Singapore
xiaofei_hui@sutd.edu.sg
Jun Liu †
SUTD
Singapore
jun_liu@sutd.edu.sg

Yujun Cai
Meta
U.S.
yujuncai@meta.com

Abstract
Open-set object recognition aims to identify if an object is from a class that has
been encountered during training or not. To perform open-set object recognition
accurately, a key challenge is how to reduce the reliance on spurious-discriminative
features. In this paper, motivated by that different large models pre-trained through
different paradigms can possess very rich while distinct implicit knowledge, we
propose a novel framework named Large Model Collaboration (LMC) to tackle
the above challenge via collaborating different off-the-shelf large models in a
training-free manner. Moreover, we also incorporate the proposed framework with
several novel designs to effectively extract implicit knowledge from large models.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed framework. Code
is available here.

1

Introduction

Open-set object recognition aims to identify if an object is from a closed-set class that has appeared
during training, or an open-set class that has not been encountered in the training set. It is a crucial
task since open-set classes always exist in the real world [63], and misidentifying open-set classes
into closed-set ones can lead to severe consequences in many practical applications [2], such as
autonomous driving [19], robotics system [54], malware classification [18], and medical analysis [15].
Due to its importance, open-set object recognition has received a lot of research attention recently
and various methods have been proposed [14, 36, 28, 6, 66, 56, 12].
To perform open-set object recognition well, some existing works [34, 40] have noted that a key
challenge is how to reduce the reliance on spurious-discriminative features. Specifically, a spuriousdiscriminative feature refers to a feature that satisfies the following two requirements: 1) it is
discriminative between a closed-set class and other closed-set classes; 2) it is shared between this
closed-set class and certain open-set classes. As suggested by previous works [34, 40], while
such spurious-discriminative features can facilitate classification within the closed set, in open-set
recognition, relying on such features can make closed-set and open-set classes to be easily confused
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to the work.
Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

