AUDIT: Audio Editing by Following Instructions with
Latent Diffusion Models
Yuancheng Wang12∗, Zeqian Ju1 , Xu Tan1 , Lei He1 , Zhizheng Wu2 , Jiang Bian1 , Sheng Zhao1
1
Microsoft, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
1
{v-yuancwang,v-zeqianju,xuta,helei,jiabia,szhao}@microsoft.com
2
yuanchengwang@link.cuhk.edu.cn,wuzhizheng@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Audio editing is applicable for various purposes, such as adding background sound
effects, replacing a musical instrument, and repairing damaged audio. Recently,
some diffusion-based methods achieved zero-shot audio editing by using a diffusion
and denoising process conditioned on the text description of the output audio.
However, these methods still have some problems: 1) they have not been trained on
editing tasks and cannot ensure good editing effects; 2) they can erroneously modify
audio segments that do not require editing; 3) they need a complete description of
the output audio, which is not always available or necessary in practical scenarios.
In this work, we propose AUDIT, an instruction-guided audio editing model based
on latent diffusion models. Specifically, AUDIT has three main design features:
1) we construct triplet training data (instruction, input audio, output audio) for
different audio editing tasks and train a diffusion model using instruction and input
(to be edited) audio as conditions and generating output (edited) audio; 2) it can
automatically learn to only modify segments that need to be edited by comparing
the difference between the input and output audio; 3) it only needs edit instructions
instead of full target audio descriptions as text input. AUDIT achieves state-of-theart results in both objective and subjective metrics for several audio editing tasks
(e.g., adding, dropping, replacement, inpainting, super-resolution). Demo samples
are available at https://audit-demopage.github.io/.

AUDIT
Adding

T5 Encoder
“Add horse hooves in the background”

×𝑻

Dropping
“Drop the sound of duck quacking”

Replacement
“Replace string instrument to drum kit”

VAE
Encoder

Diffusion

VAE
Decoder

Inpainting
“Inpaint”

Super-Resolution

𝝐 ~ 𝓝(𝟎, 𝑰)
“Increase resolution”

Figure 1: AUDIT consists of a VAE, a T5 text encoder, and a diffusion network, and accepts the
mel-spectrogram of the input audio and the edit instructions as conditional inputs and generates the
edited audio as output.
∗

Work done as an intern at Microsoft.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

