DataPerf:
Benchmarks for Data-Centric AI Development
Mark Mazumder1 , Colby Banbury1 , Xiaozhe Yao2 , Bojan Karlaš2 , William Gaviria Rojas3 ,
Sudnya Diamos3 , Greg Diamos4 , Lynn He5 , Alicia Parrish 8 , Hannah Rose Kirk17 , Jessica Quaye1 ,
Charvi Rastogi11 , Douwe Kiela9,21 , David Jurado6,20 , David Kanter6 , Rafael Mosquera6,20 ,
Juan Ciro6,20 , Lora Aroyo8 , Bilge Acun7 , Lingjiao Chen9 , Mehul Smriti Raje3 , Max Bartolo16,19 ,
Sabri Eyuboglu9 , Amirata Ghorbani9 , Emmett Goodman9 , Oana Inel18 , Tariq Kane3,8 ,
Christine R. Kirkpatrick10 , Tzu-Sheng Kuo11 , Jonas Mueller12 , Tristan Thrush9 ,
Joaquin Vanschoren13 , Margaret Warren14 , Adina Williams7 , Serena Yeung9 , Newsha Ardalani7 ,
Praveen Paritosh6 , Ce Zhang2 , James Zou9 , Carole-Jean Wu7 , Cody Coleman3 , Andrew Ng4,5,9 ,
Peter Mattson8 , and Vijay Janapa Reddi1
1

Harvard University, 2 ETH Zurich, 3 Coactive.AI, 4 Landing AI, 5 DeepLearning.AI, 6 MLCommons,
7
Meta, 8 Google, 9 Stanford University, 10 San Diego Supercomputer Center, UC San Diego,
11
Carnegie Mellon University, 12 Cleanlab, 13 Eindhoven University of Technology,
14
Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, 15 Kaggle, 16 Cohere, 17 University of Oxford,
18
University of Zurich, 19 University College London, 20 Factored, 21 Contextual AI

Abstract
Machine learning research has long focused on models rather than datasets, and
prominent datasets are used for common ML tasks without regard to the breadth,
difficulty, and faithfulness of the underlying problems. Neglecting the fundamental importance of data has given rise to inaccuracy, bias, and fragility in real-world
applications, and research is hindered by saturation across existing dataset benchmarks. In response, we present DataPerf, a community-led benchmark suite for
evaluating ML datasets and data-centric algorithms. We aim to foster innovation
in data-centric AI through competition, comparability, and reproducibility. We
enable the ML community to iterate on datasets, instead of just architectures, and
we provide an open, online platform with multiple rounds of challenges to support
this iterative development. The first iteration of DataPerf contains five benchmarks
covering a wide spectrum of data-centric techniques, tasks, and modalities in vision, speech, acquisition, debugging, and diffusion prompting, and we support
hosting new contributed benchmarks from the community. The benchmarks, online evaluation platform, and baseline implementations are open source, and the
MLCommons Association will maintain DataPerf to ensure long-term benefits to
academia and industry.

1

Introduction

Machine learning research has overwhelmingly focused on improving models rather than on improving datasets. Large public datasets such as ImageNet [14], Freebase [7], Switchboard [22], and
SQuAD [44] serve as compasses for benchmarking model performance. Consequently, researchers
eagerly adopt the largest existing dataset without fully considering its breadth, difficulty and fidelity
to the underlying problem. Critically, better data quality [2] is increasingly necessary to improve
generalization, avoid bias, and aid safety in data cascades [48]. Without high-quality training data
models can exhibit performance discrepancies leading to reduced accuracy and persistent fairness
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

