PRODIGY: Enabling In-context Learning Over Graphs

Qian Huang1∗
qhwang@cs.stanford.edu
Peng Chen1
pengc@stanford.edu

Hongyu Ren1∗
hyren@cs.stanford.edu

Gregor Kržmanc2
gregor.krzmanc@ijs.si

Percy Liang1
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Daniel Zeng1
dzeng@cs.stanford.edu

Jure Leskovec1
jure@cs.stanford.edu

1

2

Stanford University
University of Ljubljana

Abstract
In-context learning is the ability of a pretrained model to adapt to novel and diverse
downstream tasks by conditioning on prompt examples, without optimizing any
parameters. While large language models have demonstrated this ability, how
in-context learning could be performed over graphs is unexplored. In this paper,
we develop Pretraining Over Diverse In-Context Graph Systems (PRODIGY),
the first pretraining framework that enables in-context learning over graphs. The
key idea of our framework is to formulate in-context learning over graphs with a
novel prompt graph representation, which connects prompt examples and queries.
We then propose a graph neural network architecture over the prompt graph and a
corresponding family of in-context pretraining objectives. With PRODIGY, the pretrained model can directly perform novel downstream classification tasks on unseen
graphs via in-context learning. We provide empirical evidence of the effectiveness
of our framework by showcasing its strong in-context learning performance on tasks
involving citation networks and knowledge graphs. Our approach outperforms the
in-context learning accuracy of contrastive pretraining baselines with hard-coded
adaptation by 18% on average across all setups. Moreover, it also outperforms
standard finetuning with limited data by 33% on average with in-context learning.

1

Introduction

In-context learning is a novel and one of the most intriguing capabilities of language models [1]. It refers
to the capability of a pretrained model to perform novel and diverse tasks directly at the prediction time
when prompted with just a few examples, without the need to update the model weights. For example,
a person may describe the new task (e.g., question answering, machine translation, or code generation)
using natural language and demonstrate it to the language model with several prompt examples. The
language model then directly without any model training or finetunning performs the task.
However, how to enable in-context learning for diverse graph machine learning tasks, such as
identifying misinformation spreader in social networks [14] and product suggestions across online
e-commerce websites [21], still remain unexplored and challenging. An in-context learner for
graphs should be able to solve novel tasks on novel graphs. For example, give music product
∗

indicates equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

