SHAP-IQ: Unified Approximation of any-order
Shapley Interactions

Fabian Fumagalli∗
Bielefeld University, CITEC
D-33619, Bielefeld, Germany
ffumagalli@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de

Maximilian Muschalik∗
LMU Munich, MCML Munich
D-80539, Munich, Germany
maximilian.muschalik@ifi.lmu.de

Patrick Kolpaczki
Paderborn University
D-33098, Paderborn, Germany
patrick.kolpaczki@upb.de

Eyke Hüllermeier
LMU Munich, MCML Munich
D-80539, Munich, Germany
eyke@ifi.lmu.de

Barbara Hammer
Bielefeld University, CITEC
D-33619, Bielefeld, Germany
bhammer@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de

Abstract
Predominately in explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) research, the Shapley
value (SV) is applied to determine feature attributions for any black box model.
Shapley interaction indices extend the SV to define any-order feature interactions. Defining a unique Shapley interaction index is an open research question
and, so far, three definitions have been proposed, which differ by their choice of
axioms. Moreover, each definition requires a specific approximation technique.
Here, we propose SHAPley Interaction Quantification (SHAP-IQ), an efficient
sampling-based approximator to compute Shapley interactions for arbitrary cardinal interaction indices (CII), i.e. interaction indices that satisfy the linearity,
symmetry and dummy axiom. SHAP-IQ is based on a novel representation and,
in contrast to existing methods, we provide theoretical guarantees for its approximation quality, as well as estimates for the variance of the point estimates. For
the special case of SV, our approach reveals a novel representation of the SV and
corresponds to Unbiased KernelSHAP with a greatly simplified calculation. We
illustrate the computational efficiency and effectiveness by explaining language,
image classification and high-dimensional synthetic models.

1

Introduction

Feature attributions are a prevalent approach to interpret black box machine learning (ML) models
[2, 7, 26]. However, in many real-world applications, such as understanding drug-drug interactions,
mutational events or complex language models, quantifying interactions between features is essential,
too [48, 23, 43]. Feature interactions provide a more comprehensive explanation, which can be
seen as an enrichment of feature attributions [3, 39, 40]. While feature attributions quantify the
contribution of single features to the model’s prediction or performance, feature interactions quantify
the contribution of a group of features to the model’s prediction or performance.
∗

denotes equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

