On the Last-iterate Convergence in Time-varying
Zero-sum Games: Extra Gradient Succeeds where
Optimism Fails
Yi Feng
SUFE⇤
2021310186@live.sufe.edu.cn
Qun Hu
SUFE
huqun29@163.com

Ping Li
SUFE
lping0423@163.com

Bo Peng
SUFE
ahqspb@163.sufe.edu.cn

Hu Fu
SUFE†
fuhu@shufe.edu.cn
Ioannis Panageas
University of California, Irvine
ipanagea@ics.uci.edu
Xiao Wang
SUFE†
wangxiao@shufe.edu.cn

Abstract
Last-iterate convergence has received extensive study in two player zero-sum games
starting from bilinear, convex-concave up to settings that satisfy the MVI condition. Typical methods that exhibit last-iterate convergence for the aforementioned
games include extra-gradient (EG) and optimistic gradient descent ascent (OGDA).
However, all the established last-iterate convergence results hold for the restrictive
setting where the underlying repeated game does not change over time. Recently, a
line of research has focused on regret analysis of OGDA in time-varying games,
i.e., games where payoffs evolve with time; the last-iterate behavior of OGDA
and EG in time-varying environments remains unclear though. In this paper, we
study the last-iterate behavior of various algorithms in two types of unconstrained,
time-varying, bilinear zero-sum games: periodic and convergent perturbed games.
These models expand upon the usual repeated game formulation and incorporate
external environmental factors, such as the seasonal effects on species competition
and vanishing external noise. In periodic games, we prove that EG will converge
while OGDA and momentum method will diverge. This is quite surprising, as to
the best of our knowledge, it is the first result that indicates EG and OGDA have
qualitatively different last-iterate behaviors and do not exhibit similar behavior. In
convergent perturbed games, we prove all these algorithms converge as long as the
game itself stabilizes with a faster rate than 1/t.

1

Introduction

A central problem in game theory and min-max optimization is to come up with a pair of vectors
(x, y) that solves
min max x> Ay,

x2X y2Y

Authors are listed according to the alphabetical order.
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
†
Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics, Ministry of Education.

⇤

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

(1)

