HyPoradise: An Open Baseline for Generative Speech
Recognition with Large Language Models
∗

Chen Chen1,† Yuchen Hu1,† Chao-Han Huck Yang2 ,3
Sabato Marco Siniscalchi2,4 Pin-Yu Chen5 Eng Siong Chng1
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Georgia Institute of Technology 3 NVIDIA Research
4
Norwegian University of Science and Technology 5 IBM Research AI
{chen1436,yuchen005}@e.ntu.edu.sg huckiyang@gatech.edu

Abstract
Advancements in deep neural networks have allowed automatic speech recognition
(ASR) systems to attain human parity on several publicly available clean speech
datasets. However, even state-of-the-art ASR systems experience performance
degradation when confronted with adverse conditions, as a well-trained acoustic model is sensitive to variations in the speech domain, e.g., background noise.
Intuitively, humans address this issue by relying on their linguistic knowledge:
the meaning of ambiguous spoken terms is usually inferred from contextual cues
thereby reducing the dependency on the auditory system. Inspired by this observation, we introduce the first open-source benchmark to utilize external large language
models (LLMs) for ASR error correction, where N-best decoding hypotheses provide informative elements for true transcription prediction. This approach is a
paradigm shift from the traditional language model rescoring strategy that can
only select one candidate hypothesis as the output transcription. The proposed
benchmark contains a novel dataset, “HyPoradise” (HP), encompassing more than
334,000 pairs of N-best hypotheses and corresponding accurate transcriptions
across prevalent speech domains. Given this dataset, we examine three types
of error correction techniques based on LLMs with varying amounts of labeled
hypotheses-transcription pairs, which gains a significant word error rate (WER)
reduction. Experimental evidence demonstrates the proposed technique achieves a
breakthrough by surpassing the upper bound of traditional re-ranking based methods. More surprisingly, LLM with reasonable prompt and its generative capability
can even correct those tokens that are missing in N-best list. We make our results
publicly accessible for reproducible pipelines with released pre-trained models,
thus providing a new evaluation paradigm for ASR error correction with LLMs.

1

Introduction

Automatic speech recognition (ASR) has become increasingly important in modern society, as it
enables efficient and accurate transcription of spoken languages. This capability facilitates access to
information and enhances communication across various domains, including education [7], healthcare [50], and business [36]. Driven by the recent advances in deep learning, remarkable success has
been achieved on several ASR tasks through end-to-end training techniques [28, 27, 9, 22, 30, 100, 15].
However, a major challenge of applying ASR in practical conditions lies in effectively handling
variations in speech caused by different factors such as background noise [11], speaker accent [85],
and speaking styles [82, 2]. These adverse factors are common and inevitable in speech signal,
significantly affecting the accuracy of the recognition results [55].
∗

Work done & open source while the author was at Georgia Tech; Corresponding author. †Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

