Importance-aware Co-teaching for Offline
Model-based Optimization

Ye Yuan1∗, Can (Sam) Chen1,2∗†, Zixuan Liu3 , Willie Neiswanger4 , Xue Liu1
1

McGill University, 2 MILA - Quebec AI Institute,
University of Washington, 4 Stanford University
ye.yuan3@mail.mcgill.ca, can.chen@mila.quebec,
zucksliu@cs.washington.edu, neiswanger@cs.stanford.edu,
xueliu@cs.mcgill.ca
3

Abstract
Offline model-based optimization aims to find a design that maximizes a property
of interest using only an offline dataset, with applications in robot, protein, and
molecule design, among others. A prevalent approach is gradient ascent, where a
proxy model is trained on the offline dataset and then used to optimize the design.
This method suffers from an out-of-distribution issue, where the proxy is not
accurate for unseen designs. To mitigate this issue, we explore using a pseudolabeler to generate valuable data for fine-tuning the proxy. Specifically, we propose
Importance-aware Co-Teaching for Offline Model-based Optimization (ICT). This
method maintains three symmetric proxies with their mean ensemble as the final
proxy, and comprises two steps. The first step is pseudo-label-driven co-teaching.
In this step, one proxy is iteratively selected as the pseudo-labeler for designs near
the current optimization point, generating pseudo-labeled data. Subsequently, a
co-teaching process identifies small-loss samples as valuable data and exchanges
them between the other two proxies for fine-tuning, promoting knowledge transfer.
This procedure is repeated three times, with a different proxy chosen as the pseudolabeler each time, ultimately enhancing the ensemble performance. To further
improve accuracy of pseudo-labels, we perform a secondary step of meta-learningbased sample reweighting, which assigns importance weights to samples in the
pseudo-labeled dataset and updates them via meta-learning. ICT achieves state-ofthe-art results across multiple design-bench tasks, achieving the best mean rank of
3.1 and median rank of 2, among 15 methods. Our source code can be found here.

1

Introduction

A primary goal in many domains is to design or create new objects with desired properties [1].
Examples include the design of robot morphologies [2], protein design, and molecule design [3, 4].
Numerous studies obtain new designs by iteratively querying an unknown objective function that
maps a design to its corresponding property score. However, in real-world scenarios, evaluating
the objective function can be expensive or risky [3–7]. As a result, it is often more practical to
assume access only to an offline dataset of designs and their property scores. This type of problem is
referred to as offline model-based optimization (MBO) [1]. The goal of MBO is to find a design that
maximizes the unknown objective function using solely the offline dataset.
∗
†

Equal contribution with random order.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

