A Scale-Invariant Sorting Criterion to Find a Causal
Order in Additive Noise Models
Alexander G. Reisach∗
CNRS, MAP5
Université Paris Cité
F-75006 Paris, France

Myriam Tami
CentraleSupélec
Université Paris-Saclay
F-91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

Antoine Chambaz
CNRS, MAP5
Université Paris Cité
F-75006 Paris, France

Christof Seiler
Department of Advanced
Computing Sciences, Maastricht
University, The Netherlands

Sebastian Weichwald
Department of Mathematical Sciences
and Pioneer Centre for AI,
University of Copenhagen, Denmark

Abstract
Additive Noise Models (ANMs) are a common model class for causal discovery
from observational data. Due to a lack of real-world data for which an underlying
ANM is known, ANMs with randomly sampled parameters are commonly used
to simulate data for the evaluation of causal discovery algorithms. While some
parameters may be fixed by explicit assumptions, fully specifying an ANM requires
choosing all parameters. Reisach et al. (2021) show that, for many ANM parameter
choices, sorting the variables by increasing variance yields an ordering close to
a causal order and introduce ‘var-sortability’ to quantify this alignment. Since
increasing variances may be unrealistic and cannot be exploited when data scales
are arbitrary, ANM data are often rescaled to unit variance in causal discovery
benchmarking.
We show that synthetic ANM data are characterized by another pattern that is
scale-invariant and thus persists even after standardization: the explainable fraction
of a variable’s variance, as captured by the coefficient of determination R2 , tends
to increase along the causal order. The result is high ‘R2 -sortability’, meaning
that sorting the variables by increasing R2 yields an ordering close to a causal
order. We propose a computationally efficient baseline algorithm termed ‘R2 SortnRegress’ that exploits high R2 -sortability and that can match and exceed the
performance of established causal discovery algorithms. We show analytically that
sufficiently high edge weights lead to a relative decrease of the noise contributions
along causal chains, resulting in increasingly deterministic relationships and high
R2 . We characterize R2 -sortability on synthetic data with different simulation
parameters and find high values in common settings. Our findings reveal high
R2 -sortability as an assumption about the data generating process relevant to causal
discovery and implicit in many ANM sampling schemes. It should be made explicit,
as its prevalence in real-world data is an open question. For causal discovery
benchmarking, we provide implementations of R2 -sortability, the R2 -SortnRegress
algorithm, and ANM simulation procedures in our library CausalDisco.

∗

Correspondence to alexander.reisach@math.cnrs.fr

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

