Learning Invariant Representations with a
Nonparametric Nadaraya-Watson Head

Alan Q. Wang
Cornell University

Minh Nguyen
Cornell University

Mert R. Sabuncu
Cornell University

Abstract
Machine learning models will often fail when deployed in an environment with
a data distribution that is different than the training distribution. When multiple
environments are available during training, many methods exist that learn representations which are invariant across the different distributions, with the hope that
these representations will be transportable to unseen domains. In this work, we
present a nonparametric strategy for learning invariant representations based on the
recently-proposed Nadaraya-Watson (NW) head. The NW head makes a prediction
by comparing the learned representations of the query to the elements of a support
set that consists of labeled data. We demonstrate that by manipulating the support
set, one can encode different causal assumptions. In particular, restricting the
support set to a single environment encourages the model to learn invariant features
that do not depend on the environment. We present a causally-motivated setup for
our modeling and training strategy and validate on three challenging real-world
domain generalization tasks in computer vision.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models often fail when there is significant distribution shift. The goal of domain
generalization is to be able to perform well with new distributions [21, 56, 71]. In this work, we are
interested in settings where multiple domains/environments are available during training and we have
access to environment indicators. A popular way to tackle domain generalization in this setting is
to learn representations that are invariant across environments [20, 41, 60]. The hope is that such
representations will work well in, or are transportable to, unseen environments. This invariance is
often encoded via constraints on a learned predictor which aligns its behavior across environments;
often, these conditions are derived using causal reasoning and/or by making assumptions about the
data-generating process [39].
In a parametric setting, almost all existing methods enforce these constraints by training a single
model and adding a regularizer on top of a standard predictive loss [1, 5, 18, 20, 27, 48, 54, 58]. Most
notably, invariant risk minimization (IRM) enforces the representations to be such that the optimal
classifier on top of those representations is the same across all environments. Other examples include
enforcing the layer activations of the predictor to be aligned across environments [48], enforcing the
predictor to be calibrated across environments [54], and enforcing gradients of the predictor to be
aligned across environments [46]. Often, optimizing these constraints demand approximations or
relaxations that undermine the efficacy of the approach [22].
In this work, we take a different approach using a nonparametric strategy based on a recently-proposed
Nadaraya-Watson (NW) head [55]. Instead of computing the class probability directly from an input
query, the NW head makes a prediction by comparing the learned representations of the query to the
elements of a support set that consists of labeled data. Thus, the NW prediction is computed relative
to other real datapoints in the support set, with the support set providing a degree of flexibility not
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

