UDC-SIT: A Real-World Dataset
for Under-Display Cameras

Kyusu Ahn1,3

Byeonghyun Ko2

HyunGyu Lee2

Chanwoo Park2

Jaejin Lee1,2

1

2

Dept. of Data Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
3
Research Center, Samsung Display Co., Ltd., Yongin, Republic of Korea
kyusu.ahn@snu.ac.kr, {byeonghyun, hyungyu}@aces.snu.ac.kr, {99chanwoo, jaejin}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Under Display Camera (UDC) is a novel imaging system that mounts a digital
camera lens beneath a display panel with the panel covering the camera. However, the display panel causes severe degradation to captured images, such as low
transmittance, blur, noise, and flare. The restoration of UDC-degraded images
is challenging because of the unique luminance and diverse patterns of flares.
Existing UDC dataset studies focus on unrealistic or synthetic UDC degradation
rather than real-world UDC images. In this paper, we propose a real-world UDC
dataset called UDC-SIT. To obtain the non-degraded and UDC-degraded images
for the same scene, we propose an image-capturing system and an image alignment technique that exploits discrete Fourier transform (DFT) to align a pair of
captured images. UDC-SIT also includes comprehensive annotations missing from
other UDC datasets, such as light source, day/night, indoor/outdoor, and flare
components (e.g., shimmers, streaks, and glares). We compare UDC-SIT with
four existing representative UDC datasets and present the problems with existing
UDC datasets. To show UDC-SIT’s effectiveness, we compare UDC-SIT and a
representative synthetic UDC dataset using five representative learnable image
restoration models. The result indicates that the models trained with the synthetic
UDC dataset are impractical because the synthetic UDC dataset does not reflect
the actual characteristics of UDC-degraded images. UDC-SIT can enable further
exploration in the UDC image restoration area and provide better insights into the
problem. UDC-SIT is available at: https://github.com/mcrl/UDC-SIT.

1

Introduction

Under Display Camera (UDC) is a technology designed to place a camera module under the display
to use the UDC area as a display space and take pictures when the camera operates. Since a larger
screen-to-body ratio is a common consumer demand that leads to a trend toward bezel-less display
products [21, 26, 41], such as smartphones, laptops, tablets, and TVs, the display products equipped
with UDC will well meet such a market trend. Moreover, video conferencing uses UDC products that
enable natural eye-tracking by arranging a camera in the center of the display. However, UDC has
some drawbacks of image deterioration problems, such as low transmittance, blur, noise, and flare.
Since the pixels in the micrometer scale diffract the light traveling through the camera lens [35],
degrading image quality, UDC displays have a lower pixel density above the camera lens to reduce
transmittance loss and diffraction, as shown in Figure 1. However, a lower display resolution in the
UDC area affects natural video viewing. Thus, improving the quality of UDC images is a critical
problem. Especially UDC image reconstruction models to enable higher pixel densities around the
camera are essential to overcome the problem for more comfortable viewing.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

