Conditional Adapters: Parameter-efficient
Transfer Learning with Fast Inference

Tao Lei∗ Junwen Bai Siddhartha Brahma Joshua Ainslie Kenton Lee Yanqi Zhou
Nan Du Vincent Y. Zhao Yuexin Wu Bo Li Yu Zhang Ming-Wei Chang
Google

Abstract
We propose Conditional Adapter (C O DA), a parameter-efficient transfer learning
method that also improves inference efficiency. C O DA generalizes beyond standard
adapter approaches to enable a new way of balancing speed and accuracy using
conditional computation. Starting with an existing dense pretrained model, C O DA
adds sparse activation together with a small number of new parameters and a
light-weight training phase. Our experiments demonstrate that the C O DA approach
provides an unexpectedly efficient way to transfer knowledge. Across a variety of
language, vision, and speech tasks, C O DA achieves a 2x to 8x inference speed-up
compared to the state-of-the-art Adapter approaches with moderate to no accuracy
loss and the same parameter efficiency.

1

Introduction

Large pretrained models have achieved groundbreaking results but the main impediment to deploy
them has been the cost of adaptation and inference. Due to the ever growing size of the pretrained
models, for example, finetuning has become increasingly expensive as it requires a separate copy of
the full model and updates to all parameters for every downstream task. Parameter-efficient transfer
learning such as Adapter [Houlsby et al., 2019] and Prompt Tuning [Lester et al., 2021] have been
proposed to address this issue. These methods only update a small subset of parameters for each
downstream task, allowing the model to retain knowledge and avoid catastrophic forgetting [Vu et al.,
2022]. Noticeably, these methods can match the accuracy of a fully finetuned model, while achieving
better accuracy on out-of-domain data distributions [Lester et al., 2021, Awadalla et al., 2022].
Unfortunately, standard parameter-efficient transfer learning methods only bring parameter efficiency,
not inference efficiency. For example, while only a few small projection matrices are added into the
pretrained model in the Adapter approach, all the model inputs (such as tokens) still use all parameters
during inference. Therefore, the inference speed is the same (or slightly lower) with respect to the
full finetuning method. Moreover, prior studies have shown that these parameter-efficient learning
methods are most effective when the size of the pretrained model is large [Lester et al., 2021], making
many advantages of these methods difficult to realize in practice.
In this paper, we propose Conditional Adapter (C O DA), a parameter-efficient transfer learning
method that offers both parameter and inference efficiency. C O DA is a generalization of the adapter
approach, built with the following intuition – we can treat the pretrained model as a universal
source of knowledge but only query against it for necessary inputs. Figure 1 compares C O DA with
finetuning and standard adapter approaches. Similar to standard adapter approaches, our model
adds and updates a small adapter in each layer, while fixing the pretrained Transformer blocks for
downstream adaptation. Unlike previous approaches, however, C O DA assumes that many of input
∗

Correspondence: taoleics@gmail.com, junwen@google.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

