Towards Understanding the Dynamics of
Gaussian–Stein Variational Gradient Descent
Promit Ghosal
Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Waltham, MA 02453
promit@mit.edu

Tianle Liu
Department of Statistics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
tianleliu@fas.harvard.edu
Krishnakumar Balasubramanian
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
kbala@ucdavis.edu

Natesh S. Pillai
Department of Statistics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
pillai@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD) is a nonparametric particle-based deterministic sampling algorithm. Despite its wide usage, understanding the theoretical
properties of SVGD has remained a challenging problem. For sampling from a
Gaussian target, the SVGD dynamics with a bilinear kernel will remain Gaussian
as long as the initializer is Gaussian. Inspired by this fact, we undertake a detailed
theoretical study of the Gaussian–SVGD, i.e., SVGD projected to the family of
Gaussian distributions via the bilinear kernel, or equivalently Gaussian variational
inference (GVI) with SVGD. We present a complete picture by considering both
the mean-field PDE and discrete particle systems. When the target is strongly
log-concave, the mean-field Gaussian–SVGD dynamics is proven to converge
linearly to the Gaussian distribution closest to the target in KL divergence. In the
finite-particle setting, there is both uniform in time convergence to the mean-field
limit and linear convergence in time to the equilibrium if the target is Gaussian. In
the general case, we propose a density-based and a particle-based implementation
of the Gaussian–SVGD, and show that several recent algorithms for GVI, proposed
from different perspectives, emerge as special cases of our unifying framework. Interestingly, one of the new particle-based instance from this framework empirically
outperforms existing approaches. Our results make concrete contributions towards
obtaining a deeper understanding of both SVGD and GVI.

1

Introduction

Sampling from a given target density arises frequently in Bayesian statistics, machine learning and
applied mathematics. Specifically, given a potential V : Rd → R, the target density is given by
ρ(x) := Z −1 e−V (x) , where Z := ∫ e−V (x) dx is the normalizing constant.
Traditionally-used Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling algorithms are invariably not
scalable to large-scale datasets [8, 61]. Variational inference and particle-based methods are two
related alternatives proposed in the literature, both motivated by viewing sampling as optimization
over the space of densities. We refer to [33, 39] for additional details related to this line of works.
In the literature on variational inference, recent efforts have focused on the Gaussian Variational
Inference (GVI) problem. On the theoretical side, this is statistically motivated by the Bernstein-von
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

