Self-Supervised Reinforcement Learning that
Transfers using Random Features

Boyuan Chen∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Boston, MA 02139
boyuanc@mit.edu

Chuning Zhu∗
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98105
zchuning@cs.washington.edu

Pulkit Agrawal
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Boston, MA 02139
pulkitag@mit.edu
Kaiqing Zhang†
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
kaiqing@umd.edu

Abhishek Gupta†
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98105
abhgupta@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Model-free reinforcement learning algorithms have exhibited great potential in
solving single-task sequential decision-making problems with high-dimensional
observations and long horizons, but are known to be hard to generalize across tasks.
Model-based RL, on the other hand, learns task-agnostic models of the world that
naturally enables transfer across different reward functions, but struggles to scale
to complex environments due to the compounding error. To get the best of both
worlds, we propose a self-supervised reinforcement learning method that enables
the transfer of behaviors across tasks with different rewards, while circumventing
the challenges of model-based RL. In particular, we show self-supervised pretraining of model-free reinforcement learning with a number of random features as
rewards allows implicit modeling of long-horizon environment dynamics. Then,
planning techniques like model-predictive control using these implicit models
enable fast adaptation to problems with new reward functions. Our method is
self-supervised in that it can be trained on offline datasets without reward labels,
but can then be quickly deployed on new tasks. We validate that our proposed
method enables transfer across tasks on a variety of manipulation and locomotion
domains in simulation, opening the door to generalist decision-making agents.

1

Introduction

As in most machine learning problems, the ultimate goal of building deployable sequential decisionmaking agents via reinforcement learning (RL) is its broad generalization across tasks in the real
world. While reinforcement learning algorithms have been shown to successfully synthesize complex
behavior in single-task sequential decision-making problems [31, 36, 45], their performance as
generalist agents across tasks has been less convincing [9]. In this work, we focus on the problem of
learning generalist agents that are able to transfer across problems where the environment dynamics
are shared, but the reward function is changing. This problem setting is reflective of scenarios
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Equal advising.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

