A IR D ELHI: Fine-Grained Spatio-Temporal Particulate
Matter Dataset From Delhi For ML based Modeling

Sachin Kumar Chauhan, Sayan Ranu, Rijurekha Sen
Department of Computer Science
IIT Delhi
{csz188012, sayanranu, riju}@cse.iitd.ac.in
Zeel B Patel, Nipun Batra
Department of Computer Science
IIT Gandhinagar
{patel_zeel, nipun.batra}@iitgn.ac.in

Abstract
Air pollution poses serious health concerns in developing countries, such as India, necessitating large-scale measurement for correlation analysis, policy recommendations, and informed decision-making. However, fine-grained data collection is costly. Specifically, static sensors for pollution measurement cost several
thousand dollars per unit, leading to inadequate deployment and coverage. To
complement the existing sparse static sensor network, we propose a mobile sensor network utilizing lower-cost PM2.5 sensors mounted on public buses in the
Delhi-NCR region of India. Through this exercise, we introduce a novel dataset
A IR D ELHI comprising PM2.5 and PM10 measurements. This dataset is made publicly available at https: // www. cse. iitd. ac. in/ pollutiondata , serving
as a valuable resource for machine learning (ML) researchers and environmentalists. We present three key contributions with the release of this dataset. Firstly,
through in-depth statistical analysis, we demonstrate that the released dataset significantly differs from existing pollution datasets, highlighting its uniqueness
and potential for new insights. Secondly, the dataset quality been validated
against existing expensive sensors. Thirdly, we conduct a benchmarking exercise
(https: // github. com/ sachin-iitd/ DelhiPMDatasetBenchmark ), evaluating state-of-the-art methods for interpolation, feature imputation, and forecasting on this dataset, which is the largest publicly available PM dataset to date.
The results of the benchmarking exercise underscore the substantial disparities in
accuracy between the proposed dataset and other publicly available datasets. This
finding highlights the complexity and richness of our dataset, emphasizing its value
for advancing research in the field of air pollution.

1

Introduction

United Nations Sustainable Development Goals [UN, 2015], especially the Goal-11 Sustainable
Cities and Communities, is a primary research focus in institutions of developing countries like
India [IIITD, 2023], with related research works in sustainable transport [Chauhan et al., 2020] and
pollution [Shukla et al., 2020; Bikkina et al., 2019; Iyer et al., 2022; Abidi et al., 2022].
Air pollution has now reached life-threatening levels in Delhi-National Capital Region (NCR),
India [Tripathi et al., 2019; Mannucci and Franchini, 2017], which is one of the most densely
populated urban centers. The population of Delhi-NCR exceeds 46 million people [Nagar et al.,
2017] and it has been reported that 50% of all children staying in this region suffer from irreversible
lung damage [Chatterji, 2021; ORF, 2021]. Particulate Matter (PM) is especially dangerous, since
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

