DeepPCR: Parallelizing Sequential Operations in
Neural Networks
Federico Danieli

Miguel Sarabia

Xavier Suau Pau Rodríguez Luca Zappella
Apple
{f_danieli, miguelsdc, xsuaucuadros, pau.rodriguez, lzappella}@apple.com

Abstract
Parallelization techniques have become ubiquitous for accelerating inference and
training of deep neural networks. Despite this, several operations are still performed
in a sequential manner. For instance, the forward and backward passes are executed
layer-by-layer, and the output of diffusion models is produced by applying a
sequence of denoising steps. This sequential approach results in a computational
cost proportional to the number of steps involved, presenting a potential bottleneck
as the number of steps increases. In this work, we introduce DeepPCR, a novel
algorithm which parallelizes typically sequential operations in order to speed up
inference and training of neural networks. DeepPCR is based on interpreting a
sequence of L steps as the solution of a specific system of equations, which we
recover using the Parallel Cyclic Reduction algorithm. This reduces the complexity
of computing the sequential operations from O(L) to O(log2 L), thus yielding a
speedup for large L. To verify the theoretical lower complexity of the algorithm,
and to identify regimes for speedup, we test the effectiveness of DeepPCR in
parallelizing the forward and backward pass in multi-layer perceptrons, and reach
speedups of up to 30× for the forward, and 200× for the backward pass. We
additionally showcase the flexibility of DeepPCR by parallelizing training of
ResNets with as many as 1024 layers, and generation in diffusion models, enabling
up to 7× faster training and 11× faster generation, respectively, when compared to
the sequential approach.

1

Introduction

Neural Networks (NNs) have proven very effective at solving complex tasks, such as classification
[26, 14], segmentation [5, 30], and image or text generation [26]. Training NNs, however, is a
computationally demanding task, often requiring wall-clock times in the order of days, or even weeks
[35, 18], before attaining satisfactory results. Even inference in pre-trained models can be slow,
particularly when complex architectures are involved [4]. To reduce training times, a great effort has
been invested into speeding up inference, whether by developing dedicated software and hardware [7,
22, 23], or by investigating algorithmic techniques such as (early) pruning [28, 40, 20, 27, 43, 9].
Another possibility for reducing wall-clock time, and the one we focus on in this work, consists in parallelizing computations that would otherwise be performed sequentially. The most intuitive approach
to parallelization involves identifying sets of operations which are (almost entirely) independent,
and executing them concurrently. Two paradigms that follow this principle are data-parallelization,
where multiple datapoints are processed simultaneously in batches; and model-parallelization, where
the model is split among multiple computational units, which perform their evaluations in parallel [1].
Still, certain operations which are key for training and inference in NNs have a sequential structure. The forward and backward pass of a NN are examples of such operations, where activations
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

