Towards Consistent Video Editing with
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models

Zicheng Zhang1∗ Bonan Li1∗ Xuecheng Nie2
1

Congying Han1† Tiande Guo1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

2

Luoqi Liu2

MT Lab, Meitu Inc.

Video clip:
“A woman
is talking”
“A woman is talking, 3D rendering style
”

Prior work

“A woman man is talking”

Figure 1: Comparisons of the proposed EI2 and prior SOTA for text-driven video editing with
Text-to-Image diffusion model. EI2 addresses problems on temporal and semantic inconsistencies
existing in prior work, leading to more consistent editing results. Better visual effect in color mode.

Abstract
Existing works have advanced Text-to-Image (TTI) diffusion models for video
editing in a one-shot learning manner. Despite their low requirements of data and
computation, these methods might produce results of unsatisfied consistency with
text prompt as well as temporal sequence, limiting their applications in the real
world. In this paper, we propose to address the above issues with a novel EI2
model towards Enhancing vIdeo Editing consIstency of TTI-based frameworks.
Specifically, we analyze and find that the inconsistent problem is caused by newly
added modules into TTI models for learning temporal information. These modules
lead to covariate shift in the feature space, which harms the editing capability. Thus,
we design EI2 to tackle the above drawbacks with two classical modules: Shiftrestricted Temporal Attention Module (STAM) and Fine-coarse Frame Attention
Module (FFAM). First, through theoretical analysis, we demonstrate that covariate
shift is highly related to Layer Normalization, thus STAM employs a Instance
Centering layer replacing it to preserve the distribution of temporal features. In
addition, STAM employs an attention layer with normalized mapping to transform
temporal features while constraining the variance shift. As the second part, we
incorporate STAM with a novel FFAM, which efficiently leverages fine-coarse
spatial information of overall frames to further enhance temporal consistency.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of the proposed EI2 model.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

