A case for reframing automated
medical image classification as segmentation

Sarah M. Hooper
Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
Kush Bhatia
Computer Science
Stanford University

Mayee F. Chen
Computer Science
Stanford University

Khaled Saab
Electrical Engineering
Stanford University

Curtis Langlotz
Radiology and Biomedical Data Science
Stanford University

Christopher Ré
Computer Science
Stanford University

Abstract
Image classification and segmentation are common applications of deep learning to radiology. While many tasks can be framed using either classification
or segmentation, classification has historically been cheaper to label and more
widely used. However, recent work has drastically reduced the cost of training
segmentation networks. In light of this recent work, we reexamine the choice
of training classification vs. segmentation models. First, we use an information
theoretic approach to analyze why segmentation vs. classification models may
achieve different performances on the same dataset and task. We then implement
methods for using segmentation models to classify medical images, which we
call segmentation-for-classification, and compare these methods against traditional
classification on three retrospective datasets (n=2,018–19,237). We use our analysis
and experiments to summarize the benefits of using segmentation-for-classification,
including: improved sample efficiency, enabling improved performance with fewer
labeled images (up to an order of magnitude lower), on low-prevalence classes, and
on certain rare subgroups (up to 161.1% improved recall); improved robustness
to spurious correlations (up to 44.8% improved robust AUROC); and improved
model interpretability, evaluation, and error analysis.

1

Introduction

Classification and segmentation are two popular applications of deep learning to radiology [1].
Classification produces coarse-grained, image-level predictions, while segmentation produces finegrained, pixel-level maps. While many tasks can be framed using either classification or segmentation
(Figure 1), classification is often the default framing. For one, classification has been cheaper to
label, requiring only one label per image compared to segmentation’s tedious, pixel-wise labels.
Second, training classification networks to produce image-level outputs mirrors radiologists’ standard
workflows, where radiologists summarize findings at the image-level and only routinely perform
segmentation in a few sub-disciplines that rely on quantitative measurements over the segmentation
masks. These factors have led to an abundance of medical image classification models [2, 3].
In contrast, because segmentation has been so cumbersome to label and is performed relatively
infrequently by radiologists, segmentation networks are often only trained when the downstream
application requires it (e.g., for computing the volumes or diameters of structures in an image).
Recent work in label-efficient training enables us to reexamine this paradigm. Self-supervised learning, in-context learning, weakly-supervised learning, and semi-supervised learning can substantially
reduce labeling burden [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Additionally, more public datasets and broad-use pre37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

