Understanding and Mitigating Copying
in Diffusion Models
Gowthami Somepalli 1 , Vasu Singla 1 , Micah Goldblum 2 , Jonas Geiping 1 , Tom Goldstein 1
1

University of Maryland, College Park

2

{gowthami, vsingla, jgeiping, tomg}@cs.umd.edu

New York University
goldblum@nyu.edu

Abstract
Images generated by diffusion models like Stable Diffusion are increasingly
widespread. Recent works and even lawsuits have shown that these models are
prone to replicating their training data, unbeknownst to the user. In this paper, we
first analyze this memorization problem in text-to-image diffusion models. While
it is widely believed that duplicated images in the training set are responsible for
content replication at inference time, we observe that the text conditioning of the
model plays a similarly important role. In fact, we see in our experiments that data
replication often does not happen for unconditional models, while it is common
in the text-conditional case. Motivated by our findings, we then propose several
techniques for reducing data replication at both training and inference time by
randomizing and augmenting image captions in the training set. Code is available
at https://github.com/somepago/DCR.

1

Introduction

A major hazard of diffusion models is their ability to produce images that replicate their training data,
often without warning to the user [Somepalli et al., 2022, Carlini et al., 2023]. Despite their risk of
breaching privacy, data ownership, and copyright laws, diffusion models have been deployed at the
commercial scale by subscription-based companies like midjourney, and more recently as offerings
within search engines like bing and bard. Currently, a number of ongoing lawsuits [Saveri and
Butterick, 2023] are attempting to determine in what sense companies providing image generation
systems can be held liable for replications of existing images.
In this work, we take a deep dive into understanding the causes of memorization for modern text-toimage diffusion models. Prior work has largely focused on the role of duplicate images in the training
set. While this certainly plays a role, we find that image duplication alone cannot explain much of the
replication behavior we see at test time. Our experiments reveal that text conditioning plays a major
role in data replication, and in fact, test-time replication can be greatly mitigated by diversifying
captions on images, even if the images themselves remain highly duplicated in the training set. Armed
with these observations, we propose a number of strategies for mitigating replication by randomizing
text conditioning during either train time or test time. Our observations serve as an in-depth guide for
both users and builders of diffusion models concerned with copying behavior.

2

Related work

Memorization in generative models. Most insights on the memorization capabilities of generative
models are so far empirical, as in studies by Webster et al. [2021] for GANs and a number of studies
for generative language models [Carlini et al., 2022, Jagielski et al., 2022, Lee et al., 2022].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

