Learning Descriptive Image Captioning via
Semipermeable Maximum Likelihood Estimation

Zihao Yue, Anwen Hu, Liang Zhang, Qin Jin∗
Renmin University of China
{yzihao, anwenhu, zhangliang00, qjin}@ruc.edu.cn
https://github.com/yuezih/SMILE

Human
a woman holding a birthday cake with lit candles.
MLE
a woman holding a cake with lit candles.

Human
a wire with a street light hanging from it.
MLE
a traffic light hanging from the side of a building.

a pretty young lady that has some kind of white
frosted birthday cake with lots of lit candles on
top of it, surrounded by several other people
looking onwardly at something in the distance.

a close-up image of two red stoplights hanging
from an electrical cable system outside a large
brick church building, during the early morning
hours.

Human
ocean showing a boat sailing on the waters.
MLE
a boat floating on top of a large body of water.

Human
a man in black surfing in high and strong waves.
MLE
a man riding a wave on top of a surfboard.

a lone fishing vessel that appears to be floating
peacefully across the vast expanse of crystal blue
water near an island in the far distance.

a young adult male leans forward as he stands
atop an extremely wide red and white striped
surfboard in the midst of crashing waves.

Figure 1: Descriptive captions generated by our SMILE-optimized captioning model, compared to
human annotations and descriptions generated by the MLE-optimized captioning model.

Abstract
Image captioning aims to describe visual content in natural language. As ‘a picture
is worth a thousand words’, there could be various correct descriptions for an image.
However, with maximum likelihood estimation as the training objective, the captioning model is penalized whenever its prediction mismatches with the label. For
instance, when the model predicts a word expressing richer semantics than the label,
it will be penalized and optimized to prefer more concise expressions, referred to
as conciseness optimization. In contrast, predictions that are more concise than
labels lead to richness optimization. Such conflicting optimization directions could
eventually result in the model generating general descriptions. In this work, we introduce Semipermeable MaxImum Likelihood Estimation (SMILE), which allows
richness optimization while blocking conciseness optimization, thus encouraging
the model to generate longer captions with more details. Extensive experiments on
two mainstream image captioning datasets MSCOCO and Flickr30K demonstrate
that SMILE significantly enhances the descriptiveness of generated captions. We
further provide in-depth investigations to facilitate a better understanding of how
SMILE works.

∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

