Fast Projected Newton-like Method for Precision
Matrix Estimation under Total Positivity

Jian-Feng Cai1,2 , José Vinícius de M. Cardoso1 , Daniel P. Palomar1 , Jiaxi Ying1,2∗
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology1
HKUST Shenzhen-Hong Kong Collaborative Innovation Research Institute2

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating precision matrices in Gaussian distributions
that are multivariate totally positive of order two (MTP2 ). The precision matrix
in such a distribution is an M-matrix. This problem can be formulated as a signconstrained log-determinant program. Current algorithms are designed using the
block coordinate descent method or the proximal point algorithm, which becomes
computationally challenging in high-dimensional cases due to the requirement
to solve numerous nonnegative quadratic programs or large-scale linear systems.
To address this issue, we propose a novel algorithm based on the two-metric
projection method, incorporating a carefully designed search direction and variable
partitioning scheme. Our algorithm substantially reduces computational complexity,
and its theoretical convergence is established. Experimental results on synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate that our proposed algorithm provides a significant
improvement in computational efficiency compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of estimating the precision matrix (i.e., inverse covariance matrix) in a
multivariate Gaussian distribution, where all the off-diagonal elements of the precision matrix are
nonpositive. The resulting precision matrix is a symmetric M-matrix. Such property is also known
as multivariate totally positive of order two (MTP2 ) [1]. For ease of presentation, we call the
nonpositivity constraints on the off-diagonal elements of the precision matrix as MTP2 constraints.
This model arises in a variety of applications such as taxonomic reasoning [2], graph signal processing
[3], factor analysis in psychometrics [4], and financial markets [5].
Estimating precision matrices under MTP2 constraints is an active research topic. Recent results
in [2, 4, 6] show that MTP2 constraints lead to a drastic reduction on the number of observations
required for the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) to exist in Gaussian distributions and Ising
models. This advantage is crucial in high-dimensional regimes with limited observations. Growing
interest in estimating precision matrices under MTP2 constraints is seen in graph signal processing
[7–9]. A precision matrix fulfilling MTP2 constraints can be regarded as a generalized graph
Laplacian, where eigenvalues and eigenvectors are interpreted as spectral frequencies and Fourier
bases, facilitating the computation of graph Fourier transform [10]. The MTP2 property has also
been studied in portfolio allocation [5] and structure recovery [11, 12].
Estimating precision matrices under MTP2 constraints can be formulated as a sign-constrained
log-determinant program. Existing algorithms for solving this problem, such as the block coordinate
descent (BCD) [2, 3, 8] and proximal point algorithm (PPA) [9], are efficient for low-dimensional
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

