Attention as Implicit Structural Inference

Ryan Singh
School of Engineering and Informatics,
University of Sussex.
rs773@sussex.ac.uk

Christopher L. Buckley
School of Engineering and Informatics,
University of Sussex.
VERSES AI Research Lab,
Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Abstract
Attention mechanisms play a crucial role in cognitive systems by allowing them to
flexibly allocate cognitive resources. Transformers, in particular, have become a
dominant architecture in machine learning, with attention as their central innovation. However, the underlying intuition and formalism of attention in Transformers
is based on ideas of keys and queries in database management systems. In this
work, we pursue a structural inference perspective, building upon, and bringing
together, previous theoretical descriptions of attention such as; Gaussian Mixture
Models, alignment mechanisms and Hopfield Networks. Specifically, we demonstrate that attention can be viewed as inference over an implicitly defined set of
possible adjacency structures in a graphical model, revealing the generality of such
a mechanism. This perspective unifies different attentional architectures in machine
learning and suggests potential modifications and generalizations of attention. Here
we investigate two and demonstrate their behaviour on explanatory toy problems:
(a) extending the value function to incorporate more nodes of a graphical model
yielding a mechanism with a bias toward attending multiple tokens; (b) introducing
a geometric prior (with conjugate hyper-prior) over the adjacency structures producing a mechanism which dynamically scales the context window depending on
input. Moreover, by describing a link between structural inference and precisionregulation in Predictive Coding Networks, we discuss how this framework can
bridge the gap between attentional mechanisms in machine learning and Bayesian
conceptions of attention in Neuroscience. We hope by providing a new lens on
attention architectures our work can guide the development of new and improved
attentional mechanisms.

1

Introduction

Designing neural network architectures with favourable inductive biases lies behind many recent
successes in Deep Learning. The Transformer, and in particular the attention mechanism has allowed
language models to achieve human like generation abilities previously thought impossible [1, 2]. The
success of the attention mechanism as a domain agnostic architecture has prompted adoption across a
diverse range of tasks beyond language modelling, notably reaching state-of-the-art performance in
visual reasoning and segmentation tasks [3, 4].
This depth and breadth of success indicates the attention mechanism expresses a useful computational
primitive. Recent work has shown interesting theoretical links to kernel methods [5, 6, 7], Hopfield
networks [8], and Gaussian mixture models [9, 10, 11, 12, 13], however a formal understanding
that captures the generality of this computation remains outstanding. In this paper, we show the
attention mechanism can naturally be described as inference on the structure of a graphical model,
agreeing with observations that transformers are able to flexibly choose between models based on
context [14, 15]. This Bayesian perspective complements previous theory [16, 8, 12], adding new
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

