Revealing the unseen: Benchmarking video action
recognition under occlusion

Shresth Grover
IIT Kanpur
shrgo@iitk.ac.in

Vibhav Vineet
Microsoft Research
vibhav.vineet@microsoft.com

Yogesh S Rawat
University of Central Florida
yogesh@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
In this work, we study the effect of occlusion on video action recognition. To
facilitate this study, we propose three benchmark datasets and experiment with
seven different video action recognition models. These datasets include two synthetic benchmarks, UCF-101-O and K-400-O, which enabled understanding the
effects of fundamental properties of occlusion via controlled experiments. We
also propose a real-world occlusion dataset, UCF-19-Y-OCC, which helps in further validating the findings of this study. We find several interesting insights
such as 1) transformers are more robust than CNN counterparts, 2) pretraining
make models robust against occlusions, and 3) augmentation helps, but does
not generalize well to real-world occlusions. In addition, we propose a simple
transformer based compositional model, termed as CTx-Net, which generalizes
well under this distribution shift. We observe that CTx-Net outperforms models
which are trained using occlusions as augmentation, performing significantly better
under natural occlusions. We believe this benchmark will open up interesting
future research in robust video action recognition. Code is publicly available at
https://shroglck.github.io/rev_unseen.

1

Introduction

Video action recognition is a challenging and important task in computer vision with numerous
real-world applications, including security, robotics, sports analysis, and human-computer interaction
[42, 39]. Recent years have witnessed significant progress in this field, facilitated by the availability
of large-scale datasets [20, 8, 40], enabling the learning of increasingly complex models [1, 7, 11,
13, 44, 30], which have demonstrated human-level performance. However, the robustness of such
models for real-world applications, particularly in the presence of occlusion, has not been explored
[38, 6]. Given the dynamic nature of the environment, occlusion is an inherent property of real-world
videos and needs to be studied.
To study this problem, we propose three benchmark datasets for analyzing the robustness of deep
learning models against occlusion, namely UCF-101-O, K-400-O, and UCF-19-Y-OCC. The first
two are derived from UCF-101(license CCLA-BY 4.0) [40] and Kinetics-400 (license CCLABY 4.0)[20, 8] respectively, and are created by synthetically occluding the actions in the videos
using objects from the Pascal VOC dataset [10]. These benchmarks facilitate systematic analysis
of occlusion effects by examining occluder properties such as severity and occluder dynamics.
Additionally, we introduce a benchmark dataset with natural occlusion, UCF-19-Y-OCC, which
comprises real-world videos containing natural occlusion. This dataset, is collected from YouTube,
with categories based on a subset of classes from UCF-101, enables validation of observations made
in the synthetic setting within a real-world environment.
We investigate the effects of occlusion on seven different video action recognition models, encompassing various aspects such as network size and architecture (transformer vs CNN). Through extensive
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

