Modeling Dynamics over Meshes with
Gauge Equivariant Nonlinear Message Passing

Jung Yeon Park, Lawson L.S. Wong† , Robin Walters†
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
{park.jungy@northeastern.edu, lsw@ccs.neu.edu,
r.walters@northeastern.edu}

Abstract
Data over non-Euclidean manifolds, often discretized as surface meshes, naturally
arise in computer graphics and biological and physical systems. In particular,
solutions to partial differential equations (PDEs) over manifolds depend critically
on the underlying geometry. While graph neural networks have been successfully
applied to PDEs, they do not incorporate surface geometry and do not consider
local gauge symmetries of the manifold. Alternatively, recent works on gauge
equivariant convolutional and attentional architectures on meshes leverage the
underlying geometry but underperform in modeling surface PDEs with complex
nonlinear dynamics. To address these issues, we introduce a new gauge equivariant
architecture using nonlinear message passing. Our novel architecture achieves
higher performance than either convolutional or attentional networks on domains
with highly complex and nonlinear dynamics. However, similar to the non-mesh
case, design trade-offs favor convolutional, attentional, or message passing networks for different tasks; we investigate in which circumstances our message
passing method provides the most benefit 1 .

1

Introduction

Surfaces embedded in 3D space appear in many domains such as computer graphics [1], structural
biology [2, 3], neuroscience [4], climate pattern segmentation [5, 6], and fluid dynamics [7]. Such
objects are naturally Riemannian manifolds but are often discretized into meshes for computational
tractability. Unlike other 3D representations such as point clouds or voxels, meshes encode both the
geometry and topology of the surface.
One important task that naturally arises over meshes is solving partial differential equations (PDEs)
over surfaces and non-Euclidean manifolds [11–14]. A classic approach to solving surface PDEs is
to model the domain as a mesh and use the finite element method and the variational formulation
[15, 16]. Recently, there has been increasing success in applying deep learning methods to accelerate
solving PDEs and building differentiable surrogates for dynamics models [17–20]. While there are
many effective approaches for gridded data or point clouds, fewer methods exist for leveraging the
geometric structure of meshes. Several approaches simply treat the mesh as a graph by approximating
patches of the manifold as Euclidean [21–23]. However, these approaches do not exploit the geometric
properties of meshes, and Verma et al. [24], de Haan et al. [9] have shown that not retaining this
information leads to poor performance. One way to express such information is to specify the local
†
1

Equal advising.
Project website with code: https://jypark0.github.io/hermes

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

