Towards A Richer 2D Understanding of Hands at Scale

Tianyi Cheng∗1 Dandan Shan∗1 Ayda Sultan1,2 Richard E. L. Higgins1 David F. Fouhey1,3
1
University of Michigan 2 Addis Ababa University 3 New York University
{evacheng, dandans, ayhassen, relh, fouhey}@umich.edu

Abstract
As humans, we learn a lot about how to interact with the world by observing others
interacting with their hands. To help AI systems obtain a better understanding of
hand interactions, we introduce a new model that produces a rich understanding
of hand interaction. Our system produces a richer output than past systems at a
larger scale. Our outputs include boxes and segments for hands, in-contact objects,
and second objects touched by tools as well as contact and grasp type. Supporting
this method are annotations of 257K images, 401K hands, 288K objects, and 19K
second objects spanning four datasets. We show that our method provides rich
information and performs and generalizes well.

1

Introduction

From the moment we wake up to the moment we go to sleep, most of us actively use our hands to
shape and interact with the world. As infants, our own ability to interact with the world is accelerated
and guided by our observations of others using their hands [55, 37]. These interactions involve not
just the objects we directly hold, but also tools that enable us to interact with second objects, such as
a spatula that enables us to push an egg in a pan. As adults, as demonstrated by the endless supply of
instructional videos on the Internet [39], we can parse demonstrations of activities to help guide our
own efforts; we can follow hands, the objects they hold, the grasps they use, and how they use tools to
interact with the world. Accordingly, there have been many efforts on 2D hand understanding, each
focusing on a different aspect. These include large-scale bounding box datasets [53], segmentation
datasets [65, 3, 14], and in-lab grasp and contact efforts [50, 5]. Each contributes to the literature,
but obtaining a unified understanding of hands in action, from box to segment to grasp to tool use,
requires stitching together many models and datasets.
We contribute a model that predicts a rich, unified 2D output of hands interacting with objects that
is effective on a variety of first and third person data. Our model predicts boxes for hands and
in-contact/active objects like past efforts [53, 17], as well as second objects, or objects contacted by
an in-use tool, which in turn enables understanding how humans use tools to manipulate their world.
Like past work [53, 44], our model predicts when hands contact objects; we extend this to a richer
vocabulary that distinguishes touching, holding and using, and includes grasps. Finally, by converting
boxes to segments [29], our system produces segments for hands, objects, and second objects.
These outputs are built on two key components – a model and a dataset. The model is a straightforward,
easily-extensible deep network for parsing interaction from an image. We build on standard detection
machinery [24] with standard losses and use a simple inference method. Powering this model is a
large dataset, Hands23, consisting of 257K images, 401K hands, 288K objects, and 19K second
objects. Hands23 provides unified annotations for four datasets: EPIC-KITCHENS [13] VISOR [14],
the 2017 train set of COCO [35], Internet Articulation [46], as well as on our introduced dataset of
interaction-rich videos, New Days. All Internet data has Creative Commons licenses and has had
faces obfuscated after automatic and manual detection as well as minors removed from the dataset.
*

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

