Speculative Decoding with Big Little Decoder

Sehoon Kim1
Karttikeya Mangalam1
Suhong Moon1
1
123
Jitendra Malik
Michael W. Mahoney
Amir Gholami12
Kurt Keutzer1
1

University of California, Berkeley

2

ICSI

3

LBNL

{sehoonkim, mangalam, suhong.moon, malik, mahoneymw, amirgh, keutzer}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
The recent emergence of Large Language Models based on the Transformer architecture has enabled dramatic advancements in the field of Natural Language
Processing. However, these models have long inference latency, which limits their
deployment and makes them prohibitively expensive for various real-time applications. The inference latency is further exacerbated by autoregressive generative
tasks, as models need to run iteratively to generate tokens sequentially without
leveraging token-level parallelization. To address this, we propose Big Little Decoder (BiLD), a framework that can improve inference efficiency and latency for
a wide range of text generation applications. The BiLD framework contains two
models with different sizes that collaboratively generate text. The small model runs
autoregressively to generate text with a low inference cost, and the large model
is only invoked occasionally to refine the small model’s inaccurate predictions in
a non-autoregressive manner. To coordinate the small and large models, BiLD
introduces two simple yet effective policies: (1) the fallback policy that determines
when to hand control over to the large model; and (2) the rollback policy that
determines when the large model needs to correct the small model’s inaccurate
predictions. To evaluate our framework across different tasks and models, we apply
BiLD to various text generation scenarios encompassing machine translation on
IWSLT 2017 De-En and WMT 2014 De-En, and summarization on XSUM and
CNN/DailyMail. On an NVIDIA T4 GPU, our framework achieves a speedup of
up to 2.12× speedup with minimal generation quality degradation. Furthermore,
our framework is fully plug-and-play and can be applied without any modifications
in the training process or model architecture. Our code is open-sourced1 .

1

Introduction

In recent years, the Transformer [63] has become the de-facto model architecture for a wide range
of Natural Language Processing tasks. The potential of the Transformer architecture has been
further enhanced by the emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) with up to hundreds of
billions of parameters trained on massive text corpora [2, 47, 50, 10, 23, 7, 55, 83, 62]. Despite
their performance, efficiently running these models for inference is a challenge due to their large
model size and runtime complexity. This limits their use in many applications that require real-time
responses.
These computational inefficiencies are particularly pronounced in autoregressive generative tasks
such as machine translation [3, 1], summarization [21], and language modeling [41]. For these tasks,
models need to run iteratively to generate tokens sequentially, as each token is dependent on the
previously generated tokens. This requires the models to load weight matrices, as well as the cached
keys and values of previously generated tokens [46], for each token generation, thus preventing
1

https://github.com/kssteven418/BigLittleDecoder

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

