Human-Aligned Calibration for AI-Assisted
Decision Making

Nina L. Corvelo Benz
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
ETH Zürich
ninacobe@mpi-sws.org

Manuel Gomez Rodriguez
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
manuel@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Whenever a binary classifier is used to provide decision support, it typically provides both a label prediction and a confidence value. Then, the decision maker is
supposed to use the confidence value to calibrate how much to trust the prediction.
In this context, it has been often argued that the confidence value should correspond
to a well calibrated estimate of the probability that the predicted label matches
the ground truth label. However, multiple lines of empirical evidence suggest that
decision makers have difficulties at developing a good sense on when to trust a prediction using these confidence values. In this paper, our goal is first to understand
why and then investigate how to construct more useful confidence values. We first
argue that, for a broad class of utility functions, there exist data distributions for
which a rational decision maker is, in general, unlikely to discover the optimal
decision policy using the above confidence values—an optimal decision maker
would need to sometimes place more (less) trust on predictions with lower (higher)
confidence values. However, we then show that, if the confidence values satisfy
a natural alignment property with respect to the decision maker’s confidence on
her own predictions, there always exists an optimal decision policy under which
the level of trust the decision maker would need to place on predictions is monotone on the confidence values, facilitating its discoverability. Further, we show
that multicalibration with respect to the decision maker’s confidence on her own
predictions is a sufficient condition for alignment. Experiments on four different
AI-assisted decision making tasks where a classifier provides decision support to
real human experts validate our theoretical results and suggest that alignment may
lead to better decisions.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been an increasing excitement on the potential of machine learning models to
improve decision making in a variety of high-stakes domains such as medicine, education or criminal
justice [1–3]. One of the main focus has been binary classification tasks, where a classifier helps a
decision maker by predicting a binary label of interest using a set of observable features [4–7]. For
example, in medical treatment, the classifier may help a doctor by predicting whether a patient may
benefit from a treatment. In college admissions, it may help an admissions committee by predicting
whether a candidate may successfully complete an undergraduate program. In loan decisions, it
may help a bank by predicting whether a prospective customer may default on a loan. In all these
scenarios, the decision maker—the doctor, the committee or the bank—aim to use these predictions,
together with their own predictions, to take good decisions that maximize a given utility function. In
this context, since the predictions are unlikely to always match the truth, it has been widely agreed
that the classifier should also provide a confidence value together with each prediction [8, 9].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

