On the Robustness of Removal-Based Feature
Attributions
Chris Lin∗
University of Washington
clin25@cs.washington.edu

Ian Covert∗†
Stanford University
icovert@stanford.edu

Su-In Lee
University of Washington
suinlee@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
To explain predictions made by complex machine learning models, many feature
attribution methods have been developed that assign importance scores to input
features. Some recent work challenges the robustness of these methods by showing
that they are sensitive to input and model perturbations, while other work addresses
this issue by proposing robust attribution methods. However, previous work on
attribution robustness has focused primarily on gradient-based feature attributions,
whereas the robustness of removal-based attribution methods is not currently
well understood. To bridge this gap, we theoretically characterize the robustness
properties of removal-based feature attributions. Specifically, we provide a unified
analysis of such methods and derive upper bounds for the difference between intact
and perturbed attributions, under settings of both input and model perturbations.
Our empirical results on synthetic and real-world data validate our theoretical
results and demonstrate their practical implications, including the ability to increase
attribution robustness by improving the model’s Lipschitz regularity.

1

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning has shown great promise in a variety of real-world applications. An
obstacle to its widespread deployment is the lack of transparency, an issue that has prompted a wave
of research on interpretable or explainable machine learning [45, 51, 53, 56, 60, 67]. One popular
way of explaining a machine learning model is feature attribution, which assigns importance scores to
input features of the model [45, 51, 53, 56, 60]. Many feature attribution methods can be categorized
as either gradient-based methods that compute gradients of model predictions with respect to input
features [6], or removal-based methods that remove features to quantify each feature’s influence [17].
While substantial progress has been made and current tools are widely used for model debugging
and scientific discovery [10, 18, 37, 50], some important concerns remain. Among them is unclear
robustness properties: feature attributions are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, and even without an
adversary appear unstable under small changes to the input or model.
As a motivating example, consider the work of Ghorbani et al. [28], which shows that minor
perturbations to an image can lead to substantially different feature attributions while preserving the
original prediction. Similar to adversarial examples designed to alter model predictions [29, 43, 61],
this phenomenon violates the intuition that explanations should be invariant to imperceptible changes.
A natural question, and the focus of this work, is therefore: When can we guarantee that feature
∗

Equal contribution. †Work done while at the University of Washington.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

