Neural Foundations of Mental Simulation:
Future Prediction of Latent Representations on
Dynamic Scenes
Aran Nayebi1,* , Rishi Rajalingham1,4 , Mehrdad Jazayeri1,2 , and Guangyu Robert Yang1,2,3
1
McGovern Institute for Brain Research, MIT; Cambridge, MA 02139
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT; Cambridge, MA 02139
3
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT; Cambridge, MA 02139
4
Reality Labs, Meta; 390 9th Ave, New York, NY 10001
*
Correspondence: anayebi@mit.edu
2

Abstract
Humans and animals have a rich and flexible understanding of the physical world,
which enables them to infer the underlying dynamical trajectories of objects and
events, plausible future states, and use that to plan and anticipate the consequences
of actions. However, the neural mechanisms underlying these computations are
unclear. We combine a goal-driven modeling approach with dense neurophysiological data and high-throughput human behavioral readouts that contain thousands
of comparisons to directly impinge on this question. Specifically, we construct
and evaluate several classes of sensory-cognitive networks to predict the future
state of rich, ethologically-relevant environments, ranging from self-supervised
end-to-end models with pixel-wise or object-slot objectives, to models that future
predict in the latent space of purely static image-pretrained or dynamic videopretrained foundation models. We find that “scale is not all you need”, and that
many state-of-the-art machine learning models fail to perform well on our neural
and behavioral benchmarks for future prediction. In fact, only one class of models
matches these data well overall. We find that neural responses are currently best
predicted by models trained to predict the future state of their environment in the
latent space of pretrained foundation models optimized for dynamic scenes in a
self-supervised manner. These models also approach the neurons’ ability to predict
the environmental state variables that are visually hidden from view, despite not
being explicitly trained to do so. Finally, we find that not all foundation model
latents are equal. Notably, models that future predict in the latent space of video
foundation models that are optimized to support a diverse range of egocentric sensorimotor tasks, reasonably match both human behavioral error patterns and neural
dynamics across all environmental scenarios that we were able to test. Overall,
these findings suggest that the neural mechanisms and behaviors of primate mental
simulation have strong inductive biases associated with them, and are thus far most
consistent with being optimized to future predict on reusable visual representations
that are useful for Embodied AI more generally.

1

Introduction

Within the span of a couple seconds, we are able to draw rich inferences and make predictions about
novel scenes [Smith and Vul, 2013, Battaglia et al., 2013]. A dominant cognitive theory has been that
the brain builds mental models of the physical world, using those models to make inferences about the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

