A Guide Through the Zoo of Biased SGD

Yury Demidovich
AI Initiative, KAUST
yury.demidovich@kaust.edu.sa
Igor Sokolov
AI Initiative, KAUST
igor.sokolov.1@kaust.edu.sa

Grigory Malinovsky
AI Initiative, KAUST
grigorii.malinovskii@kaust.edu.sa
Peter Richtárik
AI Initiative, KAUST
peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is arguably the most important single algorithm
in modern machine learning. Although SGD with unbiased gradient estimators
has been studied extensively over at least half a century, SGD variants relying on
biased estimators are rare. Nevertheless, there has been an increased interest in this
topic in recent years. However, existing literature on SGD with biased estimators
(BiasedSGD) lacks coherence since each new paper relies on a different set of
assumptions, without any clear understanding of how they are connected, which
may lead to confusion. We address this gap by establishing connections among
the existing assumptions, and presenting a comprehensive map of the underlying
relationships. Additionally, we introduce a new set of assumptions that is provably
weaker than all previous assumptions, and use it to present a thorough analysis
of BiasedSGD in both convex and non-convex settings, offering advantages over
previous results. We also provide examples where biased estimators outperform
their unbiased counterparts or where unbiased versions are simply not available.
Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework through experimental
results that validate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) [Robbins and Monro, 1951] is a widely used and effective
algorithm for training various models in machine learning. The current state-of-the-art methods for
training deep learning models are all variants of SGD [Goodfellow et al., 2016; Sun, 2020]. The
algorithm has been extensively studied in recent theoretical works [Bottou et al., 2018; Gower et al.,
2019; Khaled and Richtárik, 2023]. In practice and theory, SGD with unbiased gradient oracles is
mostly used. However, there has been a recent surge of interest in SGD with biased gradient oracles,
which has been studied in several papers and applied in different domains.
In distributed parallel optimization where data is partitioned across multiple nodes, communication
can be a bottleneck, and techniques such as structured sparsity [Alistarh et al., 2018; Wangni et al.,
2018] or asynchronous updates [Niu et al., 2011] are involved to reduce communication costs.
Nonetheless, sparsified or delayed SGD-updates are not unbiased anymore and require additional
analysis [Stich and Karimireddy, 2020; Beznosikov et al., 2020].
Zeroth-order methods are often utilized when there is no access to unbiased gradients, e.g., for
optimization of black-box functions [Nesterov and Spokoiny, 2017], or for finding adversarial
examples in deep learning [Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017]. Many zeroth-order
training methods exploit biased gradient oracles [Nesterov and Spokoiny, 2017; Liu et al., 2018;
Bergou et al., 2020; Boucherouite et al., 2022]. Various other techniques as smoothing, proximate
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

