Privacy Amplification via Compression: Achieving the
Optimal Privacy-Accuracy-Communication Trade-offs
in Distributed Mean Estimation
Wei-Ning Chen
Stanford University
wnchen@stanford.edu

Dan Song
Stanford University
songdan@stanford.edu

Ayfer Özgür
Stanford University
aozgur@stanford.edu

Peter Kairouz
Google Research
kairouz@google.com

Abstract
Privacy and communication constraints are two major bottlenecks in federated
learning (FL) and analytics (FA). We study the optimal accuracy of mean and
frequency estimation (canonical models for FL and FA respectively) under joint
communication and (ε, δ)-differential privacy (DP) constraints. We consider both
the central and the multi-message shuffled DP models. We show that in order to
achieve the optimal
 for each client to send
 ℓ2 error under (ε, δ)-DP, it is sufficient
Θ n min ε, ε2 bits for FL and Θ log n min ε, ε2
bits for FA to the server,
where n is the number of participating clients. Without compression, each client
needs O(d) bits and O (log d) bits for the mean and frequency estimation problems
respectively (where d corresponds to the number of trainable parameters in FL or
the domain 
size in FA), meaning that we can get significant savings in the regime
n min ε, ε2 = o(d), which is often the relevant regime in practice.
We propose two different ways to leverage compression for privacy amplification
and achieve the optimal privacy-communication-accuracy trade-offs. In both cases,
each client communicates only partial information about its sample and we show
that privacy is amplified by randomly selecting the part contributed by each client.
In the first method, the random selection is revealed to the server, which results in a
central DP guarantee with optimal privacy-communication-accuracy trade-offs. In
the second method, the random data parts from the clients are shuffled by a secure
shuffler resulting in a multi-message shuffling scheme with the same optimal tradeoffs. As a result, we establish the optimal three-way trade-offs between privacy,
communication, and accuracy for both the central DP and multi-message shuffling
frameworks.

1

Introduction

In the basic setting of federated learning (FL) [68, 64, 61] and analytics (FA), a server wants to
execute a specific learning or analytics task on raw data that is kept on clients’ devices. Consider, for
example, model updates in FL or histogram estimation in FA, both of which can be modeled as a
distributed mean estimation problem. Clients communicate targeted messages to the server and the
privacy of the users’ data is ensured (in terms of explicit differential privacy (DP) [38] guarantees) by
adding carefully calibrated noise to the computed mean at the server before releasing it to downstream
modules (e.g., the server computes the average model update and corrupts it with the addition of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

