Compositional Generalization from First Principles

Thaddäus Wiedemer1,2,3∗ Prasanna Mayilvahanan1,2,3∗
Matthias Bethge1,2† Wieland Brendel2,3†
1

3

University of Tübingen 2 Tübingen AI Center
Max-Planck-Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

{thaddaeus.wiedemer, prasanna.mayilvahanan}@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Leveraging the compositional nature of our world to expedite learning and facilitate
generalization is a hallmark of human perception. In machine learning, on the
other hand, achieving compositional generalization has proven to be an elusive
goal, even for models with explicit compositional priors. To get a better handle on
compositional generalization, we here approach it from the bottom up: Inspired by
identifiable representation learning, we investigate compositionality as a property
of the data-generating process rather than the data itself. This reformulation enables
us to derive mild conditions on only the support of the training distribution and
the model architecture, which are sufficient for compositional generalization. We
further demonstrate how our theoretical framework applies to real-world scenarios
and validate our findings empirically. Our results set the stage for a principled
theoretical study of compositional generalization.

1

Introduction

Systematic compositionality [1] is the remarkable ability to utilize a finite set of known components to
understand and generate a vast array of novel combinations. This ability, referred to by Chomsky [2]
as the “infinite use of finite means”, is a distinguishing feature of human cognition, enabling us to
adapt to diverse situations and learn from varied experiences.
It’s been a long-standing idea to leverage the compositional nature of the world for learning. In
object-centric learning, models learn to isolate representations of individual objects as building
blocks for complex scenes. In disentanglement, models aim to infer factors of variation that capture
compositional and interpretable aspects of their inputs, for example hair color, skin color, and gender
for facial data. So far, however, there is little evidence that these methods deliver substantially
increased learning efficacy or generalization capabilities (Schott et al. [3], Montero et al. [4]).
Across domains and modalities, machine learning models still largely fail to capture and utilize the
compositional nature of the training data (Lake and Baroni [5], Loula et al. [6], Keysers et al. [7]).
To exemplify this failure, consider a model trained on a data set with images of two sprites with
varying position, size, shape, and color overlaid on a black canvas. Given the latent factors, a simple
multi-layer neural network can easily learn to reconstruct images containing compositions of these
sprites that were covered by the training set. However, reconstruction fails for novel compositions—
even if the individual components have been observed before (see Figure 1). Failure to generalize to
* Equal contribution

†

Equal supervision

Code available at https://github.com/brendel-group/compositional-ood-generalization
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023), New Orleans.

