SGFormer: Simplifying and Empowering
Transformers for Large-Graph Representations

Qitian Wu1 , Wentao Zhao1 , Chenxiao Yang1 , Hengrui Zhang2 , Fan Nie1 ,
Haitian Jiang3 , Yatao Bian4 , Junchi Yan1∗
1
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
3
Courant Institute, New York University
4
Tencent AI Lab
{echo740,permanent,chr26195,youluo2001,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn,
hzhan55@uic.edu, hatian.jiang@nyu.edu, yatao.bian@gmail.com

Abstract
Learning representations on large-sized graphs is a long-standing challenge due
to the inter-dependence nature involved in massive data points. Transformers, as
an emerging class of foundation encoders for graph-structured data, have shown
promising performance on small graphs due to its global attention capable of capturing all-pair influence beyond neighboring nodes. Even so, existing approaches
tend to inherit the spirit of Transformers in language and vision tasks, and embrace
complicated models by stacking deep multi-head attentions. In this paper, we critically demonstrate that even using a one-layer attention can bring up surprisingly
competitive performance across node property prediction benchmarks where node
numbers range from thousand-level to billion-level. This encourages us to rethink
the design philosophy for Transformers on large graphs, where the quadratic global
attention is a computation overhead hindering the scalability. We frame the proposed scheme as Simplified Graph Transformers (SGFormer), which is empowered
by a simple attention model that can efficiently propagate information among
arbitrary nodes at the minimal cost of one propagation layer and linear complexity
w.r.t. node numbers. Moreover, SGFormer requires none of positional encodings,
feature/graph pre-processing or extra loss. Empirically, SGFormer successfully
scales to the web-scale graph ogbn-papers100M and yields up to 141x inference
acceleration over SOTA Transformers on medium-sized graphs. Beyond current
results, we believe the proposed methodology alone enlightens a new technical
path of independent interest for building Transformers on large graphs. The codes
are publicly available at https://github.com/qitianwu/SGFormer.

1

Introduction

Learning on large graphs that connect interdependent data points is a fundamental problem in
machine learning, with diverse applications in social and natural sciences [45; 15; 48; 43; 14]. One
key challenge is to obtain effective node representations, especially under limited computation budget
(e.g., time and space), that can be efficiently utilized for various downstream tasks.
Recently, Transformers have emerged as a popular class of foundation encoders for graph-structured
data, by treating nodes in the graph as input tokens, and show highly competitive performance on
∗
Corresponding author. This work was partly supported by National Key Research and Development Program
of China (2020AAA0107600), NSFC (62222607) and STCSM (22511105100).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

