Likelihood Ratio Confidence Sets for
Sequential Decision Making

Nicolas Emmenegger∗
ETH Zürich

Mojmír Mutný∗
ETH Zürich

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich

Abstract
Certifiable, adaptive uncertainty estimates for unknown quantities are an essential
ingredient of sequential decision-making algorithms. Standard approaches rely
on problem-dependent concentration results and are limited to a specific combination of parameterization, noise family, and estimator. In this paper, we revisit the
likelihood-based inference principle and propose to use likelihood ratios to construct any-time valid confidence sequences without requiring specialized treatment
in each application scenario. Our method is especially suitable for problems with
well-specified likelihoods, and the resulting sets always maintain the prescribed
coverage in a model-agnostic manner. The size of the sets depends on a choice of
estimator sequence in the likelihood ratio. We discuss how to provably choose the
best sequence of estimators and shed light on connections to online convex optimization with algorithms such as Follow-the-Regularized-Leader. To counteract
the initially large bias of the estimators, we propose a reweighting scheme that also
opens up deployment in non-parametric settings such as RKHS function classes.
We provide a non-asymptotic analysis of the likelihood ratio confidence sets size for
generalized linear models, using insights from convex duality and online learning.
We showcase the practical strength of our method on generalized linear bandit
problems, survival analysis, and bandits with various additive noise distributions.

1

Introduction

One of the main issues addressed by machine learning and statistics is the estimation of an unknown
model from noisy observations. For example, in supervised learning, this might concern learning
the dependence between an input (covariate) x and a random variable (observation) y. In many
cases, we are not only interested in an estimate θ̂ of the true model parameter θ⋆ , but instead in a
set of plausible values that θ⋆ could take. Such confidence sets are of tremendous importance in
sequential decision-making tasks, where uncertainty is used to drive exploration or risk-aversion
needs to be implemented, and covariates are iteratively chosen based on previous observations. This
setting includes problems such as bandit optimization, reinforcement learning, or active learning. In
the former two, the confidence sets are often used to solve the exploration-exploitation dilemma and
more generally influence the selection rule (Mukherjee et al., 2022), termination rule (Katz-Samuels
and Jamieson, 2020), exploration (Auer, 2002) and/or risk-aversion (Makarova et al., 2021).
When we interact with the environment by gathering data sequentially based on previous confidence
sets, we introduce correlations between past noisy observations and future covariates. Data collected
in this manner is referred to as adaptively gathered (Wasserman et al., 2020). Constructing estimators,
confidence sets, and hypothesis tests for such non-i.i.d. data comes with added difficulty. Accordingly,
and also for its importance in light of the reproducibility crisis (Baker, 2016), the task has attracted
significant attention in the statistics community in recent years (Ramdas et al., 2022).
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

