ForecastPFN: Synthetically-Trained Zero-Shot
Forecasting

Samuel Dooley∗ 1 , Gurnoor Singh Khurana1 , Chirag Mohapatra1 ,
Siddartha Naidu1 , Colin White1,2
1
Abacus.AI, 2 Caltech

Abstract
The vast majority of time-series forecasting approaches require a substantial training dataset. However, many real-life forecasting applications have very little
initial observations, sometimes just 40 or fewer. Thus, the applicability of most
forecasting methods is restricted in data-sparse commercial applications. While
there is recent work in the setting of very limited initial data (so-called ‘zero-shot’
forecasting), its performance is inconsistent depending on the data used for pretraining. In this work, we take a different approach and devise ForecastPFN, the
first zero-shot forecasting model trained purely on a novel synthetic data distribution. ForecastPFN is a prior-data fitted network, trained to approximate Bayesian
inference, which can make predictions on a new time series dataset in a single
forward pass. Through extensive experiments, we show that zero-shot predictions
made by ForecastPFN are more accurate and faster compared to state-of-the-art
forecasting methods, even when the other methods are allowed to train on hundreds
of additional in-distribution data points.

1

Introduction

Time-series forecasting is an important and long-studied problem that has attracted significant
attention for many years [9, 14, 18, 29]. Time-series forecasting has a wide variety of applications
such as healthcare [10, 20], economics [28, 42], climate science [5, 38], and renewable energy
[19, 53]. Many forecasting algorithms have been proposed, including traditional statistical methods
[4, 12], and more recently, deep learning methods [29, 30, 52, 54].
Nearly all time-series forecasting approaches (including both traditional methods and deep learning
methods) require a substantial number of initial time-series datapoints in order to learn patterns and
make future predictions. However, many real-world forecasting applications have very few initial
observations, sometimes just 40 or fewer [6, 8, 16, 23]. This setting is deemed ‘zero-shot forecasting’
in prior work [36], in contrast to the typical setting in which hundreds or thousands of observations
from the target series are used for training. While there is recent work on zero-shot forecasting [36],
its performance is inconsistent depending on the dataset used for pretraining.
In this work, we take a different approach and devise ForecastPFN, the first zero-shot method trained
purely on a novel synthetic data distribution. ForecastPFN is a prior-data fitted network (PFN)
[33]; PFNs are a recently-proposed paradigm, in which a model is pretrained offline on synthetic
data generated from a prior to approximate Bayesian inference. PFNs have recently been used
in a breakthrough result for tabular datasets [22]. However, there are significant challenges when
designing a general and flexible PFN in the forecasting setting, namely, constructing a general
time-series distribution, and tuning an architecture and training scheme that can learn it.
∗

Correspondence to: samuel@abacus.ai, crwhite@caltech.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

