Embracing the chaos: analysis and diagnosis of
numerical instability in variational flows

Zuheng Xu
Trevor Campbell
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
[zuheng.xu | trevor]@stat.ubc.ca

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the impact of numerical instability on the reliability
of sampling, density evaluation, and evidence lower bound (ELBO) estimation in
variational flows. We first empirically demonstrate that common flows can exhibit
a catastrophic accumulation of error: the numerical flow map deviates significantly
from the exact map—which affects sampling—and the numerical inverse flow map
does not accurately recover the initial input—which affects density and ELBO
computations. Surprisingly though, we find that results produced by flows are
often accurate enough for applications despite the presence of serious numerical
instability. In this work, we treat variational flows as dynamical systems, and
leverage shadowing theory to elucidate this behavior via theoretical guarantees
on the error of sampling, density evaluation, and ELBO estimation. Finally, we
develop and empirically test a diagnostic procedure that can be used to validate
results produced by numerically unstable flows in practice.

1

Introduction

Variational families of probability distributions play a prominent role in generative modelling and
probabilistic inference. A standard construction of a variational family involves passing a simple
reference distribution—such as a standard normal—through a sequence of parametrized invertible
transformations, i.e., a flow [1–7]. Modern flow-based variational families have the representational
capacity to adapt to highly complex target distributions while still providing computationally tractable
i.i.d. draws and density evaluations, which in turn enables convenient training by minimizing the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence [8] via stochastic optimization methods [9–11].
In practice, creating a flexible variational flow often requires many flow layers, as the expressive power
of a variational flow generally increases with the number of transformations [5, 12, 13]. Composing
many transformations in this manner, however, can create numerical instability [5, 14–16], i.e., the
tendency for numerical errors from imprecise floating-point computations to be quickly magnified
along the flow. This accumulation of error can result in low-quality sample generation [14], numerical
non-invertibility [14, 15], and unstable training [16]. But in this work, we demonstrate that this is
not always the case with a counterintuitive empirical example: a flow that exhibits severe numerical
instability—with error that grows exponentially in the length of the flow—but which surprisingly still
returns accurate density values, i.i.d. draws, and evidence lower bound (ELBO) estimates.
Motivated by this example, the goal of this work is twofold: (1) to provide a theoretical understanding
of how numerical instability in flows relates to error in downstream results; and (2) to provide a
diagnostic procedure such that users of normalizing flows can check whether their particular results are
reliable in practice. We develop a theoretical framework that investigates the influence of numerical
instability using shadowing theory from dynamical systems [17–20]. Intuitively, shadowing theory
asserts that although a numerical flow trajectory may diverge quickly from its exact counterpart,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

