Posthoc privacy guarantees for collaborative inference
with modified Propose-Test-Release

Abhishek Singh1 , Praneeth Vepakomma1 , Vivek Sharma1,2,3,⋆ , Ramesh Raskar1
1
MIT Media Lab, 2 MGH, Harvard Medical School, 3 Sony AI

Abstract
Cloud-based machine learning inference is an emerging paradigm where users
query by sending their data through a service provider who runs an ML model
on that data and returns back the answer. Due to increased concerns over data
privacy, recent works have proposed Collaborative Inference (CI) to learn a privacypreserving encoding of sensitive user data before it is shared with an untrusted
service provider. Existing works so far evaluate the privacy of these encodings
through empirical reconstruction attacks. In this work, we develop a new framework
that provides formal privacy guarantees for an arbitrarily trained neural network by
linking its local Lipschitz constant with its local sensitivity. To guarantee privacy using local sensitivity, we extend the Propose-Test-Release (PTR) framework to make
it tractable for neural network queries. We verify the efficacy of our framework
experimentally on real-world datasets and elucidate the role of Adversarial Representation Learning (ARL) in improving the privacy-utility trade-off. The source
code and other details are available at tremblerz.github.io/posthoc.

1

Introduction

While training ML models privately has seen tremendous progress[1, 45, 10, 26] in the last few
years, protecting privacy during the inference phase remains elusive as these models get deployed by
cloud-based service providers. Cryptographic techniques[43, 31, 40, 27] address this challenge by
computing over encrypted data. To combat the high computational cost of encryption techniques,
several recent works [66, 65, 5, 56, 57] have proposed Collaborative Inference (CI) – an alternate
paradigm where users share a lower dimensional embedding of raw data where task-irrelevant
information is suppressed. However, CI techniques are currently incompatible with formal privacy
frameworks and their evaluation is currently based on empirical reconstruction attacks. The central
issue in CI is the usage of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) making it unsuitable for formal and
worst-case privacy analysis. In this work, we take the first step towards a formal privacy framework
for CI that will enable a more rigorous evaluation and a reliable understanding of the CI techniques.
The key aspect of any CI algorithm is an obfuscator (typically a DNN), which is trained to encode
a user’s private data such that an attacker can not reconstruct the original data from its encoding.
Hence, CI techniques typically evaluate the privacy of their representations by empirically measuring
the information leakage using a proxy adversary. However, existing works [57, 66, 18, 56] show that
a proxy adversary’s performance as a measure of protection could be unreliable because a future
adversary can come up with a stronger attack. Alternately a few existing CI techniques have used
theoretical tools [20, 69, 4, 68, 62, 5, 39] for measuring information leakage empirically. However,
most of these works analyze specific obfuscation techniques and lack formal privacy definitions.
Therefore, we first introduce a privacy definition applicable to CI by adopting a different threat
model from that of differential privacy (DP)[12] because (as we explain in detail in Sec 2) protecting
membership inference is at odds with achieving a non-trivial privacy-utility trade-off in CI.
⋆

Part of this work was carried out while he was at MIT and MGH, Harvard Medical School.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

