Simple and Controllable Music Generation

Jade Copet♠♢ Felix Kreuk♠♢ Itai Gat Tal Remez David Kant
Gabriel Synnaeve ♢ Yossi Adi∗♢ Alexandre Défossez ♢
♠: equal contributions, ♢: core team

Meta AI
{jadecopet, felixkreuk, adiyoss}@meta.com

Abstract
We tackle the task of conditional music generation. We introduce M USIC G EN, a single Language Model (LM) that operates over several streams of compressed discrete
music representation, i.e., tokens. Unlike prior work, M USIC G EN is comprised of
a single-stage transformer LM together with efficient token interleaving patterns,
which eliminates the need for cascading several models, e.g., hierarchically or upsampling. Following this approach, we demonstrate how M USIC G EN can generate
high-quality samples, both mono and stereo, while being conditioned on textual
description or melodic features, allowing better controls over the generated output.
We conduct extensive empirical evaluation, considering both automatic and human
studies, showing the proposed approach is superior to the evaluated baselines on a
standard text-to-music benchmark. Through ablation studies, we shed light over
the importance of each of the components comprising M USIC G EN. Music samples,
code, and models are available at github.com/facebookresearch/audiocraft.

1

Introduction

Text-to-music is the task of generating musical pieces given text descriptions, e.g., “90s rock song with
a guitar riff”. Generating music is a challenging task as it requires modeling long range sequences.
Unlike speech, music requires the use of the full frequency spectrum [Müller, 2015]. That means
sampling the signal at a higher rate, i.e., the standard sampling rates of music recordings are 44.1
kHz or 48 kHz vs. 16 kHz for speech. Moreover, music contains harmonies and melodies from
different instruments, which create complex structures. Human listeners are highly sensitive to
disharmony [Fedorenko et al., 2012, Norman-Haignere et al., 2019], hence generating music does not
leave a lot of room for making melodic errors. Lastly, the ability to control the generation process in
a diverse set of methods, e.g., key, instruments, melody, genre, etc. is essential for music creators.
Recent advances in self-supervised audio representation learning [Balestriero et al., 2023], sequential
modeling [Touvron et al., 2023], and audio synthesis [Tan et al., 2021] provide the conditions to
develop such models. To make audio modeling more tractable, recent studies proposed representing
audio signals as multiple streams of discrete tokens representing the same signal [Défossez et al.,
2022]. This allows both high-quality audio generation and effective audio modeling. However, this
comes at the cost of jointly modeling several parallel dependent streams.
Kharitonov et al. [2022], Kreuk et al. [2022] proposed modeling multi-streams of speech tokens in
parallel following a delay approach, i.e., introduce offsets between the different streams. Agostinelli
et al. [2023] proposed representing musical segments using multiple sequences of discrete tokens at
different granularity and model them using a hierarchy of autoregressive models. In parallel, Donahue
et al. [2023] follows a similar approach but for the task of singing to accompaniment generation.
Recently, Wang et al. [2023] proposed tackling this problem in two stages: (i) modeling the first
∗

Yossi Adi is Affiliated with both The Hebrew University of Jerusalem & MetaAI.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

