Max-Margin Token Selection in Attention Mechanism

Davoud Ataee Tarzanagh
University of Pennsylvania
tarzanaq@upenn.edu

Yingcong Li
Xuechen Zhang
University of California, Riverside
{yli692,xzhan394}@ucr.edu

Samet Oymak
University of Michigan
UC Riverside
oymak@umich.edu

Abstract
Attention mechanism is a central component of the transformer architecture which
led to the phenomenal success of large language models. However, the theoretical
principles underlying the attention mechanism are poorly understood, especially its
nonconvex optimization dynamics. In this work, we explore the seminal softmaxattention model f (X) = ⟨Xv, softmax(XW p)⟩, where X is the token sequence and
(v, W, p) are trainable parameters. We prove that running gradient descent on p,
or equivalently W, converges in direction to a max-margin solution that separates
locally-optimal tokens from non-optimal ones. This clearly formalizes attention as
an optimal token selection mechanism. Remarkably, our results are applicable to
general data and precisely characterize optimality of tokens in terms of the value
embeddings Xv and problem geometry. We also provide a broader regularization
path analysis that establishes the margin maximizing nature of attention even for
nonlinear prediction heads. When optimizing v and p simultaneously with logistic
loss, we identify conditions under which the regularization paths directionally
converge to their respective hard-margin SVM solutions where v separates the
input features based on their labels. Interestingly, the SVM formulation of p is
influenced by the support vector geometry of v. Finally, we verify our theoretical
findings via numerical experiments and provide insights.

1

Introduction

Since its introduction in the seminal work [1], attention mechanism has played an influential role
in advancing natural language processing, and more recently, large language models [2, 3, 4, 5].
Initially introduced for encoder-decoder RNN architectures, attention allows the decoder to focus
on the most relevant parts of the input sequence, instead of relying solely on a fixed-length hidden
state. Attention mechanism has taken the center stage in the transformers [6], where the self-attention
layer – which calculates softmax similarities between input tokens – serves as the backbone of the
architecture. Since their inception, transformers have revolutionized natural language processing,
from models like BERT [7] to ChatGPT [8], and have also become the architecture of choice for
foundation models [9] addressing diverse challenges in generative modeling [3, 10], computer vision
[11, 12], and reinforcement learning [13, 14, 15].
The prominence of the attention mechanism motivates a fundamental theoretical understanding of its
role in optimization and learning. While it is well-known that attention enables the model to focus on
the relevant parts of the input sequence, the precise mechanism by which this is achieved is far from
clear. To this end, we ask
Q: What are the optimization dynamics and inductive biases of the attention mechanism?
We study this question using the fundamental attention model f (X) = Xv, S(XW ⊤ p) . Here, X is
the sequence of input tokens, v is the prediction head, W is the trainable key-query weights, and S
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

