Knowledge-Augmented Reasoning Distillation for
Small Language Models in Knowledge-Intensive Tasks

Minki Kang1,2∗, Seanie Lee2 , Jinheon Baek2 , Kenji Kawaguchi3 , Sung Ju Hwang2,4
1
KRAFTON, 2 KAIST, 3 National University of Singapore, 4 DeepAuto.ai
{zzxc1133, lsnfamily02, jinheon.baek}@kaist.ac.kr,
kenji@comp.nus.edu.sg, sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown promising performance in knowledgeintensive reasoning tasks that require a compound understanding of knowledge.
However, deployment of the LLMs in real-world applications can be challenging due to their high computational requirements and concerns on data privacy.
Previous studies have focused on building task-specific small Language Models
(LMs) by fine-tuning them with labeled data or distilling LLMs. However, these
approaches are ill-suited for knowledge-intensive reasoning tasks due to the limited capacity of small LMs in memorizing the knowledge required. Motivated
by our theoretical analysis on memorization, we propose Knowledge-Augmented
Reasoning Distillation (KARD), a novel method that fine-tunes small LMs to
generate rationales obtained from LLMs with augmented knowledge retrieved
from an external knowledge base. Moreover, we further propose a neural reranker
to obtain documents relevant to rationale generation. We empirically show that
KARD significantly improves the performance of small T5 and GPT models on
the challenging knowledge-intensive reasoning datasets, namely MedQA-USMLE,
StrategyQA, and OpenbookQA. Notably, our method makes the 250M T5 models
achieve superior performance against the fine-tuned 3B models, having 12 times
larger parameters, on both MedQA-USMLE and StrategyQA benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [5, 8] have excelled at various tasks across diverse domains with
in-context learning. Recently, scaling up the number of parameters of LLMs has been shown to
significantly improve their knowledge encoding and reasoning capability [54, 24]. Moreover, such
LLMs have achieved remarkable performance on knowledge-intensive tasks in professional domains
which are highly challenging, since they require a considerable depth of domain knowledge and
reasoning [34, 48]. For example, in Figure 1 top, answering a medical question requires both domain
knowledge and reasoning ability. The LLM should understand that the patient likely has ALS based
on the symptoms and recognize SOD1 is the main cause of motor neuron diseases. Furthermore, it
needs to reason over the knowledge that a mutation in SOD1 is highly associated with the symptoms.
Despite its effectiveness, deploying LLMs can still be challenging, especially in real-world applications. Firstly, utilizing LLMs to make predictions is computationally expensive. It requires 326GB
GPU memory to load the GPT3-175B model [11]. Moreover, deployment of the LLM potentially
poses a risk of privacy leakage since most of the production-grade LLMs [5, 44, 8, 43] operate in a
black-box manner. That is, users cannot access the parameters of LLMs but only their output via
some Application Programming Interfaces. Consequently, the need for white-box Small Language
Models tailored to address problems requiring domain-specific knowledge will continue to gain
∗

Work done at AITRICS. † Code is available at https://github.com/Nardien/KARD.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

