REASONER: An Explainable Recommendation
Dataset with Comprehensive Labeling Ground Truths
∗

∗

†

Xu Chen1,2 , Jingsen Zhang1,2, , Lei Wang1,2, , Quanyu Dai4, , Zhenhua Dong4 ,
Ruiming Tang4 , Rui Zhang5 , Li Chen3 , Wayne Xin Zhao1,2 , Ji-Rong Wen1,2
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
4
5
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
www.ruizhang.info

Abstract
Explainable recommendation has attracted much attention from the industry and
academic communities. It has shown great potential to improve the recommendation persuasiveness, informativeness and user satisfaction. In the past few years,
while a lot of promising explainable recommender models have been proposed, the
datasets used to evaluate them still suffer from several limitations, for example,
the explanation ground truths are not labeled by the real users, the explanations
are mostly single-modal and around only one aspect. To bridge these gaps, in
this paper, we build a new explainable recommendation dataset, which, to our
knowledge, is the first contribution that provides a large amount of real user labeled
multi-modal and multi-aspect explanation ground truths. In specific, we firstly
develop a video recommendation platform, where a series of questions around the
recommendation explainability are carefully designed. Then, we recruit about 3000
high-quality labelers with different backgrounds to use the system, and collect their
behaviors and feedback to our questions. In this paper, we detail the construction
process of our dataset and also provide extensive analysis on its characteristics. In
addition, we develop a library, where many well-known explainable recommender
models are implemented in a unified framework. Based on this library, we build
several benchmarks for different explainable recommendation tasks. At last, we
present many new opportunities brought by our dataset, which are expected to
promote the field of explainable recommendation. Our dataset, library and the
related documents have been released at https://reasoner2023.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Recommender system has become an indispensable component in a large amount of real-world
applications, ranging from e-commence [32] and entertainment [46] to education [30] and healthcaring [37]. Basically, recommender system bridges the content providers with the users. For the
content providers, better recommendations can effectively expose the items which are more likely
to be clicked or purchased by the users, and thus, achieve better business targets. For the users, an
effective recommender model can help to quickly discover the items of interest, and thus, save the user
time and alleviate the problem of information overloading. Recently, explainable recommendation
has been recognized as an important research direction [36, 2]. Essentially, providing explanations
for the recommended items can further enhance the utilities of the content providers and users. For
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

