Stanford-ORB: A Real-World 3D Object
Inverse Rendering Benchmark

Zhengfei Kuang∗ Yunzhi Zhang∗
Samir Agarwala

Shangzhe Wu

Hong-Xing Yu
Jiajun Wu

Stanford University

Abstract
We introduce Stanford-ORB, a new real-world 3D Object inverse Rendering Benchmark. Recent advances in inverse rendering have enabled a wide range of real-world
applications in 3D content generation, moving rapidly from research and commercial use cases to consumer devices. While the results continue to improve, there
is no real-world benchmark that can quantitatively assess and compare the performance of various inverse rendering methods. Existing real-world datasets typically
consist only of the shape and multi-view images of objects, which are not sufficient
for evaluating the quality of material recovery and object relighting. Methods capable of recovering material and lighting often resort to synthetic data for quantitative
evaluation, which on the other hand does not guarantee generalization to complex
real-world environments. We introduce a new dataset of real-world objects captured
under a variety of natural scenes with ground-truth 3D scans, multi-view images,
and environment lighting. Using this dataset, we establish the first comprehensive
real-world evaluation benchmark for object inverse rendering tasks from in-thewild scenes and compare the performance of various existing methods. All data,
code, and models can be accessed at https://stanfordorb.github.io/.

1

Introduction

When we take a photograph of an object, light travels through space, bounces off surfaces, and
eventually reaches the camera sensors to create an image. Inverting this image formation process
is a fundamental problem in computer vision—from just the resulting single 2D image, we aim to
reconstruct the physical scene in 3D, inferring 3D object shape, reasoning about its reflectance, and
disentangling its intrinsic appearance from illumination effects. This process is often referred to as
inverse rendering. Enabling machines to do so is not only crucial for general image understanding
and object analysis, but also facilitates numerous downstream applications, such as controllable 3D
content generation [65, 50, 12, 91, 52] and robotic manipulation [77, 51, 20, 14, 66, 61].
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in inverse rendering, with the emergence of various
differentiable and neural rendering techniques. Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [43], for instance,
have emerged as a powerful volumetric representation that effectively encodes the geometry and
view-dependent appearance of a scene into a neural network, allowing for high-fidelity novel view
synthesis of complex real-world scenes given raw multi-view images as input. This framework has
been successfully extended to further decompose the appearance into explicit material representations
(e.g., BRDFs) and environment lighting [63, 88, 9, 7]. As the visual granularity of these inverse
rendering results continues to improve, it becomes an increasingly pressing challenge to quantify and
compare the performance of different methods.
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

