Generating QM1B with PySCFIPU
Alexander Mathiasen1 Hatem Helal1 Kerstin Klaser1 Paul Balanca1 Josef Dean1
Carlo Luschi1 Dominique Beaini2, 3, 4 Andrew Fitzgibbon1 Dominic Masters1
1

Graphcore

2

Mila - Québec AI Institute

3

Valence

4

Université de Montréal

Abstract
The emergence of foundation models in Computer Vision and Natural Language
Processing have resulted in immense progress on downstream tasks. This progress
was enabled by datasets with billions of training examples. Similar benefits are
yet to be unlocked for quantum chemistry, where the potential of deep learning is
constrained by comparatively small datasets with 100k to 20M training examples.
These datasets are limited in size because the labels are computed using the accurate
(but computationally demanding) predictions of Density Functional Theory (DFT).
Notably, prior DFT datasets were created using CPU supercomputers without
leveraging hardware acceleration. In this paper, we take a first step towards
utilising hardware accelerators by introducing the data generator PySCFIPU using
Intelligence Processing Units (IPUs). This allowed us to create the dataset QM1B
with one billion training examples containing 9-11 heavy atoms. We demonstrate
that a simple baseline neural network (SchNet 9M) improves its performance by
simply increasing the amount of training data without additional inductive biases.
To encourage future researchers to use QM1B responsibly, we highlight several
limitations of QM1B and emphasise the low-resolution of our DFT options, which
also serves as motivation for even larger, more accurate datasets. Code and dataset.

1

Introduction

Artificial Intelligence research is quickly moving towards building systems that are able to perform
generally applicable functions using foundation models that are pretrained on billions of training
examples. Foundation models have transformed natural language processing (NLP) [1] and computer
vision (CV) [2], but have not yet been demonstrated in the important field of molecular machine
learning. Addressing this has the potential to accelerate the design of new medicines and materials.
A promising approach within molecular machine learning is to train neural networks (NN) to
approximate the predictions of quantum chemistry, yielding 1000x faster predictions [3, 4] with errors
approaching that of experimental measurement. However, current molecular datasets are limited to
100k-20M training examples, that are seemingly insufficient to train foundation models. Due to the
high cost and time consuming nature of constructing chemical datasets directly from experimental
measurement, prior datasets rely on computational methods to generate labels. The computational
method routinely used to generate machine learning datasets is Density Functional Theory (DFT).
Although DFT strikes a favourable balance between accuracy and computational cost relative to other
molecular simulation methods, its computational cost has nevertheless limited prior datasets1 to fewer
than 20M training examples. Notably, prior DFT datasets such as QM9 [6, 7], ANI-1 [8] or PCQ [9]
were created by running DFT on CPUs. To the best of our knowledge no prior work utilises hardware
acceleration to create larger DFT datasets for deep learning.
1

Gaussian basis DFT datasets. This excludes semi-empirical methods [5] and plane-wave DFT [4].

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

