Cascading Bandits: Optimizing Recommendation
Frequency in Delayed Feedback Environments

Junyu Cao∗
The University of Texas at Austin
junyu.cao@mccombs.utexas.edu

Dairui Wang
Tsinghua University
wdr23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Yan Zhang
McGill University
yan.zhang13@mail.mcgill.ca

Wei Qi*
Tsinghua University
qiw@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Delayed feedback is a critical problem in dynamic recommender systems. In
practice, the feedback result often depends on the frequency of recommendation.
Most existing online learning literature fails to consider optimization of the recommendation frequency, and regards the reward from each successfully recommended
message as equal. In this paper, we consider a novel cascading bandits setting,
where individual messages from a selected list are sent to a user periodically. Whenever a user does not like a message, she may abandon the system with a probability
positively correlated with the recommendation frequency. A learning agent needs to
learn both the underlying message attraction probabilities and users’ abandonment
probabilities through the randomly delayed feedback. We first show a dynamic
programming solution to finding the optimal message sequence in deterministic
scenarios, in which the reward is allowed to vary with different messages. Then we
propose a polynomial time UCB-based offline learning algorithm, and discuss its
performance by characterizing its regret bound. For the online setting, we propose
a learning algorithm which allows adaptive content for a given user. Numerical
experiment on AmEx dataset confirms the effectiveness of our algorithms.

1

Background

1.1

Introduction

Recommending dynamic content based on adaptive learning of user behavior is a critical task to
online platforms. In marketing campaign, as only 2% of web traffic converts on the first visit1 , it is
important to re-target potential users with notifications such as ads, emails or app reminders to gain
traction and awareness. The content for those notifications should be dynamic and adapted to a user’s
behavior. Since the feedback may not be instant, a campaign system still needs to provide campaigns
to other users while waiting. Meanwhile, the frequency at which the notifications are sent should also
be judiciously managed, i.e., sending more messages may increase the odds of a click, but frequent
messaging may also alienate and drive away users.
Online learning for recommendation tasks has been extensively studied in the multi-armed bandit
framework. In this setting, pulling certain arms in the bandit problem corresponds to selecting
marketing messages for a user. In particular, cascading bandit [13, 14, 18, 21, 20, 25] which models
∗
1

Corresponding authors.
https://retargeter.com/what-is-retargeting-and-how-does-it-work/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

