SOC: Semantic-Assisted Object Cluster for
Referring Video Object Segmentation

Zhuoyan Luo1∗,
Yicheng Xiao1∗ ,
Yong Liu1∗ ,
3
2
1
Shuyan Li , Yitong Wang , Yansong Tang , Xiu Li1† , Yujiu Yang1†
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
ByteDance Inc.
3
Engineering Department, University of Cambridge
{luozy23, xiaoyc23, liu-yong20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
sl2141@cam.ac.uk wangjingshen@bytedance.com
{tang.yansong, li.xiu, yang.yujiu}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper studies referring video object segmentation (RVOS) by boosting videolevel visual-linguistic alignment. Recent approaches model the RVOS task as
a sequence prediction problem and perform multi-modal interaction as well as
segmentation for each frame separately. However, the lack of a global view of
video content leads to difficulties in effectively utilizing inter-frame relationships
and understanding textual descriptions of object temporal variations. To address
this issue, we propose Semantic-assisted Object Cluster (SOC), which aggregates
video content and textual guidance for unified temporal modeling and cross-modal
alignment. By associating a group of frame-level object embeddings with language
tokens, SOC facilitates joint space learning across modalities and time steps.
Moreover, we present multi-modal contrastive supervision to help construct wellaligned joint space at the video level. We conduct extensive experiments on popular
RVOS benchmarks, and our method outperforms state-of-the-art competitors on
all benchmarks by a remarkable margin. Besides, the emphasis on temporal
coherence enhances the segmentation stability and adaptability of our method
in processing text expressions with temporal variations. Code is available at
https://github.com/RobertLuo1/NeurIPS2023_SOC.

1

Introduction

Referring Video Object Segmentation (RVOS) [1, 42] aims to segment the target object referred by
the given text description in a video. Unlike conventional single-modal segmentation tasks according
to pre-defined categories [31, 32] or visual guidance [24–26, 10], referring segmentation requires
comprehensive understanding of the content across different modalities to identify and segment the
target object accurately. Compared to referring image segmentation, RVOS is even more challenging
since the algorithms must also model the temporal relationships of different objects and locations.
This emerging topic has attracted great attention and has many potential applications, such as video
editing and human-robot interaction.
Due to the varieties of video content as well as the unrestricted language expression, the critical
problem of RVOS lies in how to perform pixel-level alignment between different modalities and time
steps. To accomplish this challenging task, previous methods have tried various alignment workflows.
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

