Learning Functional Transduction

Mathieu Chalvidal
Capital Fund Management
Paris, France
mathieu.chalvidal@gmail.com

Thomas Serre
Carney Institute for Brain Science
Brown University, U.S.
thomas_serre@brown.edu

Rufin VanRullen
Centre de Recherche Cerveau & Cognition
CNRS, Universite de Toulouse, France
rufin.vanrullen@cnrs.fr

Abstract
Research in statistical learning has polarized into two general approaches to perform
regression analysis: Transductive methods construct estimates directly based on
exemplar data using generic relational principles which might suffer from the curse
of dimensionality. Conversely, inductive methods can potentially fit highly complex
functions at the cost of compute-intensive solution searches. In this work, we
leverage the theory of vector-valued Reproducing Kernel Banach Spaces (RKBS)
to propose a hybrid approach: We show that transductive regression systems
can be meta-learned with gradient descent to form efficient in-context neural
approximators of function defined over both finite and infinite-dimensional spaces
(operator regression). Once trained, our Transducer can almost instantaneously
capture new functional relationships and produce original image estimates, given a
few pairs of input and output examples. We demonstrate the benefit of our metalearned transductive approach to model physical systems influenced by varying
external factors with little data at a fraction of the usual deep learning training costs
for partial differential equations and climate modeling applications.

1

Introduction

Transduction vs. induction ˛ In statistical learning, transductive inference (Vapnik, 2006) refers to
the process of reasoning directly from observed (training) cases to new (testing) cases and contrasts
with inductive inference, which amounts to extracting general rules from observed training cases to
produce estimates. The former principle powers some of the most successful regression algorithms
benefiting from straightforward construction properties, from k-Nearest Neighbors (Cover and
Hart, 1967) to Support Vector Machines (Boser et al., 1992) or Gaussian Processes (Williams and
Rasmussen, 1995). In contrast, deep learning research has mostly endeavored to find inductive
solutions, relying on stochastic gradient descent to faithfully encode functional relationships
described by large datasets into the weights of a neural network. Although ubiquitous, inductive
neural learning with gradient descent is compute-intensive, necessitates large amounts of data, and
poorly generalizes outside of the training distribution (Jin et al., 2020) such that a slight modification
of the problem might require retraining and cause "catastrophic" forgetting of the previous solution
(McCloskey and Cohen, 1989). This may be particularly problematic for real-world applications
where data has heterogeneous sources, or only a few examples of the target function are available.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

