AGD: an Auto-switchable Optimizer using Stepwise
Gradient Difference for Preconditioning Matrix

Yun Yue ∗
Ant Group
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
yueyun.yy@antgroup.com
Jiadi Jiang ∗
Ant Group
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
jiadi.jjd@antgroup.com

Zhiling Ye ∗
Ant Group
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
yezhiling.yzl@antgroup.com

Yongchao Liu
Ant Group
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
yongchao.ly@antgroup.com

Ke Zhang
Ant Group
Beijing, China
yingzi.zk@antgroup.com

Abstract
Adaptive optimizers, such as Adam, have achieved remarkable success in deep
learning. A key component of these optimizers is the so-called preconditioning
matrix, providing enhanced gradient information and regulating the step size of
each gradient direction. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to designing the
preconditioning matrix by utilizing the gradient difference between two successive
steps as the diagonal elements. These diagonal elements are closely related to the
Hessian and can be perceived as an approximation of the inner product between the
Hessian row vectors and difference of the adjacent parameter vectors. Additionally,
we introduce an auto-switching function that enables the preconditioning matrix to
switch dynamically between Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and the adaptive
optimizer. Based on these two techniques, we develop a new optimizer named
AGD that enhances the generalization performance. We evaluate AGD on public
datasets of Natural Language Processing (NLP), Computer Vision (CV), and Recommendation Systems (RecSys). Our experimental results demonstrate that AGD
outperforms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) optimizers, achieving highly competitive
or significantly better predictive performance. Furthermore, we analyze how AGD
is able to switch automatically between SGD and the adaptive optimizer and its
actual effects on various scenarios. The code is available at this link2 .

1

Introduction

Consider the following empirical risk minimization problems:
M

minn f (w) :=

w∈R

1 X
`(w; xk ),
M

(1)

k=1

where w ∈ Rn is the parameter vector to optimize, {x1 , . . . , xM } is the training set, and `(w; x) is
the loss function measuring the predictive performance of the parameter w on the example x. Since
it is expensive to calculate the full batch gradient in each optimization iteration when M is large, the
∗

Co-first authors with equal contributions.
https://github.com/intelligent-machine-learning/dlrover/tree/master/atorch/
atorch/optimizers
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

