Topological RANSAC for instance verification and
retrieval without fine-tuning
Guoyuan An1 , Juhyung Seon1 , InKyu An1,4 , Yuchi Huo2,3 , and Sung-Eui Yoon1
1
School of Computing, KAIST
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
3
Zhejiang Lab
4
ETRI, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
2

Abstract
This paper presents an innovative visual reasoning approach to enhancing instance
verification and retrieval, particularly in situations where a fine-tuning set is unavailable. The widely-used SPatial verification (SP) method, despite its efficacy, relies
on a spatial model and the hypothesis-testing strategy for instance recognition,
leading to inherent limitations, including the assumption of planar structures and
neglect of topological relations among features. To address these shortcomings,
we introduce a pioneering technique that replaces the spatial model with a topological one within the RANSAC process. We propose bio-inspired saccade and
fovea functions to verify the topological consistency among features, effectively
circumventing the issues associated with SP’s spatial model. Our experimental
results demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms SP, achieving stateof-the-art performance in non-fine-tuning retrieval. Furthermore, our approach can
enhance performance when used in conjunction with fine-tuned features. Importantly, our method retains high explainability and is lightweight, offering a practical
and adaptable solution for a variety of real-world applications. Our code can be
found through this link.

1

Introduction and related work

Content-based image retrieval, a fundamental and long-standing challenge, has seen significant
advancements due to the rise of deep learning [29, 45, 7, 24]. These data-driven approaches, although
successful, often rely heavily on fine-tuning with data from the same domain [24, 46]. However,
acquiring such a fine-tuning set can be impractical or costly, particularly in open-world or private
scenarios. Moreover, these methods often fall short in providing explainability, a critical factor for
real-world applications where search results are integral to decision-making.
In situations where a fine-tuning set is absent, the esteemed SPatial verification (SP) [26] method has
demonstrated the highest accuracy in verifying an image pair [28]. However, its dependency on a
spatial model for recognition exposes vulnerabilities, particularly to viewpoint changes in 3D objects
and neglect of topological relations among key points (Sect. 2.1). To address these issues, we pioneer
the replacement of the spatial model with a topological one during the RANdom SAmple Consensus
(RANSAC) process. We introduce Homeomorphism Region (Def. 2.1), which circumvents the
mentioned problems, providing a size metric superior to the original inlier counts used in SP. Drawing
inspiration from human observation, we propose innovative saccade and fovea functions to validate
topological relations among keypoints within RANSAC [12] iterations (Sect. 3).
Numerous studies have explored SP [2, 31, 21, 36], but none have made such a direct modification to
the spatial model in RANSAC, possibly because earlier benchmarks presented the issues of the spatial
model as less severe [28, 26, 27]. However, with the introduction of more challenging benchmarks
like ROxford and RParis [28], these problems have become increasingly critical. While some recent
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

