Diverse Shape Completion via Style Modulated
Generative Adversarial Networks
Wesley Khademi
Oregon State University
khademiw@oregonstate.edu

Li Fuxin
Oregon State University
lif@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Shape completion aims to recover the full 3D geometry of an object from a partial
observation. This problem is inherently multi-modal since there can be many ways
to plausibly complete the missing regions of a shape. Such diversity would be
indicative of the underlying uncertainty of the shape and could be preferable for
downstream tasks such as planning. In this paper, we propose a novel conditional
generative adversarial network that can produce many diverse plausible completions
of a partially observed point cloud. To enable our network to produce multiple
completions for the same partial input, we introduce stochasticity into our network
via style modulation. By extracting style codes from complete shapes during
training, and learning a distribution over them, our style codes can explicitly carry
shape category information leading to better completions. We further introduce
diversity penalties and discriminators at multiple scales to prevent conditional mode
collapse and to train without the need for multiple ground truth completions for each
partial input. Evaluations across several synthetic and real datasets demonstrate that
our method achieves significant improvements in respecting the partial observations
while obtaining greater diversity in completions.

Figure 1: Given a partially observed point cloud (gray), our method is capable of producing many
plausible completions (blue) of the missing regions.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advancements in 3D sensing technologies, point clouds have emerged as a popular
representation for capturing the geometry of real-world objects and scenes. Point clouds come from
sensors such as LiDAR and depth cameras, and can find applications in various domains such as
robotics, computer-aided design, augmented reality, and autonomous driving. However, the 3D
geometry produced by such sensors is typically sparse, noisy, and incomplete, which hinders their
effective utilization in many downstream tasks.
This motivates the task of 3D shape completion from a partially observed point cloud, which has seen
significant research in the past few years [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Many early point cloud completion works
mostly focus on generating a single completion that matches the ground truth in the training set, which
does not take into account the potential uncertainty underlying the complete point cloud given the
partial view. Ideally, an approach should correctly characterize such uncertainty – generating mostly
similar completions when most of the object has been observed, and less similar completions when
less of the object has been observed. A good characterization of uncertainty would be informative for
downstream tasks such as planning or active perception to aim to reduce such uncertainty.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

