The geometry of hidden representations of large
transformer models
Lucrezia Valeriani1,2∗

Diego Doimo1,3∗

Francesca Cuturello1

Alessandro Laio3,4

Alessio Ansuini1†

Alberto Cazzaniga1†

1
2

AREA Science Park, Trieste, Italy
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy
3
SISSA, Trieste, Italy
4
ICTP, Trieste, Italy

Abstract
Large transformers are powerful architectures used for self-supervised data analysis
across various data types, including protein sequences, images, and text. In these
models, the semantic structure of the dataset emerges from a sequence of transformations between one representation and the next. We characterize the geometric
and statistical properties of these representations and how they change as we move
through the layers. By analyzing the intrinsic dimension (ID) and neighbor composition, we find that the representations evolve similarly in transformers trained on
protein language tasks and image reconstruction tasks. In the first layers, the data
manifold expands, becoming high-dimensional, and then contracts significantly in
the intermediate layers. In the last part of the model, the ID remains approximately
constant or forms a second shallow peak. We show that the semantic information of
the dataset is better expressed at the end of the first peak, and this phenomenon can
be observed across many models trained on diverse datasets. Based on our findings,
we point out an explicit strategy to identify, without supervision, the layers that
maximize semantic content: representations at intermediate layers corresponding
to a relative minimum of the ID profile are more suitable for downstream learning
tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has significantly changed the landscape of scientific research and technology advancements across multiple disciplines in recent years. A particular class of deep learning models,
transformers trained with self-supervision, combine high predictive performance and architectural
simplicity. These transformer models consist of a stack of identical self-attention blocks trained in a
self-supervised manner using masked language modeling (MLM) or auto-regressive objectives [1, 2].
It has been shown that the features learned by these models can be used to solve a wide range of
downstream tasks in natural language processing [3–5], biology [6–9], and computer vision [10–12].
Previous studies analyzing convolutional architectures have shown that data representations in deep
learning models undergo profound changes across the layers [13, 14]. In transformers, each module
maps the data into a representation, and it has already been observed that the organization of
representations in the last hidden layer can reflect abstract, domain-specific properties [10]. However,
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence: alessio.ansuini@areasciencepark.it, alberto.cazzaniga@areasciencepark.it

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

