Thinker: Learning to Plan and Act

Stephen Chung
University of Cambridge
mhc48@cam.ac.uk

Ivan Anokhin
Mila, Université de Montréal
ivan.anokhin@mila.quebec

David Krueger
University of Cambridge
dsk30@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose the Thinker algorithm, a novel approach that enables reinforcement
learning agents to autonomously interact with and utilize a learned world model.
The Thinker algorithm wraps the environment with a world model and introduces
new actions designed for interacting with the world model. These model-interaction
actions enable agents to perform planning by proposing alternative plans to the
world model before selecting a final action to execute in the environment. This
approach eliminates the need for handcrafted planning algorithms by enabling
the agent to learn how to plan autonomously and allows for easy interpretation of
the agent’s plan with visualization. We demonstrate the algorithm’s effectiveness
through experimental results in the game of Sokoban and the Atari 2600 benchmark,
where the Thinker algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance and competitive
results, respectively. Visualizations of agents trained with the Thinker algorithm
demonstrate that they have learned to plan effectively with the world model to
select better actions. Thinker is the first work showing that an RL agent can learn
to plan with a learned world model in complex environments.

1

Introduction

Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) has significantly enhanced sample efficiency and performance by employing world models, or simply models, to generate additional training data [1, 2],
provide better estimates of the gradient [3, 4], and facilitate planning [5]. Here, planning refers
to the process of interacting with the world model to inform the subsequent selection of actions.
Handcrafted planning algorithms, such as Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) [6], have achieved
remarkable success in recent years [7, 8, 5], underscoring the importance of planning.
However, a significant research gap persists in creating methods that enable an RL agent to learn
to plan [9], meaning to interact autonomously with a model, eliminating the need for handcrafted
planning algorithms. We suggest this shortfall stems from the inherent complexities of mastering
several skills concurrently required by planning: searching (exploring new potential plans), evaluating
(assessing plan quality), summarizing (contrasting different plans), and executing (implementing the
optimal plan). While a handcrafted planning algorithm can handle these tasks, they pose a significant
learning challenge for an RL agent that learns to plan. Introducing a learned world model further
complicates the issue, as predictions from the model might not be accurate.
To address these challenges, we introduce the Thinker algorithm, a novel approach that enables the
agent to interact with a learned model as an integral part of the environment. The Thinker algorithm
wraps a Markov Decision Process (MDP) with a learned model and introduces a new set of actions
that enable agents to interact with the model.1 The manner in which an agent uses a model is not
predetermined. In principle, an agent can learn various common planning algorithms, such as n-step
exhaustive search or MCTS, or ignore the model if planning is not beneficial. Importantly, we
1
Full code is available at https://github.com/stephen-chung-mh/thinker, which allows for using
the Thinker-augmented MDP with the same interface as OpenAI Gym [10].

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

