Failure-Aware Gaussian Process Optimization
with Regret Bounds

Shogo Iwazaki
MI-6 Ltd., Tokyo, Japan
iwazaki@mi-6.co.jp

Shion Takeno
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan
shion.takeno@riken.jp

Tomohiko Tanabe
MI-6 Ltd., Tokyo, Japan
tanabe@mi-6.co.jp

Mitsuru Irie
MI-6 Ltd., Tokyo, Japan
irie@mi-6.co.jp

Abstract
Real-world optimization problems often require black-box optimization with observation failure, where we can obtain the objective function value if we succeed,
otherwise, we can only obtain a fact of failure. Moreover, this failure region can
be complex by several latent constraints, whose number is also unknown. For this
problem, we propose a failure-aware Gaussian process upper confidence bound
(F-GP-UCB), which only requires a mild assumption for the observation failure that
an optimal solution lies on an interior of a feasible region. Furthermore, we show
that the number of successful observations grows linearly, by which we provide
the first regret upper bounds and the convergence of F-GP-UCB. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of F-GP-UCB in several benchmark functions, including the
simulation function motivated by material synthesis experiments.

1

Introduction

The effectiveness of optimization methods based on Gaussian process (GP) regression for expensiveto-evaluate black-box functions has been repeatedly shown in a wide range of real-world applications,
including robotics [34, 35], experimental design [14], and hyperparameter optimization [4, 41].
On the other hand, failure of the observation itself must often be considered. For example, in the
optimization of hyperparameters for a complicated physical model, the evaluation may crash for
some hyperparameters. Another example is materials development, in which experimental testing of
new materials can reveal that the synthesis procedure fails.
Therefore, this study considers the optimization of a black-box function f with a black-box deterministic failure function c : X → {0, 1}, where X is an input space. In this study, failure of observation
at the input x is represented as c(x) = 1, while the success of observation is represented as c(x) = 0.
Then, our optimization problem can be formulated as follows:
x∗ = arg max f (x) s.t. c(x) = 0,

(1)

x∈X

where the observation of f can be obtained only if c(x) = 0, but the observation cost is consumed
even if c(x) = 1. Hence, the goal is to efficiently identify the optimal point x∗ while considering the
observation failure.
One of the notable technical difficulties of problem (1) is how to handle the failure function c. To
model c, existing studies [32, 2] use the GP classification (GPC) model [38] or its variants, which
assume that c can be represented by a smooth latent function. However, the observation failure can
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

