R EALT IME QA: What’s the Answer Right Now?
♡∗

♣□∗

♣

♢

Jungo Kasai
Keisuke Sakaguchi
Yoichi Takahashi
Ronan Le Bras
♠
♥
♦
Akari Asai
Xinyan Velocity Yu
Dragomir Radev
♢♠
♢♠
△♣□
Noah A. Smith
Yejin Choi
Kentaro Inui
♡
♣
□
♢
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Tohoku University
RIKEN
Allen Institute for AI
♠
♥
♦
△
University of Washington
University of Southern California
Yale University
MBZUAI
realtimeqa.nlp@gmail.com

@realtimeqa

Abstract
We introduce R EALT IME QA, a dynamic question answering (QA) platform that
announces questions and evaluates systems on a regular basis (weekly in this
version). R EALT IME QA inquires about the current world, and QA systems need
to answer questions about novel events or information. It therefore challenges static,
conventional assumptions in open-domain QA datasets and pursues instantaneous
applications. We build strong baseline models upon large pretrained language
models, including GPT-3 and T5. Our benchmark is an ongoing effort, and this
paper presents real-time evaluation results over the past year. Our experimental
results show that GPT-3 can often properly update its generation results, based on
newly-retrieved documents, highlighting the importance of up-to-date information
retrieval. Nonetheless, we find that GPT-3 tends to return outdated answers when
retrieved documents do not provide sufficient information to find an answer. This
suggests an important avenue for future research: can an open-domain QA system
identify such unanswerable cases and communicate with the user or even the
retrieval module to modify the retrieval results? We hope that R EALT IME QA will
2
spur progress in instantaneous applications of question answering and beyond.

1

Introduction

How many home runs has Shohei Ohtani hit so far
this season? A user of a question answering (QA)
system might ask such time-sensitive questions and
seek out answers in real time. Widely-used evaluation benchmarks of QA systems, however, implicitly assume that answers are static regardless
of the time of inquiry. Several recent works (Jia
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2021; Zhang and Choi,
2021; Liška et al., 2022) challenged this assumption and proposed QA datasets that specify the temporal context (e.g., who was the President of the
U.S. in 1940?). We extend these recent efforts on
time-sensitive QA to fulfill real-time, more instantaneous information needs from users: we establish
∗
2

Work was done during JK’s internship at AI2.
https://realtimeqa.github.io/.

Q: How many home runs has Shohei Ohtani hit?
A: 24

Q: How many home runs has Shohei Ohtani hit?
A: 25

Figure 1: R EALT IME QA establishes a
framework to benchmark question answering at
the present time: answers (e.g., the number of
Shohei Ohtani’s home runs) change in real time.
Source: https://thecomeback.com/mlb/
shohei-ohtani-home-runs-tommy-john.
html.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

