CHAMMI: A benchmark for channel-adaptive models
in microscopy imaging

Zitong S. Chen∗
Broad Institute
Cambridge, MA

Chau Pham∗
Boston University
Boston, MA

Nikita Moshkov
Biological Research Centre
Szeged, Hungary

Siqi Wang
Boston University
Boston, MA

Bryan A. Plummer
Boston University
Boston, MA

Michael Doron
Broad Institute
Cambridge, MA

Juan C. Caicedo
Univ. of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI

Abstract
Most neural networks assume that input images have a fixed number of channels
(three for RGB images). However, there are many settings where the number of
channels may vary, such as microscopy images where the number of channels
changes depending on instruments and experimental goals. Yet, there has not
been a systemic attempt to create and evaluate neural networks that are invariant
to the number and type of channels. As a result, trained models remain specific
to individual studies and are hardly reusable for other microscopy settings. In
this paper, we present a benchmark for investigating channel-adaptive models in
microscopy imaging, which consists of 1) a dataset of varied-channel single-cell images, and 2) a biologically relevant evaluation framework. In addition, we adapted
several existing techniques to create channel-adaptive models and compared their
performance on this benchmark to fixed-channel, baseline models. We find that
channel-adaptive models can generalize better to out-of-domain tasks and can be
computationally efficient. We contribute a curated dataset1 and an evaluation API2
to facilitate objective comparisons in future research and applications.

1

Introduction

Microscopy images routinely enable a myriad of applications in experimental biology, including
tracking living cells, characterizing diseases, and estimating the effectiveness of treatments. The
analysis of microscopy images often requires quantitative methods that capture differences between
cellular conditions, e.g., differences between control and treated cells in a vaccine trial. To accomplish
effective cell-morphology quantification, deep learning has been adopted in problems such as cell
segmentation [1], sub-cellular protein localization [2], and compound bioactivity prediction [3].
Unlike natural images (stored in RGB format), microscopy images are often multiplexed and can span
a variety of specialized colors in different channels [4–6]. The number of channels in a microscopy
study is a choice made by biologists depending on various factors that include instrument capabilities
and experimental needs. There is no universal standard for acquiring images with a fixed set of
channels, and instead, novel imaging techniques push the limits with more and more fluorescent
markers measured simultaneously [7]. This flexibility increases the potential to observe specific
biological events, but poses practical challenges for established computer vision methods. For
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7988357
2
https://github.com/broadinstitute/MorphEm.git
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

