C LUSTER F ORMER: Clustering As
A Universal Visual Learner
James C. Liang
Rochester Institute of Technology
Tong Geng
University of Rochester

Yiming Cui
University of Florida

Wenguan Wang
Zhejiang University

Qifan Wang
Meta AI

Dongfang Liu∗
Rochester Institute of Technology

Abstract
This paper presents C LUSTER F ORMER, a universal vision model that is based on
the C LUSTERing paradigm with TransF ORMER. It comprises two novel designs: ①
recurrent cross-attention clustering, which reformulates the cross-attention mechanism in Transformer and enables recursive updates of cluster centers to facilitate
strong representation learning; and ② feature dispatching, which uses the updated
cluster centers to redistribute image features through similarity-based metrics, resulting in a transparent pipeline. This elegant design streamlines an explainable
and transferable workflow, capable of tackling heterogeneous vision tasks (i.e.,
image classification, object detection, and image segmentation) with varying levels
of clustering granularity (i.e., image-, box-, and pixel-level). Empirical results
demonstrate that C LUSTER F ORMER outperforms various well-known specialized
architectures, achieving 83.41% top-1 acc. over ImageNet-1K for image classification, 54.2% and 47.0% mAP over MS COCO for object detection and instance
segmentation, 52.4% mIoU over ADE20K for semantic segmentation, and 55.8%
PQ over COCO Panoptic for panoptic segmentation. For its efficacy, we hope our
work can catalyze a paradigm shift in universal models in computer vision.

1

Introduction

Computer vision has seen the
emergence of specialized solutions for different vision tasks
(e.g., ResNet [34] for image
C LUSTER F ORMER
classification, Faster RCNN [70]
for object detection, and Mask Figure 1: C LUSTER F ORMER is a clustering-based universal model,
RCNN [33] for instance segmenta- offering superior performance over various specialized architectures.
tion), aiming for superior performance. Nonetheless, neuroscience research [73, 65, 82, 5] has shown
that the human perceptual system exhibits exceptional interpretive capabilities for complex visual
stimuli, without task-specific constraints. This trait of human perceptual cognition diverges from
current computer vision techniques [95, 44, 46], which often employ diverse architectural designs.
Human vision possesses a unique attention mechanism that selectively focuses on relevant parts of
the visual field while disregarding irrelevant information [81, 40]. This can be likened to a clustering
approach [2, 3, 89], in which individual pixel points are decomposed and reorganized into relevant
concepts to address various tasks. This essentially is a hierarchical process that involves combining
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

