DeepACO: Neural-enhanced Ant Systems for
Combinatorial Optimization

Haoran Ye1 , Jiarui Wang1 , Zhiguang Cao2,* , Helan Liang1,* , Yong Li3
1
School of Computer Science & Technology, Soochow University
2
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
3
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
{hrye, jrwangfurffico}@stu.suda.edu.cn, zgcao@smu.edu.sg,
hlliang@suda.edu.cn, liyong07@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) is a meta-heuristic algorithm that has been successfully applied to various Combinatorial Optimization Problems (COPs). Traditionally, customizing ACO for a specific problem requires the expert design of
knowledge-driven heuristics. In this paper, we propose DeepACO, a generic framework that leverages deep reinforcement learning to automate heuristic designs.
DeepACO serves to strengthen the heuristic measures of existing ACO algorithms
and dispense with laborious manual design in future ACO applications. As a neuralenhanced meta-heuristic, DeepACO consistently outperforms its ACO counterparts
on eight COPs using a single neural model and a single set of hyperparameters. As
a Neural Combinatorial Optimization method, DeepACO performs better than or
on par with problem-specific methods on canonical routing problems. Our code is
publicly available at https://github.com/henry-yeh/DeepACO.

1

Introduction

Ant systems in nature are self-learners. They utilize chemical signals and environmental cues to
locate and return food to the colony. The pheromone trails deposited by ants indicate the quality
and distance of a food source. The intensity of pheromone trails increases as more ants visit and
decreases due to evaporation, creating a self-learning foraging system.
Inspired by the ant systems in nature, researchers propose and develop Ant Colony Optimization
(ACO) meta-heuristics for (but not limited to) Combinatorial Optimization Problems (COPs) [24, 26].
ACO deploys a population of artificial ants to explore the solution space through repeated solution
constructions and pheromone updates. The exploration is biased toward more promising areas through
instance-specific pheromone trails and problem-specific heuristic measures. Both the pheromone trail
and the heuristic measure indicate how promising a solution component is. Typically, pheromone
trails are initialized uniformly for all solution components and learned while solving an instance. On
the contrary, heuristic measures are predefined based on prior knowledge of a problem, and devising
proper heuristic measures for complicated COPs is quite challenging (an example is [49]).
Over the past decades, research and practice efforts have been dedicated to a careful design of
heuristic measures in pursuit of knowledge-driven performance enhancement [57, 62, 33, 49, 26, 24].
However, this routine of algorithm customization exhibits certain deficiencies: 1) it requires extra
effort and makes ACO less flexible; 2) the effectiveness of the heuristic measure heavily relies on
expert knowledge and manual tuning; and 3) designing a heuristic measure for less-studied problems
can be particularly challenging, given the paucity of available expert knowledge.
* Corresponding authors: Zhiguang Cao and Helan Liang.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

