Prototypical Variational Autoencoder
for Few-shot 3D Point Cloud Object Detection

Weiliang Tang*
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
wltang21@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Biqi Yang*
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
bqyang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Xianzhi Li
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
xzli@hust.edu.cn
Yunhui Liu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
yhliu@mae.cuhk.edu.hk

Pheng-Ann Heng
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
pheng@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Chi-Wing Fu
Department of CSE and SHIAE
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
cwfu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Few-Shot 3D Point Cloud Object Detection (FS3D) is a challenging task, aiming to
detect 3D objects of novel classes using only limited annotated samples for training.
Considering that the detection performance highly relies on the quality of the latent
features, we design a VAE-based prototype learning scheme, named prototypical
VAE (P-VAE), to learn a probabilistic latent space for enhancing the diversity and
distinctiveness of the sampled features. The network encodes a multi-center GMMlike posterior, in which each distribution centers at a prototype. For regularization,
P-VAE incorporates a reconstruction task to preserve geometric information. To
adopt P-VAE for the 3D object detection framework, we formulate Geometricinformative Prototypical VAE (GP-VAE) to handle varying geometric components
and Class-specific Prototypical VAE (CP-VAE) to handle varying object categories.
In the first stage, we harness GP-VAE to aid feature extraction from the input
scene. In the second stage, we cluster the geometric-informative features into
per-instance features and use CP-VAE to refine each instance feature with categorylevel guidance. Experimental results show the top performance of our approach
over the state of the arts on two FS3D benchmarks. Quantitative ablations and
qualitative prototype analysis further demonstrate that our probabilistic modeling
can significantly boost prototype learning for FS3D.

1

Introduction

3D point cloud object detection is a fundamental scene understanding task, aiming at recognizing and
localizing objects in point-based scenes. Recent deep-learning methods are mostly fully supervised,
requiring extensive labeled data to support the model training. Such a data-hungry setting is, however,
*

Equal contributions to the works. This work was supported by Shenzhen Portion of Shenzhen-Hong
Kong Science and Technology Innovation Cooperation Zone under HZQB-KCZYB-20200089. This work was
supported by the Hong Kong Centre for Logistics Robotics, the Research Grants Council-General Research
Fund (No. 14201620). This work was supported by InnoHK of the Government of Hong Kong via the Hong
Kong Centre for Logistics Robotics. This work was supported by project MMT-p2-21 of the Shun Hing Institute
of Advanced Engineering (SHIAE).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

