Balance Risk and Reward: A Batched-Bandit Strategy
for Automated Phased Release
Yufan Li1 ,

Jialiang Mao2 ,

Iavor Bojinov3

1
Harvard University 2 LinkedIn Corporation 3 Harvard Business School
yufan_li@g.harvard.edu, jimao@linkedin.com, ibojinov@hbs.com

Abstract
Phased releases are a common strategy in the technology industry for gradually
releasing new products or updates through a sequence of A/B tests in which the
number of treated units gradually grows until full deployment or deprecation.
Performing phased releases in a principled way requires selecting the proportion
of units assigned to the new release in a way that balances the risk of an adverse
effect with the need to iterate and learn from the experiment rapidly. In this paper,
we formalize this problem and propose an algorithm that automatically determines
the release percentage at each stage in the schedule, balancing the need to control
risk while maximizing ramp-up speed. Our framework models the challenge as a
constrained batched bandit problem that ensures that our pre-specified experimental
budget is not depleted with high probability. Our proposed algorithm leverages an
adaptive Bayesian approach in which the maximal number of units assigned to the
treatment is determined by the posterior distribution, ensuring that the probability
of depleting the remaining budget is low. Notably, our approach analytically solves
the ramp sizes by inverting probability bounds, eliminating the need for challenging
rare-event Monte Carlo simulation. It only requires computing means and variances
of outcome subsets, making it highly efficient and parallelizable.

1

Introduction

Phased release, also known as staged rollout, is a widely used strategy in the technology industry
that involves gradually releasing a new product or update to larger audiences over time [17, 30]. For
example, Apple’s App Store offers a phased release option where application updates are released
over a 7-day period on a fixed schedule [1]. Google Play Console provides a similar feature with more
flexibility in the release schedule [16]. Typically, the audiences are randomly selected at each stage
from the set of all customers, and so phased releases can be thought of as a sequence of A/B tests (or
randomized experiments) in which the proportion of units assigned to the treatment group changes
until either the product or update is fully launched or deprecated [26, 18, 3, 33, 6]. The process of
combining phased releases with A/B tests is often called controlled rollout or iterative experiments
and provides companies with an important mechanism to gather feedback on early product versions
[30, 20, 5].
The key advantage of phased release is its ability to mitigate risks associated with launching a new
product or update directly to all users. The potential impact of faulty features is limited by releasing
the update first to a small percentage of the users (i.e., the treatment group). However, this risk-averse
approach introduces an opportunity cost for slowly launching beneficial features, which quickly adds
up for companies that release thousands of features yearly [34]. Therefore, when designing a phased
release schedule, it is important to determine the release percentage (known as ramp schedule) at
each stage that balances the need to control risk while maximizing the speed of ramp-up. ‘ This
paper proposes an algorithm to address this challenge by automatically determining the release
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

