Free-Bloom: Zero-Shot Text-to-Video Generator
with LLM Director and LDM Animator
Hanzhuo Huang∗ Yufan Feng∗ Cheng Shi Lan Xu Jingyi Yu Sibei Yang†
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
https://github.com/SooLab/Free-Bloom

Abstract
Text-to-video is a rapidly growing research area that aims to generate a semantic,
identical, and temporal coherence sequence of frames that accurately align with
the input text prompt. This study focuses on zero-shot text-to-video generation
considering the data- and cost-efficient. To generate a semantic-coherent video,
exhibiting a rich portrayal of temporal semantics such as the whole process of
flower blooming rather than a set of “moving images”, we propose a novel FreeBloom pipeline that harnesses large language models (LLMs) as the director to
generate a semantic-coherence prompt sequence, while pre-trained latent diffusion
models (LDMs) as the animator to generate the high fidelity frames. Furthermore,
to ensure temporal and identical coherence while maintaining semantic coherence,
we propose a series of annotative modifications to adapting LDMs in the reverse
process, including joint noise sampling, step-aware attention shift, and dual-path
interpolation. Without any video data and training requirements, Free-Bloom
generates vivid and high-quality videos, awe-inspiring in generating complex
scenes with semantic meaningful frame sequences. In addition, Free-Bloom is
naturally compatible with LDMs-based extensions.

1

Introduction

Recent impressive breakthroughs [31, 33, 35] in text-to-image synthesis have been attained by
training diffusion models on large-scale multimodal datasets [37, 38] comprising billions of textimage pairs. The resulting images are unprecedentedly diverse and photo-realistic while maintaining
coherence with the input text prompt. Nevertheless, extending this idea to text-to-video generation
poses challenges as it requires substantial quantities of annotated text-video data and considerable
computational resources. Instead, recent studies [53, 19, 40, 28, 5, 49, 17] introduce adapting pretrained image diffusion models to the video domain in a data-efficient and cost-efficient manner,
showing promising potential in one-shot video generation and zero-shot video editing.
This work takes the study of zero-shot text-to-video generation further, enabling the generation
of diverse videos without the need for any video data. Instead of relying on a reference video for
generation or editing [19, 28, 5, 40], the proposed approach generates videos from scratch solely
conditioned on the text prompt. While a concurrent work, Text2Video-Zero [17], similarly focuses
on zero-shot video generation, our study and Text2Video-Zero differ significantly not only in terms
of technical contributions but also in motivation: we aim to generate complete videos that encompass
meaningful temporal variations, which distinguish it from the generation with “moving images”. As
shown in Figure 1, with the text prompt of “a flower is gradually blooming”, our approach generates
a video that thoroughly depicts the entire process, seamlessly progressing from a flower bud to the
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author. yangsb@shanghaitech.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

