A Path to Simpler Models Starts With Noise

Lesia Semenova Harry Chen Ronald Parr Cynthia Rudin
Department of Computer Science, Duke University
{lesia.semenova,harry.chen084,ronald.parr,cynthia.rudin}@duke.edu

Abstract
The Rashomon set is the set of models that perform approximately equally well
on a given dataset, and the Rashomon ratio is the fraction of all models in a
given hypothesis space that are in the Rashomon set. Rashomon ratios are often
large for tabular datasets in criminal justice, healthcare, lending, education, and
in other areas, which has practical implications about whether simpler models
can attain the same level of accuracy as more complex models. An open question
is why Rashomon ratios often tend to be large. In this work, we propose and
study a mechanism of the data generation process, coupled with choices usually
made by the analyst during the learning process, that determines the size of the
Rashomon ratio. Specifically, we demonstrate that noisier datasets lead to larger
Rashomon ratios through the way that practitioners train models. Additionally, we
introduce a measure called pattern diversity, which captures the average difference
in predictions between distinct classification patterns in the Rashomon set, and
motivate why it tends to increase with label noise. Our results explain a key aspect
of why simpler models often tend to perform as well as black box models on
complex, noisier datasets.

1

Introduction

It is possible that for many datasets, a simple predictive model can perform as well as the best black
box model – we simply have not found the simple model yet. Interestingly, however, we may be able
to infer whether such a simple model exists without finding it first, and we may be able to determine
conditions under which such simple models are likely to exist.
We already know that many datasets exhibit the “Rashomon effect” [7], which is that for many
real-world tabular datasets, many models can describe the data equally well. If there are many good
models, it is more likely that at least one of them is simple (e.g., sparse) [39]. Thus, a key question in
determining the existence of simpler models is to understand why and when the Rashomon effect
happens. This is a difficult question, and there has been little study of it. The literature on the
Rashomon effect has generally been more practical, showing either that the Rashomon effect often
exists in practice [39, 13, 45], showing how to compute or visualize the set of good models for a given
dataset [52, 14, 15, 1, 32, 53, 54, 48], or trying to reduce underspecification by learning a diverse
ensemble of models [25, 37]. However, no prior works have focused on understanding what causes
this phenomenon in the first place.
Our thesis is that noise is both a theoretical and practical motivator for the adoption of simpler models.
Specifically, in this work, we refer to noise in the generation process that determines the labels. In
noisy problems, the label is more difficult to predict. Data about humans, such as medical data or
criminal justice data, are often noisy because many things worth predicting (such as whether someone
will commit a crime within 2 years of release from prison, or whether someone will experience a
medical condition within the next year) have inherent randomness that is tied to random processes
in the world (Will the person get a new job? How will their genetics interact with their diet?). It
might sound intuitive that noisy data would lead to simpler models being useful, but this is not
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

