On Masked Pre-training and the Marginal Likelihood

Pablo Moreno-Muñoz
Section for Cognitive Systems
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
pabmo@dtu.dk

Pol G. Recasens∗
CROMAI , Barcelona Supercomputing Center
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC)

pol.garcia@bsc.es

Søren Hauberg
Section for Cognitive Systems
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
sohau@dtu.dk

Abstract
Masked pre-training removes random input dimensions and learns a model that
can predict the missing values. Empirical results indicate that this intuitive form of
self-supervised learning yields models that generalize very well to new domains. A
theoretical understanding is, however, lacking. This paper shows that masked pretraining with a suitable cumulative scoring function corresponds to maximizing the
model’s marginal likelihood, which is de facto the Bayesian model selection measure of generalization. Beyond shedding light on the success of masked pre-training,
this insight also suggests that Bayesian models can be trained with appropriately designed self-supervision. Empirically, we confirm the developed theory and explore
the main learning principles of masked pre-training in large language models.

1

Introduction

Masked pre-training (MPT) is a family of self-supervised learning methods (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020;
Devlin et al., 2018; Caron et al., 2021), that empirically has been demonstrated to result in models
that generalize very well to new settings. In essence, masked pre-training removes random features
of the data and learns a model to recover these from the remaining input. While empirical results
are impressive, a deeper understanding of why pre-trained models generalize so well is lacking. Is
it due to the use of transformer architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017), the vast over-parametrization
(Neyshabur et al., 2019), or something entirely different?
The marginal likelihood or evidence is commonly used as the measure of generalization ability in
Bayesian models (Tenenbaum and Griffiths, 2001; MacKay, 2003). While computationally expensive,
the blessing of the marginal likelihood comes from the probabilistic integration of hypotheses.
Whenever we are considering a latent variable model in the Bayesian framework, such integration
can be thought of as the average over all the possible latent variable mappings, weighted by our
prior beliefs. Since masked pre-training drives generalization so well, the lingering question in the
Bayesian modeling community is then: Is masked pre-training somehow related to the maximization
of the marginal likelihood?
In this paper, we provide a positive answer. We show that masked pre-training optimizes according
to a stochastic gradient of the log-marginal likelihood (LML). Importantly, the log-marginal likelihood
is equivalent to the cumulative sum of masked pre-training losses shaped with different sizes for the
random mask. Even if its practical use avoids this cumulative sum, we demonstrate that choosing a
∗

Work done during an Erasmus exchange in DTU (Denmark).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

