DESSERT: An Efficient Algorithm for Vector Set
Search with Vector Set Queries

Joshua Engels
ThirdAI
josh.adam.engels@gmail.com
Vihan Lakshman
ThirdAI
vihan@thirdai.com

Benjamin Coleman
ThirdAI
benjamin.ray.coleman@gmail.com

Anshumali Shrivastava
ThirdAI, Rice University
anshu@thirdai.com, anshumali@rice.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of vector set search with vector set queries. This task
is analogous to traditional near-neighbor search, with the exception that both
the query and each element in the collection are sets of vectors. We identify
this problem as a core subroutine for semantic search applications and find that
existing solutions are unacceptably slow. Towards this end, we present a new
approximate search algorithm, DESSERT (DESSERT Effeciently Searches Sets
of Embeddings via Retrieval Tables). DESSERT is a general tool with strong
theoretical guarantees and excellent empirical performance. When we integrate
DESSERT into ColBERT, a state-of-the-art semantic search model, we find a 2-5x
speedup on the MS MARCO and LoTTE retrieval benchmarks with minimal loss
in recall, underscoring the effectiveness and practical applicability of our proposal.

1

Introduction

Similarity search is a fundamental driver of performance for many high-profile machine learning
applications. Examples include web search [16], product recommendation [33], image search [21],
de-duplication of web indexes [29] and friend recommendation for social media networks [39]. In this
paper, we study a variation on the traditional vector search problem where the dataset D consists of a
collection of vector sets D = {S1 , ...SN } and the query Q is also a vector set. We call this problem
vector set search with vector set queries because both the collection elements and the query are sets
of vectors. Unlike traditional vector search, this problem currently lacks a satisfactory solution.
Furthermore, efficiently solving the vector set search problem has immediate practical implications.
Most notably, the popular ColBERT model, a state-of-the-art neural architecture for semantic search
over documents [23], achieves breakthrough performance on retrieval tasks by representing each
query and document as a set of BERT token embeddings. ColBERT’s current implementation of
vector set search over these document sets, while superior to brute force, is prohibitively slow for
real-time inference applications like e-commerce that enforce strict search latencies under 20-30
milliseconds [34, 5]. Thus, a more efficient algorithm for searching over sets of vectors would have
significant implications in making state-of-the-art semantic search methods feasible to deploy in
large-scale production settings, particularly on cost-effective CPU hardware.
Given ColBERT’s success in using vector sets to represent documents more accurately, and the
prevailing focus on traditional single-vector near-neighbor search in the literature [1, 41, 19, 12,
14, 28, 18], we believe that the potential for searching over sets of representations remains largely
untapped. An efficient algorithmic solution to this problem could enable new applications in domains
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

