A Spectral Algorithm for List-Decodable Covariance
Estimation in Relative Frobenius Norm
Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin–Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu
Jasper C.H. Lee
University of Wisconsin–Madison
jasper.lee@wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane
University of California, San Diego
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Ankit Pensia
IBM Research
ankitp@ibm.com

Thanasis Pittas
University of Wisconsin–Madison
pittas@wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of list-decodable Gaussian covariance estimation. Given a
multiset T of n points in Rd such that an unknown α < 1/2 fraction of points in T
are i.i.d. samples from an unknown Gaussian N (µ, Σ), the goal is to output a list of
O(1/α) hypotheses at least one of which is close to Σ in relative Frobenius norm.
Our main result is a poly(d, 1/α) sample and time algorithm for this task that
guarantees relative Frobenius norm error of poly(1/α). Importantly, our algorithm
relies purely on spectral techniques. As a corollary, we obtain an efficient spectral
algorithm for robust partial clustering of Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) — a
key ingredient in the recent work of [BDJKKV22] on robustly learning arbitrary
GMMs. Combined with the other components of [BDJKKV22], our new method
yields the first Sum-of-Squares-free algorithm for robustly learning GMMs, resolving an open problem proposed by Vempala [Vem22] and Kothari [Kot21]. At
the technical level, we develop a novel multi-filtering method for list-decodable
covariance estimation that may be useful in other settings.

1

Introduction

Robust statistics studies the efficient (parameter) learnability of an underlying distribution given
samples some fraction of which might be corrupted, perhaps arbitrarily. While the statistical theory
of these problems has been well-established for some time [Hub64; HR09], only recently has the algorithmic theory of such estimation problems begun to be understood [DKKLMS16; LRV16; DK23].
A classical problem in robust estimation is that of multivariate robust mean estimation — that is,
estimating the mean of an unknown distribution in the presence of a small constant fraction of
outliers. One of the original results in the field is that given samples from a Gaussian N (µ, I) with an
ϵ-fraction
p of outliers (for some ϵ < 1/2), the unknown mean µ can be efficiently estimated to an error
of O(ϵ log 1/ϵ) in the ℓ2 -norm [DKKLMS16]. Note that the use of the ℓ2 -norm here is quite natural,
as the total variation distance between two identity-covariance Gaussians is roughly proportional to
the ℓ2 -distance between their
pmeans; thus, this estimator learns the underlying distribution to total
variation distance error O(ϵ log 1/ϵ). This bound cannot be substantially improved, as learning to
error o(ϵ) in total variation distance is information-theoretically impossible.
While the above algorithmic result works when ϵ is small (less than 1/2), if more than half of the
samples are corrupted, it becomes impossible to learn with only a single returned hypothesis—the
corruption might simply simulate other Gaussians, and no algorithm can identify which Gaussian
is the original one. This issue can be circumvented using the list-decodable mean estimation
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

