State-Action Similarity-Based Representations for
Off-Policy Evaluation

Brahma S. Pavse and Josiah P. Hanna
University of Wisconsin – Madison
pavse@wisc.edu, jphanna@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, off-policy evaluation (OPE) is the problem of estimating
the expected return of an evaluation policy given a fixed dataset that was collected
by running one or more different policies. One of the more empirically successful
algorithms for OPE has been the fitted q-evaluation (FQE) algorithm that uses
temporal difference updates to learn an action-value function, which is then used to
estimate the expected return of the evaluation policy. Typically, the original fixed
dataset is fed directly into FQE to learn the action-value function of the evaluation
policy. Instead, in this paper, we seek to enhance the data-efficiency of FQE by
first transforming the fixed dataset using a learned encoder, and then feeding the
transformed dataset into FQE. To learn such an encoder, we introduce an OPEtailored state-action behavioral similarity metric, and use this metric and the fixed
dataset to learn an encoder that models this metric. Theoretically, we show that this
metric allows us to bound the error in the resulting OPE estimate. Empirically, we
show that other state-action similarity metrics lead to representations that cannot
represent the action-value function of the evaluation policy, and that our stateaction representation method boosts the data-efficiency of FQE and lowers OPE
error relative to other OPE-based representation learning methods on challenging
OPE tasks. We also empirically show that the learned representations significantly
mitigate divergence of FQE under varying distribution shifts. Our code is available
here: https://github.com/Badger-RL/ROPE.

1

Introduction

In real life applications of reinforcement learning, practitioners often wish to assess the performance
of a learned policy before allowing it to make decisions with real life consequences [Theocharous
et al., 2015]. That is, they want to be able to evaluate the performance of a policy without actually
deploying it. One approach of accomplishing this goal is to apply methods for off-policy evaluation
(OPE). OPE methods evaluate the performance of a given evaluation policy using a fixed offline
dataset previously collected by one or more policies that may be different from the evaluation policy.
One of the core challenges in OPE is that the offline datasets may have limited size. In this situation,
it is often critical that OPE algorithms are data-efficient. That is, they are able produce accurate
estimates of the evaluation policy value even when only small amounts of data are available. In this
paper, we seek to enhance the data-efficiency of OPE methods through representation learning. While
prior works have studied representation learning for OPE, they have mostly considered representations
that induce guaranteed convergent learning without considering whether data-efficiency increases
[Chang et al., 2022, Wang et al., 2021]. For example, Chang et al. [2022] introduce a method for
learning Bellman complete representations for FQE but empirically find that having such a learned
representation provides little benefit compared to FQE without the learned representation. Thus, in
this work we ask the question, "can explicit representation learning lead to more data-efficient OPE?"
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

