Block-State Transformers
Jonathan Pilault124∗ Mahan Fathi123∗
Orhan Firat
Christopher Pal24 Pierre-Luc Bacon23 Ross Goroshin1
1
Google DeepMind 2 Mila 3 Université de Montréal 4 Polytechnique Montréal
1

Abstract
State space models (SSMs) have shown impressive results on tasks that require
modeling long-range dependencies and efficiently scale to long sequences owing to
their subquadratic runtime complexity. Originally designed for continuous signals,
SSMs have shown superior performance on a plethora of tasks, in vision and audio;
however, SSMs still lag Transformer performance in Language Modeling tasks. In
this work, we propose a hybrid layer named Block-State Transformer (BST), that
internally combines an SSM sublayer for long-range contextualization, and a Block
Transformer sublayer for short-term representation of sequences. We study three
different, and completely parallelizable, variants that integrate SSMs and blockwise attention. We show that our model outperforms similar Transformer-based
architectures on language modeling perplexity and generalizes to longer sequences.
In addition, the Block-State Transformer demonstrates more than tenfold increase
in speed at the layer level compared to the Block-Recurrent Transformer when
model parallelization is employed.

1

Introduction

Transformers have shown impressive performance on a wide range of natural language processing
(NLP) tasks. While they have been primarily used for language modeling the Transformer architecture
[40] has also been successfully applied to other tasks outside of the NLP and have mostly replaced
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). Several factors contribute to this success, including computational efficiency and architectural inductive biases that are well-suited for training on natural language
tasks at scale. On the computational upside, Transformers are able to process tokens of a given
input sequence in parallel, making the most of modern accelerator hardware. Moreover, the attention
mechanism enables Transformers to find relationships in longer sequences by providing ready access
to all the extracted information from past tokens when inferring the next token. Compared to RNNs
and LSTMs [19], the benefits of self-attention are two-fold: (i) the capacity of what could be stored
and directly accessible as context is drastically increased, and (ii) training on longer sequences is
more stable [18, 23].
Given the remarkable achievements of Transformers in language modeling tasks, and their improved
performance at scale on hard NLP tasks such as reasoning and question answering [2, 39, 6], the
demand for deploying even deeper and larger networks is greater than ever before. An orthogonal
scaling dimension, which could be potentially even more consequential, is the size of the input
sequence. Despite the several advantages of Transformers over RNNs, it is still problematic to scale
the input sequence length, again for both computational performance and quality reasons. Further, the
Transformer’s runtime is quadratic with respect to the input sequence length, which makes training
these models increasingly expensive. Furthermore, Transformers with attention, that is local [8],
sparse [4, 43, 36], low-rank approximated [41] or linearized via kernel methods [5, 22], notoriously
struggle on long-input classification tasks [37]. Vanilla transformers can be unstable when trained
∗

Equal Contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

