Fed-CO2: Cooperation of Online and Offline Models
for Severe Data Heterogeneity in Federated Learning

Zhongyi Cai
ShanghaiTech University
caizhy@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Wei Huang
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
wei.huang.vr@riken.jp

Ye Shi ∗
ShanghaiTech University
shiye@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Jingya Wang
ShanghaiTech University
wangjingya@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a promising distributed learning paradigm
that enables multiple clients to learn a global model collaboratively without sharing
their private data. However, the effectiveness of FL is highly dependent on the
quality of the data that is being used for training. In particular, data heterogeneity
issues, such as label distribution skew and feature skew, can significantly impact the
performance of FL. Previous studies in FL have primarily focused on addressing
label distribution skew data heterogeneity, while only a few recent works have made
initial progress in tackling feature skew issues. Notably, these two forms of data
heterogeneity have been studied separately and have not been well explored within
a unified FL framework. To address this gap, we propose Fed-CO2 , a universal
FL framework that handles both label distribution skew and feature skew within
a Cooperation mechanism between the Online and Offline models. Specifically,
the online model learns general knowledge that is shared among all clients, while
the offline model is trained locally to learn the specialized knowledge of each
individual client. To further enhance model cooperation in the presence of feature
shifts, we design an intra-client knowledge transfer mechanism that reinforces
mutual learning between the online and offline models, and an inter-client knowledge transfer mechanism to increase the models’ domain generalization ability.
Extensive experiments show that our Fed-CO2 outperforms a wide range of existing
personalized federated learning algorithms in terms of handling label distribution
skew and feature skew, both individually and collectively. The empirical results are
supported by our convergence analyses in a simplified setting.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [1, 2] is a distributed learning framework that involves collaboratively
training a global model with multiple clients while ensuring privacy protection. The pioneering work
FedAvg [2] learns the global model by aggregating the local client models and obtains satisfactory
performance when the client data are independently and identically distributed (IID). However, when
the data are heterogeneous and non-IID among clients, performance with the global model can
degrade substantially [3, 4]. Common data heterogeneity issues include label distribution skew and
feature skew. Clients experiencing label distribution skew exhibit varying class distributions within
the same domain, while clients encountering feature skew maintain consistent class distributions
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

