Environment-Aware Dynamic Graph Learning for
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Haonan Yuan1,2 , Qingyun Sun1,2∗, Xingcheng Fu3 , Ziwei Zhang4 , Cheng Ji1,2 ,
Hao Peng1 , Jianxin Li1,2
1
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
3
Key Lab of Education Blockchain and Intelligent Technology, Guangxi Normal University
4
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
{yuanhn,sunqy,jicheng,penghao,lijx}@buaa.edu.cn
fuxc@gxnu.edu.cn, zwzhang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Dynamic graph neural networks (DGNNs) are increasingly pervasive in exploiting
spatio-temporal patterns on dynamic graphs. However, existing works fail to
generalize under distribution shifts, which are common in real-world scenarios.
As the generation of dynamic graphs is heavily influenced by latent environments,
investigating their impacts on the out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization is
critical. However, it remains unexplored with the following two major challenges:
(1) How to properly model and infer the complex environments on dynamic graphs
with distribution shifts? (2) How to discover invariant patterns given inferred
spatio-temporal environments? To solve these challenges, we propose a novel
Environment-Aware dynamic Graph LEarning (EAGLE) framework for OOD
generalization by modeling complex coupled environments and exploiting spatiotemporal invariant patterns. Specifically, we first design the environment-aware EADGNN to model environments by multi-channel environments disentangling. Then,
we propose an environment instantiation mechanism for environment diversification
with inferred distributions. Finally, we discriminate spatio-temporal invariant
patterns for out-of-distribution prediction by the invariant pattern recognition
mechanism and perform fine-grained causal interventions node-wisely with a
mixture of instantiated environment samples. Experiments on real-world and
synthetic dynamic graph datasets demonstrate the superiority of our method against
state-of-the-art baselines under distribution shifts. To the best of our knowledge, we
are the first to study OOD generalization on dynamic graphs from the environment
learning perspective.

1

Introduction

Dynamic graphs are ubiquitous in the real world, like social networks [6, 25], financial transaction
networks [61, 93], traffic networks [47, 97, 96], etc., where the graph topology evolves as time passes.
Due to their complexity in both spatial and temporal correlation patterns, wide-ranging applications
such as relation prediction [39, 68], anomaly detection [10, 69], etc. are rather challenging. With excellent expressive power, dynamic graph neural networks (DGNNs) achieve outstanding performance
in dynamic graph representation learning by combining the merits of graph neural network (GNN)
based models and sequential-based models.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

