Similarity, Compression and Local Steps: Three
Pillars of Efficient Communications for Distributed
Variational Inequalities
Aleksandr Beznosikov
Innopolis University, Skoltech, MIPT, Yandex

Martin Takáč
MBZUAI

Alexander Gasnikov
MIPT, Skoltech, IITP RAS

Abstract
Variational inequalities are a broad and flexible class of problems that includes
minimization, saddle point, and fixed point problems as special cases. Therefore,
variational inequalities are used in various applications ranging from equilibrium
search to adversarial learning. With the increasing size of data and models, today’s instances demand parallel and distributed computing for real-world machine
learning problems, most of which can be represented as variational inequalities.
Meanwhile, most distributed approaches have a significant bottleneck – the cost
of communications. The three main techniques to reduce the total number of
communication rounds and the cost of one such round are the similarity of local functions, compression of transmitted information, and local updates. In this
paper, we combine all these approaches. Such a triple synergy did not exist before for variational inequalities and saddle problems, nor even for minimization
problems. The methods presented in this paper have the best theoretical guarantees of communication complexity and are significantly ahead of other methods
for distributed variational inequalities. The theoretical results are confirmed by
adversarial learning experiments on synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Variational Inequalities (VI) have a rather long history of research. Their first applications were
the equilibrium problems in economics and game theory [72, 34, 29]. Variational inequalities were
seen as a universal paradigm, involving other attractive problems, including minimization, Saddle
Point Problems (SPP), fixed point problems, and others. Whereas research for minimization was
actively developed separately, research for saddle point problems was often coupled with science’s
development around variational inequalities. This trend continues even now. This is partly related to
the fact that the methods for minimization problems are not always suitable for SPP and VI. Moreover,
from the theoretical point of view, these methods give relatively poor or even zero guarantees of
convergence. Therefore a separate branch of algorithms has been developed for VI and SPP. Such
methods include, e.g. Extra Gradient [50, 71, 42], Tseng’s method [84] and many others [14].
Over time, VI found new applications, e.g. in signal processing [77]. In the last decade, they also
attracted the interest of the machine learning community. Nowadays, VI and SPP are used in various
aspects of machine learning. For example, there are many applications for the already classical
learning tasks in supervised learning (with non-separable loss [40]; with non-separable regularizer
[6]), unsupervised learning (discriminative clustering [89]; matrix factorization [7]), image denoising
[28, 17], robust optimization [10]. It turns out that VI can be also linked with modern areas of
learning science, including reinforcement learning [73, 39], adversarial training [62], and GANs
[31, 23, 30, 67, 20, 57, 74] to name a few.
Machine learning’s rapid development offers more possibilities for consumers, but poses challenges
for engineers. To meet modern society’s demands, the performance and generalization capacity of
the model must be improved. This is currently done by increasing training data and model size [5].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

