SparseProp: Efficient Event-Based Simulation and
Training of Sparse Recurrent Spiking Neural
Networks
Rainer Engelken
Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute, Columbia University, New York, USA
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, Göttingen, Germany
Göttingen Campus Institute for Dynamics of Biological Networks, Göttingen, Germany
re2365@columbia.edu

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are biologically-inspired models that are capable
of processing information in streams of action potentials. However, simulating and
training SNNs is computationally expensive due to the need to solve large systems
of coupled differential equations. In this paper, we introduce SparseProp, a novel
event-based algorithm for simulating and training sparse SNNs. Our algorithm
reduces the computational cost of both the forward and backward pass operations
from O(N) to O(log(N)) per network spike, thereby enabling numerically exact simulations of large spiking networks and their efficient training using backpropagation
through time. By leveraging the sparsity of the network, SparseProp eliminates
the need to iterate through all neurons at each spike, employing efficient state
updates instead. We demonstrate the efficacy of SparseProp across several classical
integrate-and-fire neuron models, including a simulation of a sparse SNN with one
million LIF neurons. This results in a speed-up exceeding four orders of magnitude
relative to previous event-based implementations. Our work provides an efficient
and exact solution for training large-scale spiking neural networks and opens up
new possibilities for building more sophisticated brain-inspired models.

1

Introduction

The cortex processes information via streams of action potentials - commonly referred to as spikes
- that propagate within and between layers of recurrent neural networks. Spiking neural networks
(SNNs) provide a more biologically plausible description of neuronal activity, capturing in contrast
to rate networks membrane potentials and temporal sequences of spikes. Moreover, SNNs promise
solutions to the high energy consumption and CO2 emissions of deep networks [1, 2], as well as the
ability to transmit information through precise spike timing [3, 4, 5].
Unlike commonly used iterative ODE solvers that necessitate time discretization, event-based simulations resolve neural network dynamics precisely between spike events. This approach ensures
machine-level precision in simulations, thereby alleviating the necessity for verification of result
robustness with respect to time step size ∆t and mitigating numerical issues, for instance in the
vicinity of synchronous regimes [6]. However, a major drawback of event-based simulations is the
computational cost of iterating through all neurons at every network spike time.
To tackle this challenge, we introduce SparseProp, an novel event-based algorithm designed for simulating and training sparse SNNs. Our algorithm reduces the computational cost of both the forward
and backward pass from O(N ) to O(log(N )) per network spike. This efficiency enables numerically
exact simulations of large spiking networks and their efficient training using backpropagation through
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

