Django: Detecting Trojans in Object Detection Models
via Gaussian Focus Calibration
Guangyu Shen∗
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
shen447@purdue.edu

Siyuan Cheng∗
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
cheng535@purdue.edu

Guanhong Tao
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
taog@purdue.edu

Kaiyuan Zhang
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
zhan4057@purdue.edu

Yingqi Liu
Microsoft
Redmond, Washington 98052
yingqiliu@microsoft.com

Shengwei An
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
an93@purdue.edu

Shiqing Ma
University of Massachusetts at Amherst
Amherst, MA, 01003
shiqingma@umass.edu

Xiangyu Zhang
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
xyzhang@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract
Object detection models are vulnerable to backdoor or trojan attacks, where an
attacker can inject malicious triggers into the model, leading to altered behavior
during inference. As a defense mechanism, trigger inversion leverages optimization
to reverse-engineer triggers and identify compromised models. While existing
trigger inversion methods assume that each instance from the support set is equally
affected by the injected trigger, we observe that the poison effect can vary significantly across bounding boxes in object detection models due to its dense prediction
nature, leading to an undesired optimization objective misalignment issue for existing trigger reverse-engineering methods. To address this challenge, we propose
the first object detection backdoor detection framework Django (Detecting Trojans
in Object Detection Models via Gaussian Focus Calibration). It leverages a dynamic Gaussian weighting scheme that prioritizes more vulnerable victim boxes
and assigns appropriate coefficients to calibrate the optimization objective during
trigger inversion. In addition, we combine Django with a novel label proposal
pre-processing technique to enhance its efficiency. We evaluate Django on 3 object
detection image datasets, 3 model architectures, and 2 types of attacks, with a
total of 168 models. Our experimental results show that Django outperforms 6
state-of-the-art baselines, with up to 38% accuracy improvement and 10x reduced
overhead. The code is available at https://github.com/PurduePAML/DJGO.

1

Introduction

Object detection is an extensively studied computer vision application that aims to identify multiple
objects in a given image. It has been widely integrated into various real-world systems, including
public surveillance [51], autonomous driving [14, 25], optical character recognition (OCR)[41], etc.
*

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

