Differentiable sorting for censored time-to-event data.

Andre Vauvelle12∗, Benjamin Wild3∗, Roland Eils3 , Spiros Denaxas1
University College London1 , BenevolentAI2 , Berlin Institute of Health3
{andre.vauvelle.19,s.denaxas}@ucl.ac.uk
{benjamin.wild, roland.eils}@bih-charite.de

Abstract
Survival analysis is a crucial semi-supervised task in machine learning with significant real-world applications, especially in healthcare. The most common approach
to survival analysis, Cox’s partial likelihood, can be interpreted as a ranking model
optimized on a lower bound of the concordance index. We follow these connections further, with listwise ranking losses that allow for a relaxation of the pairwise
independence assumption. Given the inherent transitivity of ranking, we explore
differentiable sorting networks as a means to introduce a stronger transitive inductive bias during optimization. Despite their potential, current differentiable
sorting methods cannot account for censoring, a crucial aspect of many real-world
datasets. We propose a novel method, Diffsurv, to overcome this limitation by
extending differentiable sorting methods to handle censored tasks. Diffsurv predicts matrices of possible permutations that accommodate the label uncertainty
introduced by censored samples. Our experiments reveal that Diffsurv outperforms
established baselines in various simulated and real-world risk prediction scenarios.
Furthermore, we demonstrate the algorithmic advantages of Diffsurv by presenting
a novel method for top-k risk prediction that surpasses current methods. In conclusion, Diffsurv not only provides a novel framework for survival analysis through
differentiable sorting, but also significantly impacts real-world applications by improving risk stratification and offering a methodological foundation for developing
predictive models in healthcare and beyond.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

21

22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

1

Introduction

Survival analysis plays a pivotal role in many realworld machine learning applications, spanning
fields such as reliability engineering, marketing, and insurance, with a particularly significant impact
in healthcare. The goal of survival analysis is to predict the time until the occurrence of an event of
interest, such as death, based on a set of covariates. In clinical studies, these include demographic
variables such as sex and age, but may also encompass more complex data modalities such as medical
images.
The concept of censoring is a distinguishing characteristic that sets survival analysis apart from
conventional machine learning approaches. Particularly prevalent in observational datasets, it refers
to situations where event times remain unobserved because a patient might not have undergone the
event by the time of data collection. This can be due to a variety of reasons such as the study period
ending before all events of interest have occurred or subjects leaving the study.
Overlooking censoring can skew predictions towards the censoring event, rather than the event of
interest. This bias becomes particularly noticeable when the study’s endpoint can be inferred from the
observed covariates - age being a notable example. In such cases, the predicted event times are likely
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

