A Trichotomy for Transductive Online Learning

Steve Hanneke
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Shay Moran
Faculty of Mathematics,
Faculty of Computer Science, and
Faculty of Data and Decision Sciences
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
smoran@technion.ac.il

Jonathan Shafer
Computer Science Division
UC Berkeley
shaferjo@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present new upper and lower bounds on the number of learner mistakes in
the ‘transductive’ online learning setting of Ben-David, Kushilevitz and Mansour
(1997). This setting is similar to standard online learning, except that the adversary
fixes a sequence of instances x1 , . . . , xn to be labeled at the start of the game, and
this sequence is known to the learner. Qualitatively, we prove a trichotomy, stating
that the minimal number of mistakes made by the learner as n grows can take only
one of precisely three possible values: n, Θ (log(n)), or Θ(1). Furthermore, this
behavior is determined by a combination of the VC dimension and the Littlestone
dimension. Quantitatively, we show a variety of bounds relating the number of
mistakes to well-known combinatorial dimensions. In particular,
we improve
p

the known lower bound on the constant in the Θ(1) case from Ω
log(d) to
Ω(log(d)) where d is the Littlestone dimension. Finally, we extend our results to
cover multiclass classification and the agnostic setting.

1

Introduction

In classification tasks like PAC learning and online learning, the learner simultaneously confronts
two distinct types of uncertainty: labeling-related uncertainty regarding the best labeling function,
and instance-related uncertainty regarding the instances that the learner will be required to classify in
the future. To gain insight into the role played by each type of uncertainty, researchers have studied
modified classification tasks in which the learner faces only one type of uncertainty, while the other
type has been removed.
In the context of PAC learning, [BB11] studied a variant of proper PAC learning in which the true
labeling function is known to the learner, and only the distribution over the instances is not known.
They show bounds on the sample complexity in this setting, which conceptually quantify the instancerelated uncertainty. Conversely, labeling-related uncertainty is captured by PAC learning with respect
to a fixed (e.g., uniform) domain distribution [BI91], a setting which has been studied extensively.
In this paper we improve upon the work of [BKM97], who quantified the label-related uncertainty in
online learning. They introduced a model of transductive online learning,1 in which the adversary
1

[BKM97] call their model ‘off-line learning with the worst sequence’, but in this paper we opt
for ‘transductive online learning’, a name that has appeared in a number of publications, including
[KK05, Pec08, CS13, SKS16]. We remark there are at least two different variants referred to in the litera37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

