A Computation and Communication Efficient Method
for Distributed Nonconvex Problems
in the Partial Participation Setting

Alexander Tyurin
KAUST
Saudi Arabia
alexandertiurin@gmail.com

Peter Richtárik
KAUST
Saudi Arabia
richtarik@gmail.com

Abstract
We present a new method that includes three key components of distributed optimization and federated learning: variance reduction of stochastic gradients, partial
participation, and compressed communication. We prove that the new method has
optimal oracle complexity and state-of-the-art communication complexity in the
partial participation setting. Regardless of the communication compression feature,
our method successfully combines variance reduction and partial participation: we
get the optimal oracle complexity, never need the participation of all nodes, and do
not require the bounded gradients (dissimilarity) assumption.

1

Introduction

Federated and distributed learning have become very popular in recent years (Konečný et al., 2016;
McMahan et al., 2017). The current optimization tasks require much computational resources and
machines. Such requirements emerge in machine learning, where massive datasets and computations
are distributed between cluster nodes (Lin et al., 2017; Ramesh et al., 2021). In federated learning,
nodes, represented by mobile phones, laptops, and desktops, do not send their data to a server due to
privacy and their huge number (Ramaswamy et al., 2019), and the server remotely orchestrates the
nodes and communicates with them to solve an optimization problem.
As in classical optimization tasks, one of the main current challenges is to find computationally
efficient optimization algorithms. However, the nature of distributed problems induces many other
(Kairouz et al., 2021), including i) partial participation of nodes in algorithm steps: due to stragglers
(Li et al., 2020) or communication delays (Vogels et al., 2021), ii) communication bottleneck: even
if a node participates, it can be costly to transmit information to a server or other nodes (Alistarh
et al., 2017; Ramesh et al., 2021; Kairouz et al., 2021; Sapio et al., 2019; Narayanan et al., 2019). It
is necessary to develop a method that considers these problems.

2

Optimization Problem

Let us consider the nonconvex distributed optimization problem
(
)
n
1X
min f (x) :=
fi (x) ,
n i=1
x∈Rd

(1)

where fi : Rd → R is a smooth nonconvex function for all i ∈ [n] := {1, . . . , n}. The full
information about function fi is stored on ith node. The communication between nodes is maintained
in the parameters server fashion (Kairouz et al., 2021): we have a server that receives compressed
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

