Necessary and Sufficient Conditions for Optimal
Decision Trees using Dynamic Programming

Jacobus G. M. van der Linden
Mathijs M. de Weerdt
Emir Demirović
Delft University of Technology, Department of Computer Science
{J.G.M.vanderLinden, M.M.deWeerdt, E.Demirovic}@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Global optimization of decision trees has shown to be promising in terms of
accuracy, size, and consequently human comprehensibility. However, many of the
methods used rely on general-purpose solvers for which scalability remains an issue.
Dynamic programming methods have been shown to scale much better because they
exploit the tree structure by solving subtrees as independent subproblems. However,
this only works when an objective can be optimized separately for subtrees. We
explore this relationship in detail and show the necessary and sufficient conditions
for such separability and generalize previous dynamic programming approaches
into a framework that can optimize any combination of separable objectives and
constraints. Experiments on five application domains show the general applicability
of this framework, while outperforming the scalability of general-purpose solvers
by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Many high-stake domains, such as medical diagnosis, parole decisions, housing appointments,
and hiring procedures, require human-comprehensible machine learning (ML) models to ensure
transparency, safety, and reliability [74]. Decision trees offer such human comprehensibility, provided
the trees are small [71]. This motivates the search for optimal decision trees, i.e., trees that globally
optimize an objective for a given maximum size.
The aforementioned application domains wildly differ from one another, and therefore the objective
and constraints also differ, leading to a variety of tasks: e.g., cost-sensitive classification for medical
diagnosis [32, 82]; prescriptive policy generation for revenue maximization [13]; or ensuring fairness
constraints are met [1]. For broad-scale application of optimal decision trees, we need methods
that can generalize to incorporate objectives and constraints such as the ones from these application
domains, while remaining scalable to real-world problem sizes.
However, many state-of-the-art methods for optimal decision trees lack the required scalability, for example, to optimize datasets with more than several thousands of instances or to find
optimal trees beyond depth three. This includes approaches such as mixed-integer programming (MIP) [10, 86], constraint programming (CP) [84], boolean satisfiability (SAT) [42] or maximum
satisfiability (MaxSAT) [34].
Dynamic programming (DP) approaches show scalability that is orders of magnitude better [3, 20, 52]
by directly exploiting the tree structure. Each problem is solved by a recursive step that involves two
subproblems, each just half the size of the original problem. Additional techniques such as bounding
and caching are used to further enhance performance.
However, unlike general-purpose solvers, such as MIP, DP cannot trivially adapt to the variety of
objectives and constraints mentioned before. For DP to work efficiently, it must be possible to solve
the optimization task at hand separately for every subtree.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

