NICE: NoIse-modulated Consistency rEgularization
for Data-Efficient GANs

†

Yao Ni† , Piotr Koniusz∗,§,†
The Australian National University § Data61 CSIRO
†
firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are powerful tools for image synthesis.
However, they require access to vast amounts of training data, which is often costly
and prohibitive. Limited data affects GANs, leading to discriminator overfitting
and training instability. In this paper, we present a novel approach called NoIsemodulated Consistency rEgularization (NICE) to overcome these challenges. To
this end, we introduce an adaptive multiplicative noise into the discriminator to
modulate its latent features. We demonstrate the effectiveness of such a modulation
in preventing discriminator overfitting by adaptively reducing the Rademacher
complexity of the discriminator. However, this modulation leads to an unintended
consequence of increased gradient norm, which can undermine the stability of
GAN training. To mitigate this undesirable effect, we impose a constraint on
the discriminator, ensuring its consistency for the same inputs under different
noise modulations. The constraint effectively penalizes the first and second-order
gradients of latent features, enhancing GAN stability. Experimental evidence aligns
with our theoretical analysis, demonstrating the reduction of generalization error
and gradient penalization of NICE. This substantiates the efficacy of NICE in
reducing discriminator overfitting and improving stability of GAN training. NICE
achieves state-of-the-art results on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, ImageNet and FFHQ
datasets when trained with limited data, as well as in low-shot generation tasks.

1

Introduction

The remarkable advancements and breakthroughs in deep learning [31] can be largely attributed
to the extensive utilization of vast amounts of training data. This abundance of data has driven
the progress across various domains of deep learning. Among notable recent advancements are
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [13], popular in industry and academia. GANs have proven
their high-quality image generation abilities and achieved high generation speeds [47], establishing
them as a versatile tool for a wide range of applications, such as text-to-image generation [20, 47, 55],
destylization [48, 49, 50], image-to-image translation [27, 44], and 3D generation [52, 53, 65].
Despite the impressive capabilities of state-of-the-art GANs in generating diverse and high-quality
images [7, 25], their effectiveness heavily relies on large volumes of training data. The acquisition of
such large datasets helps GANs attain the desired adversarial equilibrium. However, under limited
training data regime, GANs encounter challenges associated with discriminator overfitting and
unstable training [22, 68, 57, 11, 17].
To address the aforementioned challenges, recent studies have approached the problem from three
perspectives. The first perspective involves the utilization of extensive differentiable data augmentation techniques, aimed at expanding the distribution of the available data [22, 68, 17, 32, 63, 64, 69].
The second perspective leverages knowledge gained from large-scale models trained on large datasets
[9, 70, 29]. While these approaches are effective, they also carry inherent risks, such as the leakage
of augmentation clues [64, 22, 40] or pre-trained knowledge [30].
∗

The corresponding author.

Code: https://github.com/MaxwellYaoNi/NICE

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

