Expressive probabilistic sampling in recurrent neural
networks
Shirui Chen∗
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Washington, Seattle
sc256@uw.edu

Linxing Preston Jiang
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
& Engineering
University of Washington, Seattle
prestonj@cs.washington.edu

Rajesh P. N. Rao
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
& Engineering and Center for Neurotechnology
University of Washington, Seattle
rao@cs.washington.edu

Eric Shea-Brown
Department of Applied Mathematics
Computational Neuroscience Center
University of Washington, Seattle
etsb@uw.edu

Abstract
In sampling-based Bayesian models of brain function, neural activities are assumed
to be samples from probability distributions that the brain uses for probabilistic
computation. However, a comprehensive understanding of how mechanistic models
of neural dynamics can sample from arbitrary distributions is still lacking. We
use tools from functional analysis and stochastic differential equations to explore
the minimum architectural requirements for recurrent neural circuits to sample
from complex distributions. We first consider the traditional sampling model
consisting of a network of neurons whose outputs directly represent the samples
(sampler-only network). We argue that synaptic current and firing-rate dynamics in
the traditional model have limited capacity to sample from a complex probability
distribution. We show that the firing rate dynamics of a recurrent neural circuit with
a separate set of output units can sample from an arbitrary probability distribution.
We call such circuits reservoir-sampler networks (RSNs). We propose an efficient
training procedure based on denoising score matching that finds recurrent and
output weights such that the RSN implements Langevin sampling. We empirically
demonstrate our model’s ability to sample from several complex data distributions
using the proposed neural dynamics and discuss its applicability to developing the
next generation of sampling-based Bayesian brain models.

1

Introduction

There is growing evidence that humans and other animals make decisions by representing uncertainty
internally and carrying out probabilistic computations that approximate Bayesian inference [42, 30,
18, 23, 34]. How networks of neurons in the brain represent probability distributions for Bayesian
inference has remained a major open question. There exist two major theories: one assumes that the
neural activities encode the parameters of the underlying posterior distributions over sensory stimuli
[5, 35, 52]. The other is the sampling-based hypothesis, which assumes that the neural responses can
be interpreted as samples from a posterior distribution [28]. Under this hypothesis, recurrent neural
circuits make use of their inherent stochasticity to produce samples from posterior distributions. The
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

