Constraint-Conditioned Policy Optimization
for Versatile Safe Reinforcement Learning
Yihang Yao⇤1 , Zuxin Liu⇤1 , Zhepeng Cen1 , Jiacheng Zhu1,3 ,
Wenhao Yu2 , Tingnan Zhang2 , Ding Zhao1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Google DeepMind, 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
⇤
Equal contribution, {yihangya, zuxinl}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Safe reinforcement learning (RL) focuses on training reward-maximizing agents
subject to pre-defined safety constraints. Yet, learning versatile safe policies that
can adapt to varying safety constraint requirements during deployment without retraining remains a largely unexplored and challenging area. In this work, we formulate the versatile safe RL problem and consider two primary requirements: training
efficiency and zero-shot adaptation capability. To address them, we introduce the
Constraint-Conditioned Policy Optimization (CCPO) framework, consisting of two
key modules: (1) Versatile Value Estimation (VVE) for approximating value functions under unseen threshold conditions, and (2) Conditioned Variational Inference
(CVI) for encoding arbitrary constraint thresholds during policy optimization. Our
extensive experiments demonstrate that CCPO outperforms the baselines in terms
of safety and task performance, while preserving zero-shot adaptation capabilities
to different constraint thresholds data-efficiently. This makes our approach suitable
for real-world dynamic applications.

1

Introduction

Safe reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a promising approach to address the challenges
faced by agents operating in complex, real-world environments [1], such as autonomous driving [2],
home service [3], and UAV locomotion [4]. Safe RL aims to learn a reward-maximizing policy within
a constrained policy set [5–10]. By explicitly accounting for safety constraints during policy learning,
agents can better reason about the trade-off between task performance and safety constraints, making
them well-suited for safety-critic applications [11].
Despite the advances in safe RL, the development of a versatile policy that can adapt to varying safety
constraint requirements during deployment without retraining remains a largely unexplored area.
Investigating versatile safe RL is crucial due to the inherent trade-off between task reward and safety
requirement [12, 13]: stricter constraints typically lead to more conservative behavior and lower task
rewards. For example, an autonomous vehicle can adapt to different thresholds for driving on an
empty highway and crowded urban area to maximize transportation efficiency. Consequently, learning
a versatile policy allows agents to efficiently adapt to diverse constraint conditions, enhancing their
applicability and effectiveness in real-world scenarios [14].
This paper studies the problem of training a versatile safe RL policy capable of adapting to tasks with
different cost thresholds. The primary challenges are two-fold:
(1) Training efficiency. A straightforward approach is to train multiple policies under different
constraint thresholds, then the agent can switch between policies for different safety requirements.
However, this method is sampling inefficient, making it unsuitable for most practical applications, as
the agent may only collect data under a limited number of thresholds during training.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

