Exploiting Correlated Auxiliary Feedback in
Parameterized Bandits
Arun Verma
Zhongxiang Dai
Yao Shu
Bryan Kian Hsiang Low
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
{arun, daizhongxiang, shuyao, lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We study a novel variant of the parameterized bandits problem in which the learner
can observe additional auxiliary feedback that is correlated with the observed
reward. The auxiliary feedback is readily available in many real-life applications,
e.g., an online platform that wants to recommend the best-rated services to its users
can observe the user’s rating of service (rewards) and collect additional information
like service delivery time (auxiliary feedback). In this paper, we first develop
a method that exploits auxiliary feedback to build a reward estimator with tight
confidence bounds, leading to a smaller regret. We then characterize the regret
reduction in terms of the correlation coefficient between reward and its auxiliary
feedback. Experimental results in different settings also verify the performance
gain achieved by our proposed method.

1

Introduction

Parameterized bandits (Slivkins, 2019; Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020) have many real-life
applications in online recommendation, advertising, web search, and e-commerce. In this bandit
problem, a learner selects an action and receives a reward for the selected action. Due to the large (or
infinite) number of actions, the mean reward of each action is assumed to be parameterized by an
unknown function, e.g., linear (Li et al., 2010; Chu et al., 2011; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Agrawal
and Goyal, 2013), GLM (Filippi et al., 2010; Li et al., 2017; Jun et al., 2017), and non-linear (Valko
et al., 2013; Chowdhury and Gopalan, 2017). The learner aims to learn the best action as quickly
as possible. However, it depends on the tightness of confidence bounds of function that correlate
action with the reward. The learner exploits any available information like side information (i.e.,
information available to the learner before selecting an action, e.g., contexts) (Li et al., 2010; Agrawal
and Goyal, 2013; Li et al., 2017) and side observations (i.e., information about other actions, e.g.,
graph feedback) (Alon et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2015) to make confidence bounds as tight as possible.
This paper considers another type of additional information (correlated with the reward) that a learner
can observe with reward for the selected action, which we call auxiliary feedback.
The auxiliary feedback is readily available in many real-life applications. For example, consider an
online food delivery platform that wishes to recommend the best restaurants (actions) to its users.
After receiving food, the platform observes user ratings (rewards) for the order and can collect
additional information like food delivery time (auxiliary feedback). Since the restaurant’s rating
also depends on overall food delivery time, one can expect it to be correlated with the user rating.
The platform can estimate or know the average delivery time for a given order from historical data.
Similar scenarios arise in recommending the best cab to users (auxiliary information can be the
cab’s distance from the rider or driver’s response to ride request), e-commerce platforms choosing
top sellers to buyers (auxiliary information can be seller’s response time for order confirmation and
delivery), queuing network (Lavenberg and Welch, 1981; Lavenberg et al., 1982), jobs scheduler
(Verma and Hanawal, 2021), and many more. Therefore, the following question naturally arises:
How to exploit correlated auxiliary feedback to improve the performance of a bandit algorithm?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

