Characterization of Overfitting in Robust Multiclass
Classification
Jingyuan Xu
Weiwei Liu∗
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University
{jingyuanxu777,liuweiwei863}@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper considers the following question: Given the number of classes m, the
number of robust accuracy queries k, and the number of test examples in the dataset
n, how much can adaptive algorithms robustly overfit the test dataset? We solve
this problem by equivalently giving near-matching upper and lower bounds of the
robust overfitting bias in multiclass classification problems.

1

Introduction

Learning models that are robust to adversarial perturbations has garnered significant research attention
in recent years. However, despite this progress, a pervasive issue continues to plague these models,
namely robust overfitting [1]. A common approach to overcome overfitting is to divide the dataset
into a training set, and a holdout (or test) set. Nonetheless, modern machine learning is adaptive
in its nature. Prior information about a model’s performance on the test set inevitably influences
future modeling choices in extensive experiments and competitions. Recent studies have shown that
excessive reuse of the holdout dataset can also leads to overfitting in non-robust setting [2, 3], and a
body of subsequent work has quantitatively explored this phenomenon in the framework of perfect
test label reconstruction [4, 5, 6]. Accordingly, in this paper we attempt to address the following
questions: Can adaptive behavior result in overfitting in an adversarial setting? If so, by how much
can adaptive algorithms robustly overfit the test dataset?
To solve these questions, we generalize the framework of perfect reconstruction to the adversarial
setting, and analyze the average case performance that can be achieved by an adaptive algorithm,
denoted as hU (k, n, m), where k, n, m represents the number of robust accuracy queries, test samples
and classes, respectively. This term equivalently measures the maximum level of robust overfitting in a multiclass classification problem. In this paper, we derive both upper and lower bounds
of hU (k, n, m), and demonstrate that our upper bounds and lower bounds are matching within
logarithmic factors when n and the distribution of test dataset features DX are fixed.
1.1

Related works

Perfect test label reconstruction. The question of perfect test label reconstruction in non-robust
setting dates back to decades ago [7, 8, 9]. The developments on studying biasing results due to
adaptive reuse of the test data start with the work of [4, 10], which broadly fall in the field of adaptive
data analysis [11, 12]. [5] first pose the problem of characterizing the overfitting bias as a function of
k, n, m, but they fail to give upper and lower bounds on the same order of m, which is left as an open
∗

Correspondence to: Weiwei Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

