FD-Align: Feature Discrimination Alignment for
Fine-tuning Pre-Trained Models in Few-Shot Learning

Kun Song1

Huimin Ma1,† Bochao Zou1

Huishuai Zhang3

Weiran Huang2,†

1

2

SCCE, University of Science and Technology Beijing
Qing Yuan Research Institute, SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Microsoft Research Asia

songkun@xs.ustb.edu.cn, {mhmpub, zoubochao}@ustb.edu.cn, huzhang@microsoft.com, weiran.huang@outlook.com

Abstract
Due to the limited availability of data, existing few-shot learning methods trained
from scratch fail to achieve satisfactory performance. In contrast, large-scale
pre-trained models such as CLIP demonstrate remarkable few-shot and zero-shot
capabilities. To enhance the performance of pre-trained models for downstream
tasks, fine-tuning the model on downstream data is frequently necessary. However,
fine-tuning the pre-trained model leads to a decrease in its generalizability in
the presence of distribution shift, while the limited number of samples in fewshot learning makes the model highly susceptible to overfitting. Consequently,
existing methods for fine-tuning few-shot learning primarily focus on fine-tuning
the model’s classification head or introducing additional structure. In this paper,
we introduce a fine-tuning approach termed Feature Discrimination Alignment
(FD-Align). Our method aims to bolster the model’s generalizability by preserving
the consistency of spurious features across the fine-tuning process. Extensive
experimental results validate the efficacy of our approach for both ID and OOD
tasks. Once fine-tuned, the model can seamlessly integrate with existing methods,
leading to performance improvements. Our code could be found in https://
github.com/skingorz/FD-Align.

1

Introduction

The Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training model (CLIP) [1] represents a groundbreaking development in multi-modal deep learning. By utilizing contrastive learning, CLIP aligns visual and textual
representations within a unified embedding space, and exhibits superior performance in a variety of
downstream tasks, including image classification [2, 3], detection [4], and segmentation [5, 6], which
is typically done by fully fine-tuning CLIP using downstream data. However, in many real-world
scenarios, there is often an insufficient amount of labeled data available. Thus, fully fine-tuning will
lead to overfitting and significantly diminishing the model performance.
To mitigate this few-shot challenge, we consider using a proxy dataset correlated to the downstream
target dataset for fine-tuning CLIP, aiming to obtain a model that can efficiently generalize to the
few-shot target task. Directly fully fine-tuning CLIP on the proxy dataset is not feasible, as the finetuned model may overfit to the proxy data or have worse out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization [7],
limiting its performance on the target task. As an example illustrated in Figure 1, the fully fine-tuned
CLIP tends to focus more on local regions and less on the foreground compared to the original CLIP.
†

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

