LART: Neural Correspondence Learning with Latent
Regularization Transformer for 3D Motion Transfer

Haoyu Chen1 Hao Tang2,3 Radu Timofte2,4 Luc Van Gool2,5,6 Guoying Zhao1∗
1
CMVS, University of Oulu 2 Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich
3
Carnegie Mellon University 4 University of Wurzburg 5 ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven
6
INSAIT, Sofia Un. St. Kliment Ohridski
chen.haoyu@oulu.fi, hao.tang@vision.ee.ethz.ch, radu.timofte@uni-wuerzburg.de
vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch, guoying.zhao@oulu.fi

Abstract
3D motion transfer aims at transferring the motion from a dynamic input sequence
to a static 3D object and outputs an identical motion of the target with high-fidelity
and realistic visual effects. In this work, we propose a novel 3D Transformer framework called LART for 3D motion transfer. With carefully-designed architectures,
LART is able to implicitly learn the correspondence via a flexible geometry perception. Thus, unlike other existing methods, LART does not require any key point
annotations or pre-defined correspondence between the motion source and target
meshes and can also handle large-size full-detailed unseen 3D targets. Besides,
we introduce a novel latent metric regularization on the Transformer for better
motion generation. Our rationale lies in the observation that the decoded motions
can be approximately expressed as linearly geometric distortion at the frame level.
The metric preservation of motions could be translated to the formation of linear
paths in the underlying latent space as a rigorous constraint to control the synthetic
motions occurring in the construction of the latent space. The proposed LART
shows a high learning efficiency with the need for a few samples from the AMASS
dataset to generate motions with plausible visual effects. The experimental results
verify the potential of our generative model in applications of motion transfer,
content generation, temporal interpolation, and motion denoising. The code is
made available: https://github.com/mikecheninoulu/LART.
Driving motion

Unseen target

+

Generated results

=

Figure 1: Given as driving mesh sequences with random-ordered vertices, our learned LART could
transfer the motion from the driving sequences to the unseen 3D targets without any further finetuning. Here we connect the points based on the vertex order to verify that our LART does not need
the pre-defined correspondence, which is vertex-order invariant. Samples are from the AMASS
dataset [21].
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

