Structured Federated Learning through
Clustered Additive Modeling

1

Jie MA1 , Tianyi Zhou2 , Guodong Long1 , Jing Jiang1 , Chengqi Zhang1
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney
2
University of Maryland
jie.ma-5@student.uts.edu.au, tianyi@umd.au
{guodong.long, jing.jiang, chengqi.zhang}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Heterogeneous federated learning without assuming any structure is challenging
due to the conflicts among non-identical data distributions of clients. In practice,
clients often comprise near-homogeneous clusters so training a server-side model
per cluster mitigates the conflicts. However, FL with client clustering often suffers
from “clustering collapse”, i.e., one cluster’s model excels on increasing clients,
and reduces to single-model FL. Moreover, cluster-wise models hinder knowledge
sharing between clusters and each model depends on fewer clients. Furthermore,
the static clustering assumption on data may not hold for dynamically changing
models, which are sensitive to cluster imbalance/initialization or outliers. To address these challenges, we propose “Clustered Additive Modeling (CAM)”, which
applies a globally shared model Θg on top of the cluster-wise models Θ1:K , i.e.,
y = h(x; Θg )+f (x; Θk ) for clients of cluster-k. The global model captures the features shared by all clusters so Θ1:K are enforced to focus on the difference among
clusters. To train CAM, we develop a novel Fed-CAM algorithm that alternates between client clustering and training global/cluster models to predict the residual of
each other. We can easily modify any existing clustered FL methods by CAM and
significantly improve their performance without “clustering collapse” in different
non-IID settings. We also provide a convergence analysis of Fed-CAM algorithm.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) trains a global model over distributed clients and enforces data localization,
i.e., data only stay local for model training at the client side while the server periodically averages
client models’ weights to update a global model and broadcast it to all clients. When the local data
distributions are identical across clients, one global model suffices to serve all clients [1] However,
non-identical distributions across clients (i.e., statistical heterogeneity) [2] are more common in
practical FL scenarios, which leads to conflicts between the global objective and local ones. Instead
of applying one model to all the m clients, an ideal case for non-IID settings would be training
a local model per client without any interference from others. However, the local data are usually
insufficient so a global model trained on heterogeneous clients exploiting all their data can still be
helpful to local training. Hence, non-IID FL methods [3–5] usually struggle to find a sweet spot
between the global consensus and local personalization. Without any assumptions on the structure
among clients, all clients’ distributions can be equally different from each other so a global model
is impacted by the conflicts of all clients and may provide limited guidance to their local training.
Clustered Federated Learning. That being said, non-IID clients in practice usually have rich
structures that have not been explored by most existing FL methods. A common structure is clusters,
i.e., heterogeneous clients can be grouped into several near-homogeneous clusters each composed of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

