Uncertainty Quantification via Neural Posterior
Principal Components

Elias Nehme
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
seliasne@campus.technion.ac.il

Omer Yair
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
omeryair@campus.technion.ac.il

Tomer Michaeli
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification is crucial for the deployment of image restoration models
in safety-critical domains, like autonomous driving and biological imaging. To date,
methods for uncertainty visualization have mainly focused on per-pixel estimates.
Yet, a heatmap of per-pixel variances is typically of little practical use, as it does
not capture the strong correlations between pixels. A more natural measure of
uncertainty corresponds to the variances along the principal components (PCs) of
the posterior distribution. Theoretically, the PCs can be computed by applying PCA
on samples generated from a conditional generative model for the input image.
However, this requires generating a very large number of samples at test time,
which is painfully slow with the current state-of-the-art (diffusion) models. In this
work, we present a method for predicting the PCs of the posterior distribution for
any input image, in a single forward pass of a neural network. Our method can
either wrap around a pre-trained model that was trained to minimize the mean
square error (MSE), or can be trained from scratch to output both a predicted image
and the posterior PCs. We showcase our method on multiple inverse problems
in imaging, including denoising, inpainting, super-resolution, colorization, and
biological image-to-image translation. Our method reliably conveys instanceadaptive uncertainty directions, achieving uncertainty quantification comparable
with posterior samplers while being orders of magnitude faster. Code and examples
are available on our webpage.

1

Introduction

Reliable uncertainty quantification is central to making informed decisions when using predictive
models. This is especially important in domains with high stakes such as autonomous cars and
biological/medical imaging, where based on visual data, the system is asked to provide predictions
that could influence human life. In such domains, communicating predictive uncertainty becomes
a necessity. In the particular case of image-to-image inverse problems, efficient visualization of
predictive uncertainty is required. For example, in biological and medical image-to-image translation
[7, 35, 37, 38], the predicted image as a whole is supposed to inform a scientific discovery or
affect the diagnosis of a patient. Hence, an effective form of uncertainty to consider in this case is
semantically-coordinated pixel variations that could alter the output image.
Currently, the majority of existing methods handle uncertainty in image-valued inverse problems
by factorizing the output posterior into per-pixel marginals, in which case the strong correlations
between pixels are completely ignored. This leads to per-pixel uncertainty estimates in the form
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

