Understanding Deep Gradient Leakage via Inversion
Influence Functions
Haobo Zhang∗
Michigan State University
zhan2060@msu.edu

Junyuan Hong∗
Michigan State University
University of Texas at Austin
jyhong@utexas.edu

Mehrdad Mahdavi
Pennsylvania State University
mahdavi@cse.psu.edu

Yuyang Deng
Pennsylvania State University
yzd82@psu.edu

Jiayu Zhou
Michigan State University
jiayuz@msu.edu

Abstract
Deep Gradient Leakage (DGL) is a highly effective attack that recovers private
training images from gradient vectors. This attack casts significant privacy challenges on distributed learning from clients with sensitive data, where clients are
required to share gradients. Defending against such attacks requires but lacks
an understanding of when and how privacy leakage happens, mostly because
of the black-box nature of deep networks. In this paper, we propose a novel
Inversion Influence Function (I2 F) that establishes a closed-form connection between the recovered images and the private gradients by implicitly solving the
DGL problem. Compared to directly solving DGL, I2 F is scalable for analyzing deep networks, requiring only oracle access to gradients and Jacobian-vector
products. We empirically demonstrate that I2 F effectively approximated the DGL
generally on different model architectures, datasets, modalities, attack implementations, and perturbation-based defenses. With this novel tool, we provide
insights into effective gradient perturbation directions, the unfairness of privacy
protection, and privacy-preferred model initialization. Our codes are provided in
https://github.com/illidanlab/inversion-influence-function.

1

Introduction

With the growing demands for more data and distributed computation resources, distributed learning
gains its popularity in training large models from massive and distributed data sources (McMahan
et al., 2017; Gemulla et al., 2011). While most distributed learning requires participating clients to
share only gradients or equivalents and provides data confidentiality, adversaries can exploit such
information to infer training data. Deep Gradient Leakage (DGL) showed such a real-world risk
in distributed learning of deep networks (Zhu et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2021). Only given a private
gradient and the corresponding model parameters, DGL reverse-engineers the gradient and recovers
the private images with high quality. The astonishing success of the DGL started an intensive race
between privacy defenders (Sun et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2021; Scheliga et al., 2022)
and attackers (Geiping et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2021; Jeon et al., 2021; Zhu and
Blaschko, 2021; Fowl et al., 2022).
A crucial question to be answered behind the adversarial game is when and how DGL happens,
understanding of which is fundamental for designing attacks and defenses. Recent advances in
* Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

