L-CAD: Language-based Colorization
with Any-level Descriptions using Diffusion Priors

Zheng Chang#1 Shuchen Weng#2,3 Peixuan Zhang1 Yu Li4 Si Li∗1 Boxin Shi2,3
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology
School of Computer Science, Peking University
4
International Digital Economy Academy
{zhengchang98,pxzhang,lisi}@bupt.edu.cn
{shuchenweng, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn
liyu@idea.edu.cn

Abstract
Language-based colorization produces plausible and visually pleasing colors under
the guidance of user-friendly natural language descriptions. Previous methods
implicitly assume that users provide comprehensive color descriptions for most
of the objects in the image, which leads to suboptimal performance. In this paper,
we propose a unified model to perform language-based colorization with anylevel descriptions. We leverage the pretrained cross-modality generative model
for its robust language understanding and rich color priors to handle the inherent
ambiguity of any-level descriptions. We further design modules to align with
input conditions to preserve local spatial structures and prevent the ghosting effect.
With the proposed novel sampling strategy, our model achieves instance-aware
colorization in diverse and complex scenarios. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate our advantages of effectively handling any-level descriptions and
outperforming both language-based and automatic colorization methods. The code
and pretrained models are available at: https://github.com/changzheng123/L-CAD.

1

Introduction

Image colorization is a challenging task that involves converting grayscale images into plausible
and visually pleasing colorful ones. Language-based colorization approaches (e.g., [5, 6, 27]) use
natural language descriptions as guidance to produce more controllable colorized images. These
methods cater to users’ specific requests, enabling them to provide more specific and nuanced color
preferences. As automatic colorization (e.g., [39, 44, 52]) often encounters color ambiguity for
common objects (e.g., flower colors), language-based colorization has shown promising results in
producing high-quality and customizable colorized images with user-friendly input.
While language-based colorization methods have improved the consistency between language descriptions and colorization results through feature fusion [7, 27], decoupling color-object space [5, 45],
and aggregating similar patches [6], they implicitly assume that users provide comprehensive color
descriptions for most of the objects in the image. This assumption often leads to suboptimal performance, especially for objects without corresponding color descriptions. Furthermore, we have
observed that users commonly assign colors only to their objects of interest.
# Equal contribution. * Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

