Learning to Discover Skills through Guidance

Hyunseung Kim∗ ,1 Byungkun Lee∗,1 Hojoon Lee1
Dongyoon Hwang1 Sejik Park1 Kyushik Min2 Jaegul Choo1
1
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST. 2 KAKAO Corp.
{mynsng, byungkun.lee, joonleesky,
godnpeter, sejik.park, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr
queue.min@kakaocorp.com

Abstract
In the field of unsupervised skill discovery (USD), a major challenge is limited
exploration, primarily due to substantial penalties when skills deviate from their
initial trajectories. To enhance exploration, recent methodologies employ auxiliary
rewards to maximize the epistemic uncertainty or entropy of states. However,
we have identified that the effectiveness of these rewards declines as the environmental complexity rises. Therefore, we present a novel USD algorithm, skill
discovery with guidance (DISCO-DANCE), which (1) selects the guide skill
that possesses the highest potential to reach unexplored states, (2) guides other
skills to follow guide skill, then (3) the guided skills are dispersed to maximize
their discriminability in unexplored states. Empirical evaluation demonstrates
that DISCO-DANCE outperforms other USD baselines in challenging environments, including two navigation benchmarks and a continuous control benchmark. Qualitative visualizations and code of DISCO-DANCE are available at
https://mynsng.github.io/discodance/.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has shown remarkable success in a wide range of complex
tasks, from playing video games [28, 49] to complex robotic manipulation [4, 14]. However, the
majority of DRL models are designed to train from scratch for each different task, resulting in
significant inefficiencies. Furthermore, reward functions adopted for training the agents are generally
handcrafted, acting as an impediment that prevents DRL from scaling for real-world tasks. For these
reasons, there has been an increasing interest in training task-agnostic policies without access to a predefined reward function. One approach that has been widely studied for achieving this is unsupervised
skill discovery (USD), which is a training paradigm that aims to acquire diverse and discriminable
behaviors, referred to as skills [7, 11, 13, 17, 22, 25, 47, 52, 32, 20, 46]. These pre-trained skills can
be utilized as useful primitives or directly employed to solve various downstream tasks.
Most of the previous studies in USD discover a set of diverse and discriminable skills by maximizing
the self-supervised, intrinsic motivation as a form of reward [1, 11, 13, 17, 47]. Commonly, mutual
information (MI) between the skill’s latent variables and the states reached by each skill is utilized as
the self-supervised reward. However, it has been shown in recent research that solely maximizing
the sum of MI rewards is insufficient in exploring the state space because, asymptotically, the agent
receives larger rewards for visiting known states rather than for exploring novel states due to the high
MI reward it receives at a fully discriminable state [7, 25, 52, 20].
To ameliorate this issue, recent studies designed an auxiliary exploration reward that incentivizes the
agent when it succeeds in visiting novel states [52, 24, 25]. However, albeit provided these auxiliary
∗

Equal contributions.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

