SLM: A Smoothed First-Order Lagrangian Method
for Structured Constrained Nonconvex Optimization

Songtao Lu
IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
songtao@ibm.com

Abstract
Functional constrained optimization (FCO) has emerged as a powerful tool for
solving various machine learning problems. However, with the rapid increase in
applications of neural networks in recent years, it has become apparent that both
the objective and constraints often involve nonconvex functions, which poses significant challenges in obtaining high-quality solutions. In this work, we focus on
a class of nonconvex FCO problems with nonconvex constraints, where the two
optimization variables are nonlinearly coupled in the inequality constraint. Leveraging the primal-dual optimization framework, we propose a smoothed first-order
Lagrangian method (SLM) for solving this class of problems. We establish the
theoretical convergence guarantees of SLM to the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT)
solutions through quantifying dual error bounds. By establishing connections between this structured FCO and equilibrium-constrained nonconvex problems (also
known as bilevel optimization), we apply the proposed SLM to tackle bilevel optimization oriented problems where the lower-level problem is nonconvex. Numerical results obtained from both toy examples and hyper-data cleaning problems
demonstrate the superiority of SLM compared to benchmark methods.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider a structured constrained optimization framework that has broad applications in diverse machine learning problems. The goal of this problem is to minimize the objective
function using two blocks of optimization variables which are coupled in the functional constraint.
More formally, we express this class of nonlinear constrained programming problems as follows:
min f (x, y),

x∈X ,y

s.t.

g(x, y) − g ∗ (x) ≤ δ

(1)

where feasible set X is convex and compact, the objective function f (x, y) is smooth and nonconvex, constraint g(x, y) is smooth and nonconvex and it also satisfies the Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PŁ)
condition with respect to (w.r.t.) y, g ∗ (x) , miny g(x, y) (which is also called value function [1])
is obtained by minimizing g(x, y) over y, and constant δ > 0.
When δ = 0, problem (1) reduces to the classic bilevel optimization (BO) problem (aka mathematical programs with equilibrium constraints [2]). More specifically, it takes the form of
min f (x, y),

x∈X ,y

s.t.

y ∈ S(x) , arg min
g(x, y ′ ),
′
y

(2)

where f (x, y) and g(x, y ′ ) denote the upper-level (UL) and lower-level (LL) objective functions,
S(x) represents the set that contains the global optimal solutions of the LL problem w.r.t. the blocky ′ . This BO formulation has been shown to be a useful framework for modeling various multi-task
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

