Exploring Loss Functions for Time-based Training
Strategy in Spiking Neural Networks

Yaoyu Zhu
School of Computer Science
Peking University
Beijing, China 100871
yaoyu.zhu@pku.edu.cn

Wei Fang
School of Computer Science
Peking University
Beijing, China 100871
fwei@pku.edu.cn

Xiaodong Xie
School of Computer Science
Peking University
Beijing, China 100871
donxie@pku.edu.cn

Tiejun Huang
School of Computer Science
Peking University
Beijing, China 100871
tjhuang@pku.edu.cn

Zhaofei Yu ∗
Institute for Artificial Intelligence
Peking University
Beijing, China 100871
yuzf12@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are considered promising brain-inspired energyefficient models due to their event-driven computing paradigm. The spatiotemporal
spike patterns used to convey information in SNNs consist of both rate coding
and temporal coding, where the temporal coding is crucial to biological-plausible
learning rules such as spike-timing-dependent-plasticity. The time-based training
strategy is proposed to better utilize the temporal information in SNNs and learn
in an asynchronous fashion. However, some recent works train SNNs by the timebased scheme with rate-coding-dominated loss functions. In this paper, we first
map rate-based loss functions to time-based counterparts and explain why they are
also applicable to the time-based training scheme. After that, we infer that loss
functions providing adequate positive overall gradients help training by theoretical
analysis. Based on this, we propose the enhanced counting loss to replace the
commonly used mean square counting loss. In addition, we transfer the training of
scale factor in weight standardization into thresholds. Experiments show that our
approach outperforms previous time-based training methods in most datasets. Our
work provides insights for training SNNs with time-based schemes and offers a
fresh perspective on the correlation between rate coding and temporal coding. Our
code is available at https://github.com/zhuyaoyu/SNN-temporal-training-losses.

1

Introduction

Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) have achieved remarkable progress in various fields, such as
computer vision [23], natural language processing [58], and reinforcement learning [51]. Compared
with the conventional non-spiking ANNs, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) exhibit a greater level of
biological plausibility [65] and achieve significantly improved energy efficiency on neuromorphic
chips [9, 17, 37, 44, 49]. The benefit of SNNs on computation cost and power consumption originates
from their event-driven nature to a large extent [47].
ANNs use real values to encode the state of a neuron. This encoding scheme is similar to the firing
rate of a biological neuron. Inspired by this encoding scheme, researchers have applied ANN-SNN
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

