Learning to Influence Human Behavior
with Offline Reinforcement Learning

Joey Hong

Sergey Levine Anca Dragan
UC Berkeley
{joey hong,sergey.levine,anca}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
When interacting with people, AI agents do not just influence the state of the
world – they also influence the actions people take in response to the agent, and
even their underlying intentions and strategies. Accounting for and leveraging
this influence has mostly been studied in settings where it is sufficient to assume
that human behavior is near-optimal: competitive games, or general-sum settings
like autonomous driving alongside human drivers. Instead, we focus on influence
in settings where there is a need to capture human suboptimality. For instance,
imagine a collaborative task in which, due either to cognitive biases or lack of
information, people do not perform very well – how could an agent influence them
towards more optimal behavior? Assuming near-optimal human behavior will not
work here, and so the agent needs to learn from real human data. But experimenting
online with humans is potentially unsafe, and creating a high-fidelity simulator of
the environment is often impractical. Hence, we focus on learning from an offline
dataset of human-human interactions. Our observation is that offline reinforcement
learning (RL) can learn to effectively influence suboptimal humans by extending
and combining elements of observed human-human behavior. We demonstrate that
offline RL can solve two challenges with effective influence. First, we show that
by learning from a dataset of suboptimal human-human interaction on a variety of
tasks – none of which contains examples of successful influence – an agent can
learn influence strategies to steer humans towards better performance even on new
tasks. Second, we show that by also modeling and conditioning on human behavior,
offline RL can learn to affect not just the human’s actions but also their underlying
strategy, and adapt to changes in their strategy.

1

Introduction

In many AI applications, including games [27], healthcare [26, 32], recommender systems [1], and
robotics [15], agents interact with people and end up influencing human behavior. Accounting for and
leveraging this influence has mainly been studied in settings where it is sufficient to model human
behavior as near-optimal [13, 8], like in games such as Go [27], or in autonomous driving settings
where agents try to influence people to slow down and make space [25].
In contrast, we target settings where influence is important but real humans might not behave in
strategically optimal or even rational ways, such as cooperative scenarios with other non-expert
humans, or social scenarios that are not inherently strategic, like dialogue. For instance, imagine
a human and robot collaborating to cook a meal. The human might start chopping the tomatoes to
make a salad because there are tomatoes conveniently nearby, but it might be much more efficient to
let the robot make the salad while the human plates the main course (because the robot is less adept
at plating). To try to get the human to plate, the robot might put a plate right next to them to make the
plating task more appealing, or it might even block the human from accessing the tomatoes. Such
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

