DPM-Solver-v3: Improved Diffusion ODE Solver with
Empirical Model Statistics

Kaiwen Zheng∗†1 , Cheng Lu∗1 , Jianfei Chen1 , Jun Zhu‡123
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab
1
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Shengshu Technology, Beijing 3 Pazhou Lab (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
{zkwthu,lucheng.lc15}@gmail.com; {jianfeic, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

arXiv:submit/5200479 [cs.CV] 27 Oct 2023

1

Abstract
Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) have exhibited excellent performance for
high-fidelity image generation while suffering from inefficient sampling. Recent works accelerate the sampling procedure by proposing fast ODE solvers
that leverage the specific ODE form of DPMs. However, they highly rely on
specific parameterization during inference (such as noise/data prediction), which
might not be the optimal choice. In this work, we propose a novel formulation
towards the optimal parameterization during sampling that minimizes the firstorder discretization error of the ODE solution. Based on such formulation, we
propose DPM-Solver-v3, a new fast ODE solver for DPMs by introducing several
coefficients efficiently computed on the pretrained model, which we call empirical model statistics. We further incorporate multistep methods and a predictorcorrector framework, and propose some techniques for improving sample quality
at small numbers of function evaluations (NFE) or large guidance scales. Experiments show that DPM-Solver-v3 achieves consistently better or comparable
performance in both unconditional and conditional sampling with both pixelspace and latent-space DPMs, especially in 5∼10 NFEs. We achieve FIDs of
12.21 (5 NFE), 2.51 (10 NFE) on unconditional CIFAR10, and MSE of 0.55 (5
NFE, 7.5 guidance scale) on Stable Diffusion, bringing a speed-up of 15%∼30%
compared to previous state-of-the-art training-free methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/thu-ml/DPM-Solver-v3.

1

Introduction

Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) [47, 15, 51] are a class of state-of-the-art image generators.
By training with a strong encoder, a large model, and massive data as well as leveraging techniques
such as guided sampling, DPMs are capable of generating high-resolution photorealistic and artistic
images on text-to-image tasks. However, to generate high-quality visual content, DPMs usually
require hundreds of model evaluations to gradually remove noise using a pretrained model [15],
which is much more time-consuming compared to other deep generative models such as generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [13]. The sampling overhead of DPMs emerges as a crucial obstacle
hindering their integration into downstream tasks.
To accelerate the sampling process of DPMs, one can employ training-based methods [37, 53, 45] or
training-free samplers [48, 51, 28, 3, 52, 56]. We focus on the latter approach since it requires no
†

Work done during an internship at Shengshu Technology

* Equal contribution
‡

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

