Modulated Neural ODEs
Ilze Amanda Auzina
University of Amsterdam
i.a.auzina@uva.nl

Çağatay Yıldız
University of Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center

Matthias Bethge
University of Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center

Sara Magliacane
University of Amsterdam
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Efstratios Gavves
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
Neural ordinary differential equations (NODEs) have been proven useful for learning non-linear dynamics of arbitrary trajectories. However, current NODE methods
capture variations across trajectories only via the initial state value or by autoregressive encoder updates. In this work, we introduce Modulated Neural ODEs
(MoNODEs), a novel framework that sets apart dynamics states from underlying
static factors of variation and improves the existing NODE methods. In particular,
we introduce time-invariant modulator variables that are learned from the data.
We incorporate our proposed framework into four existing NODE variants. We test
MoNODE on oscillating systems, videos and human walking trajectories, where
each trajectory has trajectory-specific modulation. Our framework consistently
improves the existing model ability to generalize to new dynamic parameterizations
and to perform far-horizon forecasting. In addition, we verify that the proposed
modulator variables are informative of the true unknown factors of variation as
measured by R2 scores.

1

Introduction

Differential equations are the de facto standard for learning dynamics of biological [Hirsch et al.,
2012] and physical [Tenenbaum and Pollard, 1985] systems. When the observed phenomenon is
deterministic, the dynamics are typically expressed in terms of ordinary differential equations (ODEs).
Traditionally, ODEs have been built from a mechanistic perspective, in which states of the observed
system and the governing differential equation with its parameters are specified by domain experts.
However, when the parametric form is unknown and only observations are available, neural network
surrogates can be used to model the unknown differential function, called neural ODEs (NODEs)
Chen et al. [2018]. Since its introduction by Chen et al. [2018], there has been an abundance of
research that uses NODE type models for learning differential equation systems and extend it by
introducing a recurrent neural networks (RNNs) encoder [Rubanova et al., 2019, Kanaa et al., 2021],
a gated recurrent unit [De Brouwer et al., 2019, Park et al., 2021], or a second order system [Yildiz
et al., 2019, Norcliffe et al., 2020, Xia et al., 2021].
Despite these recent developments, all of the above methods have a common limitation: any static
differences in the observations can only be captured in a time-evolving ODE state. This modelling
approach is not suitable when the observations contain underlying factors of variation that are fixed
in time, yet can (i) affect the dynamics or (ii) affect the appearance of the observations. As a concrete
example of this, consider human walking trajectories. The overall motion is shared across all subjects,
e.g. walking. However, every subject might exhibit person-specific factors of variation, which in
turn could either affect the motion exhibited, e.g. length of legs, or could be a characteristic of a
given subject, e.g. color of a shirt. A modelling approach that is able to (i) distinguish the dynamic
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

