Volume Feature Rendering for Fast Neural Radiance
Field Reconstruction
Kang Han
Wei Xiang∗
Lu Yu
School of Computing, Engineering and Mathematical Sciences
La Trobe University
{k.han, w.xiang, l.yu}@latrobe.edu.au

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) are able to synthesize realistic novel views from
multi-view images captured from distinct positions and perspectives. In NeRF’s
rendering pipeline, neural networks are used to represent a scene independently
or transform queried learnable feature vector of a point to the expected color or
density. With the aid of geometry guides either in the form of occupancy grids
or proposal networks, the number of color neural network evaluations can be
reduced from hundreds to dozens in the standard volume rendering framework.
However, many evaluations of the color neural network are still a bottleneck for
fast NeRF reconstruction. This paper revisits volume feature rendering (VFR) for
the purpose of fast NeRF reconstruction. The VFR integrates the queried feature
vectors of a ray into one feature vector, which is then transformed to the final pixel
color by a color neural network. This fundamental change to the standard volume
rendering framework requires only one single color neural network evaluation
to render a pixel, which substantially lowers the high computational complexity
of the rendering framework attributed to a large number of color neural network
evaluations. Consequently, we can use a comparably larger color neural network to
achieve a better rendering quality while maintaining the same training and rendering
time costs. This approach achieves the state-of-the-art rendering quality on both
synthetic and real-world datasets while requiring less training time compared with
existing methods.

1

Introduction

For the task of view synthesis, unobserved views of a scene are synthesized from captured multi-view
images. This is a long-standing problem that has been studied for several decades in computer vision
and computer graphics. The most popular solution to this problem at present is the neural radiance
field (NeRF) [18] since it can render views with high fidelity. NeRF represents the density and color
of a spatial point in a given direction using a neural network (NN), typically the multilayer perceptron
(MLP). With the predicted densities and colors of sampled points along a ray, the NeRF and its
variants [2, 3, 28] use the volume rendering technique to aggregate colors to obtain the final rendered
pixel color. As many samples are required to render one pixel, the underlying MLP needs to run many
times, leading to high computational complexities for both training and rendering. Alternatively,
researchers introduced extra learnable features in the form of 3D grids [25, 17], hash tables [19] and
decomposed tensors [6, 12, 7, 23] in addition to MLP’s parameters to represent a scene’s density and
color fields. As querying the feature vector of a sampled point by interpolation is much faster than
one MLP evaluation, only a small MLP is used to transform the queried feature vector to the density
or color, leading to substantial speed acceleration compared with pure MLP representations.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

