Saving 100x Storage: Prototype Replay for
Reconstructing Training Sample Distribution in
Class-Incremental Semantic Segmentation

Jinpeng Chen1 , Runmin Cong2∗‡ , Yuxuan Luo1 , Horace Ho Shing Ip1† , and Sam Kwong3‡
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
2
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China
3
Lingnan University, Hong Kong
jinpechen2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, rmcong@sdu.edu.cn, yuxuanluo4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk,
horace.ip@cityu.edu.hk, samkwong@ln.edu.hk

Abstract
Existing class-incremental semantic segmentation (CISS) methods mainly tackle
catastrophic forgetting and background shift, but often overlook another crucial
issue. In CISS, each step focuses on different foreground classes, and the training
set for a single step only includes images containing pixels of the current foreground
classes, excluding images without them. This leads to an overrepresentation of these
foreground classes in the single-step training set, causing the classification biased
towards these classes. To address this issue, we present STAR, which preserves the
main characteristics of each past class by storing a compact prototype and necessary
statistical data, and aligns the class distribution of single-step training samples
with the complete dataset by replaying these prototypes and repeating background
pixels with appropriate frequency. Compared to the previous works that replay
raw images, our method saves over 100 times the storage while achieving better
performance. Moreover, STAR incorporates an old-class features maintaining
(OCFM) loss, keeping old-class features unchanged while preserving sufficient
plasticity for learning new classes. Furthermore, a similarity-aware discriminative
(SAD) loss is employed to specifically enhance the feature diversity between similar
old-new class pairs. Experiments on two public datasets, Pascal VOC 2012 and
ADE20K, reveal that our model surpasses all previous state-of-the-art methods.
The official code is available at https://github.com/jinpeng0528/STAR.

1

Introduction

Typically, neural networks [6, 15, 16] are trained in a one-time fashion.When data updates occur,
retraining on the entire dataset is often necessary, as finetuning solely on new data leads to catastrophic
forgetting [21] of previously learned knowledge. However, frequent retraining is time-consuming and
requires the storage of all past data. Consequently, there is a growing interest in enabling networks to
achieve continual learning, which aims to attain performance comparable to one-time training by
progressively learning from new data.
* Runmin Cong is also with the Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and System Control, Ministry of
Education, Jinan, Shandong, China.
†
Horace Ho Shing Ip is also with the Centre for Innovative Applications of Internet and Multimedia
Technologies, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
‡
Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

