DisDiff: Unsupervised Disentanglement of Diffusion
Probabilistic Models
Tao Yang1∗, Yuwang Wang2†, Yan Lu3 , Nanning Zheng1†
yt14212@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics,
Xi’an Jiaotong University,
2
Tsinghua University, Shanghai AI Laboratory,
3
Microsoft Research Asia
https://github.com/thomasmry/DisDiff

Abstract
Targeting to understand the underlying explainable factors behind observations and
modeling the conditional generation process on these factors, we connect disentangled representation learning to Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) to take
advantage of the remarkable modeling ability of DPMs. We propose a new task,
disentanglement of (DPMs): given a pre-trained DPM, without any annotations
of the factors, the task is to automatically discover the inherent factors behind the
observations and disentangle the gradient fields of DPM into sub-gradient fields,
each conditioned on the representation of each discovered factor. With disentangled
DPMs, those inherent factors can be automatically discovered, explicitly represented, and clearly injected into the diffusion process via the sub-gradient fields.
To tackle this task, we devise an unsupervised approach named DisDiff, achieving disentangled representation learning in the framework of DPMs. Extensive
experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
DisDiff.

1

Introduction

As one of the most successful generative models, diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) achieve
remarkable performance in image synthesis. They use a series of probabilistic distributions to corrupt
images in the forward process and train a sequence of probabilistic models converging to image
distribution to reverse the forward process. Despite the remarkable success of DPM in tasks such
as image generation [41], text-to-images [37], and image editing [32], little attention has been paid
to representation learning [49] based on DPM. Diff-AE [33] and PDAE [49] are recently proposed
methods for representation learning by reconstructing the images in the DPM framework. However,
the learned latent representation can only be interpreted relying on an extra pre-trained with predefined
semantics linear classifier. In this paper, we will refer DPMs exclusively to the Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) [19].
On the other hand, disentangled representation learning [17] aims to learn the representation of the
underlying explainable factors behind the observed data and is thought to be one of the possible ways
for AI to understand the world fundamentally. Different factors correspond to different kinds of image
variations, respectively and independently. Most of the methods learn the disentangled representation
∗
†

Work done during internships at Microsoft Research Asia.
Corresponding authors: wang-yuwang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn; nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

