CMMA: Benchmarking Multi-Affection Detection in
Chinese Multi-Modal Conversations
Yang Yu
Zhengzhou University of Light Industry
yuyang19980818@outlook.com

Yazhou Zhang
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
China Mobile Communication Group Tianjin Co.,
Zhengzhou University of Light Industry
yzhou_zhang@tju.edu.cn
Qing Guo
IHPC and CFAR, Agency for Science,
Technology and Research, Singapore
tsingqguo@ieee.org

Benyou Wang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
wabyking@gmail.com

Dongming Zhao
China Mobile Communication Group Tianjin Co.
waitman_840602@163.com

Sagar Uprety
Bravura Solutions
suprety@bravurasolutions.com

Dawei Song
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
dwsong@bit.edu.cn
Qiuchi Li∗
Copenhagen University
qiuchi.li@di.ku.dk

Jing Qin
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Human communication has a multi-modal and multi-affect nature. The interrelatedness of different emotions and sentiments poses a challenge to jointly detect
multiple human affects with multi-modal clues. Recent advances in this field
employed multi-task learning paradigms to render the inter-relatedness across
tasks, but the scarcity of publicly available resources sets a limit to the potential
of works. To fill this gap, we build the first Chinese Multi-modal Multi-Affect
conversation (CMMA) dataset, which contains 3,000 multi-party conversations and
21,795 multi-modal utterances collected from various styles of TV-series. CMMA
contains a wide variety of affect labels, including sentiment, emotion, sarcasm
and humor, as well as the novel inter-correlations values between certain pairs of
tasks. Moreover, it provides the topic and speaker information in conversations,
which promotes better modeling of conversational context. On the dataset, we
empirically analyze the influence of different data modalities and conversational
contexts on different affect analysis tasks, and exhibit the practical benefit of
inter-task correlations. The full dataset will be publicly available for research2 .
∗
2

Corresponding author: Qiuchi Li
https://github.com/annoymity2022/Chinese-Dataset

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

