A Theory of Multimodal Learning

Zhou Lu
Princeton University
zhoul@princeton.edu

Abstract
Human perception of the empirical world involves recognizing the diverse appearances, or ’modalities’, of underlying objects. Despite the longstanding consideration of this perspective in philosophy and cognitive science, the study of
multimodality remains relatively under-explored within the field of machine learning. Nevertheless, current studies of multimodal machine learning are limited to
empirical practices, lacking theoretical foundations beyond heuristic arguments.
An intriguing finding from the practice of multimodal learning is that a model
trained on multiple modalities can outperform a finely-tuned unimodal model, even
on unimodal tasks. This paper provides a theoretical framework that explains
this phenomenon, by studying generalization properties of multimodal learning
algorithms. We demonstrate that multimodal learning allows for a √
superior generalization bound compared to unimodal learning, up to a factor of O( n), where
n represents the sample size. Such advantage occurs when both connection and
heterogeneity exist between the modalities.

1

Introduction

Even before the common era, the concept of viewing an object as the collection of its appearances,
has already sprouted in early philosophy. The Buddha, in the ’Diamond Sutra’, separated the essence
of universe from various modalities such as sight, sound, smell, taste and touch. Two centuries
ago, Immanuel Kant made a further step, positing that humans perceive only the representations of
’noumena’ from the empirical world. He wrote:
"And we indeed, rightly considering objects of sense as mere appearances, confess
thereby that they are based upon a thing in itself, though we know not this thing in
its internal constitution, but only know its appearances, viz., the way in which our
senses are affected by this unknown something. – Prolegomena"
From this perspective, human cognition of the world, may therefore be considered effectively
equivalent to the multiple modalities of the underlying objects. The importance of multimodality
extends beyond metaphysics to everyday life: children learning languages often rely on illustrations,
and even mathematicians benefit from visual aids.
However, machine learning, which could be seen as the cognition of computer systems, has not fully
harnessed the power of multimodality. Multimodal machine learning, which processes and learns
from data with multiple modalities, remained relatively under-explored until recently. Despite the
impressive success of multimodal learning in empirical applications, such as Gato [31] and GPT-4
[26], the corresponding theoretical understanding is largely absent, often limited to heuristics.
A fascinating observation from empirical multimodal learning is that a model trained with multiple
modalities can outperform a finely-tuned unimodal model, even on population data of the same
unimodal task. It’s not immediately clear why multimodality offers such an advantage, considering
that the trained model’s focus is spread across different modalities.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

