SUBP: Soft Uniform Block Pruning for 1×N Sparse
CNNs Multithreading Acceleration

Jingyang Xiang1 Siqi Li1 Jun Chen1 Shipeng Bai1
Yukai Ma1 Guang Dai2,3 Yong Liu1∗
1

APRIL Lab, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
State Grid Corporation of China
3
SGIT AI Lab, Shaanxi, China

{jingyangxiang,lsq4747,junc,shipengbai,yukaima}@zju.edu.cn
guang.gdai@gmail.com,yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
The study of sparsity in Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) has become
widespread to compress and accelerate models in environments with limited resources. By constraining N consecutive weights along the output channel to be
group-wise non-zero, the recent network with 1×N sparsity has received tremendous popularity for its three outstanding advantages: 1) A large amount of storage
space saving by a Block Sparse Row matrix. 2) Excellent performance at a high
sparsity. 3) Significant speedups on CPUs with Advanced Vector Extensions. Recent work requires selecting and fine-tuning 1×N sparse weights based on dense
pre-trained weights, leading to the problems such as expensive training cost and
memory access, sub-optimal model quality, as well as unbalanced workload across
threads (different sparsity across output channels). To overcome them, this paper proposes a novel Soft Uniform Block Pruning (SUBP) approach to train a
uniform 1×N sparse structured network from scratch. Specifically, our approach
tends to repeatedly allow pruned blocks to regrow to the network based on block
angular redundancy and importance sampling in a uniform manner throughout
the training process. It not only makes the model less dependent on pre-training,
reduces the model redundancy and the risk of pruning the important blocks permanently but also achieves balanced workload. Empirically, on ImageNet, comprehensive experiments across various CNN architectures show that our SUBP
consistently outperforms existing 1×N and structured sparsity methods based on
pre-trained models or training from scratch. Source codes and models are available
at https://github.com/JingyangXiang/SUBP.

1

Introduction

In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved great success in image classification [56, 22], object detection [21, 16], semantic segmentation [17, 4] and other fields. The
remarkable performance owes to the deeper and wider architectures, also leading to the prohibitively
expensive computational cost and colossal memory footprint. Although some efficient architectures
are proposed, such as residual connection [22], inception module [58], etc., it is still difficult to deploy
the state-of-the-art CNNs on the available CPUs embedded devices with limited resource. Therefore,
the network pruning is emerging by pruning the redundancy in CNNs. Due to the appealing perfor∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

