Strategic Classification under
Unknown Personalized Manipulation

Han Shao
Toyota Technological Institute Chicago
Chicago, 60637
han@ttic.edu
Avrim Blum
Toyota Technological Institute Chicago
Chicago, 60637
avrim@ttic.edu

Omar Montasser
Toyota Technological Institute Chicago
Chicago, 60637
omar@ttic.edu

Abstract
We study the fundamental mistake bound and sample complexity in the strategic
classification, where agents can strategically manipulate their feature vector up
to an extent in order to be predicted as positive. For example, given a classifier
determining college admission, student candidates may try to take easier classes to
improve their GPA, retake SAT and change schools in an effort to fool the classifier.
Ball manipulations are a widely studied class of manipulations in the literature,
where agents can modify their feature vector within a bounded radius ball. Unlike
most prior work, our work considers manipulations to be personalized, meaning
that agents can have different levels of manipulation abilities (e.g., varying radii
for ball manipulations), and unknown to the learner.
We formalize the learning problem in an interaction model where the learner
first deploys a classifier and the agent manipulates the feature vector within their
manipulation set to game the deployed classifier. We investigate various scenarios
in terms of the information available to the learner during the interaction, such
as observing the original feature vector before or after deployment, observing the
manipulated feature vector, or not seeing either the original or the manipulated
feature vector. We begin by providing online mistake bounds and PAC sample
complexity in these scenarios for ball manipulations. We also explore non-ball
manipulations and show that, even in the simplest scenario where both the original
and the manipulated feature vectors are revealed, the mistake bounds and sample
complexity are lower bounded by Ω(|H|) when the target function belongs to a
known class H.

1

Introduction

Strategic classification addresses the problem of learning a classifier robust to manipulation and
gaming by self-interested agents (Hardt et al., 2016). For example, given a classifier determining loan
approval based on credit scores, applicants could open or close credit cards and bank accounts to
increase their credit scores. In the case of a college admission classifier, students may try to take easier
classes to improve their GPA, retake the SAT or change schools in an effort to be admitted. In both
cases, such manipulations do not change their true qualifications. Recently, a collection of papers has
studied strategic classification in both the online setting where examples are chosen by an adversary
in a sequential manner (Dong et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; Ahmadi et al., 2021, 2023), and the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

