Task-aware Distributed Source Coding
under Dynamic Bandwidth
Po-han Li1⇤ Sravan Kumar Ankireddy1⇤
Ehsan Moradi-Pari2
1

Ufuk Topcu1

Ruihan Zhao1

Hossein Nourkhiz Mahjoub2

Sandeep Chinchali1

Hyeji Kim1

The University of Texas at Austin 2 Honda Research Institute USA

Abstract
Efficient compression of correlated data is essential to minimize communication
overload in multi-sensor networks. In such networks, each sensor independently
compresses the data and transmits them to a central node. A decoder at the central
node decompresses and passes the data to a pre-trained machine learning-based
task model to generate the final output. Due to limited communication bandwidth,
it is important for the compressor to learn only the features that are relevant to the
task. Additionally, the final performance depends heavily on the total available
bandwidth. In practice, it is common to encounter varying availability in bandwidth. Since higher bandwidth results in better performance, it is essential for the
compressor to dynamically take advantage of the maximum available bandwidth at
any instant. In this work, we propose a novel distributed compression framework
composed of independent encoders and a joint decoder, which we call neural distributed principal component analysis (NDPCA). NDPCA flexibly compresses data
from multiple sources to any available bandwidth with a single model, reducing
compute and storage overhead. NDPCA achieves this by learning low-rank task
representations and efficiently distributing bandwidth among sensors, thus providing a graceful trade-off between performance and bandwidth. Experiments show
that NDPCA improves the success rate of multi-view robotic arm manipulation
by 9% and the accuracy of object detection tasks on satellite imagery by 14%
compared to an autoencoder with uniform bandwidth allocation. 2

1

Introduction

Efficient data compression plays a pivotal role in multi-sensor networks to minimize communication
overload. Due to the limited communication bandwidth of such networks, it is often impractical to
transmit all sensor data to a central server, and compression of the data is necessary. It is important
for the sensors to compress the respective data independently, to avoid communication overload in
the network. Information theory literature refers to this setting as distributed source coding [1], where
the goal is to recover the original data with minimal distortion. In many cases, the data collected by
the sensors is only processed by a downstream task model, e.g., an object detection model, but not by
humans, and hence the original distributed source coding goal of minimizing reconstruction error is
no longer applicable. Instead, the goal should be to maximize the performance of the downstream
task model. Additionally, in practice, data collected by multi-sensor networks is often correlated
e.g. stereo cameras with overlapping fields of view. To improve communication efficiency, it is
⇤

2

Equal contribution; order decided randomly. Correspondence to {pohanli, sravan.ankireddy}@utexas.edu.
https://github.com/UTAustin-SwarmLab/Task-aware-Distributed-Source-Coding.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

