Connecting Pre-trained Language Models and
Downstream Tasks via Properties of Representations

Chenwei Wu
Duke University
cwwu@cs.duke.edu

Holden Lee
Johns Hopkins University
hlee283@jhu.edu

Rong Ge
Duke University
rongge@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
Recently, researchers have found that representations learned by large-scale pretrained language models are useful in various downstream tasks. However, there
is little theoretical understanding of how pre-training performance is related to
downstream task performance. In this paper, we analyze how this performance
transfer depends on the properties of the downstream task and the structure of the
representations. We consider a log-linear model where a word can be predicted
from its context through a network having softmax as its last layer. We show that
even if the downstream task is highly structured and depends on a simple function
of the hidden representation, there are still cases when a low pre-training loss
cannot guarantee good performance on the downstream task. On the other hand,
we propose and empirically validate the existence of an “anchor vector” in the
representation space, and show that this assumption, together with properties of
the downstream task, guarantees performance transfer.

1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-trained language models have achieved strong performance in a wide range of downstream tasks, including natural language inference [Devlin et al., 2018] and reading comprehension
[Brown et al., 2020]. For many of these tasks, training a linear classifier on top of the hidden-layer
representations generated by the pre-trained models can already provide near state-of-the-art results
[Belinkov et al., 2017]. Despite many empirical investigations about the zero-shot applications of
these pre-trained models, there is little theoretical understanding of their empirical success. In this
paper, we aim to theoretically investigate this core question:
When can the representations from pre-trained models transfer to downstream
tasks that are very different from the pre-training task?
This is a fundamental question in understanding why good performance in pre-training leads to
good performance on downstream tasks. Unlike the notion of generalization in traditional learning
theory where the models are evaluated in the same task and the test data are sampled from the
same distribution as the training data, here the downstream tasks are usually very different from
pre-training. For instance, people can pre-train large language models using cross-entropy loss on a
language modeling task with webpage data, and evaluate the models using classification accuracy on
text classification in news articles. The differences between pre-training and downstream tasks make
it challenging to explain the success of these language models.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

