Are These the Same Apple?
Comparing Images Based on Object Intrinsics

Klemen Kotar∗ , Stephen Tian∗ , Hong-Xing Yu, Daniel L. K. Yamins, Jiajun Wu
Stanford University
∗

Equal contribution

{klemenk, tians, koven, yamins, jiajunw}@stanford.edu

Abstract
The human visual system can effortlessly recognize an object under different
extrinsic factors such as lighting, object poses, and background, yet current computer vision systems often struggle with these variations. An important step to
understanding and improving artificial vision systems is to measure image similarity purely based on intrinsic object properties that define object identity. This
problem has been studied in the computer vision literature as re-identification,
though mostly restricted to specific object categories such as people and cars.
We propose to extend it to general object categories, exploring an image similarity metric based on object intrinsics. To benchmark such measurements, we
collect the Common paired objects Under differenT Extrinsics (CUTE) dataset
of 18, 000 images of 180 objects under different extrinsic factors such as lighting, poses, and imaging conditions. While existing methods such as LPIPS and
CLIP scores do not measure object intrinsics well, we find that combining deep
features learned from contrastive self-supervised learning with foreground filtering
is a simple yet effective approach to approximating the similarity. We conduct
an extensive survey of pre-trained features and foreground extraction methods
to arrive at a strong baseline that best measures intrinsic object-centric image
similarity among current methods. Finally, we demonstrate that our approach can
aid in downstream applications such as acting as an analog for human subjects
and improving generalizable re-identification. Please see our project website at
https://s-tian.github.io/projects/cute/ for visualizations of the data
and demos of our metric.

1

Introduction

Human vision is extraordinarily robust against extrinsic factors that affect object appearances. When
driving on sunny or snowy days, in familiar streets or new cities, we can recognize and track traffic
lights, other cars, and pedestrians effortlessly. Such an ability to recognize an object based purely on
its intrinsic properties, irrespective of any extrinsic factors such as lighting and imaging conditions,
object pose, and background, is a key aspect of intelligent vision systems.
Existing computer vision systems often struggle with variations in lighting conditions, object poses,
and backgrounds [Hendrycks and Dietterich, 2019, Drenkow et al., 2021, Lee and Kim, 2023].
For example, visual perception models for autonomous driving can fail during extreme weather
conditions [Michaelis et al., 2019], and current video generation models suffer from temporal
consistency of object identities, producing flickering artifacts that are easily noticeable by humans [Ho
et al., 2022]. To understand and improve these artificial vision systems, an important step is to measure
the similarity between visual contents (such as images) purely based on the intrinsic object properties
that correspond to object identities.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

