SpokenWOZ: A Large-Scale Speech-Text Benchmark
for Spoken Task-Oriented Dialogue Agents

Shuzheng Si1∗, Wentao Ma1∗, Haoyu Gao1∗, Yuchuan Wu1 , Ting-En Lin1 ,
Yinpei Dai2†, Hangyu Li1 , Rui Yan3‡, Fei Huang1 and Yongbin Li1‡
1
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
2
Computer Science and Engineering Division, University of Michigan
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
sishuzheng@foxmail.com, {mawentao.mwt, ghy385779}@alibaba-inc.com
https://spokenwoz.github.io/SpokenWOZ-github.io/

Abstract
Task-oriented dialogue (TOD) models have made significant progress in recent
years. However, previous studies primarily focus on datasets written by annotators,
which has resulted in a gap between academic research and real-world spoken conversation scenarios. While several small-scale spoken TOD datasets are proposed
to address robustness issues such as ASR errors, they ignore the unique challenges
in spoken conversation. To tackle the limitations, we introduce SpokenWOZ,
a large-scale speech-text dataset for spoken TOD, containing 8 domains, 203k
turns, 5.7k dialogues and 249 hours of audios from human-to-human spoken
conversations. SpokenWOZ further incorporates common spoken characteristics
such as word-by-word processing and reasoning in spoken language. Based on
these characteristics, we present cross-turn slot and reasoning slot detection as new
challenges. We conduct experiments on various baselines, including text-modal
models, newly proposed dual-modal models, and LLMs, e.g., ChatGPT. The results
show that the current models still have substantial room for improvement in spoken
conversation, where the most advanced dialogue state tracker only achieves 25.65%
in joint goal accuracy and the SOTA end-to-end model only correctly completes
the user request in 52.1% of dialogues. Our dataset, code, and leaderboard are
available at https://spokenwoz.github.io/SpokenWOZ-github.io/.

1

Introduction

Dialogue system modeling, a classic research topic in the field of human-machine interaction, serves
as an important application area [22, 21, 35, 44, 36, 34]. Recently, task-oriented dialogue (TOD)
systems [14, 41, 3] have attracted significant attention. These systems are designed to assist users
in accomplishing specific goals, e.g., flight booking and restaurant reservation. Benefited from the
previous well-designed data-collection pipeline, such as Wizard-of-Oz [19], the TOD datasets [39, 2]
can be constructed with low costs by writing from annotators, rather than being collected from
realistic spoken conversations.
However, these TOD datasets constructed solely based on written texts may not accurately reflect the
nuances of spoken conversations, leading to a gap between academic research and real-world spoken
TOD scenarios. To advance the research on more realistic spoken TOD, various datasets have been
∗

Equal contribution.
Work done while the author was working at Alibaba.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

