Would I have gotten that reward? Long-term credit
assignment by counterfactual contribution analysis

Alexander Meulemans∗1 , Simon Schug∗1 , Seijin Kobayashi∗1
Nathaniel D Daw2,3,4 , Gregory Wayne2
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
2
Google DeepMind
3
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University
4
Department of Psychology, Princeton University
{ameulema, sschug, seijink}@ethz.ch

Abstract
To make reinforcement learning more sample efficient, we need better credit assignment methods that measure an action’s influence on future rewards. Building upon
Hindsight Credit Assignment (HCA) [1], we introduce Counterfactual Contribution
Analysis (COCOA), a new family of model-based credit assignment algorithms.
Our algorithms achieve precise credit assignment by measuring the contribution of
actions upon obtaining subsequent rewards, by quantifying a counterfactual query:
‘Would the agent still have reached this reward if it had taken another action?’.
We show that measuring contributions w.r.t. rewarding states, as is done in HCA,
results in spurious estimates of contributions, causing HCA to degrade towards the
high-variance REINFORCE estimator in many relevant environments. Instead, we
measure contributions w.r.t. rewards or learned representations of the rewarding
objects, resulting in gradient estimates with lower variance. We run experiments on
a suite of problems specifically designed to evaluate long-term credit assignment
capabilities. By using dynamic programming, we measure ground-truth policy
gradients and show that the improved performance of our new model-based credit
assignment methods is due to lower bias and variance compared to HCA and
common baselines. Our results demonstrate how modeling action contributions
towards rewarding outcomes can be leveraged for credit assignment, opening a
new path towards sample-efficient reinforcement learning.2

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) faces two central challenges: exploration and credit assignment [2].
We need to explore to discover rewards and we need to reinforce the actions that are instrumental
for obtaining these rewards. Here, we focus on the credit assignment problem and the intimately
linked problem of estimating policy gradients. For long time horizons, obtaining the latter is
notoriously difficult as it requires measuring how each action influences expected subsequent rewards.
As the number of possible trajectories grows exponentially with time, future rewards come with a
considerable variance stemming from stochasticity in the environment itself and from the stochasticity
of interdependent future actions leading to vastly different returns [3–5].
Monte Carlo estimators such as REINFORCE [6] therefore suffer from high variance, even after
variance reduction techniques like subtracting a baseline [6–9]. Similarly, in Temporal Difference
methods such as Q-learning, this high variance in future rewards results in a high bias in the value
estimates, requiring exponentially many updates to correct for it [5]. Thus, a common technique to
∗
2

Equal contribution; ordering determined by coin flip.
Code available at https://github.com/seijin-kobayashi/cocoa

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

