Fast Partitioned Learned Bloom Filter
Atsuki Sato Yusuke Matsui
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
a_sato@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
matsui@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
A Bloom filter is a memory-efficient data structure for approximate membership
queries used in numerous fields of computer science. Recently, learned Bloom
filters that achieve better memory efficiency using machine learning models have
attracted attention. One such filter, the partitioned learned Bloom filter (PLBF),
achieves excellent memory efficiency. However, PLBF requires a O(N 3 k) time
complexity to construct the data structure, where N and k are the hyperparameters
of PLBF. One can improve memory efficiency by increasing N , but the construction
time becomes extremely long. Thus, we propose two methods that can reduce the
construction time while maintaining the memory efficiency of PLBF. First, we
propose fast PLBF, which can construct the same data structure as PLBF with a
smaller time complexity O(N 2 k). Second, we propose fast PLBF++, which can
construct the data structure with even smaller time complexity O(N k log N +N k 2 ).
Fast PLBF++ does not necessarily construct the same data structure as PLBF. Still,
it is almost as memory efficient as PLBF, and it is proved that fast PLBF++ has
the same data structure as PLBF when the distribution satisfies a certain constraint.
Our experimental results from real-world datasets show that (i) fast PLBF and
fast PLBF++ can construct the data structure up to 233 and 761 times faster than
PLBF, (ii) fast PLBF can achieve the same memory efficiency as PLBF, and (iii)
fast PLBF++ can achieve almost the same memory efficiency as PLBF. The codes
are available at https://github.com/atsukisato/FastPLBF.

1

Introduction

Membership query is a problem of determining whether a given query q is contained within a set
S. Membership query is widely used in numerous areas, including networks and databases. One
can correctly answer the membership query by keeping the set S and checking whether it contains q.
However, this approach is memory intensive because we need to maintain S.
A Bloom filter [1] is a memory-efficient data structure that answers approximate membership queries.
A Bloom filter uses hash functions to compress the set into a bitstring and then answers the queries
using the bitstring. When a Bloom filter answers q ∈ S, it can be wrong (false positives can
arise); when it answers q ∈
/ S, it is always correct (no false negatives arise). A Bloom filter
has been incorporated into numerous systems, such as networks [2, 3, 4], databases [5, 6, 7], and
cryptocurrencies [8, 9].
A traditional Bloom filter does not care about the distribution of the set or the queries. Therefore, even
if the distribution has a characteristic structure, a Bloom filter cannot take advantage of it. Kraska et
al. proposed learned Bloom filters (LBFs), which utilize the distribution structure using a machine
learning model [10]. LBF achieves a better trade-off between memory usage and false positive rate
(FPR) than the original Bloom filter. Since then, several studies have been conducted on various
LBFs [11, 12, 13].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

