Causal Discovery from Subsampled Time Series
with Proxy Variables

Mingzhou Liu1,2

Xinwei Sun3∗

Lingjing Hu4

Yizhou Wang1,2,5

1

2

School of Computer Science, Peking University
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies (CFCS), Peking University
3
School of Data Science, Fudan University
4
Yanjing Medical College, Capital Medical University
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
Inferring causal structures from time series data is the central interest of many
scientific inquiries. A major barrier to such inference is the problem of subsampling,
i.e., the frequency of measurement is much lower than that of causal influence. To
overcome this problem, numerous methods have been proposed, yet either was
limited to the linear case or failed to achieve identifiability. In this paper, we
propose a constraint-based algorithm that can identify the entire causal structure
from subsampled time series, without any parametric constraint. Our observation
is that the challenge of subsampling arises mainly from hidden variables at the
unobserved time steps. Meanwhile, every hidden variable has an observed proxy,
which is essentially itself at some observable time in the future, benefiting from the
temporal structure. Based on these, we can leverage the proxies to remove the bias
induced by the hidden variables and hence achieve identifiability. Following this
intuition, we propose a proxy-based causal discovery algorithm. Our algorithm is
nonparametric and can achieve full causal identification. Theoretical advantages
are reflected in synthetic and real-world experiments. Our code is available at
https://github.com/lmz123321/proxy_causal_discovery.

1

Introduction

Temporal systems are the primary subject of causal modeling in many sciences, such as pathology,
neuroscience, and economics. For these systems, a common issue is the difficulty of collecting
sufficiently refined timescale data. That is, we can only observe a subsampled version of the true
causal interaction. This can cause serious problems for causal identification, since full observation
(i.e., causal sufficiency [1]) is believed to be an important condition for causal identification, and the
violation of which (e.g., the existence of hidden variables) can induce strong bias [2].
Example 1.1. Take the pathology study of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) as an example. In AD, patients
suffer from memory loss due to the atrophy of memory-related brain regions such as the Hippocampus
[3]. To monitor such atrophy, the standard protocol is to perform a MRI examination on the brain
every six months [4]. However, many studies have shown that the disease can progress much more
rapidly than this [5, 6]. For this reason, when recovering the causal interactions between brain regions,
those at the unobserved time steps constitute hidden variables and induce spurious edges in the causal
graph, as shown in Figure 1 (b).
To resolve this problem, many attempts have been made to recover the correct causal relations from
subsampled data. However, none of them achieved general identifiability results. For example, in
∗

Correspondence to sunxinwei@fudan.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

