Counting Distinct Elements Under Person-Level
Differential Privacy

Alexander Knop∗
Google
alexanderknop@google.com

Thomas Steinke∗
Google DeepMind
steinke@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of counting the number of distinct elements in a dataset
subject to the constraint of differential privacy. We consider the challenging setting of person-level DP (a.k.a. user-level DP) where each person may contribute
an unbounded number of items and hence the sensitivity is unbounded.
Our approach is to compute a bounded-sensitivity version of this query, which
reduces to solving a max-flow problem. The sensitivity bound is optimized to
balance the noise we must add to privatize the answer against the error of the
approximation of the bounded-sensitivity query to the true number of unique elements.

1

Introduction

An elementary data analysis task is to count the number of distinct elements occurring in a dataset.
The dataset may contain private data and even simple statistics can be combined to leak sensitive
information about people [DN03]. Our goal is to release (an approximation to) this count in a way
that ensures the privacy of the people who contributed their data. As a motivating example, consider
a collection of internet browsing histories, in which case the goal is to compute the total number of
websites that have been visited by at least one person.
Differential privacy (DP) [DMNS06] is a formal privacy standard. The simplest method for ensuring
DP is to add noise (from either a Laplace or Gaussian distribution) to the true answer, where the scale
of the noise corresponds to the sensitivity of the true answer – i.e., how much one person’s data can
change the true value.
If each person contributes a single element to the dataset, then the sensitivity of the number of
unique elements is one. However, a person may contribute multiple elements to the dataset and our
goal is to ensure privacy for all of these contributions simultaneously. That is, we seek to provide
person-level DP (a.k.a. user-level DP2 ).
This is the problem we study: We have a dataset D = (u1 , u2 , · · · , un ) of person records. Each
person i ∈ [n] contributes a finite dataset ui ∈ Ω∗ , where Ω is someS(possibly infinite) universe of
potential elements (e.g., all finite-length binary strings) and Ω∗ := `∈N Ω` denotes all subsets of
Ω of finite size. Informally, our goal is to compute the number of unique elements
DC(D) :=

[

ui

(1)

i∈[n]
∗

Alphabetical author order.
We prefer the term “person” over “user,” as the latter only makes sense in some contexts and could be
confusing in others.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

