Training shallow ReLU networks on noisy data using
hinge loss: when do we overfit and is it benign?

∗

Erin George, ∗ Michael Murray, William Swartworth, Deanna Needell
Department of Mathematics, UCLA, CA, USA
[egeo,mmurray,wswartworth,deanna]@math.ucla.edu
∗
Equal contribution

Abstract
We study benign overfitting in two-layer ReLU networks trained using gradient
descent and hinge loss on noisy data for binary classification. In particular, we
consider linearly separable data for which a relatively small proportion of labels
are corrupted or flipped. We identify conditions on the margin of the clean data
that give rise to three distinct training outcomes: benign overfitting, in which
zero loss is achieved and with high probability test data is classified correctly;
non-benign overfitting, in which zero loss is achieved but test data is misclassified
with probability lower bounded by a constant; and non-overfitting, in which clean
points, but not corrupt points, achieve zero loss and again with high probability test
data is classified correctly. Our analysis provides a fine-grained description of the
dynamics of neurons throughout training and reveals two distinct phases: in the
first phase clean points achieve close to zero loss, in the second phase clean points
oscillate on the boundary of zero loss while corrupt points either converge towards
zero loss or are eventually zeroed by the network. We prove these results using a
combinatorial approach that involves bounding the number of clean versus corrupt
updates across these phases of training.

1

Introduction

Conventional machine learning wisdom suggests that the generalization error of a complex model
will typically be worse versus a simpler model when both are trained to interpolate data. Indeed, the
bias-variance trade-off implies that although choosing a complex model is advantageous in terms of
approximation error, it comes at the price of an increased risk of overfitting. The traditional solution
to managing this trade-off is to use some form of regularization, allowing the optimizer to select a
predictor from a rich class of functions while at the same time encouraging it to choose one that is in
some sense simple. However, in recent years this perspective has been challenged by the observation
that deep learning models, trained with minimal if any form of regularization, can almost perfectly
interpolate noisy data with nominal cost to their generalization performance (Zhang et al., 2017;
Belkin et al., 2018b, 2019). This phenomenon is referred to as benign overfitting.
Following these empirical observations, a line of research has emerged aiming to theoretically
characterize the conditions under which various machine learning models, trained to zero loss on
noisy data, obtain, at least asymptotically, optimal generalization error. To date, the majority of
analyses in this regard have focused primarily on linear models, including linear regression (Bartlett
et al., 2020; Muthukumar et al., 2020; Wu & Xu, 2020; Chatterji & Long, 2021; Zou et al., 2021;
Hastie et al., 2022; Koehler et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021a; Chatterji & Long, 2022; Cao et al.,
2021; Shamir, 2022), logistic regression (Chatterji & Long, 2021; Muthukumar et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2021b) and kernel regression (Belkin et al., 2018a; Mei & Montanari, 2019; Liang & Rakhlin,
2020; Liang et al., 2019). With regards to understanding benign overfitting in neural networks, in the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

