GeoDE: a Geographically Diverse Evaluation Dataset
for Object Recognition

Vikram V. Ramaswamy1 , Sing Yu Lin1 , Dora Zhao2 *, Aaron B. Adcock3 ,
Laurens van der Maaten3 , Deepti Ghadiyaram4 , Olga Russakovsky1
1

Princeton University

2

Stanford University

3

Meta AI

4

Runway

*Work done as a student at Princeton University

Abstract
Current dataset collection methods typically scrape large amounts of data from the
web. While this technique is extremely scalable, data collected in this way tends
to reinforce stereotypical biases, can contain personally identifiable information,
and typically originates from Europe and North America. In this work, we rethink
the dataset collection paradigm and introduce GeoDE , a geographically diverse
dataset with 61,940 images from 40 classes and 6 world regions, with no personally
identifiable information, collected by soliciting images from people around the
world. We analyse GeoDE to understand differences in images collected in this
manner compared to web-scraping. We demonstrate its use as both an evaluation
and training dataset, allowing us to highlight and begin to mitigate the shortcomings
in current models, despite GeoDE’s relatively small size. We release the full dataset
and code at https://geodiverse-data-collection.cs.princeton.edu/

1

Introduction

The creation of large-scale image datasets has enabled advances in the performance of computer
vision models. Previously limited by internal manual collection efforts [13, 15, 12], in the past 15
years the size of these datasets has rapidly grown. This growth has been empowered by a new data
collection framework: scraping web images at scale. These images are either human-labelled (e.g.,
ImageNet [8, 26]), use tags (e.g., CLIP-400M [24]) or use self-supervision (e.g., PASS [2]).
However, these web-scraped datasets come with their downsides. One of these downsides is that
these datasets can often contain pernicious social and cultural biases. For example, gender and racial
biases can manifest through underrepresentation and/or through stereotypical depictions of certain
demographic groups [21, 4, 40, 34, 3]. There is also geographic bias: works of e.g., Shankar et
al. [27] and de Vries et al. [7] show that web-scraped datasets consist of images mostly from North
America and Western Europe.
The other common downsides are copyright, consent and compensation. Dataset creators frequently
do not obtain full permission of the content creators and of the people featured in the content [3].1
While annotators are compensated, content creators and image subjects rarely are [3]. Though there
have been efforts to balance datasets [10], clean datasets [36], and protect privacy of depicted subjects
by blurring [39], methods that rely on web-scraping cannot fully eliminate these issues [3, 18].
To tackle these issues, an exciting new dataset DollarStreet [25] was recently introduced (licence:
CC). Instead of web-scraping, DollarStreet sources data from the Gapminder foundation. It comprises
of images taken by volunteer and professional photographers in different countries to illustrate
households with different income statuses. This results in 38,479 images from 63 different countries,
tagged with 289 labels. DollarStreet overcomes issues of consent, and is in many ways the first truly
geographically diverse dataset (Tab. 1).
1
While images used are sometimes under the most permissive Creative Commons license, it is unclear if
creators know the full impacts of their images being used in the training of large scale models.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

