Transferable Adversarial Robustness for Categorical
Data via Universal Robust Embeddings

Klim Kireev, Maksym Andriushchenko, Carmela Troncoso, Nicolas Flammarion
EPFL

Abstract
Research on adversarial robustness is primarily focused on image and text data. Yet,
many scenarios in which lack of robustness can result in serious risks, such as fraud
detection, medical diagnosis, or recommender systems often do not rely on images
or text but instead on tabular data. Adversarial robustness in tabular data poses two
serious challenges. First, tabular datasets often contain categorical features, and
therefore cannot be tackled directly with existing optimization procedures. Second,
in the tabular domain, algorithms that are not based on deep networks are widely
used and offer great performance, but algorithms to enhance robustness are tailored
to neural networks (e.g. adversarial training). The code for our method is publicly
available at https://github.com/spring-epfl/Transferable-Cat-Robustness.
In this paper, we tackle both challenges. We present a method that allows us to train
adversarially robust deep networks for tabular data and to transfer this robustness to
other classifiers via universal robust embeddings tailored to categorical data. These
embeddings, created using a bilevel alternating minimization framework, can be
transferred to boosted trees or random forests making them robust without the need
for adversarial training while preserving their high accuracy on tabular data. We
show that our methods outperform existing techniques within a practical threat
model suitable for tabular data. The code for our method is publicly available 1 .

1

Introduction

Works on adversarial machine learning primarily focus on deep networks and are mostly evaluated on
image data. Apruzzese et al. (2022) estimate that approximately 70%-80% of works in the literature
fall in this category. Yet, a large number of high-stake tasks across fields like medical diagnosis
(Shehab et al., 2022), fraud detection (Altman, 2021), click-through rate prediction (Yang & Zhai,
2022), or credit scoring (Shi et al., 2022) neither only rely on deep networks nor operate on images
(Grinsztajn et al., 2022). These tasks often involve many discrete categorical features (e.g., country,
email, day of the week), and the predominant models used are discrete tree-based (e.g., boosted tree
ensembles, random forests). These two characteristics raise a number of challenges when trying to
achieve robustness using previous works which focus on continuous features and continuous models
(Goodfellow et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2018).
Accurate modelling of adversarial capability. The de-facto standard in adversarial robustness
evaluation (Croce et al., 2020) is to model robustness to perturbations bounded in some ℓp ball,
mostly in the image domain. This approach, however, was shown to not accurately represent the
capabilities of a real adversary in other domains (Kireev et al., 2022; Apruzzese et al., 2022). Instead,
a realistic threat model would constrain the adversary with respect to their financial capabilities. This
can be achieved by associating a financial cost with every input feature transformation, limiting the
adversary to perform transformations within their total financial budget. Such a constraint is common
1

https://github.com/spring-epfl/Transferable-Cat-Robustness

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

