Localized Symbolic Knowledge Distillation
for Visual Commonsense Models
Jae Sung Park1 , Jack Hessel2 , Khyathi Chandu2 ,
Paul Pu Liang2,4 , Ximing Lu1,2 , Peter West1,2 ,
5
Youngjae Yu , Qiuyuan Huang3 , Jianfeng Gao3 , Ali Farhadi1,2 , Yejin Choi1,2
1

University of Washington 2 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence 3 Microsoft Research
4
Carnegie Mellon University 5 Yonsei University

Abstract
Instruction following vision-language (VL) models offer a flexible interface that
supports a broad range of multimodal tasks in a zero-shot fashion. However,
interfaces that operate on full images do not directly enable the user to “point to"
and access specific regions within images. This capability is important not only to
support reference-grounded VL benchmarks, but also, for practical applications that
require precise within-image reasoning. We build Localized Visual Commonsense
models, which allow users to specify (multiple) regions-as-input. We train our
model by sampling localized commonsense knowledge from a large language
model (LLM): specifically, we prompt a LLM to collect commonsense knowledge
given a global literal image description and a local literal region description
automatically generated by a set of VL models. With a separately trained critic
model that selects high-quality examples, we find that training on the localized
commonsense corpus can successfully distill existing VL models to support a
reference-as-input interface. Empirical results and human evaluations in a zeroshot set up demonstrate that our distillation method results in more precise VL
models of reasoning compared to a baseline of passing a generated referring
expression to an LLM 1 .

1

Introduction

Large language models are capable of efficiently performing a wide array of tasks in a zero-shot
fashion. For text-only models, one commonly adopted interface is a flexible, language specification of inputs coupled with an imperative request, e.g., “[article text]. Summarize this
article." Similarly, a natural extension allowing visual inputs manifests as, e.g., “[image].
Describe this image".
But, as models expand beyond text-only modalities, they should incorporate more flexible forms of
user input as well. Allowing users to specify individual objects/actors/regions within an image as part
of the input query is an important challenge, e.g., the [image] [request] interface above would
not directly a user to ask Why is [this person in the image] sad?. One option would to
simply require users specifically describe the piece of the image they are attempting to specify,
e.g., “[image] [description of specific region] [request]". But authoring concrete
referring expressions is not only cumbersome, particularly for scenes with lots of objects (e.g., “the
person in the red jacket on the left of the scene with their arms crossed") but also challenging, even for
humans: [11] argue that a good referring expression should both specify the reference precisely, but
also, follow Grice’s maxim of Quantity, i.e., provide no extra information. Given this tension, many
1

Code will be released in https://github.com/jamespark3922/lskd

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

