Learning Neural Implicit through Volume Rendering
with Attentive Depth Fusion Priors

Pengchong Hu Zhizhong Han
Machine Perception Lab, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
pchu@wayne.edu h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Learning neural implicit representations has achieved remarkable performance
in 3D reconstruction from multi-view images. Current methods use volume rendering to render implicit representations into either RGB or depth images that
are supervised by multi-view ground truth. However, rendering a view each time
suffers from incomplete depth at holes and unawareness of occluded structures
from the depth supervision, which severely affects the accuracy of geometry inference via volume rendering. To resolve this issue, we propose to learn neural
implicit representations from multi-view RGBD images through volume rendering
with an attentive depth fusion prior. Our prior allows neural networks to perceive coarse 3D structures from the Truncated Signed Distance Function (TSDF)
fused from all depth images available for rendering. The TSDF enables accessing the missing depth at holes on one depth image and the occluded parts that
are invisible from the current view. By introducing a novel attention mechanism, we allow neural networks to directly use the depth fusion prior with the
inferred occupancy as the learned implicit function. Our attention mechanism
works with either a one-time fused TSDF that represents a whole scene or an
incrementally fused TSDF that represents a partial scene in the context of Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM). Our evaluations on widely used
benchmarks including synthetic and real-world scans show our superiority over
the latest neural implicit methods. Please see our project page for code and data at
https://machineperceptionlab.github.io/Attentive_DF_Prior/.

1

Introduction

3D reconstruction from multi-view images has been studied for decades. Traditional methods like
Structure from Motion (SfM) [61], Multi-View Stereo (MVS) [62], and Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping (SLAM) [49] estimate 3D structures as point clouds by maximizing multi-view color
consistency. Current methods [84, 28] mainly adopt data-driven strategies to learn depth estimation
priors from large scale benchmarks using deep learning models. However, the reconstructed 3D point
clouds lack geometry details, due to their discrete representation essence, which makes them not
friendly to downstream applications.
More recent methods use implicit functions such as signed distance functions (SDFs) [77] or occupancy functions [51] as continuous representations of 3D shapes and scenes. Using volume rendering,
we can learn neural implicit functions by comparing their 2D renderings with multi-view ground truth
including color [88, 97], depth [88, 3, 97] or normal [88, 76, 16] maps. Although the supervision of
using depth images as rendering target can provide detailed structure information and guide importance sampling along rays [88], both the missing depth at holes and the unawareness of occluded
structures make it hard to significantly improve the reconstruction accuracy. Hence, how to more
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

