Alternating Updates for Efficient Transformers

Cenk Baykal∗
Google Research

Dylan Cutler
Google Research

Nishanth Dikkala
Google Research

Nikhil Ghosh†
UC Berkeley

Rina Panigrahy
Google Research

Xin Wang
Google Research

Abstract
It has been well established that increasing scale in deep transformer networks leads
to improved quality and performance. However, this increase in scale often comes
with prohibitive increases in compute cost and inference latency. We introduce
Alternating Updates (AltUp), a simple-to-implement method to increase a model’s
capacity without the computational burden. AltUp enables the widening of the
learned representation, i.e., the token embedding, while only incurring a negligible
increase in latency. AltUp achieves this by working on a subblock of the widened
representation at each layer and using a predict-and-correct mechanism to update
the inactivated blocks. We present extensions of AltUp, such as its applicability
to the sequence dimension, and demonstrate how AltUp can be synergistically
combined with existing approaches, such as Sparse Mixture-of-Experts models, to
obtain efficient models with even higher capacity. Our experiments on benchmark
transformer models and language tasks demonstrate the consistent effectiveness
of AltUp on a diverse set of scenarios. Notably, on SuperGLUE and SQuAD
benchmarks, AltUp enables up to 87% speedup relative to the dense baselines at
the same accuracy.

1

Introduction

Contemporary machine learning models have been remarkably successful in many domains, ranging
from natural language [6, 20] to computer vision [56, 40]. Many of these successes have come in
part through sheer scale. A vast amount of empirical studies justify the conventional wisdom that
bigger (models and data sets) is better [19, 24]. Accordingly, state-of-the-art Transformer [48] models
often contain billions of parameters and are trained for weeks on enormously large data sets using
thousands of AI accelerators. Their immense size leads to prohibitive compute and energy costs [36]
and prevents their deployment to resource-constrained applications [31].
To alleviate these costs and enable scalability of modern Transformers, a recent line of works
have proposed techniques to increase the capacity of models without drastically increasing the
computational costs via conditional computation. A notable paradigm is sparsely-activated networks,
such as Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models [11, 59, 35, 1, 28, 43, 45]. The main idea of MoE is to
effectively widen each network layer by accessing dynamically invoked parameters, i.e., experts,
where each expert corresponds to a small subset of disjoint parameters that can be acted on by the
input. During training and inference, a given input to the network is routed to a small subset of
experts (parameters) to compute the output. As a result, the computation cost remains small relative
to the total number of parameters. This scheme enables models with higher capacity with only a
relatively small increase in computation.
∗
†

Correspondence to baykalc@google.com.
Work done as an intern at Google Research

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

