DELIFFAS: Deformable Light Fields
for Fast Avatar Synthesis

Youngjoong Kwon1∗, Lingjie Liu2,3 , Henry Fuchs1 ,
Marc Habermann3,4†, Christian Theobalt3,4
1
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. 2 University of Pennsylvania.
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus.
4
Saarbrücken Research Center for Visual Computing, Interaction and AI.
{youngjoong,fuchs}@cs.unc.edu

{lliu,mhaberma,theobalt}mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Generating controllable and photorealistic digital human avatars is a long-standing
and important problem in Vision and Graphics. Recent methods have shown great
progress in terms of either photorealism or inference speed while the combination
of the two desired properties still remains unsolved. To this end, we propose
a novel method, called DELIFFAS, which parameterizes the appearance of the
human as a surface light field that is attached to a controllable and deforming
human mesh model. At the core, we represent the light field around the human
with a deformable two-surface parameterization, which enables fast and accurate
inference of the human appearance. This allows perceptual supervision on the
full image compared to previous approaches that could only supervise individual
pixels or small patches due to their slow runtime. Our carefully designed human
representation and supervision strategy leads to state-of-the-art synthesis results
and inference time. The video results and code are available at https://vcai.
mpi-inf.mpg.de/projects/DELIFFAS.

1

Introduction

Generating photorealistic renderings of humans is a long-standing and important problem in Computer
Graphics and Vision with many applications in the movie industry, gaming, and AR/VR. Traditionally,
creating such digital avatars from real data involves complicated hardware setups and manual
intervention from experienced artists, followed by sophisticated physically-based rendering techniques
to render them into an image. Thus, recent research and also this work focuses on creating a drivable
and photoreal digital double of a real human learned solely from multi-view video data to circumvent
the complicated and manual work.
Recent works can be categorized by their underlying scene representation. Explicit mesh-based
methods represent the dynamic human by a deforming geometry and dynamic textures [15] or
textured body models [45]. While these explicit methods achieve a comparably fast inference speed,
the quality is still limited in terms of detail and photorealism. Hybrid approaches [14, 32] integrate
the coordinate-based MLP to an explicit (potentially deforming) geometry. While their synthesis
quality is drastically improved compared to explicit methods, the runtime is rather slow such that
real-time is out of reach. Last, the concept of light fields [13, 38, 5] is well known for decades and
recently, neural variants [47, 30, 55, 2, 52] have been proposed. Since ray-marching, i.e., sampling
multiple points along the ray, is not required, these methods are fast to evaluate. However, results are
∗
†

This work was completed during an internship at MPII.
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

