Safety Verification of Decision-Tree Policies
in Continuous Time
Christian Schilling
Aalborg University
Aalborg, Denmark
christianms@cs.aau.dk

Anna Lukina
TU Delft
Delft, The Netherlands
a.lukina@tudelft.nl

Emir Demirović
TU Delft
Delft, The Netherlands
e.demirovic@tudelft.nl

Kim Guldstrand Larsen
Aalborg University
Aalborg, Denmark
kgl@cs.aau.dk

Abstract
Decision trees have gained popularity as interpretable surrogate models for learningbased control policies. However, providing safety guarantees for systems controlled
by decision trees is an open challenge. We show that the problem is undecidable
even for systems with the simplest dynamics, and PSPACE-complete for finitehorizon properties. The latter can be verified for discrete-time systems via bounded
model checking. However, for continuous-time systems, such an approach requires
discretization, thereby weakening the guarantees for the original system. This
paper presents the first algorithm to directly verify decision-tree controlled systems
in continuous time. The key aspect of our method is exploiting the decisiontree structure to propagate a set-based approximation through the decision nodes.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach by verifying safety of several
decision trees distilled to imitate neural-network policies for nonlinear systems.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has shown success in deriving control policies for nonlinear systems for
which classical optimal control theory provides no solution [Mnih et al., 2015]. Despite impressive
performance, there are two key drawbacks: (i) the resulting policy is difficult to interpret, and
(ii) there are no guarantees that the system always reaches the desired goal and avoids unsafe states.
The interpretability challenge has led to a review of decision trees as well-performing, compact,
and transparent surrogates for deep neural networks [Ashok et al., 2020, 2019, David et al., 2015,
Alamdari et al., 2020, Vos and Verwer, 2023]. To provide safety guarantees, prior work proposed
to encode a discrete, time-bounded system controlled by a decision-tree policy as a set of logical
constraints [Bastani et al., 2018]. However, this approach does not apply to continuous-time dynamics.
Example 1. To illustrate the problem, we consider a quadrotor system [Ivanov et al., 2019] in
Figure 1(a), where the task is to follow the brown reference trajectory from (0, 0) and stay within the
blue dashed safety corridor. Illustrated schematically in Figure 1(b), we may observe a trajectory
that exhibits safe behavior for each discrete time point but leaves the safety corridor in between.
Since the trajectory returns quickly enough, this violation is missed by a discrete-time analysis.
In this work, we address, for the first time, the problem of verifying safety (reach-avoid) properties of
a decision-tree controlled system (DTCS) with (nonlinear) continous-time dynamics. We propose an
algorithm that exploits the structure of the decision-tree policy and propagates sets of reachable states,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

