Faster Relative Entropy Coding with
Greedy Rejection Coding
Gergely Flamich⇤
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
gf332@cam.ac.uk

Stratis Markou⇤
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
em626@cam.ac.uk

José Miguel Hernández Lobato
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Relative entropy coding (REC) algorithms encode a sample from a target distribution Q using a proposal distribution P using as few bits as possible. Unlike entropy
coding, REC does not assume discrete distributions or require quantisation. As
such, it can be naturally integrated into communication pipelines such as learnt
compression and differentially private federated learning. Unfortunately, despite
their practical benefits, REC algorithms have not seen widespread application, due
to their prohibitively slow runtimes or restrictive assumptions. In this paper, we
make progress towards addressing these issues. We introduce Greedy Rejection
Coding (GRC), which generalises the rejection based-algorithm of Harsha et al.
(2007) to arbitrary probability spaces and partitioning schemes. We first show that
GRC terminates almost surely and returns unbiased samples from Q, after which
we focus on two of its variants: GRCS and GRCD. We show that for continuous
Q and P over R with unimodal density ratio dQ/dP , the expected runtime of
GRCS is upper bounded by DKL [QkP ] + O(1) where ⇡ 4.82, and its expected
codelength is optimal. This makes GRCS the first REC algorithm with guaranteed
optimal runtime for this class of distributions, up to the multiplicative constant .
This significantly improves upon the previous state-of-the-art method, A* coding
(Flamich et al., 2022). Under the same assumptions, we experimentally observe and
conjecture that the expected runtime and codelength of GRCD are upper bounded
by DKL [QkP ] + O(1). Finally, we evaluate GRC in a variational autoencoderbased compression pipeline on MNIST, and show that a modified ELBO and an
index-compression method can further improve compression efficiency.

1

Introduction and motivation

Over the past decade, the development of excellent deep generative models (DGMs) such as variational autoencoders (VAEs; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020; Child, 2020), normalising flows (Kingma et al.,
2016) and diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) demonstrated great promise in leveraging machine
learning (ML) for data compression. Many recent learnt compression approaches have significantly
outperformed the best classical hand-crafted codecs across a range of domains, such as lossless and
lossy image or video compression (Zhang et al., 2021; Mentzer et al., 2020, 2022).
Transform coding. Most learnt compression algorithms are transform coding methods: they first
map a datum to a latent variable using a learnt transform, and encode it using entropy coding (Ballé
et al., 2020). Entropy coding assumes discrete variables while the latent variables in DGMs are
typically continuous, so most transform coding methods quantize the latent variable prior to entropy
coding. Unfortunately, quantization has zero derivative almost everywhere. Thus, state-of-the-art
DGMs trained with gradient-based optimisation must resort to some continuous approximation to
⇤

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

