How to Turn Your Knowledge Graph
Embeddings into Generative Models

Lorenzo Loconte
University of Edinburgh, UK
l.loconte@sms.ed.ac.uk

Nicola Di Mauro
University of Bari, Italy
nicola.dimauro@uniba.it

Robert Peharz
TU Graz, Austria
robert.peharz@tugraz.at

Antonio Vergari
University of Edinburgh, UK
avergari@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Some of the most successful knowledge graph embedding (KGE) models for
link prediction – CP, RESCAL, T UCK ER, C OMPL E X – can be interpreted as
energy-based models. Under this perspective they are not amenable for exact
maximum-likelihood estimation (MLE), sampling and struggle to integrate logical
constraints. This work re-interprets the score functions of these KGEs as circuits
– constrained computational graphs allowing efficient marginalisation. Then, we
design two recipes to obtain efficient generative circuit models by either restricting
their activations to be non-negative or squaring their outputs. Our interpretation
comes with little or no loss of performance for link prediction, while the circuits
framework unlocks exact learning by MLE, efficient sampling of new triples, and
guarantee that logical constraints are satisfied by design. Furthermore, our models
scale more gracefully than the original KGEs on graphs with millions of entities.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs (KGs) are a popular way to represent structured domain information as directed
graphs encoded as collections of triples (subject, predicate, object), where subjects and objects
(entities) are nodes in the graph, and predicates their edge labels. For example, the information
that the drug “loxoprofen” interacts with the protein “COX2” is represented as a triple (loxoprofen,
interacts, COX2) in the biomedical KG ogbl-biokg [32]. As real-world KGs are often incomplete, we
are interested in performing reasoning tasks over them while dealing with missing information. The
simplest reasoning task is link prediction [48], i.e., querying for the entities that are connected in a
KG by an edge labelled with a certain predicate. For instance, we can retrieve all proteins that the
drug “loxoprofen” interacts with by asking the query (loxoprofen, interacts, ?).
Knowledge graph embedding (KGE) models are state-of-the-art (SOTA) models for link prediction
[40, 56, 12] that map entities and predicates to sub-symbolic representations, which are used to assign
a real-valued degree of existence to triples in order to rank them. For example, the SOTA KGE model
C OMPL E X [65] assigns (loxoprofen, interacts, phosphoric-acid) and (loxoprofen, interacts, COX2)
scores 2.3 and 1.3, hence ranking the first higher than the second in our link prediction example.
This simple example, however, also highlights some opportunities that are missed by KGE models.
First, triple scores cannot be directly compared across different queries and across different KGE
models, as they can be seen as negative energies and not normalised probabilities over triples [41, 7,
6, 27, 43]. To establish a sound probabilistic interpretation and therefore have probabilities instead of
scores that can be easily interpreted and compared [79], we would need to compute the normalisation
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

