Improved Frequency Estimation Algorithms with and
without Predictions
Anders Aamand
MIT
aamand@mit.edu

Justin Y. Chen
MIT
justc@mit.edu

Sandeep Silwal
MIT
silwal@mit.edu

Huy Lê Nguyễn
Northeastern University
hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu
Ali Vakilian
TTIC
vakilian@ttic.edu

Abstract
Estimating frequencies of elements appearing in a data stream is a key task in largescale data analysis. Popular sketching approaches to this problem (e.g., CountMin
and CountSketch) come with worst-case guarantees that probabilistically bound
the error of the estimated frequencies for any possible input. The work of Hsu
et al. (2019) introduced the idea of using machine learning to tailor sketching
algorithms to the specific data distribution they are being run on. In particular, their
learning-augmented frequency estimation algorithm uses a learned heavy-hitter
oracle which predicts which elements will appear many times in the stream. We
give a novel algorithm, which in some parameter regimes, already theoretically
outperforms the learning based algorithm of Hsu et al. without the use of any predictions. Augmenting our algorithm with heavy-hitter predictions further reduces
the error and improves upon the state of the art. Empirically, our algorithms achieve
superior performance in all experiments compared to prior approaches.

1

Introduction

In frequency estimation, we stream a sequence of elements from [n] := {1, . . . , n}, and the goal is to
estimate fi , the frequency of the ith element, at the end of the stream using low-space. Frequency
estimation is one of the central problems in data streaming with a wide range of applications from
networking (gathering important monitoring statistics [31, 62, 46]) to machine learning (NLP [33],
feature selection [3], semi supervised learning [58]). CountMin (CM) [20] and CountSketch (CS)
[14] are arguably the most popular and versatile of the algorithms for frequency estimation, and are
implemented in many popular packages such as Spark [63], Twitter Algebird [10], and Redis.
Standard approaches to frequency estimation are designed to perform well in the worst-case due to
the multitudinous benefits of worst-case guarantees. However, algorithms designed to handle any
possible input do not exploit special structure of the particular distribution of inputs they are used
for. In practice, these patterns can be described by domain experts or learned from historical data.
Following the burgeoning trend of combining machine learning and classical algorithm design, [36]
initiated the study of learning-augmented frequency estimation by extending the classical CM and CS
algorithms in a simple but effective manner via a heavy-hitters oracle. During a training phase, they
construct a classifier (e.g. a neural network) to detect whether an element i is “heavy” (e.g., whether
fi is among the most frequent items). After such a classifier is trained, they scan the input stream,
and apply the classifier to each element i. If the element is predicted to be heavy, it is allocated a
unique bucket, so that an exact value of fi is computed. Otherwise, the stream element is inputted
into the standard sketching algorithms.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

