BayesTune: Bayesian Sparse Deep Model Fine-tuning

1

Minyoung Kim1
Samsung AI Center Cambridge, UK
mikim21@gmail.com

2

Timothy Hospedales1,2
University of Edinburgh, UK
t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep learning practice is increasingly driven by powerful foundation models (FM),
pre-trained at scale and then fine-tuned for specific tasks of interest. A key property
of this workflow is the efficacy of performing sparse or parameter-efficient finetuning, meaning that by updating only a tiny fraction of the whole FM parameters
on a downstream task can lead to surprisingly good performance, often even
superior to a full model update. However, it is not clear what is the optimal and
principled way to select which parameters to update. Although a growing number
of sparse fine-tuning ideas have been proposed, they are mostly not satisfactory,
relying on hand-crafted heuristics or heavy approximation. In this paper we propose
a novel Bayesian sparse fine-tuning algorithm: we place a (sparse) Laplace prior
for each parameter of the FM, with the mean equal to the initial value and the scale
parameter having a hyper-prior that encourages small scale. Roughly speaking, the
posterior means of the scale parameters indicate how important it is to update the
corresponding parameter away from its initial value when solving the downstream
task. Given the sparse prior, most scale parameters are small a posteriori, and
the few large-valued scale parameters identify those FM parameters that crucially
need to be updated away from their initial values. Based on this, we can threshold
the scale parameters to decide which parameters to update or freeze, leading to a
principled sparse fine-tuning strategy. To efficiently infer the posterior distribution
of the scale parameters, we adopt the Langevin MCMC sampler, requiring only two
times the complexity of the vanilla SGD. Tested on popular NLP benchmarks as
well as the VTAB vision tasks, our approach shows significant improvement over
the state-of-the-arts (e.g., 1% point higher than the best SOTA when fine-tuning
RoBERTa for GLUE and SuperGLUE benchmarks).

1

Introduction

Practical deep learning increasingly relies on a workflow of fine-tuning pre-trained foundation models
for the specific task of interest to be solved. The foundation models (FM)s are often pre-trained at
scale using large architectures and self-supervised objectives on large scale unlabelled data, allowing
them to encode a great deal of general prior knowledge. Fine-tuning then specialises these general
purpose FMs to the specific task of interest. The key challenge then becomes how to conduct
fine-tuning so as to balance the conflicting goals of adapting to the task at hand; while retaining
the knowledge obtained during foundational pre-training and avoiding overfitting on the (typically
smaller) downstream training set. This is addressed from a variety of perspectives from careful
learning rate scheduling to regularised fine-tuning [26, 12]. However, the mainstream approach in
practice is largely based on some instantiation of sparse fine-tuning.
Sparse fine-tuning, also known as parameter efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) [23, 43, 14, 24, 22, 15, 16,
18, 45, 13, 10], manages the adaptation/forgetting trade-off by selectively updating a specific subset
of parameters in the FM while keeping others frozen. These approaches also benefit from good
parameter scalability with respect to the number of downstream tasks to solve since each downstream
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

