Regularity as Intrinsic Reward for Free Play

Cansu Sancaktar1 Justus Piater2 Georg Martius1,3
2
University of Innsbruck 3 University of Tübingen
Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems, Germany
Austria
Germany
cansu.sancaktar@tuebingen.mpg.de
1

Abstract
We propose regularity as a novel reward signal for intrinsically-motivated reinforcement learning. Taking inspiration from child development, we postulate that
striving for structure and order helps guide exploration towards a subspace of tasks
that are not favored by naive uncertainty-based intrinsic rewards. Our generalized
formulation of Regularity as Intrinsic Reward (RaIR) allows us to operationalize
it within model-based reinforcement learning. In a synthetic environment, we
showcase the plethora of structured patterns that can emerge from pursuing this
regularity objective. We also demonstrate the strength of our method in a multiobject robotic manipulation environment. We incorporate RaIR into free play and
use it to complement the model’s epistemic uncertainty as an intrinsic reward.
Doing so, we witness the autonomous construction of towers and other regular
structures during free play, which leads to a substantial improvement in zero-shot
downstream task performance on assembly tasks. Code and videos are available at
https://sites.google.com/view/rair-project.

Figure 1: Regularity as intrinsic reward yields ordered and symmetric patterns. In S HAPE G RID W ORLD (top row) and in C ONSTRUCTION (bottom row), we showcase the generated constellations
when maximizing our proposed regularity reward RaIR with ground truth (GT) models.

1

Introduction

Regularity, and symmetry as a specific form of regularity, are ubiquitous in nature as well as in
our manufactured world. The ability to detect regularity helps to identify essential structures,
minimizing redundancy and allowing for efficient interaction with the world [1]. Not only do we
encounter symmetries in arts, design, and architecture, but our preference also showcases itself in
play behavior. Adults and children have both been observed to prefer symmetry in visual perception,
where symmetric patterns are more easily detected, memorized, and copied [2, 3]. Several works in
developmental psychology show that regular patterns and symmetries are actively sought out during
free play in children as well as adults [4–6].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

