Federated Learning with Manifold Regularization and
Normalized Update Reaggregation

Xuming An1 Li Shen2 * Han Hu1∗ Yong Luo3
School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
JD Explore Academy, China 3 School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
{anxuming,hhu}@bit.edu.cn, mathshenli@gmail.com, luoyong@whu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging collaborative machine learning framework
where multiple clients train the global model without sharing their own datasets. In
FL, the model inconsistency caused by the local data heterogeneity across clients
results in the near-orthogonality of client updates, which leads to the global update
norm reduction and slows down the convergence. Most previous works focus on
eliminating the difference of parameters (or gradients) between the local and global
models, which may fail to reflect the model inconsistency due to the complex
structure of the machine learning model and the Euclidean space’s limitation
in meaningful geometric representations. In this paper, we propose FedMRUR
by adopting the manifold model fusion scheme and a new global optimizer to
alleviate the negative impacts. Concretely, FedMRUR adopts a hyperbolic graph
manifold regularizer enforcing the representations of the data in the local and
global models are close to each other in a low-dimensional subspace. Because the
machine learning model has the graph structure, the distance in hyperbolic space
can reflect the model bias better than the Euclidean distance. In this way, FedMRUR
exploits the manifold structures of the representations to significantly reduce the
model inconsistency. FedMRUR also aggregates the client updates norms as the
global update norm, which can appropriately enlarge each client’s contribution
to the global update, thereby mitigating the norm reduction introduced by the
near-orthogonality of client updates. Furthermore, we theoretically prove that our
1
) for non-convex setting
algorithm can achieve a linear speedup property O( √SKT
under partial client participation, where S is the participated clients number, K is
the local interval and T is the total number of communication rounds. Experiments
demonstrate that FedMRUR can achieve a new state-of-the-art (SOTA) accuracy
with less communication.

1

Introduction

FL is a collaborative distributed framework where multiple clients jointly train the model with their
private datasets [27, 28]. To protect privacy, each client is unable to access the other dataset [2].
A centralized server receives the parameters or gradients from the clients and updates the global
model[46]. Due to the limited communication resource, only part of the clients is involved in the
collaborative learning process and train the local model in multiple intervals with their own datasets
within one communication round [23]. Due to the data heterogeneity, clients’ partial participation and
multiple local training yield severe model inconsistency, which leads to the divergences between the
directions of the local updates from the clients and thus reduces the magnitude of global updates [17].
Therefore, the model inconsistency is the major source of performance degradation in FL [40, 15].
∗

Corresponding authors: Li Shen and Han Hu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

