Conformal PID Control for Time Series Prediction
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos
Emmanuel J. Candès
Ryan J. Tibshirani
University of California, Berkeley
Stanford University
University of California, Berkeley
angelopoulos@berkeley.edu candes@stanford.edu
ryantibs@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of uncertainty quantification for time series prediction, with
the goal of providing easy-to-use algorithms with formal guarantees. The algorithms we present build upon ideas from conformal prediction and control theory,
are able to prospectively model conformal scores in an online setting, and adapt to
the presence of systematic errors due to seasonality, trends, and general distribution
shifts. Our theory both simplifies and strengthens existing analyses in online conformal prediction. Experiments on 4-week-ahead forecasting of statewide COVID-19
death counts in the U.S. show an improvement in coverage over the ensemble
forecaster used in official CDC communications. We also run experiments on
predicting electricity demand, market returns, and temperature using autoregressive, Theta, Prophet, and Transformer models. We provide an extendable codebase
for testing our methods and for the integration of new algorithms, data sets, and
forecasting rules.1

1

Introduction

Machine learning models run in production systems regularly encounter data distributions that change
over time. This can be due to factors such as seasonality and time-of-day, continual updating and retraining of upstream machine learning models, changing user behaviors, and so on. These distribution
shifts can degrade a model’s predictive performance. They also invalidate standard techniques for
uncertainty quantification, such as conformal prediction [36, 35].
To address the problem of shifting distributions, we consider the task of prediction in an adversarial
online setting, as in [16]. In this problem setting, we observe a (potentially) adversarial time series of
deterministic covariates xt ∈ X and responses yt ∈ Y, for t ∈ N = {1, 2, 3, . . . }. As in standard
conformal prediction, we are free to define any conformal score function st : X × Y → R, which we
can view as measuring the accuracy of our forecast at time t. We will assume with a loss of generality
that st is negatively oriented (lower values mean greater forecast accuracy). For example, we may
use the absolute error st (x, y) = |y − ft (x)|, where ft is a forecaster trained on data up to but not
including data at time t.
The challenge in the sequential setting is as follows. We seek to invert the score function to construct
a conformal prediction set,
Ct = {y ∈ Y : st (xt , y) ≤ qt },
(1)
where qt is an estimated 1 − α quantile for the distribution of the score st (xt , yt ) at time t. In standard
conformal prediction, we would take qt to be a level 1 − α sample quantile (up to a finite-sample
correction) of st (xi , yi ), i < t; if the data sequence (xi , yi ), i ∈ N were i.i.d. or exchangeable, then
this would yield 1 − α coverage [35] at each time t. However, in the sequential setting, which does
not assume exchangeability (or any probabilistic model for the data for that matter), choosing qt in (1)
to yield coverage is a formidable task. In fact, if we are not willing to make any assumptions about
the data sequence, then a coverage guarantee at time t would only be possible with trivial methods,
which construct prediction intervals of infinite sizes.
1

http://github.com/aangelopoulos/conformal-time-series

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

