Optimal testing using combined test statistics across
independent studies
Lasse Vuursteen⇤
Delft Institute of Applied Mathematics
Delft University of Technology
l.vuursteen@tudelft.nl

Botond Szabó
Department of Decision Sciences
and Institute for Data Science and Analytics
Bocconi University
botond.szabo@unibocconi.it

Aad van der Vaart
Delft Institute of Applied Mathematics
Delft University of Technology
a.w.vandervaart@tudelft.nl

Harry van Zanten
Mathematics Department
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
j.h.van.zanten@vu.nl

Abstract
Combining test statistics from independent trials or experiments is a popular method
of meta-analysis. However, there is very limited theoretical understanding of the
power of the combined test, especially in high-dimensional models considering
composite hypotheses tests. We derive a mathematical framework to study standard
meta-analysis testing approaches in the context of the many normal means model,
which serves as the platform to investigate more complex models.
We introduce a natural and mild restriction on the meta-level combination functions
of the local trials. This allows us to mathematically quantify the cost of compressing
m trials into real-valued test statistics and combining these. We then derive
minimax lower and matching upper bounds for the separation rates of standard
combination methods for e.g. p-values and e-values, quantifying the loss relative
to using the full, pooled data. We observe an elbow effect, revealing that in certain
cases combining the locally optimal tests in each trial results in a sub-optimal
meta-analysis method and develop approaches to achieve the global optima. We
also explore the possible gains of allowing limited coordination between the trial
designs. Our results connect meta-analysis with bandwidth constraint distributed
inference and build on recent information theoretic developments in the latter field.

1

Introduction

Given multiple data sets relating to the same hypothesis, one would like to combine the evidence.
Sometimes, the full data sets are not available (e.g. due to privacy or proprietary reasons) or difficult
to combine directly (e.g. due to the different experimental or observational setups). In such cases, the
analysis must be carried out on the basis of the published results for each of the studies. Such “metaanalysis” can increase the statistical power by combining individually inconclusive or moderately
significant tests, while keeping the false positive rate under control. Therefore, meta-analysis has
received a lot of attention in various fields, for instance in genetics and system biology, when studying
rare variants [4, 16] or in deep learning, for few shot image recognition and neural architecture search,
see the review article [24].
⇤

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

