Implicit Differentiable Outlier Detection Enables
Robust Deep Multimodal Analysis

Zhu Wang
Sourav Medya
Sathya N. Ravi
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
{zwang260,medya,sathya}@uic.edu

Abstract
Deep network models are often purely inductive during both training and inference on unseen data. When these models are used for prediction, but they may
fail to capture important semantic information and implicit dependencies within
datasets. Recent advancements have shown that combining multiple modalities
in large-scale vision and language settings can improve understanding and generalization performance. However, as the model size increases, fine-tuning and
deployment become computationally expensive, even for a small number of downstream tasks. Moreover, it is still unclear how domain or prior modal knowledge
can be specified in a backpropagation friendly manner, especially in large-scale
and noisy settings. To address these challenges, we propose a simplified alternative
of combining features from pretrained deep networks and freely available semantic
explicit knowledge. In order to remove irrelevant explicit knowledge that does
not correspond well to the images, we introduce an implicit Differentiable Outof-Distribution (OOD) detection layer. This layer addresses outlier detection by
solving for fixed points of a differentiable function and using the last iterate of
fixed point solver to backpropagate. In practice, we apply our model on several
vision and language downstream tasks including visual question answering, visual
reasoning, and image-text retrieval on different datasets. Our experiments show
that it is possible to design models that perform similarly to state-of-the-art results
but with significantly fewer samples and less training time. Our models and code
are available here: https://github.com/ellenzhuwang/implicit_vkood

1

Introduction

Numerous neural network models are constructed via the stacking of explicit layers that transform
inputs into outputs through a sequence of operations associated with the designated layers. Although
these explicit layers are expressive, they may be unnecessary in many large-scale applications where
only the function value and its gradients are required. For instance, it is possible to employ implicit
layers for diverse tasks, including hyperparameter optimization [7], meta learning [50], and solving
inverse problems in image processing [21]. Indeed, if a desired input-output correspondence within a
network can be expressed as an optimization problem, gradients can be computed efficiently [30].
Recently, JFB [17] proposed an efficient method to backpropagate through implicit layers by implementing them as a Network Operator N (·). Here, N is defined as a sequential application of a map
F (·), which is guaranteed to converge in T < ∞ iterations. Formally, N (x) can be represented as,
N (x; Θ) = |F ◦ F {z
◦ · · · ◦ F}(x; Θ),

(1)

T times

where Θ corresponds to parameters of a potential multimodal model. The convenience of N in
Equation (1) lies in its ability to backpropagate through N without requiring its full sequence (or
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

