Provably (More) Sample-Efficient Offline RL with
Options

Xiaoyan Hu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, China
xyhu21@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Ho-fung Leung
Independent Researcher
Hong Kong SAR, China
ho-fung.leung@outlook.com

Abstract
The options framework yields empirical success in long-horizon planning problems of reinforcement learning (RL). Recent works show that options improves
the sample efficiency in online RL where the learner can actively explores the
environment. However, these results are no longer applicable to scenarios where
exploring the environment online is risky, e.g., automated driving and healthcare.
In this paper, we provide the first analysis of the sample complexity for offline
RL with options, where the agent learns from a dataset without further interaction
with the environment. We propose the PEssimistic Value Iteration for Learning
with Options (PEVIO) algorithm and establish near-optimal suboptimality bounds
(with respect to the novel information-theoretic lower bound for offline RL with
options) for two popular data-collection procedures, where the first one collects
state-option transitions and the second one collects state-action transitions. We
show that compared to offline RL with actions, using options not only enjoys a
faster finite-time convergence rate (to the optimal value) but also attains a better
performance (when either the options are carefully designed or the offline data is
limited). Based on these results, we analyze the pros and cons of the data-collection
procedures, which may facilitate the selection in practice.

1

Introduction

Planning in long-horizon tasks is challenging in reinforcement learning (RL) (Co-Reyes et al., 2018;
Eysenbach et al., 2019; Hoang et al., 2021). A line of study proposes to accelerate learning in
these tasks using temporally-extended actions (Fikes et al., 1972; Sacerdoti, 1973; Drescher, 1991;
Jiang et al., 2019; Nachum et al., 2019; Machado et al., 2021; Erraqabi et al., 2022). One powerful
approach is the options framework introduced by Sutton et al. (1999), where the agent interacts with
the environment with closed-loop policies called options. Empirical success (Tessler et al., 2017;
Vezhnevets et al., 2017) shows that options help achieve sample-efficient performance in long-horizon
planning problems.
To provide a theoretical guarantee to the options framework, recent works have focused on the sample
complexity of RL with options in the online setting, where the agent continuously explores the
environment and learns a hierarchical policy to select options. Brunskill and Li (2014) establish a
PAC-like sample complexity of RL with options in the semi-Markov decision processes (SMDPs),
where temporally-extended actions are treated as indivisible and unknown units. Later, Fruit and
Lazaric (2017) provide the first regret analysis of RL with options under the Markov decision
processes (MDPs) framework. While their proposed algorithm attains a sublinear regret, it requires
prior knowledge of the environment, which is not usually available in practice. To address this
problem, Fruit et al. (2017) propose an algorithm that does not require prior knowledge, yet achieves
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

