Module-wise Training of Neural Networks via the
Minimizing Movement Scheme

Skander Karkar
Criteo, Sorbonne Université

Ibrahim Ayed
Sorbonne Université, Thales

Emmanuel de Bézenac
ETH Zurich

Patrick Gallinari
Criteo, Sorbonne Université

Abstract
Greedy layer-wise or module-wise training of neural networks is compelling in
constrained and on-device settings where memory is limited, as it circumvents a
number of problems of end-to-end back-propagation. However, it suffers from a
stagnation problem, whereby early layers overfit and deeper layers stop increasing
the test accuracy after a certain depth. We propose to solve this issue by introducing
a module-wise regularization inspired by the minimizing movement scheme for
gradient flows in distribution space. We call the method TRGL for Transport Regularized Greedy Learning and study it theoretically, proving that it leads to greedy
modules that are regular and that progressively solve the task. Experimentally, we
show improved accuracy of module-wise training of various architectures such as
ResNets, Transformers and VGG, when our regularization is added, superior to
that of other module-wise training methods and often to end-to-end training, with
as much as 60% less memory usage.

1

Introduction

End-to-end backpropagation is the standard training method of neural networks. However, it requires
storing the whole model and computational graph during training, which requires large memory
consumption. It also prohibits training the layers in parallel. Dividing the network into modules,
a module being made up of one or more layers, accompanied by auxiliary classifiers, and greedily
solving module-wise optimization problems sequentially (i.e. one after the other fully) or in parallel
(i.e. at the same time batch-wise), consumes much less memory than end-to-end training as it does
not need to store as many activations, and when done sequentially, only requires loading and training
one module (so possibly one layer) at a time. Module-wise training has therefore been used in
constrained settings in which end-to-end training can be impossible such as training on mobile
devices [58, 57] and dealing with very large whole slide images [65]. When combined with batch
buffers, parallel module-wise training also allows for parallel training of the modules [8]. Despite its
simplicity, module-wise training has been recently shown to scale well [8, 47, 60, 45], outperforming
more complicated alternatives to end-to-end training such as synthetic [33, 14] and delayed [32, 31]
gradients, while having superior memory savings.
In a classification task, module-wise training splits the network into successive modules, a module
being made up of one or more layers. Each module takes as input the output of the previous module,
and each module has an auxiliary classifier so that a local loss can be computed, with backpropagation
happening only inside the modules and not between them (see Figure 1 below).
The main drawback of module-wise training is the well-documented stagnation problem observed in
[43, 7, 60, 47], whereby early modules overfit and learn more discriminative features than end-to-end
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

