RiskQ: Risk-sensitive Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning Value Factorization

Siqi Shenab , Chennan Maab , Chao Liab , Weiquan Liuab ,
Yongquan Fuc∗, Songzhu Meic , Xinwang Liuc , Cheng Wangab
a
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University (XMU), China
b
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, XMU, China
c
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, China
{siqishen,cwang}@xmu.edu.cn, {yongquanf,xinwangliu}@nudt.edu.cn
{chennanma,chaoli}@stu.xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-agent systems are characterized by environmental uncertainty, varying policies of agents, and partial observability, which result in significant risks. In the
context of Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL), learning coordinated
and decentralized policies that are sensitive to risk is challenging. To formulate the
coordination requirements in risk-sensitive MARL, we introduce the Risk-sensitive
Individual-Global-Max (RIGM) principle as a generalization of the IndividualGlobal-Max (IGM) and Distributional IGM (DIGM) principles. This principle
requires that the collection of risk-sensitive action selections of each agent should
be equivalent to the risk-sensitive action selection of the central policy. Current
MARL value factorization methods do not satisfy the RIGM principle for common
risk metrics such as the Value at Risk (VaR) metric or distorted risk measurements.
Therefore, we propose RiskQ to address this limitation, which models the joint
return distribution by modeling quantiles of it as weighted quantile mixtures of
per-agent return distribution utilities. RiskQ satisfies the RIGM principle for the
VaR and distorted risk metrics. We show that RiskQ can obtain promising performance through extensive experiments. The source code of RiskQ is available in
https://github.com/xmu-rl-3dv/RiskQ.

1

Introduction

In cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) [1], it is important to learn coordinated
agent policies to achieve a common goal. However, achieving this goal is challenging due to random
rewards, environmental uncertainty, and varying policies among agents. Especially, for scenarios
with partial-observability, high-stochastic rewards and state-transitions [2]. In order to efficiently
learn MARL policies, many researchers have adopted the centralized training with decentralized
execution (CTDE) [3] paradigm, which offers advantages in terms of learning speed and performance.
A popular subset of the CTDE methods is the value factorization category [4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
To learn coordinated policies, value factorization algorithms must ensure that the global argmax
operator performed on the global state-action value function yields the same outcome as a set of
individual argmax operations performed on per-agent utilities. This requirement for coordination
is known as the individual-global-max (IGM) principle [6]. The IGM principle takes only the
expected return into account, but not the entire distribution of returns that includes potential outcome
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

