Learning nonparametric latent causal graphs
with unknown interventions
Yibo Jiang
University of Chicago
yiboj@uchicago.edu

Bryon Aragam
University of Chicago
bryon@chicagobooth.edu

Abstract
We establish conditions under which latent causal graphs are nonparametrically
identifiable and can be reconstructed from unknown interventions in the latent
space. Our primary focus is the identification of the latent structure in measurement
models without parametric assumptions such as linearity or Gaussianity. Moreover,
we do not assume the number of hidden variables is known, and we show that at
most one unknown intervention per hidden variable is needed. This extends a recent
line of work on learning causal representations from observations and interventions.
The proofs are constructive and introduce two new graphical concepts—imaginary
subsets and isolated edges—that may be useful in their own right. As a matter of
independent interest, the proofs also involve a novel characterization of the limits
of edge orientations within the equivalence class of DAGs induced by unknown
interventions. These are the first results to characterize the conditions under which
causal representations are identifiable without making any parametric assumptions
in a general setting with unknown interventions and without faithfulness.

1

Introduction

Among the many challenges in modern machine learning and artificial intelligence, learning and
reasoning about causes and effects from data remains a key challenge. In practice, one of the
hurdles that must be overcome is that we often do not have direct access to measurements on
causally meaningful variables, and instead can only measure primitive, indirect measurements such
as pixel intensities in vision, gene expression values in biology, letters and words in language, or
frequency signals in audio. In these applications, it is necessary to first learn representations with
meaningful causal signals, a problem known as causal representation learning [52]. Besides learning
representations or features of data, we are also interested in understanding what happens when we
intervene on these learned features, which is essential for causal reasoning. As such, broadly speaking,
causal representation learning can be broken down into two steps: (1) learning high-level features
from raw data and (2) learning causal relations between these features.
Given the proliferation of recent work of identifying latent representations in the observational setting
[2, 13, 23, 26, 29, 30, 32, 38, 40, 43–45, 51, 55, 63, 66, 70, 71, 73], in this paper we consider the
case of interventions. Data arising from interventions opens the door for a causal interpretation of the
learned representations, which is often described by a directed acyclic graph (DAG). This setting
raises new challenges, namely that the interventions are both latent and unknown. Moreover, in
practical applications, flexible deep neural networks are used to learn nonlinear representations of
the data, which necessitates the consideration of nonparametric assumptions. Motivated by these
challenges, we seek to answer the following important question:
Given a list of latent, unknown interventions, when is it possible to identify the
underlying (latent) causal relationships without making parametric assumptions?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

