Resetting the Optimizer in Deep RL:
An Empirical Study

Kavosh Asadi
Amazon

Rasool Fakoor
Amazon

Shoham Sabach
Amazon & Technion

Abstract
We focus on the task of approximating the optimal value function in deep reinforcement learning. This iterative process is comprised of solving a sequence of
optimization problems where the loss function changes per iteration. The common
approach to solving this sequence of problems is to employ modern variants of the
stochastic gradient descent algorithm such as Adam. These optimizers maintain
their own internal parameters such as estimates of the first-order and the secondorder moments of the gradient, and update them over time. Therefore, information
obtained in previous iterations is used to solve the optimization problem in the
current iteration. We demonstrate that this can contaminate the moment estimates
because the optimization landscape can change arbitrarily from one iteration to the
next one. To hedge against this negative effect, a simple idea is to reset the internal
parameters of the optimizer when starting a new iteration. We empirically investigate this resetting idea by employing various optimizers in conjunction with the
Rainbow algorithm. We demonstrate that this simple modification significantly
improves the performance of deep RL on the Atari benchmark.

1

Introduction

Value-function optimization lies at the epicenter of large-scale deep reinforcement learning (RL). In
this context, the deep RL agent is equipped with a parameterized neural network that, in conjunction
with large-scale optimization, is employed to find an approximation of the optimal value function.
The standard practice is to initialize the optimizer only once and at the beginning of training [1].
With each step of gradient computation, the optimizer updates its internal parameters, such as the
gradient’s moment estimates [2], and uses these internal parameters to update the network.
A unique ingredient in value-function optimization is a technique known as forward bootstrapping [3]. In typical regression problems, the loss function is a measure of the discrepancy between
a fixed target and the agent’s current approximation. This stands in contrast to value-function optimization with forward bootstrapping. In this setting, the goal is to minimize the discrepancy between
the agent’s current approximation and a second approximation obtained by performing one or multiple steps of look ahead. The regression target thus depends on the RL agent’s own approximation
which changes continually over the span of learning.
We first argue that in the presence of forward bootstrapping the value-function optimization process can best be thought of as solving a sequence of optimization problems where the loss function
changes per iteration. We demonstrate that in this case the loss function being minimized is comprised of two inputs: target parameters that remain fixed during each iteration, and optimization
(or online) parameters that are adjusted to minimize the loss function during each iteration. In this
context, updating the target parameters changes the loss function being minimized in the next iteration. By extension, the first-order and the second-order moments of the gradient can also change
arbitrarily because they depend on the landscape of the loss function.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

