Enhancing Adversarial Robustness via Score-Based
Optimization

Boya Zhang ∗

Weijian Luo †

Zhihua Zhang ‡

Abstract
Adversarial attacks have the potential to mislead deep neural network classifiers
by introducing slight perturbations. Developing algorithms that can mitigate the
effects of these attacks is crucial for ensuring the safe use of artificial intelligence.
Recent studies have suggested that score-based diffusion models are effective
in adversarial defenses. However, existing diffusion-based defenses rely on the
sequential simulation of the reversed stochastic differential equations of diffusion
models, which are computationally inefficient and yield suboptimal results. In
this paper, we introduce a novel adversarial defense scheme named ScoreOpt,
which optimizes adversarial samples at test-time, towards original clean data in the
direction guided by score-based priors. We conduct comprehensive experiments on
multiple datasets, including CIFAR10, CIFAR100 and ImageNet. Our experimental
results demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing adversarial defenses in
terms of both robustness performance and inference speed.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there have been breakthrough performance improvements with deep neural networks (DNNs), particularly in the realms of image classification, object detection, and semantic
segmentation, as evidenced by the works of [31, 59, 53, 19, 13, 51]. However, DNNs have been
shown to be easily deceived to produce incorrect predictions by simply adding human-imperceptible
perturbations to inputs. These perturbations are called adversarial attacks [14, 36, 38, 7], resulting in
safety concerns. Therefore, studies of mitigating the impact of adversarial attacks on DNNs, which is
referred to as adversarial defenses, are significant for AI safety.
Various strategies have been proposed in order to enhance the robustness of DNN classifiers against
adversarial attacks. One of the most effective forms of adversarial defense is adversarial training [36,
71, 16, 32, 71, 44], which involves training a classifier with both clean data and adversarial samples.
However, adversarial training has its limitations as it necessitates prior knowledge of the specific
attack method employed to generate adversarial examples, thus rendering it inadequate in handling
previously unseen types of adversarial attacks or corruptions.
On the contrary, adversarial purification [48, 68, 52, 28, 69, 40, 21] is another form of promising
defense that leverages a standalone purification model to eliminate adversarial signals before conducting downstream classification tasks. The primary benefit of adversarial purification is that it obviates
the need to retrain the classifier, enabling adaptive defense against adversarial attacks at test time.
Additionally, it showcases significant generalization ability in purifying a wide range of adversarial
attacks, without affecting pre-existing natural classifiers. The integration of adversarial purification
models into AI systems necessitates minor adjustments, making it a viable approach to enhancing the
robustness of DNN-based classifiers.
∗

Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies; Peking University; zhangboya@pku.edu.cn;
School of Mathematical Sciences; Peking University; luoweijian@stu.pku.edu.cn;
‡
School of Mathematical Sciences; Peking University; zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn;

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

