Brain Diffusion for Visual Exploration: Cortical
Discovery using Large Scale Generative Models
Andrew F. Luo
Carnegie Mellon University
afluo@cmu.edu

Margaret M. Henderson
Carnegie Mellon University
mmhender@cmu.edu

Leila Wehbe*
Carnegie Mellon University
lwehbe@cmu.edu

Michael J. Tarr*
Carnegie Mellon University
michaeltarr@cmu.edu

Abstract
A long standing goal in neuroscience has been to elucidate the functional organization of the brain. Within higher visual cortex, functional accounts have
remained relatively coarse, focusing on regions of interest (ROIs) and taking the
form of selectivity for broad categories such as faces, places, bodies, food, or
words. Because the identification of such ROIs has typically relied on manually
assembled stimulus sets consisting of isolated objects in non-ecological contexts,
exploring functional organization without robust a priori hypotheses has been
challenging. To overcome these limitations, we introduce a data-driven approach in
which we synthesize images predicted to activate a given brain region using paired
natural images and fMRI recordings, bypassing the need for category-specific
stimuli. Our approach – Brain Diffusion for Visual Exploration (“BrainDiVE”) –
builds on recent generative methods by combining large-scale diffusion models
with brain-guided image synthesis. Validating our method, we demonstrate the
ability to synthesize preferred images with appropriate semantic specificity for
well-characterized category-selective ROIs. We then show that BrainDiVE can
characterize differences between ROIs selective for the same high-level category.
Finally we identify novel functional subdivisions within these ROIs, validated with
behavioral data. These results advance our understanding of the fine-grained functional organization of human visual cortex, and provide well-specified constraints
for further examination of cortical organization using hypothesis-driven methods.
Code and project site: https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~afluo/BrainDiVE

1

Introduction

The human visual cortex plays a fundamental role in our ability to process, interpret, and act on visual
information. While previous studies have provided important evidence that regions in the higher
visual cortex preferentially process complex semantic categories such as faces, places, bodies, words,
and food [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], these important discoveries have been primarily achieved through the
use of researcher-crafted stimuli. However, hand-selected, synthetic stimuli may bias the results
or may not accurately capture the complexity and variability of natural scenes, sometimes leading
to debates about the interpretation and validity of identified functional regions [8]. Furthermore,
mapping selectivity based on responses to a fixed set of stimuli is necessarily limited, in that it can
only identify selectivity for the stimulus properties that are sampled. For these reasons, data-driven
methods for interpreting high-dimensional neural tuning are complementary to traditional approaches.
We introduce Brain Diffusion for Visual Exploration (“BrainDiVE”), a generative approach for
synthesizing images that are predicted to activate a given region in the human visual cortex. Several
*

Co-corresponding Authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

