Neural approximation of Wasserstein distance via a
universal architecture for symmetric and factorwise
group invariant functions

Samantha Chen
Department of Computer Science Engineering
University of California - San Diego
sac003@ucsd.edu

Yusu Wang
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute
University of California - San Diego
yusuwang@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Learning distance functions between complex objects, such as the Wasserstein
distance to compare point sets, is a common goal in machine learning applications.
However, functions on such complex objects (e.g., point sets and graphs) are often
required to be invariant to a wide variety of group actions e.g. permutation or rigid
transformation. Therefore, continuous and symmetric product functions (such as
distance functions) on such complex objects must also be invariant to the product
of such group actions. We call these functions symmetric and factor-wise group
invariant functions (or SFGI functions in short). In this paper, we first present a
general neural network architecture for approximating SFGI functions. The main
contribution of this paper combines this general neural network with a sketching
idea to develop a specific and efficient neural network which can approximate the
p-th Wasserstein distance between point sets. Very importantly, the required model
complexity is independent of the sizes of input point sets. On the theoretical front,
to the best of our knowledge, this is the first result showing that there exists a neural
network with the capacity to approximate Wasserstein distance with bounded model
complexity. Our work provides an interesting integration of sketching ideas for
geometric problems with universal approximation of symmetric functions. On the
empirical front, we present a range of results showing that our newly proposed
neural network architecture performs comparatively or better than other models
(including a SOTA Siamese Autoencoder based approach). In particular, our
neural network generalizes significantly better and trains much faster than the
SOTA Siamese AE. Finally, this line of investigation could be useful in exploring
effective neural network design for solving a broad range of geometric optimization
problems (e.g., k-means in a metric space).

1

Introduction

Recently, significant interest in geometric deep learning has led to a focus on neural network
architectures which learn functions on complex objects such point clouds [34, 22] and graphs [23].
Advancements in the development of neural networks for complex objects has led to progress in a
variety of applications from 3D image segmentation [28] to drug discovery [3, 13]. One challenge
in learning functions over such complex objects is that the desired functions are often required to
be invariant to certain group actions. For instance, functions on point clouds are often permutation
invariant with respect to the ordering of individual points. Indeed, developing permutation invariant
or equivariant neural network architectures, as well as understanding their universal approximation
properties, has attracted significant attention in the past few years; see e.g., [22, 34, 19, 20, 25, 16,
33, 29, 30, 4]
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

