Learning to Receive Help:
Intervention-Aware Concept Embedding Models

Mateo Espinosa Zarlenga
University of Cambridge
me466@cam.ac.uk

Katherine M. Collins
University of Cambridge
kmc61@cam.ac.uk

Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham
Google DeepMind
dvij@google.com

Adrian Weller
University of Cambridge
Alan Turing Institute
aw665@cam.ac.uk

Zohreh Shams
University of Cambridge
zs315@cam.ac.uk

Mateja Jamnik
University of Cambridge
mateja.jamnik@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) tackle the opacity of neural architectures by
constructing and explaining their predictions using a set of high-level concepts. A
special property of these models is that they permit concept interventions, wherein
users can correct mispredicted concepts and thus improve the model’s performance.
Recent work, however, has shown that intervention efficacy can be highly dependent
on the order in which concepts are intervened on and on the model’s architecture
and training hyperparameters. We argue that this is rooted in a CBM’s lack of
train-time incentives for the model to be appropriately receptive to concept interventions. To address this, we propose Intervention-aware Concept Embedding models
(IntCEMs), a novel CBM-based architecture and training paradigm that improves
a model’s receptiveness to test-time interventions. Our model learns a concept
intervention policy in an end-to-end fashion from where it can sample meaningful
intervention trajectories at train-time. This conditions IntCEMs to effectively select
and receive concept interventions when deployed at test-time. Our experiments
show that IntCEMs significantly outperform state-of-the-art concept-interpretable
models when provided with test-time concept interventions, demonstrating the
effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

It is important to know how to ask for help, but also important to know how to receive help. Knowing
how to react to feedback positively allows for bias correction [1] and efficient learning [2] while being
instrumental for mass collaborations [3]. Nevertheless, although the uptake of feedback is ubiquitous
in real-world decision-making, the same cannot be said about modern artificial intelligence (AI)
systems, where deployment tends to be in isolation from experts whose feedback could be queried.
Progress in this aspect has recently come from Explainable AI, where interpretable Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) that can benefit from expert feedback at test-time have been proposed [4–7].
In particular, Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) [4], a family of interpretable DNNs, enable
expert-model interactions by generating, as part of their inference process, explanations for their
predictions using high-level “concepts”. Such explanations allow human experts to better understand
a CBM’s prediction based on interpretable units of information (e.g., input is a “cat” because it
has “paws” and “whiskers”) rather than low-level features (e.g., input pixels). This design enables
humans to provide feedback to the CBM at test-time via concept interventions [4] (Figure 1), a
process specific to CBM-like architectures in which an expert analyses a CBM’s inferred concepts
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

