Gaussian Process Probes (GPP) for
Uncertainty-Aware Probing

Zi Wang∗
Google DeepMind
Jason Baldridge
Google DeepMind

Alexander Ku∗
Google DeepMind
Thomas L. Griffiths
Princeton University

Been Kim
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Understanding which concepts models can and cannot represent has been fundamental to many tasks: from effective and responsible use of models to detecting
out of distribution data. We introduce Gaussian process probes (GPP), a unified
and simple framework for probing and measuring uncertainty about concepts represented by models. As a Bayesian extension of linear probing methods, GPP asks
what kind of distribution over classifiers (of concepts) is induced by the model.
This distribution can be used to measure both what the model represents and how
confident the probe is about what the model represents. GPP can be applied to any
pre-trained model with vector representations of inputs (e.g., activations). It does
not require access to training data, gradients, or the architecture. We validate GPP
on datasets containing both synthetic and real images. Our experiments show it
can (1) probe a model’s representations of concepts even with a very small number
of examples, (2) accurately measure both epistemic uncertainty (how confident the
probe is) and aleatory uncertainty (how fuzzy the concepts are to the model), and
(3) detect out of distribution data using those uncertainty measures as well as classic
methods do. By using Gaussian processes to expand what probing can offer, GPP
provides a data-efficient, versatile and uncertainty-aware tool for understanding
and evaluating the capabilities of machine learning models.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have become pervasive in a wide range of fields, yet they remain largely
uninterpretable. As a result, gaining insight into which concepts deep learning models do or do
not represent is of growing importance. This has led to the development of a family of methods
known as “probes” [Alain and Bengio, 2016], which aim to understand the representations learned by
these models. One common approach to probe the representations of a model is to train independent
classifiers for each concept and measure their accuracy [Alain and Bengio, 2016, Kim et al., 2018,
Belinkov, 2022]. For example, if the classifier returns 0.5 probability (for the binary case) across a
range of examples, we would reasonably conclude that the model does not represent the concept.
However, simply examining the output of a classifier may not adequately reflect the intricate nature
of representing a concept. For example, we can think of two different scenarios that may result in
the same classifier output. If you ask a person if an olive is a fruit, only about 60% will say yes
(likewise 72% for avocado, 53% for pumpkin, and 40% for acorn) [McCloskey and Glucksberg,
1978]. This does not indicate that people have a limited representation of the fruit concept, but that
∗
Equal contribution. {wangzi, alexku, jasonbaldridge, beenkim}@google.com, tomg@princeton.edu. Our
code can be found at https://github.com/google-research/gpax.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

