An Improved Relaxation for Oracle-Efficient
Adversarial Contextual Bandits
Kiarash Banihashem
University of Maryland, College Park
kiarash@umd.edu

MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi
University of Maryland, College Park
hajiagha@umd.edu

Suho Shin
University of Maryland, College Park
suhoshin@umd.edu

Max Springer
University of Maryland, College Park
mss423@umd.edu

Abstract
We present an oracle-efficient relaxation for the adversarial contextual bandits
problem, where the contexts are sequentially drawn i.i.d from a known distribution
and the cost sequence is chosen by an online adversary. Our algorithm has a regret
2
1
bound of O(T 3 (K log(|Π|)) 3 ) and makes at most O(K) calls per round to an
offline optimization oracle, where K denotes the number of actions, T denotes
the number of rounds and Π denotes the set of policies. This is the first result to
2
1
improve the prior best bound of O((T K) 3 (log(|Π|)) 3 ) as obtained by Syrgkanis
et al. at NeurIPS 2016, and the first to match the original bound of Langford and
Zhang at NeurIPS 2007 which was obtained for the stochastic case.

1

Introduction

One of the most important problems in the study of online learning algorithms is the contextual
bandits problem. As a framework for studying decision making in the presence of side information,
the problem generalizes the classical multi-armed bandits problem and has numerous practical
applications spanning across clinical research, personalized medical care and online advertising, with
substantial emphasis placed on modern recommender systems.
In the classical multi-armed bandits problem, a decision maker is presented with K actions (or arms)
which it needs to choose from over a sequence of T rounds. In each round, the decision maker makes
its (possibly random) choice and observes the cost of its chosen action. Depending on the setting,
this cost is generally assumed to be either stochastic or adversarial. In the stochastic setting, the cost
of each action is sampled i.i.d. from a fixed, but a priori unknown, distribution. In the more general
adversarial setting, no such assumption is made and the costs in each round can be controlled by an
online adversary. The goal of the learner is to minimize its regret, defined as the absolute difference
between its total cost and the total cost of the best fixed action in hindsight.
The contextual bandits problem generalizes this by assuming that in each round, the learner first
sees some side information, referred to as a context, x ∈ X and chooses its action based on this
information. As in prior work (Rakhlin and Sridharan, 2016; Syrgkanis et al., 2016b), we assume that
the x are sampled i.i.d. from a fixed distribution D, and that the learner can generate samples from D
as needed. In addition, the learner has access to a set of policies, Π, where a policy is defined as a
mapping from contexts to actions. As before, the goal of the learner is to minimize its regret, which
we here define as the absolute difference between its total cost and the total cost of the best policy of
Π in hindsight.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

