Core-sets for Fair and Diverse Data Summarization
Sepideh Mahabadi∗
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA
smahabadi@microsoft.com

Stojan Trajanovski∗
Microsoft
London, United Kingdom
sttrajan@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study core-set construction algorithms for the task of Diversity Maximization
under fairness/partition constraint. Given a set of points P in a metric space
partitioned into m groups, and given k1 , . . . , km , the goal of this problemPis to
pick ki points from each group i such that the overall diversity of the k = i ki
picked points is maximized. We consider two natural diversity measures: sumof-pairwise distances and sum-of-nearest-neighbor distances, and show improved
core-set construction algorithms with respect to these measures. More precisely,
we show the first constant factor core-set w.r.t. sum-of-pairwise distances whose
size is independent of the size of the dataset and the aspect ratio. Second, we
show the first core-set w.r.t. the sum-of-nearest-neighbor distances. Finally, we
run several experiments showing the effectiveness of our core-set approach. In
particular, we apply constrained diversity maximization to summarize a set of
timed messages that takes into account the messages’ recency. Specifically, the
summary should include more recent messages compared to older ones. This is a
real task in one of the largest communication platforms, affecting the experience of
hundreds of millions daily active users. By utilizing our core-set method for this
task, we achieve a 100x speed-up while losing the diversity by only a few percent.
Moreover, our approach allows us to improve the space usage of the algorithm in
the streaming setting.

1

Introduction

Data summarization problem is a class of tasks where a small subset of items must be selected as a
summary to represent the whole data. Typically in applications, the selected summary is required
to fulfill various criteria such as diversity. In this paper, we focus on Diversity Maximization (DM)
which is a topic that has attracted significant attention over the past decades [11, 33, 3, 8, 9, 10,
31, 30, 24, 19, 20, 25, 14]. The goal of this line of research is to provide a summary of a large
dataset that preserves the diversity of the data as much as possible. This has many applications in
various domains including summarization, recommendation systems, search, and facility location
[15, 43, 40, 1, 5, 13, 2, 21, 39, 33]. Formally, in this task, given a universe P of n items, its goal is to
choose a small subset of size k that maximizes a given pre-specified measure of diversity.
Diversity Maximization under Partition Constraints is a variant of the problem that has been studied
to find a diverse summary while satisfying some additional orthogonal constraints [7, 31, 3, 28, 4, 10,
8, 9, 6, 26]. Here, the items in the input are partitioned into m disjoint groups P = P1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pm and
additionally, one is given a pre-specified number of desired results from each group k1 , . . . , kmP
, and
the goal is to return ki objects from each group Pi such that the overall diversity among all k = i ki
points is maximized. This formulation allows to control the number of objects from each category in
the output, e.g., the number of movies from each genre shown to a user in a recommendation system,
or to bound the number of old messages included in a summary of a user’s feed. Moreover, this
∗

This is an equal contribution paper.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

