Offline Minimax Soft-Q-learning Under Realizability
and Partial Coverage

Masatoshi Uehara ∗
Genentech
uehara.masatoshi@gene.com

Nathan Kallus
Cornell University
kallus@cornell.edu

Jason D. Lee
Princeton University
jasonlee@princeton.edu

Wen Sun
Cornell University
ws455@cornell.edu

Abstract
In offline RL, we have no opportunity to explore so we must make assumptions
that the data is sufficient to guide picking a good policy, and we want to make
these assumptions as harmless as possible. In this work, we propose value-based
algorithms for offline RL with PAC guarantees under just partial coverage, specifically, coverage of just a single comparator policy, and realizability of the soft
(entropy-regularized) Q-function of the single policy and a related function defined
as a saddle point of certain minimax optimization problem. This offers refined and
generally more lax conditions for offline RL. We further show an analogous result
for vanilla Q-functions under a soft margin condition. To attain these guarantees,
we leverage novel minimax learning algorithms and analyses to accurately estimate
either soft or vanilla Q-functions with strong L2 -convergence guarantees. Our
algorithms’ loss functions arise from casting the estimation problems as nonlinear
convex optimization problems and Lagrangifying. Surprisingly we handle partial
coverage even without explicitly enforcing pessimism.

1

Introduction

In offline Reinforcement Learning (RL), we must learn exclusively from offline data and are unable
to actively interact with the environment (Levine et al., 2020). Offline RL has garnered considerable
interest in a range of applications where experimentation may be prohibitively costly or risky.
Offline RL is generally based on two types of assumptions: sufficient coverage in the offline data and
sufficient function approximation. For instance, classical Fitted-Q-iteration (Antos et al., 2008; Chen
and Jiang, 2019) requires (a) full coverage in the offline data, max(s,a) dπ,µ0 (s, a)/Pπb (s, a) < ∞
for any policy π where Pπb (s, a) is the offline data’s distribution on the states and actions and
dπ,µ0 (s, a) is the state-action occupancy distribution under a policy π and initial-state distribution
µ0 (s); (b) realizability of the Q∗ -function in a hypothesis class; and (c) Bellman completeness,
i.e., the Bellman operator applied to any function in the hypothesis class remains in the class. Full
coverage (a) and Bellman completeness (c) can be particularly stringent because offline data is often
insufficiently exploratory and Bellman completeness significantly restricts transition dynamics.
To overcome these challenges, we here propose algorithms with guarantees under realizability of
single functions and refined partial coverage of single policies, and without Bellman completeness.
We tackle this by introducing two novel value-based algorithms. The first algorithm, MSQP (mimimax
soft-Q-learning with penalization), comprises of two steps: learning soft Q-functions (a.k.a., entropy∗

This work was done at Cornell University

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

