Small Total-Cost Constraints in Contextual Bandits
with Knapsacks, with Application to Fairness

Evgenii Chzhen
Christophe Giraud
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Laboratoire de mathématiques d’Orsay, 91405, Orsay, France
{evgenii.chzhen, christophe.giraud}@universite-paris-saclay.fr
Zhen Li
BNP Paribas Corporate and Institutional Banking, 20 boulevard des Italiens, 75009 Paris, France
zhen.li@bnpparibas.com
Gilles Stoltz
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Laboratoire de mathématiques d’Orsay, 91405, Orsay, France
HEC Paris, 78351 Jouy-en-Josas, France
gilles.stoltz@universite-paris-saclay.fr, stoltz@hec.fr

Abstract
We consider contextual bandit problems with knapsacks [CBwK], a problem where
at each round, a scalar reward is obtained and vector-valued costs are suffered.
The learner aims to maximize the cumulative rewards while ensuring that the
cumulative costs are lower than some predetermined cost constraints. We assume
that contexts come from a continuous set, that costs can be signed, and that the
expected reward and cost functions, while unknown, may be uniformly estimated—
a typical assumption in the literature. In this setting, total cost constraints had
so far to be at least of order T 3/4 , where T is the number of rounds, and were
even typically assumed to depend linearly on T . We are however motivated to
use CBwK to impose a fairness constraint of equalized average costs between
groups: the budget associated with the corresponding
√ cost constraints should be as
close as possible to the natural deviations, of order T . To that end, we introduce
a dual strategy based on projected-gradient-descent
updates, that is able to deal
√
with total-cost constraints of the order of T up to poly-logarithmic terms. This
strategy is more direct and simpler than existing strategies in the literature. It relies
on a careful, adaptive, tuning of the step size.

1

Setting, literature review, and main contributions

We consider contextual bandits with knapsacks [CBwK], a setting where at each round t ⩾ 1, the
learner, after observing some context xt ∈ X , where X ⊆ Rn , picks an action at ∈ A in a finite set
A. We do not impose the existence of a null-cost action. Contexts are independently drawn according
to a distribution ν. The learner
may pick at at random according to a probability distribution, denoted

by π t (xt ) = πt,a (xt ) a∈A for consistency with the notion of policy defined later in Section 2.
The action at played leads to some scalar reward rt ∈ [0, 1] and some signed vector-valued cost
ct ∈ [−1, 1]d . Actually, rt and ct are generated independently at random in a way such that
the conditional expectations of rt and ct given the past, xt , and at , equal r(xt , at ) and c(xt , at ),
respectively. We denoted here by r : X × A → [0, 1] and c = (c1 , . . . , cd ) : X × A → [−1, 1]d
the unknown expected-reward and expected-cost functions. The modeling and the estimation of r
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

