Efficient Policy Adaptation with Contrastive Prompt
Ensemble for Embodied Agents

Wonje Choi, Woo Kyung Kim, SeungHyun Kim, Honguk Woo∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University
{wjchoi1995, kwk2696, kimsh571, hwoo}@skku.edu

Abstract
For embodied reinforcement learning (RL) agents interacting with the environment,
it is desirable to have rapid policy adaptation to unseen visual observations, but
achieving zero-shot adaptation capability is considered as a challenging problem
in the RL context. To address the problem, we present a novel contrastive prompt
ensemble (C ON PE) framework which utilizes a pretrained vision-language model
and a set of visual prompts, thus enabling efficient policy learning and adaptation
upon a wide range of environmental and physical changes encountered by embodied agents. Specifically, we devise a guided-attention-based ensemble approach
with multiple visual prompts on the vision-language model to construct robust state
representations. Each prompt is contrastively learned in terms of an individual
domain factor that significantly affects the agent’s egocentric perception and observation. For a given task, the attention-based ensemble and policy are jointly learned
so that the resulting state representations not only generalize to various domains
but are also optimized for learning the task. Through experiments, we show that
C ON PE outperforms other state-of-the-art algorithms for several embodied agent
tasks including navigation in AI2THOR, manipulation in egocentric-Metaworld,
and autonomous driving in CARLA, while also improving the sample efficiency of
policy learning and adaptation.

1

Introduction

In the literature of vision-based reinforcement learning (RL), with the advance of unsupervised
techniques and large-scale pretrained models for computer vision, the decoupled structure, in which
visual encoders are separately trained and used later for policy learning, has gained popularity [1,
2, 3]. This decoupling demonstrates high efficiency in low data regimes with sparse reward signals,
compared to end-to-end RL. In this regard, several works on adopting the decoupled structure to
embodied agents interacting with the environment were introduced [4, 5], and specifically, pretrained
vision models (e.g., ResNet in [6]) or vision-language models (e.g., CLIP in [7, 8]) were exploited
for visual state representation encoders. Yet, it is non-trivial to achieve zero-shot adaptation to visual
domain changes in the environment with high diversity and non-stationarity, which are inherent for
embodied agents. It was rarely investigated how to optimize those popular large-scale pretrained
models to ensure the zero-shot capability of embodied agents.
Embodied agents have several environmental and physical properties, such as egocentric camera
position, stride length, and illumination, which are domain factors making significant changes in
agents’ perception and observation. In the target (deployment) environment with uncalibrated settings
on those domain factors, RL policies relying on pretrained visual encoders remain vulnerable to
domain changes.
∗

Honguk Woo is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

