Quasi-Monte Carlo Graph Random Features

Isaac Reid
University of Cambridge
ir337@cam.ac.uk
Krzysztof Choromanski∗
Google DeepMind
Columbia University
kchoro@google.com

Adrian Weller
University of Cambridge
Alan Turing Institute
aw665@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a novel mechanism to improve the accuracy of the recently-introduced
class of graph random features (GRFs) [Choromanski, 2023]. Our method induces
negative correlations between the lengths of the algorithm’s random walks by
imposing antithetic termination: a procedure to sample more diverse random walks
which may be of independent interest. It has a trivial drop-in implementation.
We derive strong theoretical guarantees on the properties of these quasi-Monte
Carlo GRFs (q-GRFs), proving that they yield lower-variance estimators of the
2-regularised Laplacian kernel under mild conditions. Remarkably, our results hold
for any graph topology. We demonstrate empirical accuracy improvements on a
variety of tasks including a new practical application: time-efficient approximation
of the graph diffusion process. To our knowledge, q-GRFs constitute the first
rigorously studied quasi-Monte Carlo scheme for kernels defined on combinatorial
objects, inviting new research on correlations between graph random walks.1

1

Introduction and related work

Kernel methods are ubiquitous in machine learning [Canu and Smola, 2006, Smola and Schölkopf,
2002, Kontorovich et al., 2008, Campbell, 2002]. Via the kernel trick, they provide a mathematically
principled and elegant way to perform nonlinear inference using linear learning algorithms. The
positive definite kernel function k : X × X → R, defined on an input domain X , measures the
‘similarity’ between two datapoints. Examples in Euclidean space include the Gaussian, linear,
Matérn, angular and arc-cosine kernels [Williams and Rasmussen, 2006, Cho and Saul, 2011].
Though very effective on small datasets, kernel methods suffer from poor scalability. The need to
materialise and invert the kernel matrix typically leads to a time-complexity cubic in the size of
the dataset. Substantial research has been dedicated to improving scalability by approximating this
matrix, notably including random features (RFs) [Rahimi and Recht, 2007, 2008, Avron et al., 2017,
Liu et al., 2022] . These randomised mappings ϕ : Rd → Rs construct low-dimensional feature
vectors whose dot product equals the kernel evaluation in expectation:

k(x, y) = E ϕ(x)⊤ ϕ(y) .
(1)
This permits a low-rank decomposition of the kernel matrix which enables better time- and spacecomplexity than exact kernel methods. Random feature methods exist for a variety of Euclidean
kernels with properties engineered for the desiderata and symmetries of the particular kernel being
∗
1

Senior lead.
Source code is available at https://github.com/isaac-reid/antithetic_termination.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

