Byzantine-Tolerant Methods for Distributed
Variational Inequalities

Nazarii Tupitsa
MBZUAI, MIPT

Abdulla Jasem Almansoori
MBZUAI

Karthik Nandakumar
MBZUAI

Yanlin Wu
MBZUAI

Samuel Horváth
MBZUAI

Martin Takáč
MBZUAI

Eduard Gorbunov∗
MBZUAI

Abstract
Robustness to Byzantine attacks is a necessity for various distributed training scenarios. When the training reduces to the process of solving a minimization problem,
Byzantine robustness is relatively well-understood. However, other problem formulations, such as min-max problems or, more generally, variational inequalities,
arise in many modern machine learning and, in particular, distributed learning
tasks. These problems significantly differ from the standard minimization ones and,
therefore, require separate consideration. Nevertheless, only one work [Adibi et al.,
2022] addresses this important question in the context of Byzantine robustness.
Our work makes a further step in this direction by providing several (provably)
Byzantine-robust methods for distributed variational inequality, thoroughly studying their theoretical convergence, removing the limitations of the previous work,
and providing numerical comparisons supporting the theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning tasks require to train large models with billions of parameters on huge
datasets to achieve reasonable quality. Training of such models is usually done in a distributed
manner since otherwise it can take a prohibitively long time [Li, 2020]. Despite the attractiveness of
distributed training, it is associated with multiple difficulties not existing in standard training.
In this work, we focus on one particular aspect of distributed learning – Byzantine tolerance/robustness
– the robustness of distributed methods to the presence of Byzantine workers2 , i.e., such workers
that can send incorrect information (maliciously or due to some computation errors/faults) and are
assumed to be omniscient. For example, this situation can appear in collaborative training, when
several participants (companies, universities, individuals) that do not necessarily know each other
train some model together [Kijsipongse et al., 2018, Diskin et al., 2021] or when the devices used in
training are faulty [Ryabinin et al., 2021]. When the training reduces to the distributed minimization
problem, the question of Byzantine robustness is studied relatively well both in theory and practice
[Karimireddy et al., 2022, Lyu et al., 2020].
However, there are a lot of problems that cannot be reduced to minimization, e.g., adversarial training
[Goodfellow et al., 2015, Madry et al., 2018], generative adversarial networks (GANs) [Goodfellow
et al., 2014], hierarchical reinforcement learning [Wayne and Abbott, 2014, Vezhnevets et al., 2017],
adversarial examples games [Bose et al., 2020], and other problems arising in game theory, control
theory, and differential equations [Facchinei and Pang, 2003]. Such problems lead to min-max
∗

Corresponding author: eduard.gorbunov@mbzuai.ac.ae
The term “Byzantine workers” is a standard term for the field [Lamport et al., 1982, Lyu et al., 2020]. We
do not aim to offend any group of people but rather use common terminology.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

