When can Regression-Adjusted Control Variates Help?
Rare Events, Sobolev Embedding and Minimax Optimality

Jose Blanchet
Department of MS&E and ICME
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu
Yiping Lu
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY 10012
yiping.lu@nyu.edu

Haoxuan Chen
ICME
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
haoxuanc@stanford.edu
Lexing Ying
Department of Mathematics and ICME
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
lexing@stanford.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the use of a machine learning-based estimator as a control
variate for mitigating the variance of Monte Carlo sampling. Specifically, we
seek to uncover the key factors that influence the efficiency of control variates
in reducing variance. We examine a prototype estimation problem that involves
simulating the moments of a Sobolev function based on observations obtained from
(random) quadrature nodes. Firstly, we establish an information-theoretic lower
bound for the problem. We then study a specific quadrature rule that employs a
nonparametric regression-adjusted control variate to reduce the variance of the
Monte Carlo simulation. We demonstrate that this kind of quadrature rule can
improve the Monte Carlo rate and achieve the minimax optimal rate under a
sufficient smoothness assumption. Due to the Sobolev Embedding Theorem, the
sufficient smoothness assumption eliminates the existence of rare and extreme
events. Finally, we show that, in the presence of rare and extreme events, a
truncated version of the Monte Carlo algorithm can achieve the minimax optimal
rate while the control variate cannot improve the convergence rate.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider a nonparametric quadrature rule on (random) quadrature points based on
regression-adjusted control variate [1, 2, 3, 4]. To construct the quadrature rule, we partition our
available data into two halves. The first half is used to construct a nonparametric estimator, which is
then utilized as a control variate to reduce the variance of the Monte Carlo algorithm implemented
over the second half of our data. Traditional and well-known results [1, Chapter 5.2] show that the
optimal linear control variate can be obtained via Ordinary Least Squares regression. In this paper,
we investigate a similar idea for constructing a quadrature rule [3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10], which uses a
non-parametric machine learning-based estimator as a regression-adjusted control variate. We aim to
answer the following two questions:
Is using optimal nonparametric machine learning algorithms to construct
control variates an optimal way to improve Monte Carlo methods? What are the
factors that determine the effectiveness of the control variate?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

