Self-Chained Image-Language Model for
Video Localization and Question Answering

Shoubin Yu

Jaemin Cho Prateek Yadav Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill
{shoubin, jmincho, praty, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Recent studies have shown promising results on utilizing large pre-trained imagelanguage models for video question answering. While these image-language models
can efficiently bootstrap the representation learning of video-language models, they
typically concatenate uniformly sampled video frames as visual inputs without
explicit language-aware, temporal modeling. When only a portion of a video input
is relevant to the language query, such uniform frame sampling can often lead to
missing important visual cues. Although humans often find a video moment to
focus on and rewind the moment to answer questions, training a query-aware video
moment localizer often requires expensive annotations and high computational costs.
To address this issue, we propose Self-Chained Video Localization-Answering
(SeViLA), a novel framework that leverages a single image-language model (BLIP2) to tackle both temporal keyframe localization and question answering on videos.
SeViLA framework consists of two modules: Localizer and Answerer, where
both are parameter-efficiently fine-tuned from BLIP-2. We propose two ways of
chaining these modules for cascaded inference and self-refinement. First, in the
forward chain, the Localizer finds multiple language-aware keyframes in a video,
which the Answerer uses to predict the answer. Second, in the reverse chain, the
Answerer generates keyframe pseudo-labels to refine the Localizer, alleviating
the need for expensive video moment localization annotations. Our SeViLA
framework outperforms several strong baselines/previous works on five challenging
video question answering and event prediction benchmarks, and achieves the stateof-the-art in both fine-tuning (NExT-QA and STAR) and zero-shot (NExT-QA,
STAR, How2QA, and VLEP) settings. We show a comprehensive analysis of our
framework, including the impact of Localizer, comparisons of Localizer with
other temporal localization models, pre-training/self-refinement of Localizer, and
varying the number of keyframes.1

1

Introduction

The recent success of large-scale pre-trained language models [2, 7, 65] has led to a burst of
multimodal vision-and-language models that can jointly understand visual (image/video) and language
data [64, 6, 60]. However, due to higher computational and annotation costs, video-language models
(video-LMs) are more challenging to scale in terms of model and data size than image-language models
(image-LMs). Hence, recent studies have explored efficient training of video-LMs by leveraging
pre-trained image-LMs [44, 14, 23, 85, 70, 31, 19, 82]. While such a warm-start strategy facilitates
visual representation learning of video-LMs, they typically concatenate uniformly/randomly sampled
video frames as visual inputs without explicit language-aware, temporal modeling. However, such a
simple uniform/random sampling of frames can lead to losing important visual cues, resulting in the
video-LMs focusing on frames that are unimportant/irrelevant to language queries [42].
1Our code and checkpoints are available at: https://github.com/Yui010206/SeViLA
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

