Data Quality in Imitation Learning

Suneel Belkhale
Stanford University
belkhale@stanford.edu

Yuchen Cui
Stanford University
yuchenc@stanford.edu

Dorsa Sadigh
Stanford University
dorsa@stanford.edu

Abstract
In supervised learning, the question of data quality and curation has been overshadowed in recent years by increasingly more powerful and expressive models
that can ingest internet-scale data. However, in offline learning for robotics, we
simply lack internet scale data, and so high quality datasets are a necessity. This
is especially true in imitation learning (IL), a sample efficient paradigm for robot
learning using expert demonstrations. Policies learned through IL suffer from state
distribution shift at test time due to compounding errors in action prediction, which
leads to unseen states that the policy cannot recover from. Instead of designing
new algorithms to address distribution shift, an alternative perspective is to develop
new ways of assessing and curating datasets. There is growing evidence that the
same IL algorithms can have substantially different performance across different
datasets. This calls for a formalism for defining metrics of “data quality” that can
further be leveraged for data curation. In this work, we take the first step toward
formalizing data quality for imitation learning through the lens of distribution shift:
a high quality dataset encourages the policy to stay in distribution at test time. We
propose two fundamental properties that shape the quality of a dataset: i) action
divergence: the mismatch between the expert and learned policy at certain states;
and ii) transition diversity: the noise present in the system for a given state and
action. We investigate the combined effect of these two key properties in imitation
learning theoretically, and we empirically analyze models trained on a variety of
different data sources. We show that state diversity is not always beneficial, and
we demonstrate how action divergence and transition diversity interact in practice.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning methods have seen large strides in recent years in computer vision (CV), natural
language processing (NLP), and human-level game playing [18, 26, 43, 8, 51, 13, 44]. These
domains have benefited from large and complex models that are trained on massive internet-scale
datasets. Despite their undeniable power, biases present in these large datasets can result in the
models exhibiting unexpected or undesirable outcomes. For example, foundation models such as
GPT-3 trained on uncurated datasets have resulted in instances of racist behavior such as associating
Muslims with violence [1, 5]. Thus offline data curation is immensely important for both safety and
cost-effectiveness, and it is gaining in prominence in training foundation models [22, 10, 40].
Data curation is even more important in the field of robotics, where internet-scale data is not readily
available and real-world datasets are small and uncurated. Noise or biases present in the data can
lead to dangerous situations in many robotics tasks, for example injuring a person or damaging
equipment. In such scenarios, deciding which data to collect and how best to collect it are especially
important [37, 34, 4]. Of course, the quality of data depends on the algorithm that uses the data. A
common paradigm in robot learning from offline datasets is imitation learning (IL), a data-driven,
sample efficient framework for learning robot policies by mimicking expert demonstrations. However,
when learning from offline data using IL, estimating data quality becomes especially difficult, since
the “test set” the robot is evaluated on is an entirely new data distribution due to compounding errors
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

