Discover and Align Taxonomic Context Priors
for Open-world Semi-Supervised Learning

Yu Wang1,6

Zhun Zhong2

Pengchong Qiao1,6

Xuxin Cheng1

Xiawu Zheng3,4

Chang Liu5 Nicu Sebe7 Rongrong Ji3,4 Jie Chen1,3,6∗
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Computer Sceince, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 4 Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted
Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
5
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
6
AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
7
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
1

{rain_wang, pcqiao, chengxx}@stu.pku.edu.cn {zhengxw01, chenj}@pcl.ac.cn zhunzhong007@gmail.com
rrji@xmu.edu.cn liuchang2022@tsinghua.edu.cn niculae.sebe@unitn.it

Abstract
Open-world Semi-Supervised Learning (OSSL) is a realistic and challenging task,
aiming to classify unlabeled samples from both seen and novel classes using partially labeled samples from the seen classes. Previous works typically explore
the relationship of samples as priors on the pre-defined single-granularity labels
to help novel class recognition. In fact, classes follow a taxonomy and samples
can be classified at multiple levels of granularity, which contains more underlying
relationships for supervision. We thus argue that learning with single-granularity
labels results in sub-optimal representation learning and inaccurate pseudo labels,
especially with unknown classes. In this paper, we take the initiative to explore and
propose a uniformed framework, called Taxonomic context prIors Discovering and
Aligning (TIDA), which exploits the relationship of samples under various granularity. It allows us to discover multi-granularity semantic concepts as taxonomic
context priors (i.e., sub-class, target-class, and super-class), and then collaboratively leverage them to enhance representation learning and improve the quality
of pseudo labels. Specifically, TIDA comprises two components: i) A taxonomic
context discovery module that constructs a set of hierarchical prototypes in the
latent space to discover the underlying taxonomic context priors; ii) A taxonomic
context-based prediction alignment module that enforces consistency across hierarchical predictions to build the reliable relationship between classes among
various granularity and provide additions supervision. We demonstrate that these
two components are mutually beneficial for an effective OSSL framework, which
is theoretically explained from the perspective of the EM algorithm. Extensive
experiments on seven commonly used datasets show that TIDA can significantly
improve the performance and achieve a new state of the art. The source codes are
publicly available at https://github.com/rain305f/TIDA.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have obtained impressive performance on a variety of visual and language
tasks [42, 48, 61, 15, 11, 12, 13, 14, 35, 36, 37, 45, 46]. However, their success is largely dependent
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

