Diversify Your Vision Datasets with Automatic
Diffusion-Based Augmentation

Lisa Dunlap

Alyssa Umino

Han Zhang

Jiezhi Yang

Joseph E. Gonzalez

Trevor Darrell

UC Berkeley

Abstract
Many fine-grained classification tasks, like rare animal identification, have limited
training data and consequently classifiers trained on these datasets often fail to
generalize to variations in the domain like changes in weather or location. As such,
we explore how natural language descriptions of the domains seen in training data
can be used with large vision models trained on diverse pretraining datasets to
generate useful variations of the training data. We introduce ALIA (Automated
Language-guided Image Augmentation), a method which utilizes large vision
and language models to automatically generate natural language descriptions of
a dataset’s domains and augment the training data via language-guided image
editing. To maintain data integrity, a model trained on the original dataset filters
out minimal image edits and those which corrupt class-relevant information. The
resulting dataset is visually consistent with the original training data and offers
significantly enhanced diversity. We show that ALIA is able to surpasses traditional
data augmentation and text-to-image generated data on fine-grained classification
tasks, including cases of domain generalization and contextual bias. Code is
available at https://github.com/lisadunlap/ALIA.

1

Introduction

While modern pretraining data are incredibly diverse, datasets for specialized tasks such as finegrained animal identification are often much less so, resulting in trained classifiers that fail when
encountering new domains such as a change in weather or location. An effective method to address
this is to add more training data from the test domain (37), but obtaining and labeling this additional
data is often costly and it can be challenging to determine which domains to gather data from.
To address this, recent works have utilized image generation models trained on large pretraining
datasets to supplement incomplete training sets by generating diverse examples from generative
models fine-tuned on the training set (8; 14; 1). Furthermore, previous work in language-guided data
augmentation with vision and language models relies on user-supplied domain descriptions (7) or
descriptions generated from word-to-sentence models (9).
Although these methods can be effective in increasing image diversity, they either require finetuning
the image generation model, which can be prohibitively expensive, or generating images which
have no visual grounding in the original training data. While the latter may be suitable for common
benchmarks, such as ImageNet (6), it proves to be much less effective when we move to a specialized
setting where generative models like Stable Diffusion (30) cannot recreate images which resemble
the training data from text alone, as shown in Figure 1. In our work, we focus on how to utilize
pretrained vision and language models for image captioning and generation as a translation layer
between task-specific image data and task-agnostic natural language descriptions of domains. Since
these high-level domain descriptions are well-represented by image generation models like Stable
Diffusion, we can use them to perform language-guided image editing of the specialized training data.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

