Double Auctions with Two-sided Bandit Feedback
Soumya Basu
Google Mountain View
basusoumya@google.com

Abishek Sankararaman
AWS
abishek.90@gmail.com

Abstract
Double Auction enables decentralized transfer of goods between multiple buyers
and sellers, thus underpinning functioning of many online marketplaces. Buyers
and sellers compete in these markets through bidding, but do not often know their
own valuation a-priori. As the allocation and pricing happens through bids, the
profitability of participants, hence sustainability of such markets, depends crucially
on learning respective valuations through repeated interactions. We initiate the
study of Double Auction markets under bandit feedback on both buyers’ and sellers’
side. We show with confidence bound based bidding, and ‘Average Pricing’ there
is an efficient price discovery among the participants. In particular, the regret on
combined valuation of the buyers and the sellers – a.k.a. the social regret – is
O(log(T )/ ) in T rounds, where is the minimum
price gap. Moreover, the
p
buyers and sellers exchanging goods attain O( T ) regret, individually. The buyers
and sellers who do not benefit from exchange in turn only experience O(log T / )
regret
p individually in T rounds. We augment our upper bound by showing that
!( T ) individual regret, and !(log T ) social regret is unattainable in certain
Double Auction markets. Our paper is the first to provide decentralized learning
algorithms in a two-sided market where both sides have uncertain preference that
need to be learned.

1

Introduction

Online marketplaces, such as eBay, Craigslist, Task Rabbit, Doordash, Uber, enables allocation
of resources between supply and demand side agents at a scale through market mechanisms, and
dynamic pricing. In many of these markets, the valuation of the resources are often personalized
across agents (both supply and demand side), and remain apriori unknown. The agents learn their
own respective valuations through repeated interactions while competing in the marketplace. In turn,
the learning influences the outcomes of the market mechanisms. In a recent line of research, this
interplay between learning and competition in markets has been studied in multiple systems, such as
bipartite matching markets [29, 30, 39, 7], centralized basic auctions [26, 22]. These works follow
the ‘protocol model’ [2], where multiple agents follow a similar protocol/algorithm, while each agent
executes her protocol using only her own observations/world-view up to the point of execution.
In this paper, we initiate the study of the decentralized Double Auction market where multiple sellers
and buyers, each with their own valuation, trades an indistinguishable good. In each round, the sellers
and the buyers present bids for the goods.1 The auctioneer is then tasked with creating an allocation,
and pricing for the goods. All sellers with bids smaller than the price set by the auctioneer sell at that
price, whereas all the buyers with higher bids buy at that price. Each buyer and seller, is oblivious
to all the prices including her own. Only a buyer, or a seller participating in the market observes
0
Work done when AS was affiliated with UC Berkeley. All opinions are that of the authors and do not
necessarily represent that of the employers
1
In some literature, the bids of the sellers is called ‘asks’, but we use bids for both sellers and buyers.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

