Marich: A Query-efficient Distributionally Equivalent
Model Extraction Attack using Public Data

Pratik Karmakar∗
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
CNRS@CREATE Ltd, 1 Create Way, Singapore
pratik.karmakar@u.nus.edu
Debabrota Basu
Équipe Scool, Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille
UMR 9189- CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
debabrota.basu@inria.fr

Abstract
We study design of black-box model extraction attacks that can send minimal
number of queries from a publicly available dataset to a target ML model through
a predictive API with an aim to create an informative and distributionally equivalent replica of the target. First, we define distributionally equivalent and MaxInformation model extraction attacks, and reduce them into a variational optimisation problem. The attacker sequentially solves this optimisation problem to select
the most informative queries that simultaneously maximise the entropy and reduce
the mismatch between the target and the stolen models. This leads to an active
sampling-based query selection algorithm, M ARICH, which is model-oblivious.
Then, we evaluate M ARICH on different text and image data sets, and different models, including CNNs and BERT. M ARICH extracts models that achieve ∼ 60 − 95%
of true model’s accuracy and uses ∼ 1, 000 − 8, 500 queries from the publicly
available datasets, which are different from the private training datasets. Models
extracted by M ARICH yield prediction distributions, which are ∼ 2 − 4× closer to
the target’s distribution in comparison to the existing active sampling-based attacks.
The extracted models also lead to 84-96% accuracy under membership inference
attacks. Experimental results validate that M ARICH is query-efficient, and capable
of performing task-accurate, high-fidelity, and informative model extraction.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) is widely deployed and used in industries.
In MLaaS [RGC15], an ML model is trained remotely on a private dataset, deployed in a Cloud, and
offered for public access through a prediction API, such as Amazon AWS, Google API, Microsoft
Azure. An API allows an user, including a potential adversary, to send queries to the ML model and
fetch corresponding predictions. Recent works have shown such models with public APIs can be
stolen, or extracted, by designing black-box model extraction attacks [TZJ+ 16]. In model extraction
attacks, an adversary queries the target model with a query dataset, which might be same or different
than the private dataset, collects the corresponding predictions from the target model, and builds a
∗
A significant portion of the work has been done as a part of P. Karmakar’s masters in Ramakrishna Mission
Vivekananda Educational and Research Institute, Belur, India.
∗∗
Code is available at: https://github.com/debabrota-basu/marich

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

