Online Clustering of Bandits with Misspecified User
Models
Zhiyong Wang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
zywang21@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Jize Xie
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
xjzzjl@sjtu.edu.cn

Xutong Liu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
liuxt@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Shuai Li∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn

John C.S. Lui
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
The contextual linear bandit is an important online learning problem where given
arm features, a learning agent selects an arm at each round to maximize the cumulative rewards in the long run. A line of works, called the clustering of bandits
(CB), utilize the collaborative effect over user preferences and have shown significant improvements over classic linear bandit algorithms. However, existing CB
algorithms require well-specified linear user models and can fail when this critical
assumption does not hold. Whether robust CB algorithms can be designed for more
practical scenarios with misspecified user models remains an open problem. In this
paper, we are the first to present the important problem of clustering of bandits with
misspecified user models (CBMUM), where the expected rewards in user models
can be perturbed away from perfect linear models. We devise two robust CB algorithms, RCLUMB and RSCLUMB (representing the learned clustering structure
with dynamic graph and sets, respectively), that can accommodate the inaccurate
user preference estimations and erroneous clustering√caused by model
√ misspecifications. We prove regret upper bounds of O(ϵ∗ T md log T + d mT log T )
for our algorithms under milder assumptions than previous CB works (notably,
we move past a restrictive technical assumption on the distribution of the arms),
which match the lower bound asymptotically in T up to logarithmic factors, and
also match the state-of-the-art results in several degenerate cases. The techniques
in proving the regret caused by misclustering users are quite general and may be of
independent interest. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world data show our
outperformance over previous algorithms.

1

Introduction

Stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) [2, 4, 22] is an online sequential decision-making problem,
where the learning agent selects an action and receives a corresponding reward at each round, so as
to maximize the cumulative reward in the long run. MAB algorithms have been widely applied in
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

