What Truly Matters in Trajectory Prediction for
Autonomous Driving?

Phong Tran1∗

Haoran Wu1,2∗
1

Cunjun Yu1∗ Panpan Cai3

Sifa Zheng2

David Hsu1

National University of Singapore
2
Tsinghua University
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Trajectory prediction plays a vital role in the performance of autonomous driving
systems, and prediction accuracy, such as average displacement error (ADE) or
final displacement error (FDE), is widely used as a performance metric. However,
a significant disparity exists between the accuracy of predictors on fixed datasets
and driving performance when the predictors are used downstream for vehicle
control, because of a dynamics gap. In the real world, the prediction algorithm
influences the behavior of the ego vehicle, which, in turn, influences the behaviors
of other vehicles nearby. This interaction results in predictor-specific dynamics that
directly impacts prediction results. In fixed datasets, since other vehicles’ responses
are predetermined, this interaction effect is lost, leading to a significant dynamics
gap. This paper studies the overlooked significance of this dynamics gap. We
also examine several other factors contributing to the disparity between prediction
performance and driving performance. The findings highlight the trade-off between
the predictor’s computational efficiency and prediction accuracy in determining
real-world driving performance. In summary, an interactive, task-driven evaluation protocol for trajectory prediction is crucial to capture its effectiveness for
autonomous driving. Source code along with experimental settings is available
online.

1

Introduction

Current trajectory prediction evaluation [29, 9, 5] relies on real-world datasets, operating under the
assumption that dataset accuracy is equivalent to prediction capability. We refer to this as Static
Evaluation. This methodology, however, falls short when the predictor serves as a sub-module
for downstream tasks in Autonomous Driving (AD) [28, 24]. As illustrated in Figure 1, the static
evaluation metrics on datasets, such as Average Displacement Error (ADE) and Final Displacement
Error (FDE), do not necessarily reflect the actual driving performance [36, 8, 10]. In contrast to the
conventional focus on uncertainty [39, 16] and potential interaction [27], we demonstrate that this
disparity stems from the overlooked dynamics gap between fixed datasets and AD systems and the
computational efficiency of predictors. The trade-off between these two factors matters in the actual
prediction performance within the entire AD system.
The dynamics gap arises from the fact that the behavior of the autonomous vehicle, also known as
the ego-agent, varies with different trajectory predictors, as presented in Figure 2. In real-world
scenarios, the ego-agent utilizes predictors to determine its actions. Different predictors result
in varied behaviors of the ego-agent, which, in turn, influence the future behaviors of other road
users, leading to different dynamics within the environment. This directly affects the accuracy of
predictions, as other agents behave differently. Since the ego-agent’s actions are predetermined on
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

