Composing Parameter-Efficient Modules with
Arithmetic Operations

1

Jinghan Zhang1 Shiqi Chen2 Junteng Liu3 Junxian He1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 City University of Hong Kong
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
zhangcharlotte84@gmail.com, junxianh@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
As an efficient alternative to conventional full finetuning, parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) is becoming the prevailing method to adapt pretrained language
models. In PEFT, a lightweight module is learned on each dataset while the underlying pretrained language model remains unchanged, resulting in multiple compact
modules representing diverse skills when applied to various domains and tasks. In
this paper, we propose to compose these parameter-efficient modules through linear
arithmetic operations in the weight space, thereby integrating different module
capabilities. Specifically, we first define addition and negation operators for the
module, and then further compose these two basic operators to perform flexible
arithmetic. Our approach requires no additional training and enables highly flexible module composition. We apply different arithmetic operations to compose the
parameter-efficient modules for (1) distribution generalization, (2) multi-tasking,
(3) unlearning, and (4) domain transfer. Additionally, we extend our approach to
detoxify Alpaca-LoRA, the latest instruction-tuned large language model based
on LLaMA. Empirical results demonstrate that our approach produces new and
effective parameter-efficient modules that significantly outperform existing ones
across all settings.1

1

Introduction

Parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) methods – that only adjust a small number of parameters
while keeping most pretrained parameters frozen – are becoming a standard approach to customize
pretrained language models (PLMs) due to its competitive performance and reduced memory and
storage cost (Houlsby et al., 2019; Li & Liang, 2021; He et al., 2022). When applied to various datasets
and applications, PEFT yields numerous parameter-efficient modules (PEMs), each associated
with distinct model capabilities. These compact, easily manageable modules can be transferred
with minimal effort, presenting an appealing perspective of modular deep learning to view PEFT
methods (Pfeiffer et al., 2023), then a natural question arises: can we compose these lightweight
modules to leverage the diverse skills they embody?
In this work, we study the composition of trained PEMs to achieve highly flexible manipulation
of the module capabilities. This includes integrating modules trained on varied data distributions
to facilitate generalization on different distributions, fusing learned skills into a multi-task learner,
unlearning certain abilities, or transferring domains. Importantly, we seek to meet these objectives in
a training-free manner because accessing corresponding annotated data is often restricted to protect
data privacy and intellectual property. To this end, we propose to compose different PEMs in the
parameter space via linear arithmetic operations, which merge separate modules into one module.
1

Code is available at https://github.com/hkust-nlp/PEM_composition.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

