Adaptive whitening with fast gain modulation
and slow synaptic plasticity

Lyndon R. Duong1,2
1

Eero P. Simoncelli1,2

Dmitri B. Chklovskii1,3

David Lipshutz1

Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute
2
Center for Neural Science, New York University
3
Neuroscience Institute, NYU Langone Medical School

{lyndon.duong, eero.simoncelli}@nyu.edu
{dchklovskii, dlipshutz}@flatironinstitute.org

Abstract
Neurons in early sensory areas rapidly adapt to changing sensory statistics, both by
normalizing the variance of their individual responses and by reducing correlations
between their responses. Together, these transformations may be viewed as an
adaptive form of statistical whitening. Existing mechanistic models of adaptive
whitening exclusively use either synaptic plasticity or gain modulation as the
biological substrate for adaptation; however, on their own, each of these models
has significant limitations. In this work, we unify these approaches in a normative
multi-timescale mechanistic model that adaptively whitens its responses with
complementary computational roles for synaptic plasticity and gain modulation.
Gains are modified on a fast timescale to adapt to the current statistical context,
whereas synapses are modified on a slow timescale to match structural properties
of the input statistics that are invariant across contexts. Our model is derived from
a novel multi-timescale whitening objective that factorizes the inverse whitening
matrix into basis vectors, which correspond to synaptic weights, and a diagonal
matrix, which corresponds to neuronal gains. We test our model on synthetic
and natural datasets and find that the synapses learn optimal configurations over
long timescales that enable adaptive whitening on short timescales using gain
modulation.

1

Introduction

Individual neurons in early sensory areas rapidly adapt to changing sensory statistics by normalizing
the variance of their responses [1–3]. At the population level, neurons also adapt by reducing
correlations between their responses [4; 5]. These adjustments enable the neurons to maximize the
information that they transmit by utilizing their entire dynamic range and reducing redundancies in
their representations [6–9]. A natural normative interpretation of these transformations is adaptive
whitening, a context-dependent linear transformation of the sensory inputs yielding responses that
have unit variance and are uncorrelated.
Decorrelation of the neural responses requires coordination between neurons and the neural mechanisms underlying such coordination are not known. Since neurons communicate via synaptic
connections, it is perhaps unsurprising that most existing mechanistic models of adaptive whitening
decorrelate neural responses by modifying the strength of these connections [10–16]. However,
long-term synaptic plasticity is generally associated with long-term learning and memory [17], and
thus may not be a suitable biological substrate for adaptive whitening (though short-term synaptic
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

