Provably Robust Temporal Difference Learning for
Heavy-Tailed Rewards

Semih Cayci
Department of Mathematics
RWTH Aachen University
Aachen, Germany
cayci@mathc.rwth-aachen.de

Atilla Eryilmaz
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
eryilmaz.2@osu.edu

Abstract
In a broad class of reinforcement learning applications, stochastic rewards have
heavy-tailed distributions, which lead to infinite second-order moments for stochastic (semi)gradients in policy evaluation and direct policy optimization. In such
instances, the existing RL methods may fail miserably due to frequent statistical
outliers. In this work, we establish that temporal difference (TD) learning with
a dynamic gradient clipping mechanism, and correspondingly operated natural
actor-critic (NAC), can be provably robustified against heavy-tailed reward distributions. It is shown in the framework of linear function approximation that a
favorable tradeoff between bias and variability of the stochastic gradients can be
achieved with this dynamic gradient clipping mechanism. In particular, we prove
1
that robust versions of TD learning achieve sample complexities of order O(ε− p )
1
and O(ε−1− p ) with and without the full-rank assumption on the feature matrix,
respectively, under heavy-tailed rewards with finite moments of order (1 + p) for
some p ∈ (0, 1], both in expectation and with high probability. We show that a
2
robust variant of NAC based on Robust TD learning achieves Õ(ε−4− p ) sample
complexity. We corroborate our theoretical results with numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we develop a framework for robust reinforcement learning in the presence of rewards
with heavy-tailed distributions. Heavy-tailed phenomena, stemming from frequently observed
statistical outliers, have been ubiquitous in decision-making applications under uncertainty. To name
a few examples, waiting times in wireless communication networks [44, 24, 58], completion times of
SAT solvers [14], numerous payoff quantities (e.g., stock prices, consumer signals) in economics and
finance [22, 35, 38, 37] exhibit heavy-tailed behavior. An important characteristic of heavy-tailed
random variables is the infinite order of higher moments, which stems from the frequently occurring
outliers.
In reinforcement learning (RL), the goal is to maximize expected total reward in a Markov decision
process (MDP) by continual interactions with the unknown and dynamic environment. Among policy
optimization methods, Natural actor-critic (NAC) method and its variants [51, 30, 46, 17, 27, 5, 29]
have become particularly prevalent due to their desirable stability and versatility characteristics,
emanating from the use of temporal difference (TD) learning as the critic for the policy evaluation
component of the NAC operation. The existing theoretical analyses for temporal difference learning
[4, 54] and natural policy gradient/actor-critic methods [62, 1, 57] assume that the stochastic gradients
have finite second-order moments, or even they are bounded. In particular, it is unknown whether
natural actor-critic with function approximation is robust for stochastic rewards of heavy-tailed
distributions with potentially infinite second-order moments. Furthermore, in practice, these methods
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

