Secure Out-of-Distribution Task Generalization with
Energy-Based Models

Shengzhuang Chen1

Long-Kai Huang2 Jonathan Richard Schwarz3
Yilun Du4 Ying Wei1,5∗
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent AI Lab 3 University College London
4
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 5 Nanyang Technological University
szchen9-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
{hlongkai, schwarzjn}@gmail.com
yilundu@mit.edu
ying.wei@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
The success of meta-learning on out-of-distribution (OOD) tasks in the wild has
proved to be hit-and-miss. To safeguard the generalization capability of the metalearned prior knowledge to OOD tasks, in particularly safety-critical applications,
necessitates detection of an OOD task followed by adaptation of the task towards the
prior. Nonetheless, the reliability of estimated uncertainty on OOD tasks by existing
Bayesian meta-learning methods is restricted by incomplete coverage of the feature
distribution shift and insufficient expressiveness of the meta-learned prior. Besides,
they struggle to adapt an OOD task, running parallel to the line of cross-domain
task adaptation solutions which are vulnerable to overfitting. To this end, we build
a single coherent framework that supports both detection and adaptation of OOD
tasks, while remaining compatible with off-the-shelf meta-learning backbones. The
proposed Energy-Based Meta-Learning (EBML) framework learns to characterize
any arbitrary meta-training task distribution with the composition of two expressive
neural-network-based energy functions. We deploy the sum of the two energy
functions, being proportional to the joint distribution of a task, as a reliable score for
detecting OOD tasks; during meta-testing, we adapt the OOD task to in-distribution
tasks by energy minimization. Experiments on four regression and classification
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposal.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning [48, 6] that builds general-purpose learners with limited data has been under constant
investigation, recently demonstrating its potential to even advance few-shot learning of large language models [36, 44]. Analogous to the notorious domain shift [23] that degrades the performance
of deep learning, meta-testing tasks that are out of the distribution of meta-training tasks (a.k.a.
out-of-distribution (OOD) tasks) put the meta-learned prior knowledge at high risk of losing effectiveness [46]. In real-world applications, though, out-of-distribution tasks are highly prevalent, e.g., bin
picking for a robot that has never been meta-trained on environments involving bins [55], MRI-based
pancreas segmentation given a host of meta-training tasks with pathology images [35], and etc. Thus,
it is imperative to secure the generalization ability of the meta-learned prior (i.e., meta-generalization)
to OOD tasks, especially in safety-critical applications such as medical image analysis.
The first step to securing meta-generalization to a task is to develop awareness of whether the task
is OOD or not, i.e., OOD task detection. Existing solutions in literature have pursued a variety of
Bayesian meta-learning methods [7, 54, 41, 10, 43] that balance between flexibility and tractability of
∗

Correspondence to Ying Wei

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

