Entropic Neural Optimal Transport
via Diffusion Processes
Nikita Gushchin
Skoltech∗
Moscow, Russia
n.gushchin@skoltech.ru

Alexander Kolesov
Skoltech∗
Moscow, Russia
a.kolesov@skoltech.ru

Dmitry Vetrov
HSE University‡, AIRI†
Moscow, Russia
vetrovd@yandex.ru

Alexander Korotin
Skoltech∗, AIRI†
Moscow, Russia
a.korotin@skoltech.ru

Evgeny Burnaev
Skoltech∗, AIRI†
Moscow, Russia
e.burnaev@skoltech.ru

Abstract
We propose a novel neural algorithm for the fundamental problem of computing the entropic optimal transport (EOT) plan between continuous probability distributions which are accessible by samples. Our algorithm is based
on the saddle point reformulation of the dynamic version of EOT which is
known as the Schrödinger Bridge problem. In contrast to the prior methods
for large-scale EOT, our algorithm is end-to-end and consists of a single learning step, has fast inference procedure, and allows handling small values of the
entropy regularization coefficient which is of particular importance in some applied problems. Empirically, we show the performance of the method on several large-scale EOT tasks. The code for the ENOT solver can be found at
https://github.com/ngushchin/EntropicNeuralOptimalTransport.

Figure 1: Trajectories of samples learned by our Algorithm 1 for Celeba deblurring with ϵ = 0, 1, 10.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) plans are a fundamental family of alignments between probability distributions.
The majority of scalable neural algorithms to compute OT are based on the dual formulations of
OT, see [28] for a survey. Despite the success of such formulations in generative modeling [42, 31],
these dual form approaches can hardly be generalized to the popular entropic OT [12]. This is due
to the numerical instability of the dual entropic OT problem [14] which appears for small entropy
∗

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
‡
HSE University
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

