Self-Supervised Motion Magnification by
Backpropagating Through Optical Flow

Zhaoying Pan∗

Daniel Geng∗
Andrew Owens
University of Michigan

https://dangeng.github.io/FlowMag

Abstract
This paper presents a simple, self-supervised method for magnifying subtle motions
in video: given an input video and a magnification factor, we manipulate the video
such that its new optical flow is scaled by the desired amount. To train our model,
we propose a loss function that estimates the optical flow of the generated video and
penalizes how far if deviates from the given magnification factor. Thus, training
involves differentiating through a pretrained optical flow network. Since our
model is self-supervised, we can further improve its performance through test-time
adaptation, by finetuning it on the input video. It can also be easily extended to
magnify the motions of only user-selected objects. Our approach avoids the need
for synthetic magnification datasets that have been used to train prior learning-based
approaches. Instead, it leverages the existing capabilities of off-the-shelf motion
estimators. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method through evaluations of
both visual quality and quantitative metrics on a range of real-world and synthetic
videos, and we show our method works for both supervised and unsupervised
optical flow methods.

1

Introduction

Motion magnification methods [32, 58, 40] increase the size of tiny motions in a video, revealing
subtle details that are difficult to discern with the naked eye. However, existing methods come with
significant limitations. Early hand-crafted methods generally require small periodic motions [64, 58]
or a human in the loop [32]. More recent supervised learning methods [40] require ground-truth
training examples, such as videos before and after magnification, which are difficult to obtain without
synthetic data. Creating this synthetic data is a challenging problem, since it seemingly requires
capturing all of the possible objects and motions that one might ever want to magnify.
In parallel, the field of motion estimation has addressed many closely related challenges. Modern
optical flow networks [65, 54, 51, 10] are designed to track objects undergoing complex motions, both
large and small. Most of these methods are trained on supervised datasets that capture a wide variety
of objects, but parallel work has shown the effectiveness of unsupervised flow estimation [33, 27].
We ask whether we can use motion estimation models to train magnification models, taking advantage
of their existing capabilities and reducing the need for special-purpose training data.
We propose a simple motion magnification model whose supervision signal comes from an offthe-shelf motion estimation model. Our method exploits the fact that optical flow networks are
differentiable, and thus can be used as part of a loss function. We train a model to take a pair of video
frames and a magnification factor α as input, and to generate a new pair whose predicted optical
flow is α times as large as that of the input. We simultaneously optimize a regularization loss that
preserves the visual appearance of each tracked pixel in the generated video. Notably, our model can
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

