Advice Querying under Budget Constraint for Online
Algorithms

Ziyad Benomar
CREST, ENSAE, Ecole polytechique
ziyad.benomar@ensae.fr

Vianney Perchet
CREST, ENSAE and Criteo AI LAB
vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
Several problems have been extensively studied in the learning-augmented setting,
where the algorithm has access to some, possibly incorrect, predictions. However,
it is assumed in most works that the predictions are provided to the algorithm as
input, with no constraint on their size. In this paper, we consider algorithms with
access to a limited number of predictions, that they can request at any time during
their execution. We study three classical problems in competitive analysis, the ski
rental problem, the secretary problem, and the non-clairvoyant job scheduling. We
address the question of when to query predictions and how to use them.

1

Introduction

With the rise of data science and the huge emphasis on research in machine learning and artificial
intelligence, powerful predictive tools have emerged. This gave birth to learning-augmented algorithms, which use these predictions to go beyond the standard long-standing worst-case limitations.
The design of such algorithms requires establishing good tradeoffs between consistency and robustness, i.e. having improved performance when the predictions are accurate, and not behaving poorly
compared to the case without predictions if they are erroneous. This was formalized by Lykouris and
Vassilvitskii [41] for the caching problem, and Purohit et al. [47] for the ski-rental and scheduling
problems. Since then, the learning-augmented setting had many applications in implementing data
structures [36, 23, 39] and in the design of algorithms [15, 7, 6, 11, 30, 5, 1, 4, 10, 40].
Several questions and research directions have been explored, such as exhibiting optimal robustnessconsistency tradeoffs [48], incorporating predictions from multiple experts [3, 19], or customizing
learning approaches to make predictions for such algorithms [49, 21, 18, 34, 2]. In most papers,
those predictions are assumed to be given as inputs, which is unfortunately not realistic, practical or
applicable to real-life scenarios. Indeed, many problems such as scheduling, paging, or set cover,
require some arbitrarily large number of predictions (roughly speaking one per request or job). We
claim that, on the contrary, algorithms might have only access to a finite budget of predictions as each
one of them is costly to compute. Therefore, the main question rather becomes deciding how and
when to spend the assigned budget, by requesting new predictions. Such a setting was considered for
example in [31] for the caching problem. Moreover, it also happens that the quality of the predictions
improves with time, as more data are collected, more knowledge of the problem is gathered, or
delaying the computation of prediction allows to allocate more computational power to them, hence
enhancing their precision, for instance with more powerful forecasting models. The question of
planning the prediction requests is thus quite crucial.
The problems we mentioned fall into the category of online algorithms, operating under uncertainty,
and gaining more information about the input of the problem through time, eventually depending on
their past decisions. The performance of such algorithms is measured by their competitive ratio [14],
which is the worst-case ratio between their output and that of the optimal offline algorithm, having
full knowledge of the inputs and parameters of the problem. To illustrate our claims, we shall focus
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

