GPEX, A Framework For Interpreting Artificial
Neural Networks
Amir Akbarnejad
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB, Canada
ah8@ualberta.ca

Gilbert Bigras
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB, Canada
Gilbert.Bigras@albertaprecisionlabs.ca

Nilanjan Ray
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB, Canada
nray1@ualberta.ca

Abstract
The analogy between Gaussian processes (GPs) and deep artificial neural networks
(ANNs) has received a lot of interest, and has shown promise to unbox the blackbox
of deep ANNs. Existing theoretical works put strict assumptions on the ANN (e.g.
requiring all intermediate layers to be wide, or using specific activation functions).
Accommodating those theoretical assumptions is hard in recent deep architectures,
and those theoretical conditions need refinement as new deep architectures emerge.
In this paper we derive an evidence lower-bound that encourages the GP’s posterior
to match the ANN’s output without any requirement on the ANN. Using our method
we find out that on 5 datasets, only a subset of those theoretical assumptions are
sufficient. Indeed, in our experiments we used a normal ResNet-18 or feed-forward
backbone with a single wide layer in the end. One limitation of training GPs is the
lack of scalability with respect to the number of inducing points. We use novel
computational techniques that allow us to train GPs with hundreds of thousands of
inducing points and with GPU acceleration. As shown in our experiments, doing
so has been essential to get a close match between the GPs and the ANNs on 5
datasets. We implement our method as a publicly available tool called GPEX:
https://github.com/amirakbarnejad/gpex. On 5 datasets (4 image datasets, and 1
biological dataset) and ANNs with 2 types of functionality (classifier or attentionmechanism) we were able to find GPs whose outputs closely match those of
the corresponding ANNs. After matching the GPs to the ANNs, we used the
GPs’ kernel functions to explain the ANNs’ decisions. We provide more than 200
explanations (around 30 explanations in the paper and the rest in the supplementary)
which are highly interpretable by humans and show the ability of the obtained GPs
to unbox the ANNs’ decisions.

1

Introduction

Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are widely adopted in machine learning. Despite their benefits,
ANNs are known to be black-box to humans, meaning that their inner mechanism for making
predictions is not necessarily interpretable/explainable to humans. ANN’s black-box property impedes
its deployment in safety-critical applications like medical imaging or autonomous driving, and makes
them hard-to-troubleshoot for machine learning researchers.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

