Regularizing Neural Networks
with Meta-Learning Generative Models

Shin’ya Yamaguchi†,‡∗ Daiki Chijiwa† Sekitoshi Kanai†
Atsutoshi Kumagai† Hisashi Kashima‡
†
NTT ‡ Kyoto University

Abstract
This paper investigates methods for improving generative data augmentation for
deep learning. Generative data augmentation leverages the synthetic samples
produced by generative models as an additional dataset for classification with
small dataset settings. A key challenge of generative data augmentation is that
the synthetic data contain uninformative samples that degrade accuracy. This is
because the synthetic samples do not perfectly represent class categories in real
data and uniform sampling does not necessarily provide useful samples for tasks.
In this paper, we present a novel strategy for generative data augmentation called
meta generative regularization (MGR). To avoid the degradation of generative
data augmentation, MGR utilizes synthetic samples in the regularization term for
feature extractors instead of in the loss function, e.g., cross-entropy. These synthetic
samples are dynamically determined to minimize the validation losses through
meta-learning. We observed that MGR can avoid the performance degradation of
naïve generative data augmentation and boost the baselines. Experiments on six
datasets showed that MGR is effective particularly when datasets are smaller and
stably outperforms baselines.

1

Introduction

While deep neural networks achieved impressive performance on various machine learning tasks,
training them still requires a large amount of labeled training data in supervised learning. The labeled
datasets are expensive when a few experts can annotate the data, e.g., medical imaging. In such
scenarios, generative data augmentation is a promising option for improving the performance of
models. Generative data augmentation basically adds pairs of synthetic samples from conditional
generative models and their target labels into real training datasets. The expectations of generative
data augmentation are that the synthetic samples interpolate missing data points and perform as
oversampling for classes with less real training samples [1]. This simple method can improve the
performance of several tasks with less diversity of inputs such as medical imaging tasks [2, 3, 4, 5].
However, in general cases that require the recognition of more diverse inputs (e.g., CIFAR
datasets [6]), generative data augmentation degrades rather than improves the test accuracy [7].
Previous studies have indicated that this can be caused by the low quality of synthetic samples in
terms of the diversity and fidelity [7, 8]. If this hypothesis is correct, we can expect high-quality
generative models (e.g., StyleGAN2-ADA [9]) to resolve the problem; existing generative data
augmentation methods adopt earlier generative models e.g., ACGAN [10] and SNGAN [11].
Contrary to the expectation, this is not the case. We observed that generative data augmentation
fails to improve models even when using a high-quality StyleGAN2-ADA (Figure 1). Although
the samples partially appear to be real to humans, they are not yet sufficient to train classifiers in
∗

Corresponding author. Email: shinya.yamaguchi@ntt.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

