Near-Optimal Algorithms for
Gaussians with Huber Contamination:
Mean Estimation and Linear Regression

Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin–Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu
Ankit Pensia
IBM Research
ankit@ibm.com

Daniel M. Kane
University of California, San Diego
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu
Thanasis Pittas
University of Wisconsin–Madison
pittas@wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the fundamental problems of Gaussian mean estimation and linear
regression with Gaussian covariates in the presence of Huber contamination.
Our main contribution is the design of the first sample near-optimal and almost
linear-time algorithms with optimal error guarantees for both these problems.
Specifically, for Gaussian robust mean estimation on Rd with contamination
parameter ϵ ∈ (0, ϵ0 ) for a small absolute constant ϵ0 , we give an algorithm with
sample complexity n = Õ(d/ϵ2 ) and almost linear runtime that approximates
the target mean within ℓ2 -error O(ϵ). This improves on prior work that achieved
this error guarantee with polynomially suboptimal sample and time complexity.
For robust linear regression, we give the first algorithm with sample complexity
n = Õ(d/ϵ2 ) and almost linear runtime that approximates the target regressor
within ℓ2 -error O(ϵ). This is the first polynomial sample and time algorithm
achieving the optimal error guarantee, answering an open question in the literature.
At the technical level, we develop a methodology that yields almost-linear time
algorithms for multi-directional filtering that may be of broader interest.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning systems operate with vast amounts of training data, which are difficult to
carefully curate. Consequently, outliers have become a fixture of modern training datasets. This contradicts the standard i.i.d. assumption of classical statistical theory and has spurred the development of robust statistics, which seeks to develop algorithms that perform well in the presence of outliers [HR09;
DK23]. The standard contamination model of outliers was first formalized by Huber [Hub64]:
Definition 1.1 (Huber Contamination Model). Given 0 < ϵ < 1/2 and a distribution family D, the
algorithm specifies n ∈ N and observes n i.i.d. samples from a distribution P = (1 − ϵ)G + ϵB,
where G is an unknown distribution in D, and B is an arbitrary distribution. We say G is the
distribution of inliers, B is the distribution of outliers, and P is an ϵ-corrupted version of G.
The Huber contamination model has since served as a bedrock for the development and evaluation of
robust algorithms. Given that estimating properties of Gaussian distributions is a prototypical task in
statistics, Gaussian estimation under Huber contamination is, analogously, a central problem in robust
statistics. The univariate version of this problem is addressed in Huber’s work [Hub64]. In this paper,
we focus on estimating high-dimensional Gaussian distributions under Huber contamination.
Authors are in alphabetical order.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

