Exponential Lower Bounds for Fictitious Play in
Potential Games
Ioannis Panageas∗
University of California, Irvine
ipanagea@ics.uci.edu

Nikolas Patris∗
University of California, Irvine
npatris@uci.edu

Stratis Skoulakis∗
LIONS, EPFL
efstratios.skoulakis@epfl.ch

Volkan Cevher
LIONS, EPFL
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
Fictitious Play (FP) is a simple and natural dynamic for repeated play with many
applications in game theory and multi-agent reinforcement learning. It was introduced by Brown [4, 5] and its convergence properties for two-player zero-sum
games was established later by Robinson [22]. Potential games [19] is another
class of games which exhibit the FP property [18], i.e., FP dynamics converges
to a Nash equilibrium if all agents follows it. Nevertheless, except for two-player
zero-sum games and for specific instances of payoff matrices [1] or for adversarial
tie-breaking rules [9], the convergence rate of FP is unknown. In this work, we
focus on the rate of convergence of FP when applied to potential games and more
specifically identical payoff games. We prove that FP can take exponential time (in
the number of strategies) to reach a Nash equilibrium, even if the game is restricted
to two agents and for arbitrary tie-breaking rules. To prove this, we recursively
construct a two-player coordination game with a unique Nash equilibrium. Moreover, every approximate Nash equilibrium in the constructed game must be close
to the pure Nash equilibrium in ℓ1 -distance.

1

Introduction

In 1949 Brown [4, 5] proposed an uncoupled dynamics called fictitious play so as to capture the
behavior of selfish agents engaged in a repeatedly-played game. Fictitious play assumes at round
t = 1, each agent selects an arbitrary action. At each round t ≥ 2, each player plays a best response
pure action to the opponents’ empirical strategy; empirical strategy is defined to be the average of the
past chosen strategies.
Due to its simplicity and natural behavioral assumptions, fictitious play is one of the most seminal
and well-studied game dynamics [7]. Despite the fact that fictitious play does not converge to a Nash
equilibrium (NE) in general normal-form games, there are several important classes of games at
which the empirical strategies always converge to a NE. In her seminal work, Robinson [22] showed
that in the case of two-player zero-sum games, the empirical strategy profiles converge to a min-max
equilibrium of the game; Robinson’s proof use a smart inductive argument on the number of strategies
of the game. Later, Monderer and Shapley [18] established that in the case of N -player potential
games, the empirical strategies also converge to a NE. Summing up, the following theorem is true:
*

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

