One-2-3-45: Any Single Image to 3D Mesh in 45
Seconds without Per-Shape Optimization

Minghua Liu1∗

1

Chao Xu2∗
Haian Jin3,4∗
Linghao Chen1,4∗
1
6
Mukund Varma T
Zexiang Xu
Hao Su1

UC San Diego 2 UCLA 3 Cornell University 4 Zhejiang University 5 Adobe Research
Project Website: http://one-2-3-45.com

Abstract
Single image 3D reconstruction is an important but challenging task that requires
extensive knowledge of our natural world. Many existing methods solve this
problem by optimizing a neural radiance field under the guidance of 2D diffusion
models but suffer from lengthy optimization time, 3D inconsistency results, and
poor geometry. In this work, we propose a novel method that takes a single image
of any object as input and generates a full 360-degree 3D textured mesh in a single
feed-forward pass. Given a single image, we first use a view-conditioned 2D
diffusion model, Zero123, to generate multi-view images for the input view, and
then aim to lift them up to 3D space. Since traditional reconstruction methods
struggle with inconsistent multi-view predictions, we build our 3D reconstruction
module upon an SDF-based generalizable neural surface reconstruction method
and propose several critical training strategies to enable the reconstruction of 360degree meshes. Without costly optimizations, our method reconstructs 3D shapes
in significantly less time than existing methods. Moreover, our method favors
better geometry, generates more 3D consistent results, and adheres more closely to
the input image. We evaluate our approach on both synthetic data and in-the-wild
images and demonstrate its superiority in terms of both mesh quality and runtime.
In addition, our approach can seamlessly support the text-to-3D task by integrating
with off-the-shelf text-to-image diffusion models.

1

Introduction

Single image 3D reconstruction, the task of reconstructing a 3D model of an object from a single
2D image, is a long-standing problem in the computer vision community and is crucial for a wide
range of applications, such as robotic object manipulation and navigation, 3D content creation, as
well as AR/VR [47; 9; 92]. The problem is challenging as it requires not only the reconstruction
of visible parts but also the hallucination of invisible regions. Consequently, this problem is often
ill-posed and corresponds to multiple plausible solutions because of insufficient evidence from
a single image. On the other hand, humans can adeptly infer unseen 3D content based on our
extensive knowledge of the 3D world. To endow intelligent agents with this ability, many existing
methods [31; 19; 25; 11; 87; 91; 16; 83; 39; 10; 37] exploit class-specific priors by training 3D
generative networks on 3D shape datasets [4]. However, these methods often fail to generalize to
unseen categories, and their reconstruction quality is constrained by the limited size of public 3D
datasets.
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

