Adaptive Data Analysis in a Balanced Adversarial
Model
Kobbi Nissim
Department of Computer Science
Georgetown University
kobbi.nissim@georgetown.edu

Uri Stemmer
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
Google Research
u@uri.co.il

Eliad Tsfadia
Department of Computer Science
Georgetown University
eliadtsfadia@gmail.com

Abstract
In adaptive data analysis, a mechanism gets n i.i.d. samples from an unknown
distribution D, and is required to provide accurate estimations to a sequence of
adaptively chosen statistical queries with respect to D. Hardt and Ullman [2014]
and Steinke and Ullman [2015a] showed that, in general, it is computationally hard
to answer more than Θ(n2 ) adaptive queries, assuming the existence of one-way
functions.
However, these negative results strongly rely on an adversarial model that significantly advantages the adversarial analyst over the mechanism, as the analyst, who
chooses the adaptive queries, also chooses the underlying distribution D. This
imbalance raises questions with respect to the applicability of the obtained hardness
results – an analyst who has complete knowledge of the underlying distribution D
would have little need, if at all, to issue statistical queries to a mechanism which
only holds a finite number of samples from D.
We consider more restricted adversaries, called balanced, where each such adversary consists of two separate algorithms: The sampler who is the entity that
chooses the distribution and provides the samples to the mechanism, and the analyst
who chooses the adaptive queries, but has no prior knowledge of the underlying
distribution (and hence has no a priori advantage with respect to the mechanism).
We improve the quality of previous lower bounds by revisiting them using an
efficient balanced adversary, under standard public-key cryptography assumptions.
We show that these stronger hardness assumptions are unavoidable in the sense
that any computationally bounded balanced adversary that has the structure of all
known attacks, implies the existence of public-key cryptography.

1

Introduction

Statistical validity is a widely recognized crucial feature of modern science. Lack of validity –
popularly known as the replication crisis in science poses a serious threat to the scientific process
and also to the public’s trust in scientific findings.
One of the factors leading to the replication crisis is the inherent adaptivity in the data analysis
process. To illustrate adaptivity and its effect, consider a data analyst who is testing a specific research
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

