Online Learning under
Adversarial Nonlinear Constraints
Pavel Kolev1 , Georg Martius1,2 , and Michael Muehlebach1
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
{pavel.kolev, georg.martius, michael.muehlebach}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
In many applications, learning systems are required to process continuous nonstationary data streams. We study this problem in an online learning framework
and propose an algorithm that can deal with adversarial time-varying and nonlinear
constraints. As we show in our work, the
√algorithm called Constraint Violation
Velocity Projection
(CVV-Pro)
achieves
T regret and converges to the feasible
√
set at a rate of 1/ T , despite the fact that the feasible set is slowly time-varying
and a priori unknown to the learner. CVV-Pro only relies on local sparse linear
approximations of the feasible set and therefore avoids optimizing over the entire
set at each iteration, which is in sharp contrast to projected gradients or FrankWolfe methods. We also empirically evaluate our algorithm on two-player games,
where the players are subjected to a shared constraint.

1

Introduction

Today’s machine learning systems are able to combine computation, data, and algorithms at unprecedented scales, which opens up new and exciting avenues in many domains, such as computer vision,
computer graphics, speech and text recognition, and robotics [Jordan and Mitchell, 2015]. One of the
leading principles that has enabled this progress is the focus on relatively simple pattern recognition
and empirical risk minimization approaches, which mostly rely on offline gradient-based optimization
and stipulate that the training, validation, and test data are independent and identically distributed.
Somewhat overlooked in these developments is the role of non-stationarity and constraints [Jordan,
2019]. Indeed, emerging machine learning problems involve decision-making in the real world, which
typically includes interactions with physical, social, or biological systems. These systems are not only
time varying and affected by past interactions, but their behavior is often characterized via fundamental
constraints. Examples include cyber-physical systems where constraints are imposed by the laws of
physics, multi-agent systems that are subjected to a shared resource constraint, or a reinforcement
learning agent that is subjected to safety and reliability constraints. In particular, in their seminal
work Auer et al. [2002] gave a reduction for the multi-arm bandit setting to the full information online
optimization setting, by employing the multiplicative weights framework [Littlestone and Warmuth,
1994]. This classical reduction was recently extended by Sun et al. [2017] to the contextual bandit
setting with sequential (time-varying) risk constraints.
This motivates our work, which is in line with a recent trend in the machine learning community
towards online learning, adaptive decision-making, and online optimization. More precisely, we
study an online problem with slowly time-varying constraints, governed by the following interaction
protocol (see Assumption 1.2). In each time step t, the learner commits a decision xt and then
in addition to a loss value ft (xt ) with its gradient ∇ft (xt ) receives partial information about the
current feasible set Ct := {x ∈ Rn | gt (x) ≥ 0}, where the constraint function gt (x) is defined as
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

