Augmentation-Aware Self-Supervision
for Data-Efficient GAN Training

Liang Hou1,3,4 , Qi Cao1 , Yige Yuan1,3 , Songtao Zhao4 , Chongyang Ma4 ,
Siyuan Pan4 , Pengfei Wan4 , Zhongyuan Wang4 , Huawei Shen1,3 , Xueqi Cheng2,3
1
CAS Key Laboratory of AI Safety and Security,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Kuaishou Technology
lianghou96@gmail.com

Abstract
Training generative adversarial networks (GANs) with limited data is challenging
because the discriminator is prone to overfitting. Previously proposed differentiable
augmentation demonstrates improved data efficiency of training GANs. However,
the augmentation implicitly introduces undesired invariance to augmentation for
the discriminator since it ignores the change of semantics in the label space caused
by data transformation, which may limit the representation learning ability of the
discriminator and ultimately affect the generative modeling performance of the
generator. To mitigate the negative impact of invariance while inheriting the benefits
of data augmentation, we propose a novel augmentation-aware self-supervised
discriminator that predicts the augmentation parameter of the augmented data.
Particularly, the prediction targets of real data and generated data are required to
be distinguished since they are different during training. We further encourage
the generator to adversarially learn from the self-supervised discriminator by
generating augmentation-predictable real and not fake data. This formulation
connects the learning objective of the generator and the arithmetic − harmonic
mean divergence under certain assumptions. We compare our method with stateof-the-art (SOTA) methods using the class-conditional BigGAN and unconditional
StyleGAN2 architectures on data-limited CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, FFHQ, LSUNCat, and five low-shot datasets. Experimental results demonstrate significant
improvements of our method over SOTA methods in training data-efficient GANs.1

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [10] have achieved great progress in synthesizing diverse
and high-quality images in recent years [2, 17, 19, 20, 13]. However, the generation quality of
GANs depends heavily on the amount of training data [47, 18]. In general, the decrease of training
samples usually yields a sharp decline in both fidelity and diversity of the generated images [39, 48].
This issue hinders the wide application of GANs due to the fact of insufficient data in real-world
applications. For instance, it is valuable to imitate the style of an artist whose paintings are limited.
GANs typically consist of a generator that is designed to generate new data and a discriminator that
guides the generator to recover the real data distribution. The major challenge of training GANs under
limited data is that the discriminator is prone to overfitting [47, 18], and therefore lacks generalization
to teach the generator to learn the underlying real data distribution.
1

Our code is available at https://github.com/liang-hou/augself-gan.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

