Lie Point Symmetry and Physics Informed Networks

Tara Akhound-Sadegh ∗
School of Computer Science, McGill University,
Mila - Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Laurence Perreault-Levasseur
Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Ciela Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Mila - Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Trottier Space Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
CCA, Flatiron Institute, New York, USA
Perimeter Institute, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
Johannes Brandstetter
Microsoft Research AI4Science,
Amsterdam, Netherlands

Max Welling
University of Amsterdam, †
Amsterdam, Netherlands

Siamak Ravanbakhsh
School of Computer Science, McGill University,
Mila - Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada

Abstract
Symmetries have been leveraged to improve the generalization of neural networks
through different mechanisms from data augmentation to equivariant architectures.
However, despite their potential, their integration into neural solvers for partial
differential equations (PDEs) remains largely unexplored. We explore the integration of PDE symmetries, known as Lie point symmetries, in a major family of
neural solvers known as physics-informed neural networks (PINNs). We propose
a loss function that informs the network about Lie point symmetries in the same
way that PINN models try to enforce the underlying PDE through a loss function.
Intuitively, our symmetry loss ensures that the infinitesimal generators of the Lie
group conserve the PDE solutions. Effectively, this means that once the network
learns a solution, it also learns the neighbouring solutions generated by Lie point
symmetries. Empirical evaluations indicate that the inductive bias introduced by the
Lie point symmetries of the PDEs greatly boosts the sample efficiency of PINNs.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning has accelerated data-driven approaches to science and
engineering.
A prominent example is the role of deep learning in solving partial
differential equations (PDEs), which are ubiquitous in many scientific disciplines.
∗
†

Corresponding author: tara.akhound-sadegh@mila.quebec
Contribution was done when at Microsoft Research AI4Science, Amsterdam.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

