A Batch-to-Online Transformation under
Random-Order Model
Jing Dong
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
jingdong@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Yuichi Yoshida
National Institute of Informatics
yyoshida@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
We introduce a transformation framework that can be utilized to develop online
algorithms with low ϵ-approximate regret in the random-order model from offline
approximation algorithms. We first give a general reduction theorem that transforms an offline approximation algorithm with low average sensitivity to an online
algorithm with low ϵ-approximate regret. We then demonstrate that offline approximation algorithms can be transformed into a low-sensitivity version using a coreset
construction method. To showcase the versatility of our approach, we apply it to
various problems, including online (k, z)-clustering, online matrix approximation,
and online regression, and successfully achieve polylogarithmic ϵ-approximate
regret for each problem. Moreover, we show that in all three cases, our algorithm
also enjoys low inconsistency, which may be desired in some online applications.

1

Introduction

In online learning literature, stochastic and adversarial settings are two of the most well-studied
cases. Although the stochastic setting is not often satisfied in real applications, the performance
and guarantees of online algorithms in the adversarial case are considerably compromised. This is
particularly true for important online tasks such as k-means clustering, which gives a significantly
worse guarantee than their offline or stochastic counterparts [Cohen-Addad et al., 2021]. As a result,
their practical applicability is greatly limited.
Recently, the random-order model has been introduced as a means of modeling learning scenarios
that fall between the stochastic and adversarial settings [Garber et al., 2020, Sherman et al., 2021]. In
the random-order model, the adversary is permitted to choose the set of losses, with full knowledge
of the learning algorithm, but has no influence over the order in which the losses are presented to
the learner. Instead, the loss sequence is uniformly and randomly permuted. This effectively bridges
the gap between the stochastic setting, where only the distribution of losses can be chosen by the
setting, and the adversarial setting, where the adversary has complete control over the order of the
losses presented to the learner.
In this work, we introduce a batch-to-online transformation framework designed specifically for the
random-order model. Our framework facilitates the conversion of an offline approximation algorithm
into an online learning algorithm with ϵ-approximate regret guarantees. Our primary technical tool
is average sensitivity, which was initially proposed by Varma and Yoshida [2021] to describe the
algorithm’s average-case sensitivity against input perturbations. We demonstrate that any offline
approximation algorithm with low average sensitivity will result in a transformed online counterpart
that has low ϵ-approximate regret. To achieve small average sensitivity for offline algorithms, we
leverage the idea of a coreset [Agarwal et al., 2005, Har-Peled and Mazumdar, 2004], which is a small
but representative subset of a larger dataset that preserves important properties of the original data.
We present a coreset construction method that attains low average sensitivity, and when combined
with the approximation algorithm, yields an overall algorithm with low average sensitivity.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

