Consensus and Subjectivity of Skin Tone Annotation
for ML Fairness
Candice Schumann
Google
United States
cschumann@google.com
Ellis Monk, Jr.
Harvard University∗
United States
emonk@fas.harvard.edu

Gbolahan O. Olanubi
Google
United States
femio@google.com

Auriel Wright
Google
United States
aurielwright@google.com

Courtney Heldreth
Google
United States
cheldreth@google.com

Susanna Ricco
Google
United States
ricco@google.com

Abstract
Understanding different human attributes and how they affect model behavior may
become a standard need for all model creation and usage, from traditional computer
vision tasks to the newest multimodal generative AI systems. In computer vision
specifically, we have relied on datasets augmented with perceived attribute signals
(e.g., gender presentation, skin tone, and age) and benchmarks enabled by these
datasets. Typically labels for these tasks come from human annotators. However,
annotating attribute signals, especially skin tone, is a difficult and subjective task.
Perceived skin tone is affected by technical factors, like lighting conditions, and
social factors that shape an annotator’s lived experience.
This paper examines the subjectivity of skin tone annotation through a series of
annotation experiments using the Monk Skin Tone (MST) scale [59], a small pool
of professional photographers, and a much larger pool of trained crowdsourced
annotators. Along with this study we release the Monk Skin Tone Examples (MSTE) dataset, containing 1515 images and 31 videos spread across the full MST scale.
MST-E is designed to help train human annotators to annotate MST effectively.
Our study shows that annotators can reliably annotate skin tone in a way that
aligns with an expert in the MST scale, even under challenging environmental
conditions. We also find evidence that annotators from different geographic regions
rely on different mental models of MST categories resulting in annotations that
systematically vary across regions. Given this, we advise practitioners to use
a diverse set of annotators and a higher replication count for each image when
annotating skin tone for fairness research.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are ubiquitous in today’s society, influencing almost every aspect of our lives.
Widespread adoption brings with it heightened scrutiny, with a focus on responsible model creation
— from data curation to evaluations — evident in regulation and policy discussions [24, 40, 67].
As a result, understanding different human attributes and how they affect model behavior may
become a standard need for all model creation and usage, from traditional computer vision tasks
to the newest multimodal generative AI systems [41]. In computer vision specifically, we foresee
skin tone becoming a significant part of this conversation. Indeed, the past few years have seen
∗

Ellis Monk performed this work while also a Visiting Researcher at Google.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

