Learning Fine-grained View-Invariant
Representations from Unpaired Ego-Exo Videos
via Temporal Alignment

1

Zihui Xue1,2
Kristen Grauman1,2
2
The University of Texas at Austin
FAIR, Meta

Abstract
The egocentric and exocentric viewpoints of a human activity look dramatically
different, yet invariant representations to link them are essential for many potential
applications in robotics and augmented reality. Prior work is limited to learning
view-invariant features from paired synchronized viewpoints. We relax that strong
data assumption and propose to learn fine-grained action features that are invariant
to the viewpoints by aligning egocentric and exocentric videos in time, even
when not captured simultaneously or in the same environment. To this end, we
propose AE2, a self-supervised embedding approach with two key designs: (1) an
object-centric encoder that explicitly focuses on regions corresponding to hands
and active objects; and (2) a contrastive-based alignment objective that leverages
temporally reversed frames as negative samples. For evaluation, we establish a
benchmark for fine-grained video understanding in the ego-exo context, comprising
four datasets—including an ego tennis forehand dataset we collected, along with
dense per-frame labels we annotated for each dataset. On the four datasets, our AE2
method strongly outperforms prior work in a variety of fine-grained downstream
tasks, both in regular and cross-view settings.1

1

Introduction

Fine-grained video understanding aims to extract the different stages of an activity and reason about
their temporal evolution. For example, whereas a coarse-grained action recognition task [31, 16,
68, 20, 7] might ask, “is this sewing or snowboarding or...?”, a fine-grained action recognition task
requires detecting each of the component steps, e.g., “the person threads the needle here, they poke the
needle through the fabric here...” Such fine-grained understanding of video is important in numerous
applications that require step-by-step understanding, ranging from robot imitation learning [42, 63]
to skill learning from instructional “how-to” videos [86, 73, 47, 46].
The problem is challenging on two fronts. First, the degree of detail and precision eludes existing
learned video representations, which are typically trained to produce global, clip-level descriptors
of the activity [69, 74, 18, 5]. Second, in many scenarios of interest, the camera viewpoint and
background will vary substantially, making the same activity look dramatically different. For
example, imagine a user wearing AR/VR glasses who wants to compare the egocentric recording
of themselves doing a tennis forehand with a third-person (exocentric) expert demonstration video
on YouTube, or a robot tasked with pouring drinks from its egocentric perspective but provided
with multiple third-person human pouring videos for learning. Existing view-invariant feature
learning [76, 27, 78, 45, 57, 58]—including methods targeting ego-exo views [63, 66]—assume that
training data contains synchronized video pairs capturing the same action simultaneously in the same
environment. This is a strong assumption. It implies significant costs and physical constraints that
can render these methods inapplicable in complex real-world scenarios.
1

Project webpage: https://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/AlignEgoExo/.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

