Supply-Side Equilibria in Recommender Systems
Meena Jagadeesan
UC Berkeley
mjagadeesan@berkeley.edu

Nikhil Garg
Cornell Tech
ngarg@cornell.edu

Jacob Steinhardt
UC Berkeley
jsteinhardt@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Algorithmic recommender systems such as Spotify and Netflix affect not only
consumer behavior but also producer incentives. Producers seek to create content
that will be shown by the recommendation algorithm, which can impact both the
diversity and quality of their content. In this work, we investigate the resulting
supply-side equilibria in personalized content recommender systems. We model
the decisions of producers as choosing multi-dimensional content vectors and
users as having heterogenous preferences, which contrasts with classical lowdimensional models. Multi-dimensionality and heterogeneity creates the potential
for specialization, where different producers create different types of content
at equilibrium. Using a duality argument, we derive necessary and sufficient
conditions for whether specialization occurs. Then, we characterize the distribution
of content at equilibrium in concrete settings with two populations of users. Lastly,
we show that specialization can enable producers to achieve positive profit at
equilibrium, which means that specialization can reduce the competitiveness of the
marketplace. At a conceptual level, our analysis of supply-side competition takes a
step towards elucidating how personalized recommendations shape the marketplace
of digital goods.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic recommender systems have disrupted the production of digital goods such as movies,
music, and news. In the music industry, artists have changed the length and structure of songs in
response to Spotify’s algorithm and payment structure [Hodgson, 2021]. In the movie industry,
personalization has led to low-budget films catering to specific audiences [McDonald, 2019], in some
cases constructing data-driven “taste communities” [Adalian, 2018]. Across industries, recommender
systems shape how producers decide what content to create, influencing the supply side of the
digital goods market. This raises the questions: What factors drive and influence the supply-side
marketplace? What content will be produced at equilibrium?
Intuitively, supply-side effects are induced by the multi-sided interaction between producers, the
recommendation algorithm, and users. Users tend to follow recommendations when deciding what
content to consume [Ursu, 2018]—thus, recommendations influence how many users consume each
digital good and impact the profit (or utility) generated by each content producer. As a result, content
producers shape their content to maximize appearance in recommendations; this creates competition
between the producers, which can be modeled as a game. However, understanding such producer-side
effects has been difficult, both empirically and theoretically. This is a pressing problem, as these gaps
in understanding have hindered the regulation of digital marketplaces [Stigler Committee, 2019].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

