Rethinking Conditional Diffusion Sampling with
Progressive Guidance

Anh-Dung Dinh
School of Computer Science
The University of Sydney
dinhanhdung1996@gmail.com

Daochang Liu
School of Computer Science
The University of Sydney
daochang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Chang Xu ∗
School of Computer Science
The University of Sydney
c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
This paper quantifies and tackles two critical challenges encountered in classifier
guidance for diffusion generative models, i.e., the lack of diversity and the presence
of adversarial effects. These issues often result in a scarcity of diverse samples or
the generation of non-robust features. The underlying cause lies in the mechanism
of classifier guidance, where discriminative gradients push samples to be recognized as conditions aggressively. This inadvertently suppresses information with
common features among relevant classes, resulting in a limited pool of features with
less diversity or the absence of robust features for image construction. We propose
a generalized classifier guidance method called Progressive Guidance, which mitigates the problems by allowing relevant classes’ gradients to contribute to shared
information construction when the image is noisy in early sampling steps. In the
later sampling stage, we progressively enhance gradients to refine the details in the
image toward the primary condition. This helps to attain a high level of diversity
and robustness compared to the vanilla classifier guidance. Experimental results
demonstrate that our proposed method further improves image quality while offering a significant level of diversity as well as robust features. Source code is available
at: https://github.com/dungdinhanh/prog-guided-diffusion.

1

Introduction

Diffusion model [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] has emerged as a state-of-the-art technique for generating high-fidelity
images without relying on adversarial training techniques like GANs [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. This approach
has gained popularity among researchers because it avoids mode collapse and training instability.
For diffusion models, the generated samples can be further enhanced with improved quality and
controllable attributes using guidance techniques for sampling. Classifier guidance [11, 12, 13] is
one of these techniques which offers numerous benefits. Conditional information can be provided to
unconditional diffusion models using noise-aware classifiers’ gradients to guide towards pre-defined
conditions during sampling. This technique is able to not only improve image quality significantly but
also trade-off between diversity and conditional information to fit with the application design. More
critically, the flexible nature of classifier guidance allows easy extensions of off-the-shelf diffusion
models at the sampling stage without any expensive re-training.
∗

Corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

