ODE-based Recurrent Model-free Reinforcement
Learning for POMDPs

Xuanle Zhao1, 2 , Duzhen Zhang1, 2 , Liyuan Han1, 2 , Tielin Zhang1, 2∗, Bo Xu1, 2, 3
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China
{zhaoxuanle2022, zhangduzhen2019, hanliyuan2019, tielin.zhang, xubo}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs) are widely recognized as the standard
for modeling physical mechanisms, which help to perform approximate inference
in unknown physical or biological environments. In partially observable (PO)
environments, how to infer unseen information from raw observations puzzled
the agents. By using a recurrent policy with a compact context, context-based
reinforcement learning provides a flexible way to extract unobservable information
from historical transitions. To help the agent extract more dynamics-related information, we present a novel ODE-based recurrent model combined with model-free
reinforcement learning (RL) framework to solve partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs). We experimentally demonstrate the efficacy of our
methods across various PO continuous control and meta-RL tasks. Furthermore,
our experiments illustrate that our method is robust against irregular observations,
owing to the ability of ODEs to model irregularly-sampled time series.

1

Introduction

Conventional reinforcement learning (RL) is typically cast as a problem of solving fully observable
Markov decision process (MDP) tasks which are trained and tested on the same task. However,
most practical applications require the agents to handle some degree of partially observable and
irregular observations. Humans are always good at solving these kinds of tasks by extracting crucial
information from past observations and actions, while conventional RL agents do not have the ability
to extract information relevant to the tasks.
In recent works, several categories of methods have been proposed to solve PO problems. The most
straightforward one is to include all historical observations as input [Lee et al., 2020]. However, this
kind of method is impractical in application owing to the dimension increment of the observation
inputs. Another category is based on model-free methods which generally use recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) as memory units and function approximators to extract historical task-related
information to solve partial observable problems [Igl et al., 2018, Kapturowski et al., 2019, Han et al.,
2019, Jaderberg et al., 2019]. Recurrent neural networks are commonly employed to encode historical
state transitions into contextual representations, leveraging their capacity to process sequential
information. These representations are then used in conjunction with the current state to find the
optimal policy. This baseline is simple and efficient, as it obtains near-optimal results and only
requires changing the policy and value network into a recurrent version. The third category considers
using a model to estimate a belief state from historical transitions [Lee et al., 2020]. Agent receives
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

