How to Fine-tune the Model: Uniﬁed Model Shift and
Model Bias Policy Optimization
Hai Zhang Hang Yu Junqiao Zhao∗ Di Zhang
Chang Huang Hongtu Zhou Xiao Zhang Chen Ye
Department of Computer Science, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
MOE Key Lab of Embedded System and Service Computing, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
{zhanghai12138, 2053881, zhaojunqiao}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Designing and deriving effective model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) algorithms with a performance improvement guarantee is challenging, mainly attributed to the high coupling between model learning and policy optimization.
Many prior methods that rely on return discrepancy to guide model learning ignore the impacts of model shift, which can lead to performance deterioration due
to excessive model updates. Other methods use performance difference bound to
explicitly consider model shift. However, these methods rely on a ﬁxed threshold
to constrain model shift, resulting in a heavy dependence on the threshold and a
lack of adaptability during the training process. In this paper, we theoretically
derive an optimization objective that can unify model shift and model bias and
then formulate a ﬁne-tuning process. This process adaptively adjusts the model
updates to get a performance improvement guarantee while avoiding model overﬁtting. Based on these, we develop a straightforward algorithm USB-PO2 (Uniﬁed model Shift and model Bias Policy Optimization). Empirical results show that
USB-PO achieves state-of-the-art performance on several challenging benchmark
tasks.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, reinforcement learning (RL) has been gaining much traction in a wide variety of complicated decision-making tasks ranging from academia to industry [42, 9, 5, 13, 28]. Part of this is
due to some remarkable model-free RL (MFRL) algorithms [40, 15, 11, 41, 18], which show desirable asymptotic performance. However, their applications are hindered by the bottleneck of sample
efﬁciency. On the contrary, model-based RL (MBRL) algorithms, using a world model to generate
the imaginary rollouts and then taking them for policy optimization [31, 20], have high sample efﬁciency while achieving similar asymptotic performance, thus becoming a compelling alternative in
practical cases [39, 16, 52].
Typically, MBRL algorithms iterate between model learning and policy optimization. Hence the
model quality is crucial for MBRL. Many prior methods [31, 20, 53, 38, 24] rely on return discrepancy to obtain model updates with a performance improvement guarantee. While having achieved
comparable results, they only account for model bias in one iteration [20] but do not consider the
impacts of model shift between two iterations [21], which can lead to performance deterioration due
to excessive model updates. Although CMLO [21] explicitly considers model shift from the perspective of the performance difference bound, it only sets a ﬁxed threshold to constrain the impacts
of model shift and determines when the model should be updated accordingly. If this threshold is
∗
2

Corresponding author
Code: https://github.com/betray12138/Uniﬁed-Model-Shift-and-Model-Bias-Policy-Optimization.git

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

