On the Variance, Admissibility, and Stability of
Empirical Risk Minimization

Gil Kur
EECS
MIT
gilkur@mit.edu

Eli Putterman
Mathematics Department
Tel Aviv University
putterman@mail.tau.ac.il

Alexnader Rakhlin
BCS & IDSS
MIT
rakhlin@mit.edu

Abstract
It is well known that Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) may attain minimax
suboptimal rates in terms of the mean squared error (Birgé and Massart, 1993). In
this paper, we prove that, under relatively mild assumptions, the suboptimality of
ERM must be due to its bias. Namely, the variance error term of ERM (in terms
of the bias and variance decomposition) enjoys the minimax rate. In the fixed
design setting, we provide an elementary proof of this result using the probabilistic
method. Then, we extend our proof to the random design setting for various
models. In addition, we provide a simple proof of Chatterjee’s admissibility
theorem (Chatterjee, 2014, Theorem 1.4), which states that in the fixed design
setting, ERM cannot be ruled out as an optimal method, and then we extend this
result to the random design setting. We also show that our estimates imply stability
of ERM, complementing the main result of Caponnetto and Rakhlin (2006) for nonDonsker classes. Finally, we highlight the somewhat irregular nature of the loss
landscape of ERM in the non-Donsker regime, by showing that functions can be
close to ERM, in terms of L2 distance, while still being far from almost-minimizers
of the empirical loss.

1

Introduction

Maximum Likelihood and the method of Least Squares are fundamental procedures in statistics.
The study of the asymptotic consistency of Maximum Likelihood has been central to the field for
almost a century (Wald, 1949). Along with consistency, failures of Maximum Likelihood have been
thoroughly investigated for nearly as long (Neyman and Scott, 1948; Bahadur, 1958; Ferguson, 1982).
In the setting of non-parametric estimation, the seminal work of (Birgé and Massart, 1993) provided
sufficient conditions for minimax optimality (in a non-asymptotic sense) of Least Squares while also
presenting an example of a model class where this basic procedure is sub-optimal. Three decades
later, we still do not have necessary and sufficient conditions for minimax optimality of Least Squares
when the model class is large. While the present paper does not resolve this question, it makes
several steps towards understanding the behavior of Least Squares — equivalently, Empirical Risk
Minimization (ERM) with square loss — in large models.
Beyond intellectual curiosity, the question of minimax optimality of Least Squares is driven by the
desire to understand the current practice of fitting large or overparametrized models, such as neural
networks, to data (cf. (Belkin et al., 2019; Bartlett et al., 2020)). At the present moment, there is little
theoretical understanding of whether such unregularized data-fitting procedures are optimal, and the
study of their statistical properties may lead to new methods with improved performance.
In addition to minimax optimality, many other important properties of Least Squares on large models
are yet to be understood. For instance, little is known about its stability with respect to perturbations of
the data. It is also unclear whether approximate minimizers of empirical loss enjoy similar statistical
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

