Convolutional State Space Models for
Long-Range Spatiotemporal Modeling
Jimmy T.H. Smith*,2,4 , Shalini De Mello1 , Jan Kautz1 , Scott W. Linderman3, 4 , Wonmin Byeon1
1
NVIDIA, * Work performed during internship at NVIDIA
2
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University.
3
Department of Statistics, Stanford University.
4
Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University.
{jsmith14,scott.linderman}@stanford.edu
{shalinig,jkautz,wbyeon}@nvidia.com.

Abstract
Effectively modeling long spatiotemporal sequences is challenging due to the need
to model complex spatial correlations and long-range temporal dependencies simultaneously. ConvLSTMs attempt to address this by updating tensor-valued states
with recurrent neural networks, but their sequential computation makes them slow
to train. In contrast, Transformers can process an entire spatiotemporal sequence,
compressed into tokens, in parallel. However, the cost of attention scales quadratically in length, limiting their scalability to longer sequences. Here, we address
the challenges of prior methods and introduce convolutional state space models
(ConvSSM)1 that combine the tensor modeling ideas of ConvLSTM with the long
sequence modeling approaches of state space methods such as S4 and S5. First,
we demonstrate how parallel scans can be applied to convolutional recurrences to
achieve subquadratic parallelization and fast autoregressive generation. We then
establish an equivalence between the dynamics of ConvSSMs and SSMs, which
motivates parameterization and initialization strategies for modeling long-range
dependencies. The result is ConvS5, an efficient ConvSSM variant for long-range
spatiotemporal modeling. ConvS5 significantly outperforms Transformers and
ConvLSTM on a long horizon Moving-MNIST experiment while training 3×
faster than ConvLSTM and generating samples 400× faster than Transformers. In
addition, ConvS5 matches or exceeds the performance of state-of-the-art methods
on challenging DMLab, Minecraft and Habitat prediction benchmarks and enables
new directions for modeling long spatiotemporal sequences.

1

Introduction

Developing methods that efficiently and effectively model long-range spatiotemporal dependencies
is a challenging problem in machine learning. Whether predicting future video frames [1, 2],
modeling traffic patterns [3, 4], or forecasting weather [5, 6], deep spatiotemporal modeling requires
simultaneously capturing local spatial structure and long-range temporal dependencies. Although
there has been progress in deep generative modeling of complex spatiotemporal data [7–12], most
prior work has only considered short sequences of 20-50 timesteps due to the costs of processing long
spatiotemporal sequences. Recent work has begun considering sequences of hundreds to thousands
of timesteps [13–16]. As hardware and data collection of long spatiotemporal sequences continue
to improve, new modeling approaches are required that scale efficiently with sequence length and
effectively capture long-range dependencies.
1

Implementation available at: https://github.com/NVlabs/ConvSSM.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

