Neural Frailty Machine: Beyond proportional hazard
assumption in neural survival regressions
Ruofan Wu∗† , Jiawei Qiao∗ ‡ , Mingzhe Wu§ ,
Wen Yu , Ming Zheng‡ , Tengfei Liu† , Tianyi Zhang† , and Weiqiang Wang†
‡

†

‡

Ant Group
Fudan University
§
Coupang

{ruofan.wrf, aaron.ltf, zty113091, weiqiang.wwq}@antgroup.com
jeremyqjw@163.com, wumingzhe.darcy@gmail.com, {wenyu, mingzheng}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
We present neural frailty machine (NFM), a powerful and flexible neural modeling
framework for survival regressions. The NFM framework utilizes the classical
idea of multiplicative frailty in survival analysis as a principled way of extending the proportional hazard assumption, at the same time being able to leverage
the strong approximation power of neural architectures for handling nonlinear
covariate dependence. Two concrete models are derived under the framework
that extends neural proportional hazard models and nonparametric hazard regression models. Both models allow efficient training under the likelihood objective.
Theoretically, for both proposed models, we establish statistical guarantees of
neural function approximation with respect to nonparametric components via
characterizing their rate of convergence. Empirically, we provide synthetic experiments that verify our theoretical statements. We also conduct experimental
evaluations over 6 benchmark datasets of different scales, showing that the proposed NFM models achieve predictive performance comparable to or sometimes
surpassing state-of-the-art survival models. Our code is publicly availabel at
https://github.com/Rorschach1989/nfm

1

Introduction

Regression analysis of time-to-event data [40] has been among the most important modeling tools
for clinical studies and has witnessed a growing interest in areas like corporate finance [22], recommendation systems [38], and computational advertising [71]. The key feature that differentiates
time-to-event data from other types of data is that they are often incompletely observed, with the most
prevailing form of incompleteness being the right censoring mechanism [40]. In the right censoring
mechanism, the duration time of a sampled subject is (sometimes) only known to be larger than the
observation time instead of being recorded precisely. It is well known in the community of survival
analysis that even in the case of linear regression, naively discarding the censored observations
produces estimation results that are statistically biased [7], at the same time losses sample efficiency
if the censoring proportion is high.
Cox’s proportional hazard (CoxPH) model [14] using the convex objective of negative partial likelihood [15] is the de facto choice in modeling right censored time-to-event data (hereafter abbreviated
as censored data without misunderstandings). The model is semiparametric [4] in the sense that the
baseline hazard function needs no parametric assumptions. The original formulation of CoxPH model
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

