Does Visual Pretraining Help End-to-End Reasoning?

Chen Sun
Brown University, Google

Calvin Luo
Brown University

Xingyi Zhou
Google Research

Anurag Arnab
Google Research

Cordelia Schmid
Google Research

Abstract
We aim to investigate whether end-to-end learning of visual reasoning can be
achieved with general-purpose neural networks, with the help of visual pretraining.
A positive result would refute the common belief that explicit visual abstraction
(e.g. object detection) is essential for compositional generalization on visual reasoning, and confirm the feasibility of a neural network “generalist” to solve visual
recognition and reasoning tasks. We propose a simple and general self-supervised
framework which “compresses” each video frame into a small set of tokens with
a transformer network, and reconstructs the remaining frames based on the compressed temporal context. To minimize the reconstruction loss, the network must
learn a compact representation for each image, as well as capture temporal dynamics and object permanence from temporal context. We perform evaluation on two
visual reasoning benchmarks, CATER and ACRE. We observe that pretraining is
essential to achieve compositional generalization for end-to-end visual reasoning.
Our proposed framework outperforms traditional supervised pretraining, including
image classification and explicit object detection, by large margins.

1

Introduction

This paper investigates if an end-to-end trained neural network is able to solve challenging visual
reasoning tasks [23, 65, 66] that involve inferring causal relationships, discovering object relations,
and capturing temporal dynamics. A prominent approach [49] for visual reasoning is to construct a
structured, interpretable representation from the visual inputs, and then apply symbolic programs [42]
or neural networks [17] to solve the reasoning task. Despite their appealing properties, such as being
interpretable and enabling the injection of expert knowledge, it is practically challenging to determine
what kinds of symbolic representations to use and how to detect them reliably from visual data. In
fact, the most suitable symbolic representation may differ significantly across different tasks: the
representation for modeling a single human’s kinematics (e.g. with body parts and joints) is unlikely
to be the same as that for modeling group social behaviors (e.g. each pedestrian can be viewed as
its own complete, independent entity). With the success of unified neural frameworks for multi-task
learning [7], it is desirable to utilize a unified input interface (e.g. raw pixels) and to have the neural
network learn to dynamically extract suitable representations for different tasks. However, how to
learn a distributed representation with a deep neural network that generalizes similarly to learning
methods based on symbolic representation [66] for visual reasoning remains an open problem.
The key hypothesis we make in this paper is that a general-purpose neural network, such as a
Transformer [55], can be turned into an implicit visual concept learner with self-supervised pretraining. An implicit visual concept refers to a vector-based representation in an end-to-end neural
network, which can be “finetuned” directly on the downstream tasks. Some of the learned implicit
representations may be discretized into human-interpretable symbols for the purposes of human
understanding of and feedback to the model. Others may correspond to part of, or a combination of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

