Design from Policies: Conservative Test-Time
Adaptation for Offline Policy Optimization

Jinxin Liu1,2

Hongyin Zhang1,2

Zifeng Zhuang1,2

Yachen Kang1,2

Donglin Wang1∗ Bin Wang3
1

Westlake University

2

Zhejiang University

3

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
In this work, we decouple the iterative bi-level offline RL (value estimation and
policy extraction) from the offline training phase, forming a non-iterative bi-level
paradigm and avoiding the iterative error propagation over two levels. Specifically, this non-iterative paradigm allows us to conduct inner-level optimization
(value estimation) in training, while performing outer-level optimization (policy
extraction) in testing. Naturally, such a paradigm raises three core questions that
are not fully answered by prior non-iterative offline RL counterparts like rewardconditioned policy: Q1) What information should we transfer from the inner-level
to the outer-level? Q2) What should we pay attention to when exploiting the
transferred information for safe/confident outer-level optimization? Q3) What are
the benefits of concurrently conducting outer-level optimization during testing?
Motivated by model-based optimization (MBO), we propose DROP (Design fROm
Policies), which fully answers the above questions. Specifically, in the inner-level,
DROP decomposes offline data into multiple subsets and learns an MBO score
model (A1). To keep safe exploitation to the score model in the outer-level, we
explicitly learn a behavior embedding and introduce a conservative regularization
(A2). During testing, we show that DROP permits test-time adaptation, enabling an
adaptive inference across states (A3). Empirically, we find that DROP, compared to
prior non-iterative offline RL counterparts, gains an average improvement probability of more than 80%, and achieves comparable or better performance compared to
prior iterative baselines.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) [37, 40] describes a task of learning a policy from static offline
data. Due to the overestimation of values at out-of-distribution (OOD) state-actions, recent iterative
offline RL methods introduce various policy/value regularization to avoid deviating from the offline
data distribution in the training phase. Then, these methods directly deploy the learned policy in an
online environment to test its performance. To unfold our following analysis, we term this kind of
learning procedure as iterative bi-level offline RL (Figure 1 left), where the inner-level optimization
refers to trying to eliminate the OOD issue, the outer-level optimization refers to trying to infer
an optimal policy that will be employed at testing. Here, we use the "iterative" term to emphasize
that the inner-level and outer-level are iteratively optimized in the training phase. However, due to
the iterative error exploitation and propagation [6] over the two levels, performing such an iterative
bi-level optimization completely in training often struggles to learn a stable policy/value function.
∗

Corresponding author: Donglin Wang <wangdonglin@westlake.edu.cn>

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

