Navigating the Pitfalls of Active Learning Evaluation:
A Systematic Framework for
Meaningful Performance Assessment

Carsten T. Lüth1,2
1

Till J. Bungert1,2

Lukas Klein1,2,3

Paul F. Jaeger1,2

German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg, Interactive Machine Learning Group, Germany
2
Helmholtz Imaging, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
3
Institute for Machine Learning, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
carsten.lueth@dkfz-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Active Learning (AL) aims to reduce the labeling burden by interactively selecting
the most informative samples from a pool of unlabeled data. While there has been
extensive research on improving AL query methods in recent years, some studies
have questioned the effectiveness of AL compared to emerging paradigms such
as semi-supervised (Semi-SL) and self-supervised learning (Self-SL), or a simple
optimization of classifier configurations. Thus, today’s AL literature presents an
inconsistent and contradictory landscape, leaving practitioners uncertain about
whether and how to use AL in their tasks. In this work, we make the case that
this inconsistency arises from a lack of systematic and realistic evaluation of AL
methods. Specifically, we identify five key pitfalls in the current literature that
reflect the delicate considerations required for AL evaluation. Further, we present
an evaluation framework that overcomes these pitfalls and thus enables meaningful
statements about the performance of AL methods. To demonstrate the relevance of
our protocol, we present a large-scale empirical study and benchmark for image
classification spanning various data sets, query methods, AL settings, and training
paradigms. Our findings clarify the inconsistent picture in the literature and enable
us to give hands-on recommendations for practitioners. The benchmark is hosted
at https://github.com/IML-DKFZ/realistic-al.

1

Introduction

Active Learning (AL) is a popular approach to efficiently label large pools of data by interactively
querying the most informative samples for training a classification system. While some parts of the
AL community actively propose new query methods (QMs) to advance the field [14, 30], others
report AL to be generally outperformed by alternative training paradigms to standard training (ST)
such as Semi-Supervised Learning (Semi-SL) [20, 43] and Self-Supervised Learning (Self-SL) [6], or
even by well-configured standard baselines [44]. To add to the confusion, further studies have shown
that AL can even decrease classification performance in certain settings, a phenomenon referred to as
the "cold start problem" [6, 20, 43].
This heterogeneous state of research in AL poses a significant challenge for anyone seeking to
efficiently annotate their dataset and facing the questions: On which tasks and datasets is AL
beneficial? And how to best employ AL on my dataset?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

