Subclass-Dominant Label Noise: A Counterexample
for the Success of Early Stopping

Yingbin Bai1 Zhongyi Han2 Erkun Yang3 Jun Yu4
Bo Han5 Dadong Wang6 Tongliang Liu1 ∗
1

Sydney AI Centre, University of Sydney; 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence;
3
Xidian University; 4 University of Science and Technology of China;
5
Hong Kong Baptist University; 6 CSIRO

Abstract
In this paper, we empirically investigate a previously overlooked and widespread
type of label noise, subclass-dominant label noise (SDN). Our findings reveal that,
during the early stages of training, deep neural networks can rapidly memorize
mislabeled examples in SDN. This phenomenon poses challenges in effectively
selecting confident examples using conventional early stopping techniques. To address this issue, we delve into the properties of SDN and observe that long-trained
representations are superior at capturing the high-level semantics of mislabeled
examples, leading to a clustering effect where similar examples are grouped together. Based on this observation, we propose a novel method called NoiseCluster
that leverages the geometric structures of long-trained representations to identify
and correct SDN. Our experiments demonstrate that NoiseCluster outperforms
state-of-the-art baselines on both synthetic and real-world datasets, highlighting the
importance of addressing SDN in learning with noisy labels. The code is available
at https://github.com/tmllab/2023_NeurIPS_SDN.

1

Introduction

The popularity of giant neural networks in recent years has emphasized the importance of vast
amounts of annotated data [42, 11, 41]. However, manually annotating large amounts of data can
be prohibitively expensive, leading researchers to explore alternative methods for collecting data
such as web crawling [57] and crowdsourcing [45] that can be more cost-effective. Unfortunately,
these methods may produce inaccurate data, particularly when noisy labels are present, thereby
undermining the performance of deep neural networks (DNNs). As a result, the research community
has increasingly focused on developing approaches to mitigate the impact of noisy labels and prevent
the degeneration of DNNs [16, 25, 13].
Most existing approaches for dealing with noisy labels broadly fall into two categories: noisemodeling-based methods and memorization-effects-based methods. Noise-modeling-based methods
[51, 53, 32, 47, 55] usually construct a transition matrix to exploit connections between given noisy
labels and underlying clean labels. While these methods offer strong theoretical guarantees that the
corrected risk closely approximates the risk associated with training on clean data, accurate estimation
of the transition matrix relies on numerous assumptions that are difficult to satisfy in real-world
scenarios [40, 56]. Memorization-effects-based methods [17, 43] mainly employ early stopping to
identify confident examples based on the phenomenon that DNNs will fit the easy examples (i.e., the
majority of examples with similar characteristics) first and then memorize the complex examples (i.e.,
the minority of examples with diverse characteristics) [58, 1, 22]. Recently, some of them [30, 34, 3],
combined with semi-supervised learning techniques [5, 23], have achieved state-of-the-art results.
∗

Correspondence to Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

