A fast heuristic to optimize time-space tradeoff for
large models

Akifumi Imanishi ∗
Preferred Networks
imanishi@preferred.jp

Zijian Xu ∗
Preferred Networks
joe@preferred.jp

Sixue Wang
Preferred Networks
cecilwang@preferred.jp

Masayuki Takagi
Preferred Networks
mtakagi@preferred.jp

Emilio Castillo
Preferred Networks
ecastill@preferred.jp

Abstract
Training large-scale neural networks is heavily constrained by GPU memory. In
order to circumvent this limitation, gradient checkpointing, or recomputation is
a powerful technique. There is active research in this area with methods such
as Checkmake [19] or Moccasin [3]. However, both Checkmate and Moccasin
rely on mixed integer linear programming or constraint programming, resulting in
limited scalability due to their exponentially large search space.
This paper proposes a novel algorithm for recomputation (FastSA) based on a
simulated annealing heuristic that achieves comparable or even better solutions
than state-of-the-art alternatives. FastSA can optimize computational graphs with
thousands of nodes within 3 to 30 seconds, several orders of magnitude faster than
current solutions.
We applied FastSA to PyTorch models and verified its effectiveness through popular large vision and text models, including recent language models with the
transformer architecture. The results demonstrate significant memory reductions
by 73% with extra 18% computational overheads on average. Our experiments
demonstrate the practicality and effectiveness of our recomputation algorithm,
further highlighting its potential for wide application in various deep learning domains.

1

Introduction

The memory requirements for deep neural networks continue to grow together with model complexity. For example, training a state-of-the-art Large Language Model (LLM) such as LLaMA [40]
with 65 billion parameters needs 1024 NVIDIA A100 GPU devices for 21 days and different techniques to overcome the immense memory consumption of the process. While the model parameters
may fit in the device memory, the results of several operations of the forward pass are saved and
remain in the device memory to compute the gradients during the backpropagation step. This limits
the size of trainable models. One of the most widely used solutions is to split the model parameters
across multiple devices into vertical or horizontal ways [34, 26] in what is called Pipeline or Model
parallelism. However, these approaches may have the following problems. (1) It may be difficult
to split the model equally across the workers when the model architecture is complex. (2) We need
to modify the model for the parallelism. (3) Hiding communication behind computation needs further tuning. Heavy inter-device communication may result in a GPU utilization of only 5% of the
hardware peak[30].
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

