Non-Smooth Weakly-Convex Finite-sum Coupled
Compositional Optimization

Quanqi Hu
Department of Computer Science
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
quanqi-hu@tamu.edu

Dixian Zhu
Department of Genetics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
dixian-zhu@stanford.edu

Tianbao Yang
Department of Computer Science
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
tianbao-yang@tamu.edu

Abstract
This paper investigates new families of compositional optimization problems,
called non-smooth weakly-convex finite-sum coupled compositional optimization
(NSWC FCCO). There has been a growing interest in FCCO due to its wide-ranging
applications in machine learning and AI, as well as its ability to address the shortcomings of stochastic algorithms based on empirical risk minimization. However,
current research on FCCO presumes that both the inner and outer functions are
smooth, limiting their potential to tackle a more diverse set of problems. Our
research expands on this area by examining non-smooth weakly-convex FCCO,
where the outer function is weakly convex and non-decreasing, and the inner
function is weakly-convex. We analyze a single-loop algorithm and establish its
complexity for finding an ϵ-stationary point of the Moreau envelop of the objective
function. Additionally, we also extend the algorithm to solving novel non-smooth
weakly-convex tri-level finite-sum coupled compositional optimization problems,
which feature a nested arrangement of three functions. Lastly, we explore the applications of our algorithms in deep learning for two-way partial AUC maximization
and multi-instance two-way partial AUC maximization, using empirical studies to
showcase the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider two classes of non-convex compositional optimization problems. The first
class is formulated as following:
1X
min F (w) :=
fi (Eξ∼Di [gi (w; ξ)]),
(1)
i∈S
n
w∈Rd
where S denotes a finite set of n items and Di denotes a distribution that could depend on i. The
second class is given by:
 X

1 X
1
min F (w) :=
fi
gi (Eξ∼Di,j [hi,j (w; ξ)]) ,
(2)
i∈S1
j∈S2
n1
n2
w∈Rd
where S1 denotes a finite set of n1 items and S2 denotes a finite set of n2 items and Dij denotes
a distribution that could depend on (i, j). For simplicity of discussion, we denote by gi (w) =
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

