On the Stability-Plasticity Dilemma in Continual
Meta-Learning: Theory and Algorithm

Qi Chen∗
Laval University

Changjian Shui
McGill University

Ligong Han
Rutgers University

Mario Marchand
Laval University

Abstract
We focus on Continual Meta-Learning (CML), which targets accumulating and
exploiting meta-knowledge on a sequence of non-i.i.d. tasks. The primary challenge is to strike a balance between stability and plasticity, where a model should
be stable to avoid catastrophic forgetting in previous tasks and plastic to learn
generalizable concepts from new tasks. To address this, we formulate the CML
objective as controlling the average excess risk upper bound of the task sequence,
which reflects the trade-off between forgetting and generalization. Based on the
objective, we introduce a unified theoretical framework for CML in both static
and shifting environments, providing guarantees for various task-specific learning
algorithms. Moreover, we first present a rigorous analysis of a bi-level trade-off
in shifting environments. To approach the optimal trade-off, we propose a novel
algorithm that dynamically adjusts the meta-parameter and its learning rate w.r.t
environment change. Empirical evaluations on synthetic and real datasets illustrate
the effectiveness of the proposed theory and algorithm.

1

Introduction

An essential goal in real-time intelligent systems is to balance stability (preserve past knowledge;
minimize catastrophic forgetting [1]) and plasticity (rapidly learn from new experiences; generalize
quickly [2]). For addressing this dilemma, a promising direction is to incorporate meta-learning
[3, 4] with Continual Learning (CL) [5–7], which constitutes the Continual Meta-Learning (CML)
[8–10] problem. Specifically, CML sequentially learns a meta-model from few-shot tasks as the
common prior. Then, for new tasks, it quickly adapts task-specific models with this prior. CML
effectively enables balancing the task-level trade-off between learning new tasks and retaining
previously acquired knowledge since the performance on previous tasks can be recovered with few
additional samples.
Despite being intuitive and technically sound, most related works in CML have focused on improving
empirical performance. There is still much room for exploration in the theoretical aspects. In
particular, there is a lack of rigorous understanding on (1) which factors are important for stability
and plasticity, (2) how to address the dilemma effectively by considering these factors.
To theoretically understand these questions, we need to characterize the sequential task-generating
process. In fact, many CML approaches are based on the implicit assumption that the non-i.i.d. tasks
are originated from a static task environment τ , where µt ∼ τ, ∀t. In addition, recent works reveal that
catastrophic forgetting often occurs when transferring a meta-model to a new environment [11, 12]
and start trying to empirically address the forgetting in shifting environments, such as [7, 13–16]. We
take this case into consideration and formally define a more general CML setting, where at each time
t the task µt is generated from a possibly shifting environment τt with µt ∼ τt (the environment is
∗

Correspondence to: qi.chen.1@ulaval.ca

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

