Fragment-based Pretraining and Finetuning on
Molecular Graphs

Kha-Dinh Luong, Ambuj Singh
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
{vluong,ambuj}@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
Property prediction on molecular graphs is an important application of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). Recently, unlabeled molecular data has become abundant,
which facilitates the rapid development of self-supervised learning for GNNs in
the chemical domain. In this work, we propose pretraining GNNs at the fragment
level, a promising middle ground to overcome the limitations of node-level and
graph-level pretraining. Borrowing techniques from recent work on principal subgraph mining, we obtain a compact vocabulary of prevalent fragments from a large
pretraining dataset. From the extracted vocabulary, we introduce several fragmentbased contrastive and predictive pretraining tasks. The contrastive learning task
jointly pretrains two different GNNs: one on molecular graphs and the other on
fragment graphs, which represents higher-order connectivity within molecules. By
enforcing consistency between the fragment embedding and the aggregated embedding of the corresponding atoms from the molecular graphs, we ensure that the
embeddings capture structural information at multiple resolutions. The structural
information of fragment graphs is further exploited to extract auxiliary labels for
graph-level predictive pretraining. We employ both the pretrained molecular-based
and fragment-based GNNs for downstream prediction, thus utilizing the fragment
information during finetuning. Our graph fragment-based pretraining (GraphFP)
advances the performances on 5 out of 8 common molecular benchmarks and
improves the performances on long-range biological benchmarks by at least 11.5%.
Code is available at: https://github.com/lvkd84/GraphFP.

1

Introduction

The rise of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) has captured the interest of the computational chemistry
community [11]. Representing molecules and chemical structures as graphs is beneficial because the
topology and connectivity are preserved and can be directly analyzed during learning [13], leading to
state-of-the-art performance. However, there is a problem in that while highly expressive GNNs are
data-hungry, the majority of molecular datasets available are considerably small, posing a critical
challenge to the generalization of GNNs. Following the steps that were taken in other domains
such as text and images, a potential solution is to pretrain GNNs on large-scale unlabeled data via
self-supervised pretraining [3, 5]. How to do so effectively is still an open question since graphs
are more complex than images or text, and the chemical specificity of molecular graphs needs to be
considered when designing graph-based pretraining tasks.
A large number of pretraining methods have been proposed for molecular graphs [38, 40]. For
example, [15] uses node embeddings to predict attributes of masked nodes, [17, 27] predicts graph
structural properties, and [16] generatively reconstructs graphs via node and edge predictions. Another
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

