Blocked Collaborative Bandits: Online Collaborative
Filtering with Per-Item Budget Constraints

Soumyabrata Pal
Google Research
Bangalore, India
soumyabratapal13@gmail.com

Arun Sai Suggala
Google Research
Bangalore, India
arunss@google.com

Karthikeyan Shanmugam
Google Research
Bangalore, India
karthikeyanvs@google.com

Prateek Jain
Google Research
Bangalore, India
prajain@google.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of blocked collaborative bandits where there are multiple
users, each with an associated multi-armed bandit problem. These users are grouped
into latent clusters such that the mean reward vectors of users within the same
cluster are identical. Our goal is to design algorithms that maximize the cumulative
reward accrued by all the users over time, under the constraint that no arm of a
user is pulled more than B times. This problem has been originally considered
by [4], and designing regret-optimal algorithms for it has since remained an open
problem. In this work, we propose an algorithm called B-LATTICE (Blocked
Latent bAndiTs via maTrIx ComplEtion) that collaborates across users, while
simultaneously satisfying the budget constraints, to maximize their cumulative
rewards. Theoretically, under certain reasonable assumptions on the latent structure,
with M users, N arms, T rounds perpuser, and C = O(1) latent clusters, B-LATTICE
O( T(1 + NM−1 ) under a budget constraint of
achieves a per-user regret of e
B = Θ(log T). These are the first sub-linear regret bounds for this problem, and
match the minimax regret bounds when B = T. Empirically, we demonstrate
that our algorithm has superior performance over baselines even when B = 1.
B-LATTICE runs in phases where in each phase it clusters users into groups and
collaborates across users within a group to quickly learn their reward models.

1

Introduction

Modern recommendation systems cater to millions of users and items [1] on a daily basis, typically
in an online fashion. A critical feature of such systems is to quickly learn tastes of individual users
from sequential actions and feedback, and suggest personalized products for each user. Furthermore,
in practice, an item that has already been consumed by a user is recommended very few times to
the same user (or not recommended at all). This is because, in applications such as movie/book
recommendations, a typical user will find little interest in consuming the same item multiple times.
This problem – that we rename as Blocked Collaborative Bandits – was abstracted out by [4] with
a modeling assumption that users have a latent clustering structure. That is, each user can belong
to an unknown cluster and the expected reward for an item/movie is same for all users in a cluster.
Formally, consider M users, N items and T rounds with M, N  T (M, N ≈ 106 in recommendation
systems such as YouTube) and in each round, every user is recommended some item (potentially
different for each user). On consuming the item, a noisy reward is assigned. As mentioned above,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

