Single-Stage Visual Query Localization
in Egocentric Videos

Hanwen Jiang1

Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan1
UT Austin1
FAIR, Meta2

Kristen Grauman1,2

Abstract
Visual Query Localization on long-form egocentric videos requires spatio-temporal
search and localization of visually specified objects and is vital to build episodic
memory systems. Prior work develops complex multi-stage pipelines that leverage
well-established object detection and tracking methods to perform VQL. However,
each stage is independently trained, and the complexity of the pipeline results in
slow inference speeds. We propose VQLoC, a novel single-stage VQL framework
that is end-to-end trainable. Our key idea is to first build a holistic understanding
of the query-video relationship and then perform spatio-temporal localization in
a single shot manner. Specifically, we establish the query-video relationship by
jointly considering query-to-frame correspondences between the query and each
video frame and frame-to-frame correspondences between nearby video frames.
Our experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms prior VQL methods
by 20% accuracy while obtaining a 10× improvement in inference speed. VQLoC
is also the top entry on the Ego4D VQ2D challenge leaderboard. Project page:
https://hwjiang1510.github.io/VQLoC/

1

Introduction

Episodic memory, a specific type of long-term memory in humans, facilitates the retrieval of our past
experiences such as their time, location, related context, and activities [46]. This form of memory is
pivotal to the progressive evolution of embodied intelligence due to its foundational role in enabling
long-horizon reasoning [4, 19]. Nevertheless, human memory can falter in accurately recalling the
details of daily activities—such as where we left our keys, or who we met while going for a run. This
perceptual overload can be mitigated through the utilization of head-worn cameras or AR glasses to
capture our past experiences and the development of systems that can retrieve information. To this
end, the episodic memory benchmark [13] is recently proposed, which aims to develop systems that
enable super-human memory by allowing humans to query about their past experiences recorded on
head-worn devices. These systems also have the potential to serve as a conduit for learning from past
experiences and data [60, 44], promoting long-term robot learning [25].
We focus on 2D Visual Query Localization (VQL), a vital task in the episodic memory benchmark
that aims to answer the question “where did I last see object X?". Specifically, given a long-form
egocentric video representing past experiences from a human camera-wearer, the goal is to search
and localize a visual query object, specified as a visual image crop, in space-time (see Fig. 1, left).
Addressing VQL is of paramount importance, as query object localization serves as a prerequisite for
downstream object-centric reasoning tasks.
VQL presents a myriad of challenges to existing computer vision systems. For example, current object
detection systems localize pre-defined object categories on well-curated internet-style images [40, 5].
In contrast, VQL requires localizing an open-set of objects specified as visual queries. Current object
tracking systems expect to be initialized with a bounding box of the object next to its appearance
in the video [54, 31]. However, the visual query crop of VQL originates from an image outside
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

