Im-Promptu: In-Context Composition
from Image Prompts

Bhishma Dedhia1 , Michael Chang2 , Jake C. Snell3 , Thomas L. Griffiths3,4 , Niraj K. Jha1
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University
2
Department of Computer Science, University of California Berkeley
3
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
4
Department of Psychology, Princeton University
{bdedhia,js2523,tomg,jha}@princeton.edu, mbchang@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Large language models are few-shot learners that can solve diverse tasks from a
handful of demonstrations. This implicit understanding of tasks suggests that the
attention mechanisms over word tokens may play a role in analogical reasoning.
In this work, we investigate whether analogical reasoning can enable in-context
composition over composable elements of visual stimuli. First, we introduce a
suite of three benchmarks to test the generalization properties of a visual in-context
learner. We formalize the notion of an analogy-based in-context learner and use it
to design a meta-learning framework called Im-Promptu. Whereas the requisite
token granularity for language is well established, the appropriate compositional
granularity for enabling in-context generalization in visual stimuli is usually unspecified. To this end, we use Im-Promptu to train multiple agents with different levels
of compositionality, including vector representations, patch representations, and
object slots. Our experiments reveal tradeoffs between extrapolation abilities and
the degree of compositionality, with non-compositional representations extending
learned composition rules to unseen domains but performing poorly on combinatorial tasks. Patch-based representations require patches to contain entire objects for
robust extrapolation. At the same time, object-centric tokenizers coupled with a
cross-attention module generate consistent and high-fidelity solutions, with these
inductive biases being particularly crucial for compositional generalization. Lastly,
we demonstrate a use case of Im-Promptu as an intuitive programming interface
for image generation.

1

Introduction
No thought can be formed that isn’t informed by the past; or, more precisely, we think only
thanks to analogies that link our present to our past.
D. Hofstadter and E. Sander, Surfaces and Essences [1]

Humans represent complex concepts by combining and organizing simpler concepts [2, 3]. This
endows us with an uncanny skill for constructing an unlimited number of concepts by composing
a relatively small set of previously learned basic building blocks, an ability more formally called
compositional generalization. For example, we can generate sentences by combining a dictionary
of words in different ways and solve a wide range of mathematical problems using a small set of
basic arithmetic operations and variables. In the case of the visual world, objects form naturally

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

