Rehearsal Learning for Avoiding Undesired Future

Tian Qin, Tian-Zuo Wang, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
{qint, wangtz, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Machine learning (ML) models have been widely used to make predictions. Instead
of a predictive statement about future outcomes, in many situations we want to
pursue a decision: what can we do to avoid the undesired future if an ML model
predicts so? In this paper, we present a rehearsal learning framework, in which
decisions that can persuasively avoid the happening of undesired outcomes can
be found and recommended. Based on the influence relation, we characterize the
generative process of variables with structural rehearsal models, consisting of a
probabilistic graphical model called rehearsal graphs and structural equations, and
find actionable decisions that can alter the outcome by reasoning under a Bayesian
framework. Moreover, we present a probably approximately correct bound to
quantify the associated risk of a decision. Experiments validate the effectiveness of
the proposed rehearsal learning framework and the informativeness of the bound.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) has achieved great success in various applications, including computer vision
[1], natural language processing [2], recommender systems [3, 4], etc. In addition to perception tasks
such as classifying an image, ML models have been widely used to make predictions, or forecasting,
about future quantities of interest [5, 6]. In many scenarios, however, what we ultimately pursue
is typically not attaining merely a predictive statement on what is likely to happen. Instead, as a
potential next direction [7], we may seek a way, possibly through decision-making, to avoid the
happening of the upcoming undesired future, if the ML model predicts so.
Suppose we use variables X to predict a future outcome Y with an ML model h. Given an instance
x, h outputs a warning signal ŷ = h(x) which is outside our desired range. The problem is: what
can we do to make the future Y fall into the desired range? We assume that there is an intermediate
stage where one can make actionable decisions to influence Y; e.g., after a sales prediction made at
the beginning of a month, there is an intermediate time window before the month-end for the sales
manager to take action. We consider decisions in the form of altering variables with fixed values,
e.g., setting the discount to 10%. We henceforth call such decisions alterations. Let Z denote the
variables in the intermediate stage. The avoiding undesired future (AUF) problem is then how to alter
variables in Z so that the future Y could be shifted to fall into the desired range.
Common decision-making methods under the umbrella of reinforcement learning (RL) [8] can be
applied to the AUF problem but may not be the most appropriate. The reasons include that (a) RL
mainly focuses on sequential decision-making tasks while AUF desires a direct decision to change the
upcoming future outcome, for which considering decision sequences could be unnecessary or even
unrealistic; (b) the success of RL in playing games [9] and autonomous control [10] rely on sufficient
interactions between the agent and the environment, but interactions in real AUF problems can be
extremely sparse, e.g., the sales manager in the above example can only interact with the environment
and make decisions once a month; (c) the Markov decision process (MDP) formalism in RL abstracts
decision-making into states, actions, and rewards, which may overlook useful fine-grained structural
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

