Bayesian Learning of Optimal Policies in Markov
Decision Processes with Countably Infinite State-Space

Saghar Adler
University of Michigan

Vijay Subramanian
University of Michigan

Abstract
Models of many real-life applications, such as queueing models of communication
networks or computing systems, have a countably infinite state-space. Algorithmic
and learning procedures that have been developed to produce optimal policies
mainly focus on finite state settings, and do not directly apply to these models. To
overcome this lacuna, in this work we study the problem of optimal control of a
family of discrete-time countable state-space Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
governed by an unknown parameter θ ∈ Θ, and defined on a countably-infinite
state-space X = Zd+ , with finite action space A, and an unbounded cost function.
We take a Bayesian perspective with the random unknown parameter θ ∗ generated
via a given fixed prior distribution on Θ. To optimally control the unknown MDP,
we propose an algorithm based on Thompson sampling with dynamically-sized
episodes: at the beginning of each episode, the posterior distribution formed via
Bayes’ rule is used to produce a parameter estimate, which then decides the policy
applied during the episode. To ensure the stability of the Markov chain obtained by
following the policy chosen for each parameter, we impose ergodicity assumptions.
From this conditionp
and using the solution of the average cost Bellman equation, we
establish an Õ(dhd |A|T ) upper bound on the Bayesian regret of our algorithm,
where T is the time-horizon. Finally, to elucidate the applicability of our algorithm,
we consider two different queueing models with unknown dynamics, and show that
our algorithm can be applied to develop approximately optimal control algorithms.

1

Introduction

Many real-life applications, such as communication networks, supply chains, and computing systems,
are modeled using queueing models with countably infinite state-space. In the existing analysis of
these systems, the models are assumed to be known, but despite this, developing optimal control
schemes is hard, with only a few examples worked out [35, 9, 54]. However, knowing the model,
algorithmic procedures exist to produce approximately optimal policies [35] (such as value iteration
and linear programming). Given the success of data-driven optimal control design, in particular
Reinforcement Learning (RL), we explore the use of such methods for the countable state-space
controlled Markov processes. However, current RL methods that focus on finite-state settings do
not apply to the mentioned queueing models. With the model unknown, our goal is to develop
a meta-learning scheme that is RL-based but obtains good performance by utilizing algorithms
developed when models are known. Specifically, we study the problem of optimal control of a family
of discrete-time countable state-space MDPs governed by an unknown parameter θ from a general
space Θ with each MDP evolving on the countable state-space X = Zd+ and finite action space A.
The cost function is unbounded and polynomially dependent on the state, following the examples of
minimizing waiting times in queueing systems. Taking a Bayesian view, we assume the model is
governed by an unknown parameter θ ∗ ∈ Θ generated from a fixed and known prior distribution. We
aim to learn a policy π that minimizes the optimal infinite-horizon average cost over a given class of
policies Π with low Bayesian regret with respect to the (parameter-dependent) optimal policy in Π.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

