CQM: Curriculum Reinforcement Learning
with a Quantized World Model

Seungjae Lee, Daesol Cho, Jonghae Park, H. Jin Kim
Seoul National University
Automation and Systems Research Institute (ASRI)
Artificial Intelligence Institute of Seoul National University (AIIS)
{ysz0301, dscho1234, bdfire1234, hjinkim}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent curriculum Reinforcement Learning (RL) has shown notable progress in
solving complex tasks by proposing sequences of surrogate tasks. However, the
previous approaches often face challenges when they generate curriculum goals
in a high-dimensional space. Thus, they usually rely on manually specified goal
spaces. To alleviate this limitation and improve the scalability of the curriculum,
we propose a novel curriculum method that automatically defines the semantic goal
space which contains vital information for the curriculum process, and suggests
curriculum goals over it. To define the semantic goal space, our method discretizes
continuous observations via vector quantized-variational autoencoders (VQ-VAE)
and restores the temporal relations between the discretized observations by a graph.
Concurrently, ours suggests uncertainty and temporal distance-aware curriculum
goals that converges to the final goals over the automatically composed goal
space. We demonstrate that the proposed method allows efficient explorations in
an uninformed environment with raw goal examples only. Also, ours outperforms
the state-of-the-art curriculum RL methods on data efficiency and performance, in
various goal-reaching tasks even with ego-centric visual inputs.

1

Introduction

Goal-conditioned Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been successfully applied to a wide range of
decision-making problems allowing RL agents to achieve diverse control tasks [42, 1, 30]. However,
training the RL agent to achieve desired final goals without any prior domain knowledge is challenging,
especially when the desired behaviors can hardly be observed. In those situations, humans typically
adopt alternative ways to learn the final goals by gradually mastering intermediate sub-tasks. Inspired
by the way humans learn, recent RL studies [29, 10, 6] have solved uninformed exploration tasks
by suggesting which goals the agent needs to practice. In this sense of generating curriculum goals,
previous approaches proposed various ideas to involve providing intermediate-level tasks [10, 38],
quantifying the uncertainty of observations [4, 31, 33, 25, 18], or proposing contextual distance to
gradually move away from the initial distribution [15, 6].
However, previous curriculum RL studies are mostly not scalable. Namely, they suffer from serious
data inefficiency when they generate curriculum goals in high dimensions. Because of this limitation,
they usually rely on the assumption that manually specified goal spaces (e.g., global X-Y coordinates)
and clear mappings from high-dimensional observations to the low-dimensional goal spaces are
available. Such an assumption requires prior knowledge about observations and the tasks, which
remains a crucial unsolved issue that restricts the applicability of previous studies.
In order to design a general curriculum solution without the need for prior knowledge about the
observations, defining its own goal space for the curriculum could be an effective scheme. To do so,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

