Alexa Arena: A User-Centric Interactive Platform for
Embodied AI
Qiaozi Gao∗

Govind Thattai∗†

Vasu Sharma†
Lucy Hu

Suhaila Shakiah∗

Gaurav S. Sukhatme

Cadence Chung

Rohan Khanna

Heather Rocker†

Bofei Yang†

Desheng Zhang

Matthew Wen

Dinakar Guthy

Hangjie Shi
Shui Hu†

Karthika Arumugam

Xiaofeng Gao∗ Shreyas Pansare

Osman Ipek

Leslie Ball

Michael Johnston
Dilek Hakkani-Tur†

Kate Bland†

Reza Ghanadan†

Prem Natarajan†

Amazon Alexa AI

Abstract
We introduce Alexa Arena, a user-centric simulation platform to facilitate research
in building assistive conversational embodied agents. Alexa Arena features multiroom layouts and an abundance of interactable objects. With user-friendly graphics
and control mechanisms, the platform supports the development of gamified robotic
tasks readily accessible to general human users, allowing high-efficiency data
collection and EAI system evaluation. Along with the platform, we introduce a
dialog-enabled task completion benchmark with online human evaluations.

1

Introduction

A longstanding goal of AI is to develop autonomous robotic agents that can assist humans in day-today activities. Experiments with robots are often conducted in controlled environments, limiting their
variety and scale of operation. To mitigate this problem, several EAI simulation platforms have been
proposed, which support virtual scenes that can be either manually designed, synthetically generated,
or captured from real scenes. An embodied agent can freely navigate and interact with objects in
these scenes to complete tasks. However, the current EAI platforms suffer from a set of limitations
that curtail the ability to build generalizable assistive AI agents.
Facilitating HRI data collection by gamification. A persistent challenge in Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) is collecting human interaction data comprising of natural language instructions along
with visual content and actions. Currently available EAI platforms, however, are not designed for
humans to effectively interact with the agent, making the data collection process expensive and time
consuming [21, 35]. Games have been historically utilized to encourage wide-spread user participation and engagement with services [6, 49, 30]. To ease the data collection effort, we introduce
gamification to EAI, which is achieved by presenting tasks or user interactions in the form of games,
∗
†

Equal contribution. Correspondence to arena-admins@amazon.com
Work done while at Amazon Alexa AI

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

