An Empirical Study Towards Prompt-Tuning for
Graph Contrastive Pre-Training in Recommendations

Haoran Yang
University of Technology Sydney
haoran.yang-2@student.uts.edu.au

Xiangyu Zhao∗
City University of Hong Kong
xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk

Yicong Li
University of Technology Sydney
yicong.li@student.uts.edu.au

Hongxu Chen
University of Queensland
hongxu.chen@uq.edu.au

Guandong Xu∗
University of Technology Sydney
guandong.xu@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Graph contrastive learning (GCL) has emerged as an effective technology for
various graph learning tasks. It has been successfully applied in real-world recommender systems, where the contrastive loss and downstream recommendation
objectives are combined to form the overall objective function. However, this
approach deviates from the original GCL paradigm, which pre-trains graph embeddings without involving downstream training objectives. In this paper, we propose a
novel framework called CPTPP, which enhances GCL-based recommender systems
by leveraging prompt tuning. This framework allows us to fully exploit the advantages of the original GCL protocol. Specifically, we first summarize user profiles in
graph recommender systems to automatically generate personalized user prompts.
These prompts are then combined with pre-trained user embeddings for prompt
tuning in downstream tasks. This helps bridge the gap between pre-training and
downstream tasks. Our extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets confirm
the effectiveness of CPTPP compared to state-of-the-art baselines. Additionally,
a visualization experiment illustrates that user embeddings generated by CPTPP
have a more uniform distribution, indicating improved modeling capability for user
preferences. The implementation code is available online2 for reproducibility.

1

Introduction

Graph contrastive learning (GCL) has gained significant attention in the research community as a
prominent self-supervised learning paradigm. Several recent studies have showcased the effectiveness
of GCL in various general graph representation tasks [21, 16, 28, 37, 30], including node classification
and link prediction. Moreover, GCL has also demonstrated its applicability in real-world domains[29],
such as recommender systems [27, 32, 14]. By introducing additional self-supervision signals, GCL
provides recommender systems with a means to address the challenge of improving performance.
Most recommendation methods based on GCL typically combine contrastive loss with recommendation objectives to optimize the model in an end-to-end manner. However, this training protocol does
∗
2

Corresponding author.
https://github.com/Haoran-Young/CPTPP

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

