Aligning Gradient and Hessian for
Neural Signed Distance Function

Ruian Wang∗
Shandong University
wra.time@gmail.com

Zixiong Wang∗
Nankai University
zixiong_wang@outlook.com

Shuangmin Chen†
Qingdao University of
Science and Technology
csmqq@163.com

Yunxiao Zhang
Shandong University
zhangyunxiaox@gmail.com

Shiqing Xin
ShanDong University
xinshiqing@sdu.edu.cn

Changhe Tu
Shandong University
chtu@sdu.edu.cn

Wenping Wang
TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY
wenping@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
The Signed Distance Function (SDF), as an implicit surface representation, provides
a crucial method for reconstructing a watertight surface from unorganized point
clouds. The SDF has a fundamental relationship with the principles of surface
vector calculus. Given a smooth surface, there exists a thin-shell space in which the
SDF is differentiable everywhere such that the gradient of the SDF is an eigenvector
of its Hessian matrix, with a corresponding eigenvalue of zero. In this paper, we
introduce a method to directly learn the SDF from point clouds in the absence
of normals. Our motivation is grounded in a fundamental observation: aligning
the gradient and the Hessian of the SDF provides a more efficient mechanism
to govern gradient directions. This, in turn, ensures that gradient changes more
accurately reflect the true underlying variations in shape. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate its ability to accurately recover the underlying shape while
effectively suppressing the presence of ghost geometry.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the neural signed distance function (SDF) has demonstrated its capability to represent
high-fidelity geometry [37, 16, 8, 53, 1, 19]. Existing approaches primarily employ neural networks
to map coordinates to their corresponding signed distance values. Depending on whether or not
supervision is used, these approaches can be classified into two categories: learning-based methods
and optimization-based methods, where the former fits data samples to their corresponding groundtruth implicit representations [37, 16, 8, 22, 21] and the latter directly infer the underlying SDF
from point clouds [1, 19, 5, 3, 48] or multi-image [45, 29, 35]. Despite significant advancements
in SDF-based surface reconstruction, both types of methods have their drawbacks. The supervised
reconstruction methods may not generalize well [42] on shapes or point distributions that are not
present in the training data. The optimizing-based methods, on the other hand, struggle to resolve the
ambiguity of the input point cloud, particularly when normal information is absent. In this paper, our
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
S. Chen is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

