GEO-Bench:
Toward Foundation Models for Earth Monitoring
Alexandre Lacoste⇤1
Hannah Kerner4
Hamed Alemohammad7
David Vazquez1
1

Nils Lehmann⇤2
Pau Rodriguez1
Evan David Sherwin3
5
3
Björn Lütjens
Jeremy Irvin
David Dao6
1,8
1
Alexandre Drouin
Mehmet Gunturkun
Gabriel Huang1,9
5
8,9
Dava Newman
Yoshua Bengio
Stefano Ermon3
2
Xiao Xiang Zhu

ServiceNow Research 2 Technical University of Munich 3 Stanford University
4
Arizona State University 5 MIT 6 ETH Zurich 7 Clark University
8
Mila-Quebec 9 University of Montreal

Abstract
Recent progress in self-supervision has shown that pre-training large neural networks
on vast amounts of unsupervised data can lead to substantial increases in generalization
to downstream tasks. Such models, recently coined foundation models, have been
transformational to the field of natural language processing. Variants have also been
proposed for image data, but their applicability to remote sensing tasks is limited. To
stimulate the development of foundation models for Earth monitoring, we propose
a benchmark comprised of six classification and six segmentation tasks, which were
carefully curated and adapted to be both relevant to the field and well-suited for model
evaluation. We accompany this benchmark with a robust methodology for evaluating
models and reporting aggregated results to enable a reliable assessment of progress.
Finally, we report results for 20 baselines to gain information about the performance
of existing models. We believe that this benchmark will be a driver of progress across
a variety of Earth monitoring tasks.

1 Introduction
Earth monitoring with machine learning-based methods plays an increasing role in climate change
mitigation and adaptation as well as climate science [57]. Related applications include methane
source detection [61, 16], forest carbon quantification [44], extreme weather prediction [49], and crop
monitoring [34, 14]. Across many of these applications, pre-trained models (e.g., a ResNet trained on
ImageNet) have been used to increase generalisation performance. Improvement of the pre-trained models
has been shown to reduce the need for large labelled datasets in some contexts [11] and can improve
model generalisation outside of the training distribution [28]. Recent studies exploring the scaling of such
pre-trained models found that increasing the size of an unsupervised (or weakly supervised) dataset as well
as properly scaling the model led to an even greater increase in performance under various metrics [33, 55].
While the training of such large-scale models is usually reserved for industrial research groups with very
large computer clusters, the publication of pre-trained models creates vast opportunities for the entire
research and technology community (including communities of domain experts outside of machine
learning). These large pre-trained models were recently coined as foundation models [6] as they might
serve as foundations for sub-fields of machine learning. Specifically, the publication of large pre-trained
models like BERT [15] and GPT-3 [7] led to a paradigm shift in the field of natural language processing
(NLP). This inspired a similar shift in the field of computer vision with the release of models like CLIP
[55] and DINO [9]. While CLIP performs well on various types of vision tasks, it still under-performs
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

