Learning to Augment Distributions for
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Qizhou Wang1∗ Zhen Fang2∗ Yonggang Zhang1 Feng Liu3 Yixuan Li4 Bo Han1†
1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
2
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney
3
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
4
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison
{csqzwang, csygzhang, bhanml}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
zhen.fang@uts.edu.au fengliu.ml@gmail.com sharonli@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Open-world classification systems should discern out-of-distribution (OOD) data
whose labels deviate from those of in-distribution (ID) cases, motivating recent
studies in OOD detection. Advanced works, despite their promising progress,
may still fail in the open world, owing to the lack of knowledge about unseen
OOD data in advance. Although one can access auxiliary OOD data (distinct from
unseen ones) for model training, it remains to analyze how such auxiliary data
will work in the open world. To this end, we delve into such a problem from a
learning theory perspective, finding that the distribution discrepancy between the
auxiliary and the unseen real OOD data is the key to affecting the open-world
detection performance. Accordingly, we propose Distributional-Augmented OOD
Learning (DAL), alleviating the OOD distribution discrepancy by crafting an OOD
distribution set that contains all distributions in a Wasserstein ball centered on
the auxiliary OOD distribution. We justify that the predictor trained over the
worst OOD data in the ball can shrink the OOD distribution discrepancy, thus
improving the open-world detection performance given only the auxiliary OOD
data. We conduct extensive evaluations across representative OOD detection setups,
demonstrating the superiority of our DAL over its advanced counterparts. The code
is publicly available at: https://github.com/tmlr-group/DAL.

1

Introduction

Deep learning in the open world often encounters out-of-distribution (OOD) data of which the label
space is disjoint with that of the in-distribution (ID) cases (Hendrycks and Gimpel, 2017; Fang et al.,
2022). It leads to the well-known OOD detection problem, where the predictor should make accurate
predictions for ID data and detect anomalies from OOD cases (Bulusu et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021).
Nowadays, OOD detection has attracted intensive attention in reliable machine learning due to its
integral role in safety-critical applications (Cao et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2021).
OOD detection remains challenging since predictors can make over-confidence predictions for OOD
data (Hendrycks et al., 2019), motivating recent studies towards effective OOD detection. Therein,
outlier exposure (Hendrycks et al., 2019; Ming et al., 2022) is among the most potent ones, learning
from auxiliary OOD data to discern ID and OOD patterns. However, due to the openness of the OOD
task objective (Wang et al., 2023), auxiliary OOD data can arbitrarily differ from the (unseen) real
OOD data in the open world. So, to formally understand their consequences, we model the difference
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Correspondence to Bo Han (bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

