CosNet: A Generalized Spectral Kernel Network

Yanfang Xue1,2 , Pengfei Fang1,2 , Jinyue Tian1,2 , Shipeng Zhu1,2 , Hui Xue1,2∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, China
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{230218795, fangpengfei, 220222083, shipengzhu, hxue}@seu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Complex-valued representation exists inherently in the time-sequential data that
can be derived from the integration of harmonic waves. The non-stationary spectral
kernel, realizing a complex-valued feature mapping, has shown its potential to
analyze the time-varying statistical characteristics of the time-sequential data, as
a result of the modeling frequency parameters. However, most existing spectral
kernel-based methods eliminate the imaginary part, thereby limiting the representation power of the spectral kernel. To tackle this issue, we propose a generalized
spectral kernel network, namely, Complex-valued spectral kernel Network (CosNet), which includes spectral kernel mapping generalization (SKMG) module
and complex-valued spectral kernel embedding (CSKE) module. Concretely, the
SKMG module is devised to generalize the spectral kernel mapping in the real
number domain to the complex number domain, recovering the inherent complexvalued representation for the real-valued data. Then a following CSKE module
is further developed to combine the complex-valued spectral kernels and neural
networks to effectively capture long-range or periodic relations of the data. Along
with the CosNet, we study the effect of the complex-valued spectral kernel mapping via theoretically analyzing the bound of covering number and generalization
error. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CosNet performs better than the
mainstream kernel methods and complex-valued neural networks.

1

Introduction

Complex numbers represent the information of the amplitude and phase simultaneously. In contrast
to the amplitude, which can be revealed by the real number, the phase can denote the time delay
and advance, thereby encoding the temporal dependency of the data Hirose [2003]. This suggests
that complex-valued models can be employed in some practical applications, especially for the timesequential data where information is wave-related, such as signal analysis Hirose et al. [2019]; Yu et al.
[2019]; Zeng et al. [2022], speech processing Shafran et al. [2018], and time series classification Yang
et al. [2020, 2017]; Wisdom et al. [2016].
In the learning community, the spectral kernel, which is constructed from the inverse Fourier transform,
can naturally realize the complex-valued mapping. That said, the spectral kernel can analyze the data
in the frequency domain directly. As a candidate of the spectral kernel family, the non-stationary
spectral kernel is also proposed to conquer the local limitations of the classical kernels, such as
stationarity and monotonicity Remes et al. [2017]; Tompkins et al. [2020]; Ton et al. [2018]; Li
et al. [2020]. Ideally, these advanced kernels can extract appropriate non-stationary time-varying
characteristics of the data by modeling the frequency parameters, and hence infer the long-range or
periodic relations of the input data.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

