A Variational Perspective on High-Resolution ODEs

Hoomaan Maskan
Umeå University
hoomaan.maskan@umu.se

Konstantinos C. Zygalakis
University of Edinburgh
k.zygalakis@ed.ac.uk

Alp Yurtsever
Umeå University
alp.yurtsever@umu.se

Abstract
We consider unconstrained minimization of smooth convex functions. We propose a novel variational perspective using forced Euler-Lagrange equation that
allows for studying high-resolution ODEs. Through this, we obtain a faster convergence rate for gradient norm minimization using Nesterov’s accelerated gradient
method. Additionally, we show that Nesterov’s method can be interpreted as a ratematching discretization of an appropriately chosen high-resolution ODE. Finally,
using the results from the new variational perspective, we propose a stochastic
method for noisy gradients. Several numerical experiments compare and illustrate
our stochastic algorithm with state of the art methods.

1

Introduction

Smooth convex minimization is a fundamental class in optimization with broad applications and a
rich theoretical foundation that enables the development of powerful methods. In fact, the theory
and methods developed for other problem classes, such as non-smooth convex or smooth non-convex
optimization, often build upon the work done in smooth convex optimization. As a result, the study
of smooth convex minimization has a significant impact on the broader field of optimization. Over
the last two decades, first-order methods –those relying solely on gradient information, in contrast
to methods like Newton’s that require Hessian information– have seen a lot of interest both in theory and applications due to their efficiency and adaptability for large-scale data-driven applications.
Among these, gradient descent stands as one of the simplest and oldest. When equipped with an
appropriate step-size, gradient descent guarantees a suboptimality gap (objective residual) of order
O(1/k) after k iterations.
In his seminal work, Nesterov [1983] has shown that the gradient method can achieve faster rates
by incorporating momentum deviations. Nesterov’s accelerated gradient algorithm (NAG) ensures
a convergence rate of O(1/k 2 ) which is an order of magnitude faster than the gradient descent. Remarkably, this rate matches information-theoretical lower bounds for first-order oracle complexity,
meaning that NAG is optimal and no other first-order method can guarantee an essentially faster
convergence rate [Nesterov, 2003].

The original proof of Nesterov [1983], known as the estimate sequence technique, is a highly algebraic and complex procedure, difficult to interpret, and provides arguably limited insight into why
momentum deviations help with the convergence rates [Hu and Lessard, 2017]. Therefore, many researchers have tried to provide a better understanding of momentum-based acceleration through different perspectives. For example, Su et al. [2016], Shi et al. [2021], and Sanz Serna and Zygalakis
[2021] consider a continuous time perspective; Lessard et al. [2016] and Fazlyab et al. [2018] use integral quadratic constraints and control systems with non-linear feedbacks; Muehlebach and Jordan
[2019, 2022, 2023] present a dynamical perspective; Attouch et al. [2020, 2021] utilize inertial dynamic involving both viscous damping and Hessian-driven damping; Zhu and Orecchia [2014] view
acceleration as a linear coupling of gradient descent and mirror descent updates; and Ahn and Sra
[2022] provide an understanding of the NAG algorithm through an approximation of the proximal
point method. Our work is focused on the continuous-time perspective.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

