Posterior Sampling for Competitive RL: Function
Approximation and Partial Observation

Shuang Qiu∗
HKUST
masqiu@ust.hk

Ziyu Dai∗
New York University
zd2365@cims.nyu.edu

Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Han Zhong
Peking University
hanzhong@stu.pku.edu.cn

Zhuoran Yang
Yale University
zhuoran.yang@yale.edu

Tong Zhang
HKUST
tongzhang@ust.hk

Abstract
This paper investigates posterior sampling algorithms for competitive reinforcement learning (RL) in the context of general function approximations. Focusing
on zero-sum Markov games (MGs) under two critical settings, namely self-play
and adversarial learning, we first propose the self-play and adversarial generalized
eluder coefficient (GEC) as complexity measures for function approximation, capturing the exploration-exploitation trade-off in MGs. Based on self-play GEC, we
propose a model-based self-play posterior sampling method to control both players
to learn Nash equilibrium, which can successfully handle the partial observability
of states. Furthermore, we identify a set of partially observable MG models fitting
MG learning with the adversarial policies of the opponent. Incorporating the adversarial GEC, we propose a model-based posterior sampling method for learning
adversarial MG with potential partial observability. We further provide low regret
bounds for proposed algorithms that can scale sublinearly with the proposed GEC
and the number of episodes T . To the best of our knowledge, we for the first time
develop generic model-based posterior sampling algorithms for competitive RL
that can be applied to a majority of tractable zero-sum MG classes in both fully
observable and partially observable MGs with self-play and adversarial learning.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) tackles sequential decision-making problems where
multiple players simultaneously interact with the shared environment, affecting each other’s behavior
in a coupled manner. Under a competitive reinforcement learning (RL) setting, the goal of each
player is to maximize (resp. minimize) her own cumulative gains (resp. losses) in the presence
of other agents. Recent years have been tremendous practical successes of MARL in a variety of
application domains, such as autonomous driving [56], Go [58], StarCraft [65], Dota2 [8] and Poker
[10]. These successes are attributed to advanced MARL algorithms that can coordinate multiple
players by exploiting potentially partial observations of the latent states and employ powerful function
approximators (neural networks in particular), which empower us to tackle practical problems with
large state spaces.
Apart from the empirical success, there is a growing body of literature on establishing theoretical
guarantees for Markov games (MGs) [57] – a standard framework for describing the dynamics of
competitive RL. In particular, [71, 16, 33, 28, 77] extend the works in single-agent reinforcement
∗

Equal Contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

