Cognitive Steering in Deep Neural Networks via
Long-Range Modulatory Feedback Connections

Talia Konkle
Department of Psychology, Kempner Institute
Center for Brain Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
talia_konkle@harvard.edu

George Alvarez
Department of Psychology, Kempner Institute
Vision Sciences Laboratory
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
alvarez@wjh.harvard.edu

Abstract
Given the rich visual information available in each glance, humans can internally
direct their visual attention to enhance goal-relevant information—a capacity often
absent in standard vision models. Here we introduce cognitively and biologicallyinspired long-range modulatory pathways to enable ‘cognitive steering’ in vision
models. First, we show that models equipped with these feedback pathways naturally show improved image recognition, adversarial robustness, and increased brain
alignment, relative to baseline models. Further, these feedback projections from the
final layer of the vision backbone provide a meaningful steering interface, where
goals can be specified as vectors in the output space. We show that there are effective ways to steer the model that dramatically improve recognition of categories in
composite images of multiple categories, succeeding where baseline feed-forward
models without flexible steering fail. And, our multiplicative modulatory motif
prevents rampant hallucination of the top-down goal category, dissociating what
the model is looking for, from what it is looking at. Thus, these long-range modulatory pathways enable new behavioral capacities for goal-directed visual encoding,
offering a flexible communication interface between cognitive and visual systems.

1

Introduction

In any given view there can be multiple kinds of objects present, each with a variety of features and
properties. Humans have the capacity to direct their encoding of the visual world based on their
internal goals, e.g. when looking for keys, flexible top-down attention mechanisms select and amplify
the relevant key-like image statistics [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However, while standard deep neural network
vision models can accurately classify objects, a key limitation of these visual encoding models is
their inability to more deeply integrate with cognitive systems–that is, to encode the visual world in a
goal-directed manner [6, 7]. Drawing on insights about top-down attention in both neuroscience and
visual cognition, here we design and implement long-range modulatory (LRM) feedback connections
that can be added to feed-forward deep neural network models, to enable goal-directed ‘cognitive
steering’ of visual processing.
The idea of adding feedback connections and recurrent processing in deep neural network models is
certainly not new (see [8] for review). However, this research typically focuses on characterizing the
efficiency benefits of reusing features (e.g. [9, 10]), and does not explore the potential for goal-directed
encoding. Other prior research aims more directly at adding goal-directed encoding into deep neural
networks, whether using long-range feedback or alternative mechanisms (e.g. [7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 6]).
However, these models typically operate over simpler datasets, require customized rather than
flexible goal-directed encoding, and/or suffer from strong hallucinations of the goal-directed category
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

