Look Ma, No Hands!
Agent-Environment Factorization of Egocentric Videos

Matthew Chang Aditya Prakash Saurabh Gupta
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
{mc48, adityap9, saurabhg}@illinois.edu

Abstract
The analysis and use of egocentric videos for robotic tasks is made challenging
by occlusion due to the hand and the visual mismatch between the human hand
and a robot end-effector. In this sense, the human hand presents a nuisance.
However, often hands also provide a valuable signal, e.g. the hand pose may
suggest what kind of object is being held. In this work, we propose to extract a
factored representation of the scene that separates the agent (human hand) and the
environment. This alleviates both occlusion and mismatch while preserving the
signal, thereby easing the design of models for downstream robotics tasks. At the
heart of this factorization is our proposed Video Inpainting via Diffusion Model
(VIDM) that leverages both a prior on real-world images (through a large-scale
pre-trained diffusion model) and the appearance of the object in earlier frames of
the video (through attention). Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
VIDM at improving inpainting quality on egocentric videos and the power of our
factored representation for numerous tasks: object detection, 3D reconstruction of
manipulated objects, and learning of reward functions, policies, and affordances
from videos.

1

Introduction

Observations of humans interacting with their environments, as in egocentric video datasets [12, 20],
hold the potential to scale up robotic policy learning. Such videos offer the possibility of learning
affordances [2, 19], reward functions [1] and object trajectories [57]. However, a key bottleneck in
these applications is the mismatch in the visual appearance of the robot and human hand, and the
occlusion caused by the hand.
Human hands can often be a nuisance. They occlude objects of interaction and induce a domain gap
between the data available for learning (egocentric videos) and the data seen by the robot at execution
time. Consequently, past work has focused on removing hands from the scene by masking [19] or
inpainting [1]. However, hands also provide a valuable signal for learning. The hand pose may reveal
object affordances, and the approach of the hand toward objects can define dense reward functions
for learning policies.
In this work, we propose the use of a factored agent and environment representation. The agent
representation is obtained by segmenting out the hand, while the environment representation is
obtained by inpainting the hand out of the image (Fig. 1). We argue that such a factored representation
removes the nuisance, but at the same time preserves the signal for learning. Furthermore, the
factorization allows independent manipulation of the representation as necessary. E.g., the agent
representation could be converted to a form that is agnostic to the embodiment for better transfer
across agents. This enables applications in 2D/3D visual perception and robot learning (see Fig. 2).
Project website with code, video, and models: https://matthewchang.github.io/vidm.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

