DeepSimHO: Stable Pose Estimation for Hand-Object
Interaction via Physics Simulation

Rong Wang
Wei Mao
Hongdong Li
The Australian National University
{rong.wang, wei.mao, hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
This paper addresses the task of 3D pose estimation for a hand interacting with an
object from a single image observation. When modeling hand-object interaction,
previous works mainly exploit proximity cues, while overlooking the dynamical
nature that the hand must stably grasp the object to counteract gravity and thus
preventing the object from slipping or falling. These works fail to leverage dynamical constraints in the estimation and consequently often produce unstable
results. Meanwhile, refining unstable configurations with physics-based reasoning
remains challenging, both by the complexity of contact dynamics and by the lack
of effective and efficient physics inference in the data-driven learning framework.
To address both issues, we present DeepSimHO: a novel deep-learning pipeline that
combines forward physics simulation and backward gradient approximation with a
neural network. Specifically, for an initial hand-object pose estimated by a base
network, we forward it to a physics simulator to evaluate its stability. However, due
to non-smooth contact geometry and penetration, existing differentiable simulators
can not provide reliable state gradient. To remedy this, we further introduce a
deep network to learn the stability evaluation process from the simulator, while
smoothly approximating its gradient and thus enabling effective back-propagation.
Extensive experiments show that our method noticeably improves the stability of
the estimation and achieves superior efficiency over test-time optimization. The
code is available at https://github.com/rongakowang/DeepSimHO.

1

Introduction

3D hand-object pose estimation from a single image facilities a wide range of applications, including
extended reality (XR) [2], human-robot interaction [32], and animation [17]. To this end, it has drawn
increasing attention in recent years [34, 52, 56, 20, 19, 5]. A key challenge in this task is to ensure
the estimated pose conforms to real-world physics, i.e. the hand should make contact with the object
without penetrating it, and more importantly, the contact can form a stable grasp to counteract gravity.
In this work, we aim to estimate hand-object pose that is both accurate and stable.
To model hand-object interaction, related works [21, 5, 57, 18, 20] often impose distance-based
attraction and repulsion constraints that encourage contact and penalize penetration. However, this
approach only enforces the proximity and do not explicitly reason the dynamical effects of the
contact. In consequence, it allows the hand to simply touch the object, which can not form a stable
grasp. As illustrated in Figure 1, such contact can cause the object to slip or fall under gravity,
therefore is physically unstable. Meanwhile, in other related tasks such as grasping synthesis [7, 50]
and dexterous manipulation [43, 12], physics simulators [48, 8, 54] are commonly used to ensure
stable grasping. However, as discussed in [50, 55], existing differentiable simulators supporting
mesh-to-mesh contact often produce numerically unreliable state gradient due to the discontinuity
in contact geometry [54] and penetration [48], therefore making them difficult to integrate into the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

