Provably Fast Convergence of Independent Natural
Policy Gradient for Markov Potential Games

Youbang Sun∗
Northeastern University
sun.youb@northeastern.edu
P. R. Kumar
Texas A&M University
prk@tamu.edu

Tao Liu∗
Texas A&M University
tliu@tamu.edu

Ruida Zhou
Texas A&M University
ruida@tamu.edu

Shahin Shahrampour
Northeastern University
s.shahrampour@northeastern.edu

Abstract
This work studies an independent natural policy gradient (NPG) algorithm for the
multi-agent reinforcement learning problem in Markov potential games. It is shown
that, under mild technical assumptions and the introduction of the suboptimality
gap, the independent NPG method with an oracle providing exact policy evaluation
asymptotically reaches an ϵ-Nash Equilibrium (NE) within O(1/ϵ) iterations. This
improves upon the previous best result of O(1/ϵ2 ) iterations and is of the same
order, O(1/ϵ), that is achievable for the single-agent case. Empirical results for
a synthetic potential game and a congestion game are presented to verify the
theoretical bounds.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is often impacted by the presence and interactions of several agents
in a multi-agent system. This challenge has motivated recent studies of multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) in stochastic games [37, 3]. Applications of MARL include robotics [30], modern
production systems [2], economic decision making [33], and autonomous driving [31]. Among the
various types of stochastic games, we focus on a commonly studied model for MARL, known as
Markov Potential Games (MPGs). MPGs are seen as a generalization of canonical Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs) in the multi-agent setting. In MPGs, there exists a potential function that can track
the value changes of all agents. Unlike single-agent systems, where the goal is to find the optimal
policy, the objective in this paper is to find a global policy, formed by the joint product of a set of
local policies, that leads the system to reach a Nash equilibrium (NE) [29], which is precisely defined
in Section 2.
A major challenge in the analysis of multi-agent systems is the restriction on joint policies of agents.
For single-agent RL, policy updates are designed to increase the probability of selecting the action
with the highest reward. However, in multi-agent systems, the global policy is constructed by taking
the product of local agents’ policies, which makes MARL algorithms suffer a greater risk of being
trapped near undesirable stationary points. Consequently, finding a NE in MARL is more challenging
than finding the global optimum in the single-agent case, and it is therefore difficult for MPGs to
recover the convergence rates of single-agent Markov decision processes (MDPs).
Additionally, the global action space in MPGs scales exponentially with the number of agents within
the system, making it crucial to find an algorithm that scales well for a large number of agents. Recent
∗

The first two authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

