CARE-MI: Chinese Benchmark for Misinformation
Evaluation in Maternity and Infant Care

Tong Xiang♦♡ , Liangzhi Li♦♡∗, Wangyue Li♦♡♠ , Mingbai Bai♦♡ , Lu Wei♦♡♠ ,
Bowen Wang♣♦♡ , Noa Garcia♣♦♡
♦
♡
Meetyou AI Lab, Xiamen Key Laboratory of Women’s Internet Health Management,
♠
Southwest University of Finance and Economics, ♣ Osaka University
{xiangtong, liliangzhi, liwangyue, baimingbai, weilu}@xiaoyouzi.com,
{wang, noagarcia}@ids.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
The recent advances in natural language processing (NLP), have led to a new trend
of applying large language models (LLMs) to real-world scenarios. While the
latest LLMs are astonishingly fluent when interacting with humans, they suffer
from the misinformation problem by unintentionally generating factually false
statements. This can lead to harmful consequences, especially when produced
within sensitive contexts, such as healthcare. Yet few previous works have focused on evaluating misinformation in the long-form (LF) generation of LLMs,
especially for knowledge-intensive topics. Moreover, although LLMs have been
shown to perform well in different languages, misinformation evaluation has been
mostly conducted in English. To this end, we present a benchmark, CARE-MI, for
evaluating LLM misinformation in: 1) a sensitive topic, specifically the maternity
and infant care domain; and 2) a language other than English, namely Chinese.
Most importantly, we provide an innovative paradigm for building LF generation
evaluation benchmarks that can be transferred to other knowledge-intensive domains and low-resourced languages. Our proposed benchmark fills the gap between
the extensive usage of LLMs and the lack of datasets for assessing the misinformation generated by these models. It contains 1,612 expert-checked questions,
accompanied with human-selected references. Using our benchmark, we conduct
extensive experiments and found that current Chinese LLMs are far from perfect
in the topic of maternity and infant care. In an effort to minimize the reliance
on human resources for performance evaluation, we offer off-the-shelf judgment
models for automatically assessing the LF output of LLMs given benchmark questions. Moreover, we compare potential solutions for LF generation evaluation
and provide insights for building better automated metrics. Code and models are
available at https://github.com/Meetyou-AI-Lab/CARE-MI.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, the community witnesses the rise of pretrained autoregressive large language
models (LLMs) [Brown et al., 2020a, Lieber et al., 2021, Rae et al., 2021, Smith et al., 2022]. These
mega models have shown transcendent power [Singhal et al., 2022], achieving and even surpassing
human performance in a breadth of tasks [Clark et al., 2019, Rajpurkar et al., 2018, 2016, Wang et al.,
2019], and cover various possible application scenarios such as code generation [Bommasani et al.,
2021], healthcare chatbots [Nuance, 2023] and keyword matching [OpenAI, 2022].
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

