The Adversarial Consistency of Surrogate Risks for
Binary Classification

Natalie S. Frank
Courant Institute
New York University
New York, NY 10012
nf1066@nyu.edu

Jonathan Niles-Weed
Courant Institute
New York University
New York, NY 10012
jnw@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
We study the consistency of surrogate risks for robust binary classification. It is
common to learn robust classifiers by adversarial training, which seeks to minimize
the expected 0-1 loss when each example can be maliciously corrupted within a
small ball. We give a simple and complete characterization of the set of surrogate
loss functions that are consistent, i.e., that can replace the 0-1 loss without affecting
the minimizing sequences of the original adversarial risk, for any data distribution.
We also prove a quantitative version of adversarial consistency for the ρ-margin
loss. Our results reveal that the class of adversarially consistent surrogates is
substantially smaller than in the standard setting, where many common surrogates
are known to be consistent.

1

Introduction

A central issue in the study of neural nets is their susceptibility to adversarial perturbations—
perturbations imperceptible to the human eye can cause a neural net to misclassify an image [Szegedy
et al., 2013, Biggio et al., 2013]. The same phenomenon appears in other types of data such as
speech and text. As deep nets are used in applications such as self-driving cars and medical imaging
[Paschali et al., 2018, Li et al., 2021], training classifiers robust to adversarial perturbations is a
central question in machine learning.
The foundational theory of surrogates for classication in well understood. In the standard classification
setting, one seeks to minimize the classification risk— the proportion of incorrectly classified data.
Since minimizing the classification risk is typically computationally intractable [Ben-David et al.,
2003], a common approach is to instead minimize a better-behaved alternative called the surrogate
risk. However, one must verify that classifiers with low surrogate risk also achieve low classification
risk. If for every data distribution, a sequence of functions minimizing the surrogate also minimizes
the classification risk, the surrogate risk is called consistent. Many classic papers study the consistency
of surrogate risks in the standard classification setting [Bartlett et al., 2006, Lin, 2004, Steinwart,
2007, Philip M. Long, 2013, Mingyuan Zhang, 2020].
Unlike the standard case, however, little is known about the consistency of surrogate risks in the
context of adversarial training, which involves risks that compute the supremum of a surrogate loss
function over an ϵ-ball. Though this question has been partially studied in the literature [Awasthi
et al., 2021a,c, Meunier et al., 2022], a general theory is lacking. Existing results reveal, however,
that the situation is substantially different from the standard case: for instance, [Meunier et al., 2022]
show that no convex surrogate can be adversarially consistent. To our knowledge, no adversarially
consistent risks are known.
In this work, we give a complete characterization of adversarial consistency for surrogate losses.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

