On the Asymptotic Learning Curves of Kernel Ridge
Regression under Power-law Decay

Yicheng Li, Haobo Zhang
Center for Statistical Science, Department of Industrial Engineering
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{liyc22,zhang-hb21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Qian Lin ∗
Center for Statistical Science, Department of Industrial Engineering
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
qianlin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The widely observed ‘benign overfitting phenomenon’ in the neural network literature raises the challenge to the ‘bias-variance trade-off’ doctrine in the statistical learning theory. Since the generalization ability of the ‘lazy trained’ overparametrized neural network can be well approximated by that of the neural tangent
kernel regression, the curve of the excess risk (namely, the learning curve) of kernel ridge regression attracts increasing attention recently. However, most recent
arguments on the learning curve are heuristic and are based on the ‘Gaussian
design’ assumption. In this paper, under mild and more realistic assumptions, we
rigorously provide a full characterization of the learning curve in the asymptotic
sense under a power-law decay condition of the eigenvalues of the kernel and also
the target function. The learning curve elaborates the effect and the interplay of
the choice of the regularization parameter, the source condition and the noise. In
particular, our results suggest that the ‘benign overfitting phenomenon’ exists in
over-parametrized neural networks only when the noise level is small.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods, in particular kernel ridge regression (KRR), have been one of the most popular
algorithms in machine learning. Its optimality under various settings has been an active topic
since Caponnetto and De Vito [2007], Andreas Christmann [2008]. The renaissance of kernel
methods arising from the neural tangent kernel (NTK) theory [Jacot et al., 2018], which shows that
over-parametrized neural networks can be well approximated by certain kernel regression with the
corresponding NTK, has posed further challenges about the interplay of generalization, regularization
and noise level. For example, it has been observed empirically that over-parametrized neural networks
can fit any data perfectly but also generalize well [Zhang et al., 2017], which contradicts to our
traditional belief of bias-variance trade-off [Vapnik, 1999].
The aforementioned ‘benign overfitting phenomenon’ that overfitted neural networks generalize
well attracts lots of attention recently. Researchers provide various explanations to reconcile the
contradiction between it and the bias-variance trade-off principle. For example, Belkin et al. [2019]
proposed the ‘double descent theory’ to explain why large model can generalize well; some other
works (e.g., Liang and Rakhlin [2020]) argued that kernel interpolating estimators can generalize
∗

Qian Lin also affiliates with Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

