A State Representation for Diminishing Rewards

Ted Moskovitz
Gatsby Unit, UCL
ted@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk
Ahmed Touati
Meta
atouati@meta.com

Samo Hromadka
Gatsby Unit, UCL
samo.hromadka.21@ucl.ac.uk

Diana Borsa
Google DeepMind
borsa@google.com

Maneesh Sahani
Gatsby Unit, UCL
maneesh@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
A common setting in multitask reinforcement learning (RL) demands that an agent
rapidly adapt to various stationary reward functions randomly sampled from a
fixed distribution. In such situations, the successor representation (SR) is a popular framework which supports rapid policy evaluation by decoupling a policy’s
expected discounted, cumulative state occupancies from a specific reward function.
However, in the natural world, sequential tasks are rarely independent, and instead
reflect shifting priorities based on the availability and subjective perception of rewarding stimuli. Reflecting this disjunction, in this paper we study the phenomenon
of diminishing marginal utility and introduce a novel state representation, the λ
representation (λR) which, surprisingly, is required for policy evaluation in this
setting and which generalizes the SR as well as several other state representations
from the literature. We establish the λR’s formal properties and examine its normative advantages in the context of machine learning, as well as its usefulness for
studying natural behaviors, particularly foraging.

Introduction

The second ice cream cone rarely tastes as good as the first,
and once all the most accessible brambles have been picked,
the same investment of effort yields less fruit. In everyday
life, the availability and our enjoyment of stimuli is sensitive
to our past interactions with them. Thus, to evaluate different
courses of action and act accordingly, we might expect our
brains to form representations sensitive to the non-stationarity
of rewards. Evidence in fields from behavioral economics
[1, 2] to neuroscience [3] supports this hypothesis. Surprisingly,
however, most of reinforcement learning (RL) takes place under
the assumptions of the Markov Decision Process [MDP; 4],
where rewards and optimal decision-making remain stationary.

Cumulative Reward

1

Constant Utility
Diminishing Utility

Stimulus Presentations
Figure 1.1: Diminishing rewards.

In this paper, we seek to bridge this gap by studying the phenomenon of diminishing marginal
utility [5] in the context of RL. Diminishing marginal utility (DMU) is the subjective phenomenon
by which repeated exposure to a rewarding stimulus reduces the perceived utility one experiences.
While DMU is thought to have its roots in the maintenance of homeostatic equilibrium (too much
ice cream can result in a stomach ache), it also manifests itself in domains in which the collected
rewards are abstract, such as economics ($10 vs. $0 is perceived as a bigger difference in value than
$1,010 vs. $1,000), where it is closely related to risk aversion [6, 7]. While DMU is well-studied in
other fields, relatively few RL studies have explored diminishing reward functions [8, 9], and, to our
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

