Boosting Verification of Deep Reinforcement Learning
via Piece-wise Linear Decision Neural Networks
Jiaxu Tian 1 , Dapeng Zhi 1 , Si Liu 2 , Peixin Wang* 3 , Cheng Chen 1 , Min Zhang* 1
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing, East China Normal University
2
ETH Zürich
3
University of Oxford
51215902014@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, zhi.dapeng@163.com, si.liu@inf.ethz.ch,

peixin.wang@cs.ox.ac.uk, {chchen,zhangmin}@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Formally verifying deep reinforcement learning (DRL) systems suffers from both
inaccurate verification results and limited scalability. The major obstacle lies in the
large overestimation introduced inherently during training and then transforming
the inexplicable decision-making models i.e., deep neural networks (DNNs), into
easy-to-verify models. In this paper, we propose an inverse transform-then-train
approach, which first encodes a DNN into an equivalent set of efficiently and
tightly verifiable linear control policies and then optimizes them via reinforcement
learning. We accompany our inverse approach with a novel neural network model
called piece-wise linear decision neural networks (PLDNNs), which are compatible
with most existing DRL training algorithms with comparable performance against
conventional DNNs. Our extensive experiments show that, compared to DNNbased DRL systems, PLDNN-based systems can be more efficiently and tightly
verified with up to 438 times speedup and a significant reduction in overestimation.
In particular, even a complex 12-dimensional DRL system is efficiently verified
with up to 7 times deeper computation steps.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been exhibiting appealing advantages in decision-making and
control for deep reinforcement learning (DRL) systems [1–4]. Nonetheless, the complexity and
inexplicability [5, 6] of DNNs render the formal verification of their hosting systems, quite often
even themselves, inaccurate and unscalable. Most existing approaches [7–10] over-approximate both
embedded DNNs and non-linear environment dynamics to build verifiable models, which inevitably
introduces dual overestimation. In particular, DNN-specific overestimation is extremely unpredictable
due to many factors such as the dimension of system states, the complexity of environment dynamics,
and the size, weight, and activation function of a neural network. For example, the verification results
may deviate significantly even if the DNNs of the same DRL system differ only in their weights (as
we also observed; see Appendix A.4 ). Unsurprisingly, verifying high-dimensional DRL systems
would only exacerbate the problems of large overestimation and limited scalability.
Common practice for formally verifying DRL systems is to train and then transform the embedded
DNNs into easy-to-verify models where, for any input set, output ranges can enclose the outputs of
the over-approximated DNNs [7–10]. Taylor models [11] are widely adopted due to their preservation
of input-output dependencies and less overestimation (accumulated in multiple steps) than the range
analysis approaches such as interval over-approximation [12, 13]. However, they are still prone to
intractable overestimation as the accuracy of verification depends heavily on the weights of DNNs
* Corresponding authors.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

