EvoFed: Leveraging Evolutionary Strategies for
Communication-Efficient Federated Learning

Mohammad Mahdi Rahimi Hasnain Irshad Bhatti Younghyun Park
Humaira Kousar Jaekyun Moon
KAIST
{mahi,hasnain,dnffkf369,humairakousar32}@kaist.ac.kr
jmoon@kaist.edu

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a decentralized machine learning paradigm that enables collaborative model training across dispersed nodes without having to force
individual nodes to share data. However, its broad adoption is hindered by the
high communication costs of transmitting a large number of model parameters.
This paper presents EvoFed, a novel approach that integrates Evolutionary Strategies (ES) with FL to address these challenges. EvoFed employs a concept of
‘fitness-based information sharing’, deviating significantly from the conventional
model-based FL. Rather than exchanging the actual updated model parameters,
each node transmits a distance-based similarity measure between the locally updated model and each member of the noise-perturbed model population. Each node,
as well as the server, generates an identical population set of perturbed models in
a completely synchronized fashion using the same random seeds. With properly
chosen noise variance and population size, perturbed models can be combined
to closely reflect the actual model updated using the local dataset, allowing the
transmitted similarity measures (or fitness values) to carry nearly the complete
information about the model parameters. As the population size is typically much
smaller than the number of model parameters, the savings in communication load
is large. The server aggregates these fitness values and is able to update the global
model. This global fitness vector is then disseminated back to the nodes, each of
which applies the same update to be synchronized to the global model. Our analysis
shows that EvoFed converges, and our experimental results validate that at the cost
of increased local processing loads, EvoFed achieves performance comparable to
FedAvg while reducing overall communication requirements drastically in various
practical settings.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) provides a decentralized machine learning framework that enables model
training across many devices, known as clients, without needing to collect and process sensitive
client data on the centralized server [1]. The typical FL process begins with each client downloading
an identical initialized model from a central server, performing model updates with local data, and
then uploading the updated local model for the next communication round. Subsequently, the server
combines the uploaded models to refine the global model, typically using a technique like FedAvg [2].
This iterative cycle repeats for a fixed number of rounds, ensuring collaborative model improvement
across clients.
Although FL provides notable benefits, such as a certain level of privacy preservation and the
utilization of diverse data sources, one of the major challenges associated with FL is the significant
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

