Multi-Fidelity Multi-Armed Bandits Revisited

Xuchuang Wang
Chinese University of Hong Kong
xcwang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Wei Chen
Microsoft Research
weic@microsoft.com

Qingyun Wu
Pennsylvania State University
qingyun.wu@psu.edu
John C.S. Lui
Chinese University of Hong Kong
cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We study the multi-fidelity multi-armed bandit (MF-MAB), an extension of the
canonical multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem. MF-MAB allows each arm to be
pulled with different costs (fidelities) and observation accuracy. We study both the
best arm identification with fixed confidence (BAI) and the regret minimization
objectives. For BAI, we present (a) a cost complexity lower bound, (b) an algorithmic framework with two alternative fidelity selection procedures, and (c) both
procedures’ cost complexity upper bounds. From both cost complexity bounds
of MF-MAB, one can recover the standard sample complexity bounds of the classic
(single-fidelity) MAB. For regret minimization of MF-MAB, we propose a new regret
definition, prove its problem-independent regret lower bound Ω(K 1/3 Λ2/3 ) and
problem-dependent lower bound Ω(K log Λ), where K is the number of arms
and Λ is the decision budget in terms of cost, and devise an elimination-based
algorithm whose worst-cost regret upper bound matches its corresponding lower
bound up to some logarithmic terms and, whose problem-dependent bound matches
its corresponding lower bound in terms of Λ.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandits (MAB) problem was first introduced in the seminal work by Lai and Robbins
[22] and was extensively studied (ref. Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi [4], Lattimore and Szepesvári [24]).
In stochastic MAB, the decision maker repeatedly pulls arms among a set of K ∈ N+ arms and
observes rewards drawn from unknown distributions of the pulled arms. The initial objective of MAB
is regret minimization [22, 1], where the regret is the cumulative differences between the rewards
from pulling the optimal arm and that from the concerned algorithm’s arm pulling strategy. This is a
fundamental sequential decision making framework for studying the exploration-exploitation trade-off,
where one needs to balance between optimistically exploring arms with high uncertainty in reward
(exploration) and myopically exploiting arms with high empirical reward average (exploitation).
Another task of MAB is the best arm identification (BAI, a.k.a., pure exploration), later introduced
by Even-Dar et al. [7, 8], Mannor and Tsitsiklis [27]. Best arm identification aims to find the best
arm without considering the cumulative regret (reward) during the learning process. In this paper, we
focus on the fixed confidence case, with the goal of identifying the best arm with a fixed confidence
with as few number of decision rounds as possible.
In this paper, we investigate a generalized MAB model with a wide range of real-world applications—
the multi-fidelity multi-armed bandit (MF-MAB)—introduced by Kandasamy et al. [19]. We study both
the regret minimization and best arm identification objectives under the MF-MAB model. The MF-MAB
model introduces flexibility for exploring arms: instead of squarely pulling an arm to observe its
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

