A Theory of Transfer-Based Black-Box Attacks:
Explanation and Implications

Yanbo Chen, Weiwei Liu∗
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University
{yanbo.acad,liuweiwei863}@gmail.com

Abstract
Transfer-based attacks [1] are a practical method of black-box adversarial attacks
in which the attacker aims to craft adversarial examples from a source model that is
transferable to the target model. Many empirical works [2–6] have tried to explain
the transferability of adversarial examples from different angles. However, these
works only provide ad hoc explanations without quantitative analyses. The theory
behind transfer-based attacks remains a mystery.
This paper studies transfer-based attacks under a unified theoretical framework. We
propose an explanatory model, called the manifold attack model, that formalizes
popular beliefs and explains the existing empirical results. Our model explains why
adversarial examples are transferable even when the source model is inaccurate as
observed in Papernot et al. [7]. Moreover, our model implies that the existence of
transferable adversarial examples depends on the “curvature” of the data manifold,
which further explains why the success rates of transfer-based attacks are hard to
improve. We also discuss our model’s expressive power and applicability.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models are vulnerable to adversarial examples [8, 9]. It has been observed
that adversarial examples of one model can fool another model [9, 10], i.e., adversarial examples
are transferable. Utilizing this transferability, researchers have developed some practical black-box
attack methods, in which they first obtain a source model and then use the adversarial examples of
the source model to attack the target model [5, 11]. This type of attack is referred to in the literature
as transfer-based attacks (TBA).
TBAs have many intriguing properties. For instance, Papernot et al. [7] find that the adversarial
examples of an inaccurate source model can transfer to the target model with a non-negligible success
rate. Besides, the success rates of TBAs are constantly lower than other methods of black-box attacks
[5, 6, 12]; the low success rate seems to be an intrinsic property of TBAs.
Previous works have tried to explain these properties from different perspectives [2–6]. Unfortunately,
these works only provide ad hoc explanations for the properties of TBAs without quantitative analyses
under a unified framework. For example, Dong et al. [6] suggest that the low success rates of TBAs
are due to the adversarial examples of the source model falling into a “non-adversarial region” of the
target model, while the properties of such regions are not discussed quantitatively. As for the cause
of transferability, a self-evident explanation is that the source and target models have similar decision
boundaries [10]. However, these similarities are hard to characterize, and it is even harder to associate
∗

Correspondence to: Weiwei Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

