Soft-Unification in Deep Probabilistic Logic

Jaron Maene
KU Leuven
jaron.maene@kuleuven.be

Luc De Raedt
KU Leuven & Örebro University
luc.deraedt@kuleuven.be

Abstract
A fundamental challenge in neuro-symbolic AI is to devise primitives that fuse the
logical and neural concepts. The Neural Theorem Prover has proposed the notion
of soft-unification to turn the symbolic comparison between terms (i.e. unification)
into a comparison in embedding space. It has been shown that soft-unification
is a powerful mechanism that can be used to learn logic rules in an end-to-end
differentiable manner. We study soft-unification from a conceptual point and outline
several desirable properties of this operation. These include non-redundancy in the
proof, well-defined proof scores, and non-sparse gradients. Unfortunately, these
properties are not satisfied by previous systems such as the Neural Theorem Prover.
Therefore, we introduce a more principled framework called DeepSoftLog based
on probabilistic rather than fuzzy semantics. Our experiments demonstrate that
DeepSoftLog can outperform the state-of-the-art on neuro-symbolic benchmarks,
highlighting the benefits of these properties.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has become the most prominent paradigm in machine learning but still suffers from
limitations such as poor interpretability, reasoning skills, and difficulties in incorporating knowledge.
Neuro-symbolic AI (NeSy) is an emerging field that seeks to address these limitations by combining
the strengths of neural networks and symbolic systems [14, 16].
A key design question in NeSy is the used representation [14, 16]. Neural networks operate on
tensors while symbolic reasoning operates on symbolic structures. Previous systems have broadly
used two ways to deal with this dilemma. The first is keeping the neural and symbolic representations
completely separate (e.g. DeepProbLog [22]). The second is relaxing the symbolic part, making
it continuous by mapping the symbols onto vector spaces (e.g. Logic Tensor Networks [4]). This
allows – in principle – for a tighter integration, where both representations are retained and fused.
The Neural Theorem Prover (NTP) [29] is an early system that pioneered such an integration, by linking the logical and neural representations with a mechanism called soft-unification.
For instance, in regular logic, matching grandpa(jef, john) with grandfather(jef, john) or
event(earthquake) and event(landslide) fails. However, by mapping grandfather and
grandpa, resp. earthquake and landslide to vectors, they can be compared in an embedding
space. The NTP is an end-to-end differentiable prover that learns these embeddings from data.
Inspired by the success of the NTP, we analyze its key concept – soft-unification – from a theoretical
perspective. We identify several natural and desirable properties of soft-unification, which are not
always satisfied by previous works. This motivates us to propose an alternative more principled
definition of soft-unification based on distances. Next, we introduce DeepSoftLog, which makes a
principled integration of embeddings in probabilistic logic programming [10].
As an example, consider the DeepSoftLog program in listing 1. By associating the constants
with learnable embeddings (denoted with the ∼ prefix), we turn a regular finite state machine
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

