Plug-and-Play Stability for Intracortical
Brain-Computer Interfaces: A One-Year
Demonstration of Seamless Brain-to-Text
Communication
Chaofei Fan6, † , Nick Hahn3 , Foram Kamdar3 , Donald Avansino8 , Guy H. Wilson2 , Leigh
Hochberg10,11,12 , Krishna V. Shenoy1,4,5,7,8,9 , Jaimie M. Henderson3,7, ‡ , and Francis R. Willett8, ‡
1

Bio-X Program, Stanford University
Department of Neuroscience, Stanford University
3
Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University
4
Department of Neurobiology, Stanford University
5
Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University
6
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
7
Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University
8
Howard Hughes Medical Institute at Stanford University
9
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
10
School of Engineering and Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University
11
VA RR&D Center for Neurorestoration and Neurotechnology, VA Providence Healthcare System
12
Center for Neurotechnology and Neurorecovery, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School
†
Correspondence: stfan@stanford.edu
‡
Equal contribution
2

Abstract
Intracortical brain-computer interfaces (iBCIs) have shown promise for restoring
rapid communication to people with neurological disorders such as amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS). However, to maintain high performance over time, iBCIs
typically need frequent recalibration to combat changes in the neural recordings
that accrue over days. This requires iBCI users to stop using the iBCI and engage
in supervised data collection, making the iBCI system hard to use. In this paper, we
propose a method that enables self-recalibration of communication iBCIs without
interrupting the user. Our method leverages large language models (LMs) to
automatically correct errors in iBCI outputs. The self-recalibration process uses
these corrected outputs ("pseudo-labels") to continually update the iBCI decoder
online. Over a period of more than one year (403 days), we evaluated our Continual
Online Recalibration with Pseudo-labels (CORP) framework with one clinical
trial participant. CORP achieved a stable decoding accuracy of 93.84% in an
online handwriting iBCI task, significantly outperforming other baseline methods.
Notably, this is the longest-running iBCI stability demonstration involving a human
participant. Our results provide the first evidence for long-term stabilization of a
plug-and-play, high-performance communication iBCI, addressing a major barrier
for the clinical translation of iBCIs.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

