arXiv:2301.08110v5 [cs.LG] 5 Nov 2023

AT M AN: Understanding Transformer Predictions
Through Memory Efficient Attention Manipulation

Björn Deiseroth1,2,3∗ Mayukh Deb1∗ Samuel Weinbach1∗ Manuel Brack2,4
Patrick Schramowski2,3,4,5 Kristian Kersting2,3,4
1
Aleph Alpha 2 Technical University Darmstadt
3
Hessian Center for Artificial Intelligence (hessian.AI)
4
German Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) 5 LAION
{bjoern.deiseroth, mayukh.deb, samuel.weinbach}@aleph-alpha.com
{manuel.brack, patrick.schramowski}@dfki.de
{kersting}@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Generative transformer models have become increasingly complex, with large
numbers of parameters and the ability to process multiple input modalities. Current
methods for explaining their predictions are resource-intensive. Most crucially,
they require prohibitively large amounts of additional memory since they rely
on backpropagation which allocates almost twice as much GPU memory as the
forward pass. This renders it difficult, if not impossible, to use explanations in
production. We present AT M AN that provides explanations of generative transformer models at almost no extra cost. Specifically, AT M AN is a modality-agnostic
perturbation method that manipulates the attention mechanisms of transformers
to produce relevance maps for the input with respect to the output prediction.
Instead of using backpropagation, AT M AN applies a parallelizable token-based
search method relying on cosine similarity neighborhood in the embedding space.
Our exhaustive experiments on text and image-text benchmarks demonstrate that
AT M AN outperforms current state-of-the-art gradient-based methods on several
metrics and models while being computationally efficient. As such, AT M AN is
suitable for use in large model inference deployments.

1

Explainability through attention maps

Generalizing beyond single-task solutions using large-scale transformer-based language models
has gained increasing attention from the community. In particular, the switch to open-vocabulary
predictions promises AI systems capable of generalizing to new tasks. Arguably, transformers are
the state-of-the-art method in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision. They have
shown exceptional performance in multi-modal scenarios, e.g., bridging Computer Vision (CV)
capabilities with text understanding to solve Visual Question Answering (VQA) scenarios [10, 18,
31, 30]. However, the increasing adoption of transformers also raises the need to understand their
otherwise black-box predictions better. Unfortunately, the “scale is all you need” assumption of
recent transformer models results in severely large and complex architectures. This renders tasks such
as their training, inference deployment, and explaining of their outputs resource-intensive, requiring
multiple enterprise-grade GPUs or even entire computing nodes, along with prolonged runtimes.
*
These authors contributed equally to this work
Source code: https://github.com/Aleph-Alpha/AtMan
Ātman (Sanskrit) “essence”

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

