Distributed Personalized Empirical Risk Minimization

Yuyang Deng
Pennsylvania State University
yzd82@psu.edu

Mohammad Mahdi Kamani
Wyze Labs
mmkamani@alumni.psu.edu

Pouria Mahdavinia
Pennsylvania State University
pxm5426@psu.edu

Mehrdad Mahdavi
Pennsylvania State University
mzm616@psu.edu

Abstract
This paper advocates a new paradigm Personalized Empirical Risk Minimization
(PERM) to facilitate learning from heterogeneous data sources without imposing
stringent constraints on computational resources shared by participating devices.
In PERM, we aim to learn a distinct model for each client by learning who to learn
with and personalizing the aggregation of local empirical losses by effectively estimating the statistical discrepancy among data distributions, which entails optimal
statistical accuracy for all local distributions and overcomes the data heterogeneity
issue. To learn personalized models at scale, we propose a distributed algorithm
that replaces the standard model averaging with model shuffling to simultaneously
optimize PERM objectives for all devices. This also allows us to learn distinct
model architectures (e.g., neural networks with different numbers of parameters)
for different clients, thus confining underlying memory and compute resources of
individual clients. We rigorously analyze the convergence of the proposed algorithm and conduct experiments that corroborate the effectiveness of the proposed
paradigm.

1

Introduction

Recently federated learning (FL) has emerged as an alternative paradigm to centralized learning to
encourage federated model sharing and create a framework to support edge intelligence by shifting
model training and inference from data centers to potentially scattered—and perhaps self-interested—
systems where data is generated [1]. While undoubtedly being a better paradigm than centralized
learning, enabling the widespread adoption of FL necessitates foundational advances in the efficient
use of statistical and computational resources to encourage a large pool of individuals or corporations
to share their private data and resources. Specifically, due to heterogeneity of data and compute
resources among participants, it is necessary, if not imperative, to develop distributed algorithms that
are i) cognizant of statistical heterogeneity (data-awareness) by designing algorithms that effectively
deal with highly heterogeneous data distributions across devices; and ii) confined to learning models
that meet available computational resources of participant devices (system-awareness).
To mitigate the negative effect of data heterogeneity (non-IIDness), two common approaches are
clustering and personalization. The key idea behind the clustering-based methods [2, 3, 4, 5] is to
partition the devices into clusters (coalitions) of similar data distributions and then learn a single shared
model for all clients within each cluster. While appealing, the partitioning methods are limited to
heuristic ideas such as clustering based on the geographical distribution of devices without taking the
actual data distributions into account and lack theoretical guarantees or postulate strong assumptions
on initial models or data distributions [4, 5]. In personalization-based methods [6, 7, 8, 2, 9, 10, 11],
the idea is to learn a distinct personalized model for each device alongside the global model, which
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

