Imagine That! Abstract-to-Intricate Text-to-Image
Synthesis with Scene Graph Hallucination Diffusion

Shengqiong Wu 1 Hao Fei 1∗ Hanwang Zhang 2 Tat-Seng Chua 1
1
NExT++, School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
swu@u.nus.edu {haofei37, dcscts}@nus.edu.sg hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In this work, we investigate the task of text-to-image (T2I) synthesis under the
abstract-to-intricate setting, i.e., generating intricate visual content from simple
abstract text prompts. Inspired by human imagination intuition, we propose a novel
scene-graph hallucination (SGH) mechanism for effective abstract-to-intricate T2I
synthesis. SGH carries out scene hallucination by expanding the initial scene
graph (SG) of the input prompt with more feasible specific scene structures, in
which the structured semantic representation of SG ensures high controllability of
the intrinsic scene imagination. To approach the T2I synthesis, we deliberately
build an SG-based hallucination diffusion system. First, we implement the SGH
module based on the discrete diffusion technique, which evolves the SG structure
by iteratively adding new scene elements. Then, we utilize another continuous-state
diffusion model as the T2I synthesizer, where the overt image-generating process
is navigated by the underlying semantic scene structure induced from the SGH
module. On the benchmark COCO dataset, our system outperforms the existing
best-performing T2I model by a significant margin, especially improving on the
abstract-to-intricate T2I generation. Further in-depth analyses reveal how our
methods advance.2

1

Introduction

The task of generating images from natural language descriptions, known as text-to-image (T2I)
synthesis, has attracted significant attention [4, 17, 52]. To approach T2I, various generative models
have been explored, including generative adversarial networks (GANs) [48, 52, 61], variational
autoencoders (VAEs) [50], flow-based models [3], and auto-regressive models (ARMs) [10, 41],
all of which aim to generate realistic images in high quality and high faithfulness. Most recently,
diffusion-based models have been proposed, which simulate the physical process of gas diffusion for
image generation [23]. Diffusion models have shown unprecedented performance in image synthesis
over existing methods, becoming the current state-of-the-art (SoTA) T2I solution [2, 9, 19, 47, 42].
As a long-reached viewpoint [28, 53, 37], sound T2I systems should not only achieve high-quality
image generation in simple straightforward visual scenery but be more capable of synthesizing
realistic images with complex scenes. Typically, detailed textual descriptions are necessarily needed
to prompt the synthesis process with adequate details for high-quality vision generation. However, in
a realistic world, it could also be ubiquitous to produce intricate visions without relying on lengthy
elaborate prompts. For example, users may prefer T2I systems to synthesize well-detailed images
while not taking too much time to write descriptions in detail. More crucially, due to the natural
modality asymmetry between language and vision, even some simple words can intrinsically describe
or represent abstract visual scenes with rich and complex details. Whenever mentioning the words
∗
2

Hao Fei is the corresponding author.
Code is available at https://github.com/ChocoWu/T2I-Salad

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

