Characterizing Graph Datasets for Node Classification:
Homophily–Heterophily Dichotomy and Beyond

Oleg Platonov∗
HSE University
Yandex Research
olegplatonov@yandex-team.ru

Denis Kuznedelev
Yandex Research
Skoltech
dkuznedelev@yandex-team.ru

Artem Babenko
Yandex Research
artem.babenko@phystech.edu

Liudmila Prokhorenkova∗†
Yandex Research
ostroumova-la@yandex-team.ru

Abstract
Homophily is a graph property describing the tendency of edges to connect
similar nodes; the opposite is called heterophily. It is often believed that heterophilous graphs are challenging for standard message-passing graph neural networks (GNNs), and much effort has been put into developing efficient methods for
this setting. However, there is no universally agreed-upon measure of homophily in
the literature. In this work, we show that commonly used homophily measures have
critical drawbacks preventing the comparison of homophily levels across different
datasets. For this, we formalize desirable properties for a proper homophily measure and verify which measures satisfy which properties. In particular, we show
that a measure that we call adjusted homophily satisfies more desirable properties
than other popular homophily measures while being rarely used in graph machine
learning literature. Then, we go beyond the homophily–heterophily dichotomy and
propose a new characteristic that allows one to further distinguish different sorts
of heterophily. The proposed label informativeness (LI) characterizes how much
information a neighbor’s label provides about a node’s label. We prove that this
measure satisfies important desirable properties. We also observe empirically that
LI better agrees with GNN performance compared to homophily measures, which
confirms that it is a useful characteristic of the graph structure.

1

Introduction

Graphs are a natural way to represent data from various domains such as social networks, citation
networks, molecules, transportation networks, text, code, and others. Machine learning on graphstructured data has experienced significant growth in recent years, with Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) showing particularly strong results. Many variants of GNNs have been proposed [16, 10,
43, 45], most of them can be unified by a general Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs)
framework [7]. MPNNs combine node features (attributes) with graph topology to learn complex
dependencies between the nodes. For this, MPNNs iteratively update the representation of each
node by aggregating information from the previous-layer representations of the node itself and its
neighbors.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

