Diverse Community Data for Benchmarking Data
Privacy Algorithms

Aniruddha Sen
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003

Dhruv Kapur
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109

Christine Task
Knexus Research
Oxon Hill, MD 20745
christine.task@knexusresearch.com

Gary Howarth
NIST
Boulder, CO 80305
gary.howarth@nist.gov ∗

Karan Bhagat
Knexus Research
Oxon Hill, MD 20745

Abstract
The Collaborative Research Cycle (CRC) is a National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) benchmarking program intended to strengthen understanding
of tabular data deidentification technologies. Deidentification algorithms are vulnerable to the same bias and privacy issues that impact other data analytics and
machine learning applications, and it can even amplify those issues by contaminating downstream applications. This paper summarizes four CRC contributions:
theoretical work on the relationship between diverse populations and challenges
for equitable deidentification; public benchmark data focused on diverse populations and challenging features; a comprehensive open source suite of evaluation
metrology for deidentified datasets; and an archive of more than 450 deidentified
data samples from a broad range of techniques. The initial set of evaluation results
demonstrate the value of the CRC tools for investigations in this field.

1

Introduction

Deidentification algorithms take records linked to individuals and attempt to produce data that is
dissociated from individuals but remains useful for analysis. Effective deidentification permits
organizations to safely share useful information from potentially sensitive data. Such data can be used
to train machine learning algorithms; expose fraud, waste, and abuse; improve health outcomes; and
much more. Many approaches are available to deidentify data. Some approaches, such as statistical
disclosure control, redact or suppress information that is deemed particularly identifying. Other
approaches, such as synthetic data algorithms leverage generative models to reproduce sensitive data
distributions using new, synthetic records. Differential privacy strengthens deidentification with a
rigorous mathematical definition of privacy, producing synthetic data with quantifiable bounds on the
influence of any real individual. While deidentification release algorithms may (but not necessarily)
improve privacy, they can also distort data by introducing artifacts and bias. Identifying and resolving
these issues is important, but it is not trivial to do.
Intuitively, individuals with many unusual values in the data are easier to identify than those with
relatively common demographic characteristics. Consider data with two subpopulations of equal
size: group A, who are internally homogeneous and have highly-correlated features; and group
B, who are internally heterogeneous with relatively independent features. We can infer that group
∗

corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

