Label-efficient Segmentation via Affinity Propagation

Wentong Li1∗ , Yuqian Yuan1∗ , Song Wang1 , Wenyu Liu1 ,
Dongqi Tang2 , Jian Liu2 , Jianke Zhu1†, Lei Zhang3
1
Zhejiang University 2 Ant Group 3 The Hong Kong Polytechnical University
https://LiWentomng.github.io/apro/

Abstract
Weakly-supervised segmentation with label-efficient sparse annotations has attracted increasing research attention to reduce the cost of laborious pixel-wise
labeling process, while the pairwise affinity modeling techniques play an essential role in this task. Most of the existing approaches focus on using the local
appearance kernel to model the neighboring pairwise potentials. However, such
a local operation fails to capture the long-range dependencies and ignores the
topology of objects. In this work, we formulate the affinity modeling as an affinity
propagation process, and propose a local and a global pairwise affinity terms to
generate accurate soft pseudo labels. An efficient algorithm is also developed
to reduce significantly the computational cost. The proposed approach can be
conveniently plugged into existing segmentation networks. Experiments on three
typical label-efficient segmentation tasks, i.e. box-supervised instance segmentation, point/scribble-supervised semantic segmentation and CLIP-guided semantic
segmentation, demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Segmentation is a widely studied problem in computer vision, aiming at generating a mask prediction
for a given image, e.g., grouping each pixel to an object instance (instance segmentation) or assigning
each pixel a category label (semantic segmentation). While having achieved promising performance,
most of the existing approaches are trained in a fully supervised manner, which heavily depend on
the pixel-wise mask annotations, incurring tedious labeling costs [1]. Weakly-supervised methods
have been proposed to reduce the dependency on dense pixel-wise labels with label-efficient sparse
annotations, such as points [2–4], scribbles [5–7], bounding boxes [8–11] and image-level labels [12–
15]. Such methods make dense segmentation more accessible with less annotation costs for new
categories or scene types.
Most of the existing weakly-supervised segmentation methods [16, 13, 8, 17, 3, 10] adopt the local
appearance kernel to model the neighboring pairwise affinities, where spatially nearby pixels with
similar color (i.g., LAB color space [8, 3] or RGB color space [13, 16, 17, 10]) are likely to be
in the same class. Though having proved to be effective, these methods suffer from two main
limitations. First, the local operation cannot capture global context cues and capture long-range
affinity dependencies. Second, the appearance kernel fails to take the intrinsic topology of objects
into account, and lacks capability of detail preservation.
To address the first issue, one can directly enlarge the kernel size to obtain a large receptive filed.
However, this will make the segmentation model insensitive to local details and increase the computational cost greatly. Some methods [14, 12] model the long-range affinity via random walk [18],
but they cannot model the fine-grained semantic affinities. As for the second issue, the tree-based
∗
†

Equal contribution
Correspondence author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

