Binary Radiance Fields

Seungjoo Shin
GSAI, POSTECH
seungjoo.shin@postech.ac.kr

Jaesik Park
CSE & IPAI, Seoul National University
jaesik.park@snu.ac.kr

https://seungjooshin.github.io/BiRF

Abstract
In this paper, we propose binary radiance fields (BiRF), a storage-efficient radiance
field representation employing binary feature encoding in a format of either +1 or
−1. This binarization strategy lets us represent the feature grid with highly compact
feature encoding and a dramatic reduction in storage size. Furthermore, our 2D-3D
hybrid feature grid design enhances the compactness of feature encoding as the 3D
grid includes main components while 2D grids capture details. In our experiments,
binary radiance field representation successfully outperforms the reconstruction
performance of state-of-the-art (SOTA) storage-efficient radiance field models with
lower storage allocation. In particular, our model achieves impressive results in
static scene reconstruction, with a PSNR of 32.03 dB for Synthetic-NeRF scenes,
34.48 dB for Synthetic-NSVF scenes, 28.20 dB for Tanks and Temples scenes
while only utilizing 0.5 MB of storage space, respectively. We hope the proposed
binary radiance field representation will make radiance fields more accessible
without a storage bottleneck.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the emergence of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [1] has greatly impacted 3D
scene modeling and novel-view synthesis. The methodology models a complex volumetric scene
as an implicit function that maps positional and directional information of sampled points to the
corresponding color and density values, enabling the rendering of photo-realistic novel views from
any desired viewpoints. Subsequent advancements [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] have demonstrated their
ability to reconstruct various 3D scenes using images and corresponding camera poses, which opens
radiance fields as a promising approach for representing the real 3D world.
Despite the significant progress, the computational burden of utilizing large-scale multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) remains a critical challenge, leading to a speed issue in both training and rendering
radiance fields. To tackle this issue, an auxiliary explicit voxel grid has been utilized for encoding
local features, denoting a voxel-based method. While the implicit radiance field representations
should update all shared learnable parameters in MLPs, parametric encoding calculates only a small
local part of encoded features leading to less computational cost. The voxel-based feature encoding
has been implemented in various data structures, such as dense grids [11, 12], octrees [13, 14], sparse
voxel grids [15], decomposed grids [16, 17, 18, 19], and hash tables [20]. These representations
succeed in efficiently reducing the time required for convergence and inference. Nonetheless, explicit
feature encoding methods have a significant disadvantage: their excessive storage usage. Now, we
are facing a new bottleneck that restricts accessibility. Consequently, the desire for a new radiance
field representation to implement a realistic 3D scene with little storage has been raised.
This paper introduces a new binary feature encoding to represent storage-efficient radiance fields
with binary feature grids, referred to as binary radiance fields (BiRF). Here, we focus on embedding
sufficient feature information restricted in binary format. We achieve this by adopting a binarization37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

