k-Median Clustering via Metric Embedding: Towards
Better Initialization with Differential Privacy

Chenglin Fan, Ping Li, Xiaoyun Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{fanchenglin, pingli98, lixiaoyun996}@gmail.com

Abstract
1

In clustering, the choice of initial centers is crucial for the convergence speed of
the algorithms. We propose a new initialization scheme for the k-median problem
in the general metric space (e.g., discrete space induced by graphs), based on
the construction of metric embedding tree structure of the data. We propose a
novel and efficient search algorithm which finds initial centers that can be used
subsequently for the local search algorithm. The so-called HST initialization
method can produce initial centers achieving lower error than those from another
popular method k-median++, also with higher efficiency when k is not too small.
Our HST initialization are then extended to the setting of differential privacy
(DP) to generate private initial centers. We show that the error of applying DP
local search followed by our private HST initialization improves prior results on
the approximation error, and approaches the lower bound within a small factor.
Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed methods.

1

Introduction

Clustering is an important classic problem in unsupervised learning that has been widely studied in
statistics, data mining, machine learning, network analysis, etc. (Punj and Stewart, 1983; Dhillon
and Modha, 2001; Banerjee et al., 2005; Berkhin, 2006; Abbasi and Younis, 2007). The objective of
clustering is to divide a set of data points into clusters, such that items within the same cluster exhibit
similarities, while those in different clusters distinctly differ. This is concretely measured by the sum
of distances (or squared distances) between each point to its nearest cluster center. One conventional
notion to evaluate a clustering algorithms is: with high probability, cost(C, D) ≤ γOP Tk (D) + ξ,
where C is the centers output by the algorithm and cost(C, D) is a cost function defined for C on
dataset D. OP Tk (D) is the cost of optimal clustering solution on D. When everything is clear from
context, we will use OP T for short. Here, γ is called multiplicative error and ξ is called additive
error. Alternatively, we may also use the notion of expected cost.
Two popularly studied clustering problems are 1) the k-median problem, and 2) the k-means problem.
The origin of k-median dates back to the 1970’s (e.g., Kaufman et al. (1977)), where one tries to find
the best location of facilities that minimizes the cost measured by the distance between clients and
facilities. Formally, given a set of points D and a distance measure, the goal is to find k center points
minimizing the sum of absolute distances of each sample point to its nearest center. In k-means, the
objective is to minimize the sum of squared distances instead. There are two general frameworks
for clustering. One heuristic is the Lloyd’s algorithm (Lloyd, 1982), which is built upon an iterative
distortion minimization approach. In most cases, this method can only be applied to numerical data,
1

This work was initially submitted in 2020 and was made public in 2021.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

