Modelling Cellular Perturbations with the Sparse
Additive Mechanism Shift Variational Autoencoder
Michael Bereket
insitro⇤
mbereket@stanford.edu

Theofanis Karaletsos
insitro*
theofanis@karaletsos.com

Abstract
Generative models of observations under interventions have been a vibrant topic of
interest across machine learning and the sciences in recent years. For example, in
drug discovery, there is a need to model the effects of diverse interventions on cells
in order to characterize unknown biological mechanisms of action. We propose
the Sparse Additive Mechanism Shift Variational Autoencoder, SAMS-VAE, to
combine compositionality, disentanglement, and interpretability for perturbation
models. SAMS-VAE models the latent state of a perturbed sample as the sum of a
local latent variable capturing sample-specific variation and sparse global variables
of latent intervention effects. Crucially, SAMS-VAE sparsifies these global latent
variables for individual perturbations to identify disentangled, perturbation-specific
latent subspaces that are flexibly composable. We evaluate SAMS-VAE both
quantitatively and qualitatively on a range of tasks using two popular single cell
sequencing datasets. In order to measure perturbation-specific model-properties,
we also introduce a framework for evaluation of perturbation models based on
average treatment effects with links to posterior predictive checks. SAMS-VAE
outperforms comparable models in terms of generalization across in-distribution
and out-of-distribution tasks, including a combinatorial reasoning task under resource paucity, and yields interpretable latent structures which correlate strongly to
known biological mechanisms. Our results suggest SAMS-VAE is an interesting
addition to the modeling toolkit for machine learning-driven scientific discovery.

1

Introduction

Scientific discovery often involves observation and intervention on systems with the aim of eliciting
a mechanistic understanding. For example, in biology, large cellular perturbation screens with
high-dimensional readouts have become increasingly popular as an approach to investigate biological
mechanisms, their regulatory dependencies, and their responses to drugs. As technology enables both
richer and finer grained measurements of these systems, there is an increasing need and opportunity
for machine learning methods to help generate predictive insights of growing complexity.
Generative models such as variational auto-encoders (VAEs) [8] are commonly used to learn representations of complex datasets and their underlying distributions. A common goal in generative modeling
is disentanglement, whereby latent structures should factorize into semantic subspaces to facilitate
generalization and discovery. A desirable outcome consists of these subspaces learned by models being indicative of latent mechanisms, while sparsely varying according to the underlying latent factors
of variation in the true data distribution [10]. This goal has recently been formalized under the Sparse
Mechanism Shift framework [20, 9] which connects disentanglement to the causal inference field
through the identification of causal graphs. Concomitantly, recent models such as the Compositional
Perturbation Autoencoder [13] and SVAE+ [12] have successfully applied disentangled deep learning
to scientific problems in single-cell RNA-sequencing under perturbation.
⇤

Research supporting this publication conducted while authors were employed at insitro

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

