Echoes Beyond Points: Unleashing the Power of Raw
Radar Data in Multi-modality Fusion

Yang Liu
CASIA

Feng Wang
TuSimple

Naiyan Wang
TuSimple

{liuyang2022, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

Zhaoxiang Zhang
MAIS of CASIA & UCAS,
HKISI_CAS

{feng.wff, winsty}@gmail.com

Abstract
Radar is ubiquitous in autonomous driving systems due to its low cost and good
adaptability to bad weather. Nevertheless, the radar detection performance is
usually inferior because its point cloud is sparse and not accurate due to the poor
azimuth and elevation resolution. Moreover, point cloud generation algorithms
already drop weak signals to reduce the false targets which may be suboptimal for
the use of deep fusion. In this paper, we propose a novel method named EchoFusion
to skip the existing radar signal processing pipeline and then incorporate the
radar raw data with other sensors. Specifically, we first generate the Bird’s Eye
View (BEV) queries and then take corresponding spectrum features from radar
to fuse with other sensors. By this approach, our method could utilize both rich
and lossless distance and speed clues from radar echoes and rich semantic clues
from images, making our method surpass all existing methods on the RADIal
dataset, and approach the performance of LiDAR. The code will be released on
https://github.com/tusen-ai/EchoFusion.

1

Introduction

Robust and accurate perception is a long-standing challenge in Autonomous Driving Systems (ADS).
The full perception system usually relies on multiple sensor fusion including camera, LiDAR, and
radar. Camera provides rich semantic cues of objects and excellent resolution, while LiDAR is
capable of capturing highly accurate spatial information. However, neither camera nor LiDAR
can directly measure speed or survive in adverse weather conditions, such as fog, sandstorms, and
snowstorms [26]. Although radar can overcome the aforementioned problems, even the point cloud
from the latest 4D millimeter wave (mmWave) radars suffers from severe sparsity and low angular
resolution, which makes it hard to discriminate objects and backgrounds solely. Fortunately, radar
and camera are highly complementary to each other. Fusing these two types of sensors becomes a
promising solution.
Radar data are usually represented as point clouds. Technically, the radar point cloud stems from
raw Analog-Digital-Converter (ADC) data received by antennas. Range, speed, and angle of arrival
(AoA) information of perceivable objects can be explicitly extracted in the frequency domain by
consecutively applying FFT along corresponding dimensions. Among these steps, side lobe suppression and constant false alarm rate (CFAR) detector [40] are usually adopted to reduce the noise and
false alarms. As a result, all the derived points are equipped with spatial coordinates, speed, and
reflection intensity. Though these noise suppression operations can significantly reduce the data size
and further computation costs, the resulting radar point cloud is extremely sparse, as shown in Figure
1. Even worse, quite a lot of useful information is lost during CFAR, which is adverse to the accurate
perception of environments and subsequent fusion with other sensors [18]. Raw data serves as a
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

