AD-PT: Autonomous Driving Pre-Training with
Large-scale Point Cloud Dataset

Jiakang Yuan1,∗ , Bo Zhang2,† , Xiangchao Yan2 , Tao Chen1,† , Botian Shi2 , Yikang Li2 , Yu Qiao2
1
School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
jkyuan22@m.fudan.edu.cn, zhangbo@pjlab.org.cn, eetchen@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
It is a long-term vision for Autonomous Driving (AD) community that the perception models can learn from a large-scale point cloud dataset, to obtain unified
representations that can achieve promising results on different tasks or benchmarks.
Previous works mainly focus on the self-supervised pre-training pipeline, meaning that they perform the pre-training and fine-tuning on the same benchmark,
which is difficult to attain the performance scalability and cross-dataset application
for the pre-training checkpoint. In this paper, for the first time, we are committed to building a large-scale pre-training point-cloud dataset with diverse data
distribution, and meanwhile learning generalizable representations from such a
diverse pre-training dataset. We formulate the point-cloud pre-training task as
a semi-supervised problem, which leverages the few-shot labeled and massive
unlabeled point-cloud data to generate the unified backbone representations that
can be directly applied to many baseline models and benchmarks, decoupling
the AD-related pre-training process and downstream fine-tuning task. During
the period of backbone pre-training, by enhancing the scene- and instance-level
distribution diversity and exploiting the backbone’s ability to learn from unknown
instances, we achieve significant performance gains on a series of downstream
perception benchmarks including Waymo, nuScenes, and KITTI, under different baseline models like PV-RCNN++, SECOND, CenterPoint. Project page:
https://jiakangyuan.github.io/AD-PT.github.io/.

1

Introduction

LiDAR sensor plays a crucial role in the Autonomous Driving (AD) system due to its high quality for
modeling the depth and geometric information of the surroundings. As a result, a lot of studies aim
to achieve the AD scene perception via LiDAR-based 3D object detection baseline models, such as
CenterPoint [32], PV-RCNN [17], and PV-RCNN++ [19].
Although the 3D object detection models can help autonomous driving recognize the surrounding
environment, the existing baselines are hard to generalize to a new domain (such as different sensor
settings or unseen cities). A long-term vision of the autonomous driving community is to develop
a scene-generalizable pre-trained model, which can be widely applied to different downstream
tasks. To achieve this goal, researchers begin to leverage the Self-Supervised Pre-Training (SSPT) paradigm recently. For example, ProposalContrast [31] proposes a contrastive learning-based
approach to enhance region-level feature extraction capability. Voxel-MAE [6] designs a masking
and reconstructing task to obtain a stronger backbone network.
∗
†

This work was done when Jiakang Yuan was an intern at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
Corresponding to Tao Chen and Bo Zhang.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

