Fully Dynamic k-Clustering in Õ(k) Update Time

Sayan Bhattacharya
University of Warwick
s.bhattacharya@warwick.ac.uk
Silvio Lattanzi
Google Research
silviol@google.com

Martín Costa
University of Warwick
martin.costa@warwick.ac.uk
Nikos Parotsidis
Google Research
nikosp@google.com

Abstract
We present a O(1)-approximate fully dynamic algorithm for the k-median and kmeans problems on metric spaces with amortized update time Õ(k) and worst-case
query time Õ(k 2 ). We complement our theoretical analysis with the first in-depth
experimental study for the dynamic k-median problem on general metrics, focusing
on comparing our dynamic algorithm to the current state-of-the-art by Henzinger
and Kale [20]. Finally, we also provide a lower bound for dynamic k-median which
shows that any O(1)-approximate algorithm with Õ(poly(k)) query time must
have Ω̃(k) amortized update time, even in the incremental setting.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental problem in unsupervised learning with several practical applications.
In clustering, one is interested in partitioning elements into different groups (i.e. clusters), so that
elements in the same group are more similar to each other than to elements in other groups. One
of the most studied formulations of clustering is the metric clustering formulation. In this setting,
elements are represented by points in a metric space, and the distances between points represent how
similar the corresponding elements are (the closer elements are, the more similar they are). More
formally, the input to our problem consists of a set of points U in a metric space with distance function
d : U ×U → R≥0 , a real number p ≥ 1, and an integer
P k ≥ 1. The goal is to compute a subset S ⊆ U
of size |S| ≤ k, so as to minimize cost(S) := x∈U d(x, S)p , where d(x, S) := miny∈S d(x, y).
We refer to the points in S as centers. We note that this captures well-known problems such as
k-median clustering (when p = 1) or k-means clustering (when p = 2).
Due to this simple and elegant formulation, metric clustering has been extensively studied throughout
the years, across a range of computational models [14, 22, 1, 12, 15, 2, 31, 11, 7]. In this paper, we
focus on the dynamic setting, where the goal is to efficiently maintain a good clustering when the
input data keeps changing over time. Because of its immediate real-world applications, the dynamic
clustering problem has received a lot of attention from the machine learning community in recent
years [16, 6, 10, 24, 18]. Below, we formally describe the model [13, 20, 3] considered in this paper.
At preprocessing, the algorithm receives the initial input U . Subsequently, the input keeps changing by
means of a sequence of update operations, where each update inserts/deletes a point in U . Throughout
this sequence of updates, the algorithm needs to implicitly maintain a solution S ∗ ⊆ U to the current
input (U, d). The algorithm has an approximation ratio of ρ ≥ 1 if and only if we always have
cost(S ∗ ) ≤ ρ · opt(U ), where opt(U ) := minS⊆U,|S|≤k cost(S) denotes the optimal objective.
Finally, whenever one queries the algorithm, it has to return the list of centers in S ∗ . The performance
of a dynamic algorithm is captured by its approximation ratio, its update time, and its query time. Let
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

