Large-Scale Distributed Learning via Private
On-Device Locality-Sensitive Hashing

Tahseen Rabbani∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
trabbani@umd.edu

Marco Bornstein∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
marcob@umd.edu

Furong Huang
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
furongh@umd.edu

Abstract
Locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) based frameworks have been used efficiently to
select weight vectors in a dense hidden layer with high cosine similarity to an input,
enabling dynamic pruning. While this type of scheme has been shown to improve
computational training efficiency, existing algorithms require repeated randomized
projection of the full layer weight, which is impractical for computational- and
memory-constrained devices. In a distributed setting, deferring LSH analysis to a
centralized host is (i) slow if the device cluster is large and (ii) requires access to
input data which is forbidden in a federated context. Using a new family of hash
functions, we develop one of the first private, personalized, and memory-efficient
on-device LSH frameworks. Our framework enables privacy and personalization
by allowing each device to generate hash tables, without the help of a central host,
using device-specific hashing hyper-parameters (e.g. number of hash tables or hash
length). Hash tables are generated with a compressed set of the full weights, and
can be serially generated and discarded if the process is memory-intensive. This
allows devices to avoid maintaining (i) the fully-sized model and (ii) large amounts
of hash tables in local memory for LSH analysis. We prove several statistical and
sensitivity properties of our hash functions and experimentally demonstrate that our
framework is competitive in training large-scale recommender networks compared
to other LSH frameworks which assume unrestricted on-device capacity.

1

Introduction

Locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) has proven to be a remarkably effective tool for memory- and
computationally-efficient data clustering and nearest neighbor search [6, 15, 2]. LSH algorithms
such as SimHash [6] can be used to search for vectors in collection W ⊂ Rd of massive cardinality
which will form a large inner product with a reference vector x ∈ Rd . This procedure, known as
maximum inner product search (MIPS) [27], has been applied to neural network (NN) training. In
NN training, the weights of a dense layer that are estimated to produce a large inner product with the
input (thereby, a large softmax, for example) are activated while the remainder is dropped out.
While LSH-based pruning greatly reduces training costs associated with large-scale models, popular
frameworks such as SLIDE [8] and Mongoose [7] cannot be deployed in distributed settings over
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

