The s-value: evaluating stability with respect to
distributional shifts
Dominik Rothenhäusler
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
rdominik@stanford.edu

Suyash Gupta
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
suyash028@gmail.com

Abstract
Common statistical measures of uncertainty such as p-values and confidence intervals quantify the uncertainty due to sampling, that is, the uncertainty due to not
observing the full population. However, sampling is not the only source of uncertainty. In practice, distributions change between locations and across time. This
makes it difficult to gather knowledge that transfers across data sets. We propose
a measure of instability that quantifies the distributional instability of a statistical
parameter with respect to Kullback-Leibler divergence, that is, the sensitivity of
the parameter under general distributional perturbations within a Kullback-Leibler
divergence ball. In addition, we quantify the instability of parameters with respect
to directional or variable-specific shifts. Measuring instability with respect to
directional shifts can be used to detect under which kind of distribution shifts a
statistical conclusion might be reversed. We discuss how such knowledge can
inform data collection for transfer learning of statistical parameters under shifted
distributions. We evaluate the performance of the proposed measure on real data
and show that it can elucidate the distributional instability of a parameter with
respect to certain shifts and can be used to improve estimation accuracy under
shifted distributions.

1

Introduction

Test data sets collected in different locations or at different time points often are drawn from different
distributions, due to changing circumstances, changes in unmeasured confounders, time shifts in
distribution, or distributional shifts in covariates [44, 19, 16, 20]. This makes it difficult to gather
knowledge that transfers across data sets. Statistical estimands such as a regression coefficient or the
average treatment effect (ATE) may vary as the underlying distribution changes and hence, statistical
findings (such as that the treatment effect is positive) may not replicate across data sets [4, 22].
In causal inference, the rapidly growing field of sensitivity analysis [12, 40, 16, 53, 11] quantifies the
stability of an estimate with respect to unobserved confounding. Roughly speaking, this line of work
sees stability analysis as part of uncertainty quantification. Inspired by this line of work, we aim to
bring a similar type of stability analysis to a wider range of statistical procedures.
In this paper, we propose a measure of instability, called the s-value, to investigate the stability of
a given statistical parameter with respect to a shift in the underlying distribution (Figure 1). The
s-value quantifies the minimum shift in distribution required to tilt the parameter to a given value,
using Kullback-Leibler divergence. We also investigate the stability of parameters with respect to
directional or variable-specific shifts. The proposed measure can be used as an exploratory tool to
identify the kind of distribution shift that could reverse a statistical conclusion. We further discuss
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

