Path Regularization: A Convexity and Sparsity
Inducing Regularization for Parallel ReLU Networks

Tolga Ergen
LG AI Research
tergen@lgresearch.ai

Mert Pilanci
Stanford University
pilanci@stanford.edu

Abstract
Understanding the fundamental principles behind the success of deep neural networks is one of the most important open questions in the current literature. To
this end, we study the training problem of deep neural networks and introduce an
analytic approach to unveil hidden convexity in the optimization landscape. We
consider a deep parallel ReLU network architecture, which also includes standard
deep networks and ResNets as its special cases. We then show that pathwise
regularized training problems can be represented as an exact convex optimization
problem. We further prove that the equivalent convex problem is regularized via a
group sparsity inducing norm. Thus, a path regularized parallel ReLU network can
be viewed as a parsimonious convex model in high dimensions. More importantly,
since the original training problem may not be trainable in polynomial-time, we
propose an approximate algorithm with a fully polynomial-time complexity in
all data dimensions. Then, we prove strong global optimality guarantees for this
algorithm. We also provide experiments corroborating our theory.

(a) 2-layer NN with WD

(b) 3-layer NN with WD

(c) 3-layer NN with PR (Ours)

Figure 1: Decision boundaries of 2-layer and 3-layer ReLU networks that are globally optimized
with weight decay (WD) and path regularization (PR). Here, our convex training approach in (c)
successfully learns the underlying spiral pattern for each class while the previously studied convex
models in (a) and (b) fail (see Appendix A.1 for details).

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved substantial improvements in several fields of machine
learning. However, since DNNs have a highly nonlinear and non-convex structure, the fundamental
principles behind their remarkable performance is still an open problem. Therefore, advances in
this field largely depend on heuristic approaches. One of the most prominent techniques to boost
the generalization performance of DNNs is regularizing layer weights so that the network can fit a
function that performs well on unseen test data. Even though weight decay, i.e., penalizing the `22 norm of the layer weights, is commonly employed as a regularization technique in practice, recently,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

