Quantum Bayesian Optimization

Zhongxiang Dai*1 , Gregory Kang Ruey Lau*1,2 , Arun Verma1 , Yao Shu1 ,
Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1 , Patrick Jaillet3
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
2
CNRS@CREATE, 1 Create Way, #08-01 Create Tower, Singapore 138602
3
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT
dzx@nus.edu.sg, greglau@comp.nus.edu.sg, arun@comp.nus.edu.sg,
shuyao95@u.nus.edu, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg, jaillet@mit.edu

Abstract
Kernelized bandits, also known as Bayesian optimization (BO), has been a prevalent
method for optimizing complicated black-box reward functions. Various BO
algorithms have been theoretically shown to enjoy upper bounds on their cumulative
regret √
which are sub-linear in the number T of iterations, and a regret lower bound
of Ω( T ) has been derived which represents the unavoidable regrets for any
classical BO algorithm. Recent works on quantum bandits have shown that with
the aid of quantum computing, it is possible to achieve tighter regret upper bounds
better than their corresponding classical lower bounds. However, these works are
restricted to either multi-armed or linear bandits, and are hence not able to solve
sophisticated real-world problems with non-linear reward functions. To this end,
we introduce the quantum-Gaussian process-upper confidence bound (Q-GP-UCB)
algorithm. To the best of our knowledge, our Q-GP-UCB is the first BO algorithm
able to achieve a regret upper bound of√O(poly log T ), which is significantly
smaller than its regret lower bound of Ω( T ) in the classical setting. Moreover,
thanks to our novel analysis of the confidence ellipsoid, our Q-GP-UCB with the
linear kernel achieves a smaller regret than the quantum linear UCB algorithm
from the previous work. We use simulations, as well as an experiment using a real
quantum computer, to verify that the theoretical quantum speedup achieved by our
Q-GP-UCB is also potentially relevant in practice.

1

Introduction

Kernelized bandits [9], also named Bayesian optimization (BO) [10, 11, 16, 19, 32], has been an
immensely popular method for various applications involving the optimization of complicated blackbox reward functions. For example, BO has been extensively used to optimize the hyperparameters of
machine learning (ML) models [12, 14, 22], the parameters of computationally expensive simulators
[5], etc. In every iteration t = 1, . . . , T , BO chooses an arm/input xt and then queries the reward
function f for a noisy observation yt = f (xt ) + ζt where ζt is a sub-Gaussian noise. In addition to its
impressive practical performance, BO is also equipped with solid theoretical guarantees. A number
of commonly adopted BO algorithms have been theoretically shown to enjoy sub-linear upper bounds
on their cumulative regret [9, 33], which ensures that they are guaranteed to be able to find the global
optimum of the reward function√as T (i.e., the total number of function queries) increases. On the
other hand, a lower bound of Ω( T ) (ignoring additional log factors) on the cumulative regret of BO
has been shown [31], which represents the fundamental limit of any BO algorithm (in the classical
setting).
In other words, no classical BO algorithm can achieve a cumulative regret smaller than
√
Ω( T ). This naturally begs the question: can we leverage more advanced technology to go beyond
* Equal contribution.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

