Mix-of-Show: Decentralized Low-Rank Adaptation for
Multi-Concept Customization of Diffusion Models

Yuchao Gu1 , Xintao Wang3 , Jay Zhangjie Wu1 , Yujun Shi2 , Yunpeng Chen2 ,
Zihan Fan2 , Wuyou Xiao2 , Rui Zhao1 , Shuning Chang1 , Weijia Wu1 ,
Yixiao Ge3 , Ying Shan3 , Mike Zheng Shou1∗
1

Show Lab, 2 National University of Singapore

3

ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

https://showlab.github.io/Mix-of-Show

Abstract
Public large-scale text-to-image diffusion models, such as Stable Diffusion, have
gained significant attention from the community. These models can be easily
customized for new concepts using low-rank adaptations (LoRAs). However,
the utilization of multiple concept LoRAs to jointly support multiple customized
concepts presents a challenge. We refer to this scenario as decentralized multiconcept customization, which involves single-client concept tuning and center-node
concept fusion. In this paper, we propose a new framework called Mix-of-Show that
addresses the challenges of decentralized multi-concept customization, including
concept conflicts resulting from existing single-client LoRA tuning and identity loss
during model fusion. Mix-of-Show adopts an embedding-decomposed LoRA (EDLoRA) for single-client tuning and gradient fusion for the center node to preserve
the in-domain essence of single concepts and support theoretically limitless concept
fusion. Additionally, we introduce regionally controllable sampling, which extends
spatially controllable sampling (e.g., ControlNet and T2I-Adapter) to address
attribute binding and missing object problems in multi-concept sampling. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that Mix-of-Show is capable of composing multiple
customized concepts with high fidelity, including characters, objects, and scenes.

1

Introduction

Pretrain Models - v1
Open-source text-to-image diffusion models,
such as Stable Diffusion [1], empower comClient-4
Client-5
Client-3
Client-1
Client-2
…
munity users to create customized models by
collecting personalized concept images and
…
fine-tuning them with low-rank adaptation
Private
(LoRA) [2, 3]. These tailored LoRA models
Shared
ED-LoRA
ED-LoRA
ED-LoRA
ED-LoRA
ED-LoRA
achieve unparalleled quality for specific con…
cepts through meticulous data selection, preGradient Fusion Update
processing, and hyperparameter tuning. While
existing concept LoRAs serve as plug-and-play
Pretrain Models - v2
plugins for pretrained models, there are still chalSample
lenges in utilizing multiple concept LoRAs to
extend the pretrained model and enable joint Figure 1: Illustration of decentralized multicomposition of those concepts. We refer to this concept customization via Mix-of-Show.
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

