Explainable Brain Age Prediction using coVariance
Neural Networks
Saurabh Sihag† , Gonzalo Mateos‡ , Corey McMillan† , Alejandro Ribeiro†
†

University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
‡
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY.

Abstract
In computational neuroscience, there has been an increased interest in developing
machine learning algorithms that leverage brain imaging data to provide estimates
of “brain age” for an individual. Importantly, the discordance between brain
age and chronological age (referred to as “brain age gap”) can capture accelerated aging due to adverse health conditions and therefore, can reflect increased
vulnerability towards neurological disease or cognitive impairments. However,
widespread adoption of brain age for clinical decision support has been hindered
due to lack of transparency and methodological justifications in most existing brain
age prediction algorithms. In this paper, we leverage coVariance neural networks
(VNN) to propose an explanation-driven and anatomically interpretable framework
for brain age prediction using cortical thickness features. Specifically, our brain
age prediction framework extends beyond the coarse metric of brain age gap in
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and we make two important observations: (i) VNNs can
assign anatomical interpretability to elevated brain age gap in AD by identifying
contributing brain regions, (ii) the interpretability offered by VNNs is contingent
on their ability to exploit specific eigenvectors of the anatomical covariance matrix.
Together, these observations facilitate an explainable and anatomically interpretable
perspective to the task of brain age prediction.

1

Introduction

Aging is characterized by progressive changes in the anatomy and function of the brain [1] that
can be captured by different modalities of neuroimaging [2, 3]. Importantly, individuals can age
at variable rates, a phenomenon described as “biological aging" [4]. Numerous existing studies
based on a large spectrum of machine learning approaches study brain-predicted biological age, also
referred to as brain age, which is derived from neuroimaging data [5–12]. Accelerated aging, i.e.,
when biological age is elevated as compared to chronological age (time since birth), may predict
age-related vulnerabilities like risk for cognitive decline or neurological conditions like Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) [13, 14]. In this domain, the metric of interest is brain age gap, i.e., the difference
between brain age and chronological age. We use the notation ∆-Age to refer to the brain age gap.
Inferring ∆-age from neuroimaging data presents a unique statistical challenge as it is essentially a
qualitative metric with no ground truth and is expected to be elevated in individuals with underlying
neurodegenerative condition as compared to the healthy population[12, 15]. The existing machine
learning approaches for inferring ∆-Age commonly rely on regression models trained to predict
chronological age for a healthy population. Under the hypothesis that such models can detect
accelerated aging, they are applied to cohorts representing adverse health conditions. From a
statistical perspective, the residuals of the regression models inform the ∆-Age estimates with the
Code: https://github.com/sihags/VNN_Brain_Age
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

