Improved Bayes Risk Can Yield Reduced Social
Welfare Under Competition
Meena Jagadeesan
UC Berkeley
mjagadeesan@berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
UC Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Jacob Steinhardt⇤
UC Berkeley
jsteinhardt@berkeley.edu

Nika Haghtalab⇤
UC Berkeley
nika@berkeley.edu

Abstract
As the scale of machine learning models increases, trends such as scaling laws
anticipate consistent downstream improvements in predictive accuracy. However,
these trends take the perspective of a single model-provider in isolation, while
in reality providers often compete with each other for users. In this work, we
demonstrate that competition can fundamentally alter the behavior of these scaling
trends, even causing overall predictive accuracy across users to be non-monotonic
or decreasing with scale. We define a model of competition for classification
tasks, and use data representations as a lens for studying the impact of increases
in scale. We find many settings where improving data representation quality
(as measured by Bayes risk) decreases the overall predictive accuracy across
users (i.e., social welfare) for a marketplace of competing model-providers. Our
examples range from closed-form formulas in simple settings to simulations with
pretrained representations on CIFAR-10. At a conceptual level, our work suggests
that favorable scaling trends for individual model-providers need not translate to
downstream improvements in social welfare in marketplaces with multiple model
providers.

1

Introduction

Scaling trends in machine learning suggest that increasing the scale of a system consistently improves
predictive accuracy. For example, scaling laws illustrate that increasing the number of model
parameters [Kaplan et al., 2020, Sharma and Kaplan, 2020, Bahri et al., 2021] and amount of data
[Hoffmann et al., 2022] can reliably improve model performance, leading to better representations
and thus better predictions for downstream tasks [Hernandez et al., 2021].
However, these scaling laws typically take the perspective of a single model-provider in isolation,
when in reality, model-providers often compete with each other for users. For example, in digital
marketplaces, multiple online platforms may provide similar services (e.g., Google search vs. Bing,
Spotify vs. Pandora, Apple Maps vs. Google) and thus compete for users on the basis of prediction
quality. A distinguishing feature of competing platforms is that users can switch between platforms
and select a platform that offers them the highest predictive accuracy for their specific requests. This
breaks the direct connection between predictive accuracy of a single platform in isolation and social
welfare across competing platforms, and raises the question: what happens to scaling laws when
model-providers compete with each other?
⇤

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

