Large Graph Property Prediction via
Graph Segment Training

Kaidi Cao1∗, Phitchaya Mangpo Phothilimthana2 , Sami Abu-El-Haija2 , Dustin Zelle2 ,
Yanqi Zhou2 , Charith Mendis3†, Jure Leskovec1 , Bryan Perozzi2
1
Stanford University, 2 Google, 3 UIUC

Abstract
Learning to predict properties of a large graph is challenging because each prediction requires the knowledge of an entire graph, while the amount of memory
available during training is bounded. Here we propose Graph Segment Training
(GST), a general framework that utilizes a divide-and-conquer approach to allow
learning large graph property prediction with a constant memory footprint. GST
first divides a large graph into segments and then backpropagates through only
a few segments sampled per training iteration. We refine the GST paradigm by
introducing a historical embedding table to efficiently obtain embeddings for segments not sampled for backpropagation. To mitigate the staleness of historical
embeddings, we design two novel techniques. First, we finetune the prediction
head to fix the input distribution shift. Second, we introduce Stale Embedding
Dropout to drop some stale embeddings during training to reduce bias. We evaluate
our complete method GST+EFD (with all the techniques together) on two large
graph property prediction benchmarks: MalNet and TpuGraphs. Our experiments
show that GST+EFD is both memory-efficient and fast, while offering a slight
boost on test accuracy over a typical full graph training regime.

1

Introduction

Graph property prediction is a task of predicting a certain property or a characteristic of an entire
graph [3]. Important applications include, predicting properties of molecules [32, 12], predicting
properties of programs/code [1, 12, 6, 41] and predicting properties of organisms based on their
protein-protein interaction networks [27, 42].
These popular graph property prediction tasks deal with relatively small graphs, so the scalability
issue arises only from a large number of (small) graphs.
However, graph property prediction tasks also face another scalability challenge, which arises due to
the large size of each individual graph, as some graphs can have millions or even billions of nodes
and edges [10]. Training typical Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to classify such large graphs can
be computationally infeasible, as the memory needed scales at least linearly with the size of the
graph [40]. This presents a challenge as even most powerful GPUs, which are optimized for handling
large amounts of data, only have a limited amount of memory available.
Previous efforts to improve scalability of GNNs have mostly focused on developing methods for
node-level and link-level prediction tasks, which can be performed using sampled subgraphs [11, 5,
13, 38, 43, 2, 21]. However, there is a lack of research on how to train scalable models for property
prediction of large graphs. Training a model on a sampled subgraph alone is insufficient for these
∗
†

The work was partially completed during Kaidi Cao’s internship at Google.
The work was partially completed when Charith Mendis was a visiting researcher at Google.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

