MonoUNI: A Unified Vehicle and Infrastructure-side
Monocular 3D Object Detection Network with
Sufficient Depth Clues

Jinrang Jia∗
Baidu Inc.
Beijing, China
jiajinrang@baidu.com

Zhenjia Li∗
Baidu Inc.
Beijing, China
lizhenjia@baidu.com

Yifeng Shi†
Baidu Inc.
Beijing, China
shiyifeng@baidu.com

Abstract
Monocular 3D detection of vehicle and infrastructure sides are two important
topics in autonomous driving. Due to diverse sensor installations and focal lengths,
researchers are faced with the challenge of constructing algorithms for the two
topics based on different prior knowledge. In this paper, by taking into account the
diversity of pitch angles and focal lengths, we propose a unified optimization target
named normalized depth, which realizes the unification of 3D detection problems
for the two sides. Furthermore, to enhance the accuracy of monocular 3D detection,
3D normalized cube depth of obstacle is developed to promote the learning of
depth information. We posit that the richness of depth clues is a pivotal factor
impacting the detection performance on both the vehicle and infrastructure sides. A
richer set of depth clues facilitates the model to learn better spatial knowledge, and
the 3D normalized cube depth offers sufficient depth clues. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Without introducing any extra
information, our method, named MonoUNI, achieves state-of-the-art performance
on five widely used monocular 3D detection benchmarks, including Rope3D and
DAIR-V2X-I for the infrastructure side, KITTI and Waymo for the vehicle side,
and nuScenes for the cross-dataset evaluation.

1

Introduction

Accurate 3D detection [14, 21, 25] is crucial for autonomous driving. Although LIDAR sensors
[8, 18, 47, 51] provide high precision, camera sensors [7, 39, 52] are cost-effective and have a wider
range of perception. Typically, autonomous driving systems employ frontal-view cameras mounted
on the vehicle for 3D detection. As intelligent transportation continues to advance, there is increasing
interest in using infrastructure-side cameras for 3D detection [13, 49, 53].
Due to the different installations and focal lengths between the vehicle and infrastructure-side
cameras, researchers usually design algorithms to solve these two problems separately, which adds
an additional application limitation. Fig. 1 illustrates the imaging process and the corresponding
visual feature under different installations and focal lengths. With respect to the different installations,
most vehicle-side cameras are installed on the top of the vehicle with a near-zero pitch angle, leading
to a prior assumption that the optical axis is parallel to the ground. Most vehicle-side methods
[4, 19, 27] are designed based on this assumption. In contrast, the infrastructure-side cameras, which
are mounted on poles, typically have large pitch angles, rendering most of the existing vehicle-side
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

