Expert load matters: operating networks at high
accuracy and low manual effort

Sara Sangalli
Computer Vision Lab
ETH Zürich
sara.sangalli@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Ertunc Erdil
Computer Vision Lab
ETH Zürich

Ender Konukoglu
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich
The LOOP Zürich – Medical Research Center, Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract
In human-AI collaboration systems for critical applications, in order to ensure
minimal error, users should set an operating point based on model confidence
to determine when the decision should be delegated to human experts. Samples
for which model confidence is lower than the operating point would be manually
analysed by experts to avoid mistakes. Such systems can become truly useful
only if they consider two aspects: models should be confident only for samples
for which they are accurate, and the number of samples delegated to experts
should be minimized. The latter aspect is especially crucial for applications where
available expert time is limited and expensive, such as healthcare. The trade-off
between the model accuracy and the number of samples delegated to experts can
be represented by a curve that is similar to an ROC curve, which we refer to as
confidence operating characteristic (COC) curve. In this paper, we argue that deep
neural networks should be trained by taking into account both accuracy and expert
load and, to that end, propose a new complementary loss function for classification
that maximizes the area under this COC curve. This promotes simultaneously the
increase in network accuracy and the reduction in number of samples delegated to
humans. We perform experiments on multiple computer vision and medical image
datasets for classification. Our results demonstrate that the proposed loss improves
classification accuracy and delegates less number of decisions to experts, achieves
better out-of-distribution samples detection and on par calibration performance
compared to existing loss functions.1

1

Introduction

Artificial intelligence (AI) systems based on deep neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art
results by reaching or even surpassing human-level performance in many predictive tasks [6; 33; 2; 36].
Despite the great potential of neural networks for automation, there are pitfalls when using them
in a fully automated setting, especially pertinent for safety-critical applications, such as healthcare
[17; 32; 34]. Human-AI collaboration aims at remedying such issues by keeping humans in the loop
and building systems that take advantage of both [29]. An example of such human-AI collaboration
is hate speech detection for social media [3], where neural networks could reduce the load of manual
analysis of contents required by humans. Healthcare is another relevant application [5; 22], . For
1

Code is available at: https://github.com/salusanga/aucoc_loss.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

