Physion++: Evaluating Physical Scene Understanding
that Requires Online Inference of Different Physical
Properties

Hsiao-Yu Tung1,2∗ Mingyu Ding1,3∗ Zhenfang Chen4 Daniel M. Bear2 Chuang Gan4,5
Joshua B. Tenenbaum1 Daniel L. K. Yamins2 Judith Fan2 Kevin A. Smith1
1
MIT 2 Stanford 3 UC Berkeley 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 5 UMass Amherst
{sfish0101, kevin.smith3}@gmail.com myding@berkeley.edu jefan@stanford.edu

Abstract
General physical scene understanding requires more than simply localizing and
recognizing objects – it requires knowledge that objects can have different latent
properties (e.g., mass or elasticity), and that those properties affect the outcome
of physical events. While there has been great progress in physical and video
prediction models in recent years, benchmarks to test their performance typically do
not require an understanding that objects have individual physical properties, or at
best test only those properties that are directly observable (e.g., size or color). This
work proposes a novel dataset and benchmark, termed Physion++, that rigorously
evaluates visual physical prediction in artificial systems under circumstances where
those predictions rely on accurate estimates of the latent physical properties of
objects in the scene. Specifically, we test scenarios where accurate prediction relies
on estimates of properties such as mass, friction, elasticity, and deformability, and
where the values of those properties can only be inferred by observing how objects
move and interact with other objects or fluids. We evaluate the performance of a
number of state-of-the-art prediction models that span a variety of levels of learning
vs. built-in knowledge, and compare that performance to a set of human predictions.
We find that models that have been trained using standard regimes and datasets do
not spontaneously learn to make inferences about latent properties, but also that
models that encode objectness and physical states tend to make better predictions.
However, there is still a huge gap between all models and human performance, and
all models’ predictions correlate poorly with those made by humans, suggesting
that no state-of-the-art model is learning to make physical predictions in a humanlike way. These results show that current deep learning models that succeed in
some settings nevertheless fail to achieve human-level physical prediction in other
cases, especially those where latent property inference is required. Project page:
https://dingmyu.github.io/physion_v2/

1

Introduction

The human visual system allows us to perceive rich contents in the dynamically changing physical
world – from a static scene, we see objects, their shapes, sizes, colors, and textures. From objects’
motions, we further see their mechanical properties, e.g., mass, friction, and elasticity, much more
beyond simple object appearance. Knowing these mechanical properties enables us to adjust our
prediction of the likely future – for instance, if we see a box sink into a couch cushion we might infer
it is filled and so will be heavy when we pick it up. Any artificial system that is designed for general
∗

Equal contribution. This work was done when Mingyu was at MIT.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

