Boosting Adversarial Transferability by
Achieving Flat Local Maxima

Zhijin Ge1∗, Hongying Liu2∗, Xiaosen Wang3∗, Fanhua Shang4†, Yuanyuan Liu1†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University
2
Medical College, Tianjin University, China
3
Huawei Singular Security Lab
4
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
zhijinge@stu.xidian.edu.cn, hyliu2009@tju.edu.cn
xiaosen@hust.edu.cn, fhshang@tju.edu.cn, yyliu@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Transfer-based attack adopts the adversarial examples generated on the surrogate
model to attack various models, making it applicable in the physical world and
attracting increasing interest. Recently, various adversarial attacks have emerged to
boost adversarial transferability from different perspectives. In this work, inspired
by the observation that flat local minima are correlated with good generalization,
we assume and empirically validate that adversarial examples at a flat local region
tend to have good transferability by introducing a penalized gradient norm to
the original loss function. Since directly optimizing the gradient regularization
norm is computationally expensive and intractable for generating adversarial examples, we propose an approximation optimization method to simplify the gradient
update of the objective function. Specifically, we randomly sample an example and adopt a first-order procedure to approximate the Hessian/vector product,
which makes computing more efficient by interpolating two neighboring gradients. Meanwhile, in order to obtain a more stable gradient direction, we randomly
sample multiple examples and average the gradients of these examples to reduce
the variance due to random sampling during the iterative process. Extensive experimental results on the ImageNet-compatible dataset show that the proposed
method can generate adversarial examples at flat local regions, and significantly
improve the adversarial transferability on either normally trained models or adversarially trained models than the state-of-the-art attacks. Our codes are available at:
https://github.com/Trustworthy-AI-Group/PGN.

1

Introduction

A great number of works have shown that Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial
examples [10, 16, 38, 26, 50], which are generated by applying human-imperceptible perturbations
on clean input to result in misclassification. Furthermore, adversarial examples have an intriguing
property of transferability [10, 11, 31, 61, 59, 57], i.e., the adversarial example generated from the
surrogate model can also misclass other models. The existence of transferability makes adversarial
attacks practical to real-world applications because hackers do not need to know any information
about the target model, which introduces a series of serious security problems in security-sensitive
applications such as self-driving [65, 13] and face-recognition [44, 30].
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

