A Theoretical Analysis of the Test Error of
Finite-Rank Kernel Ridge Regression

Tin Sum Cheng Aurelien Lucchi Ivan Dokmanić
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of Basel
{tinsum.cheng, aurelien.lucchi, ivan.dokmanic}@unibas.ch
Anastasis Kratsios
Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
McMaster University and Vector Institute,
kratsioa@mcmaster.ca

David Belius
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
UniDistance Suisse
david.belius@cantab.ch

Abstract
Existing statistical learning guarantees for general kernel regressors often yield
loose bounds when used with finite-rank kernels. Yet, finite-rank kernels naturally
appear in several machine learning problems, e.g. when fine-tuning a pre-trained
deep neural network’s last layer to adapt it to a novel task when performing transfer
learning. We address this gap for finite-rank kernel ridge regression (KRR) by
deriving sharp non-asymptotic upper and lower bounds for the KRR test error of
any finite-rank KRR. Our bounds are tighter than previously derived bounds on
finite-rank KRR, and unlike comparable results, they also remain valid for any
regularization parameters.

1

Introduction

Generalization is a central theme in statistical learning theory. The recent renewed interest in kernel
methods, especially in Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR), is largely due to the fact that deep neural
network (DNN) training can be approximated using kernels under appropriate conditions [19, 3, 10],
in which the test error is more tractable analytically and thus enjoys stronger theoretical guarantees.
However, many prior results have been derived under conditions incompatible with practical settings.
For instance [24, 26, 27, 29] give asymptotic bounds on the KRR test error, which requires the input
dimension d to tend to infinity. In reality, the input dimension of the data set and the target function is
typically finite. A technical difficulty to provide a sharp non-asymptotic bound on the KRR test error
comes from the infinite dimensionality of the kernel 1 . While this curse of dimensionality may be
unavoidable for infinite-rank kernels (at least without additional restrictions), one may likely derive
tighter bounds in a finite-rank setting. Therefore, other works [6, 2] focused on a setting where the
kernel is of finite-rank, where non-asymptotic bounds and exact formula of test error can be derived.
Since different generalization behaviours are observed depending on whether the rank of the kernel rank M is smaller than the sample size N , one typically differentiates between the underparameterized (M < N ) and over-parameterized regime (M > N ). We focus on the former due
to its relevance to several applications in the field of machine learning, including random feature
1
For a fixed input dimension d and sample size N , there exists an (infinite-dimensional) subspace in the
feature space in which we cannot control the feature vector.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

