Towards Self-Interpretable
Graph-Level Anomaly Detection

Yixin Liu1 , Kaize Ding2 , Qinghua Lu3 , Fuyi Li4,5 , Leo Yu Zhang6 , Shirui Pan6∗
1
Monash University, 2 Northwestern University, 3 Data61, CSIRO,
4
Northwest A&F University, 5 The University of Adelaide, 6 Griffith University
yixin.liu@monash.edu, kaize.ding@northwestern.edu, qinghua.lu@data61.csiro.au,
fuyi.li@nwsuaf.edu.cn, leo.zhang@griffith.edu.au, s.pan@griffth.edu.au

Abstract
Graph-level anomaly detection (GLAD) aims to identify graphs that exhibit notable
dissimilarity compared to the majority in a collection. However, current works
primarily focus on evaluating graph-level abnormality while failing to provide
meaningful explanations for the predictions, which largely limits their reliability
and application scope. In this paper, we investigate a new challenging problem,
explainable GLAD, where the learning objective is to predict the abnormality
of each graph sample with corresponding explanations, i.e., the vital subgraph
that leads to the predictions. To address this challenging problem, we propose
a Self-Interpretable Graph aNomaly dETection model (SIGNET for short) that
detects anomalous graphs as well as generates informative explanations simultaneously. Specifically, we first introduce the multi-view subgraph information
bottleneck (MSIB) framework, serving as the design basis of our self-interpretable
GLAD approach. This way SIGNET is able to not only measure the abnormality of
each graph based on cross-view mutual information but also provide informative
graph rationales by extracting bottleneck subgraphs from the input graph and its
dual hypergraph in a self-supervised way. Extensive experiments on 16 datasets
demonstrate the anomaly detection capability and self-interpretability of SIGNET.

1

Introduction

Graphs are ubiquitous data structures in numerous domains, including chemistry, traffic, and social
networks [1, 2, 3]. Among machine learning tasks for graph data, graph-level anomaly detection
(GLAD) is a challenge that aims to identify the graphs that exhibit substantial dissimilarity from the
majority of graphs in a collection [4]. GLAD presents great potential for various real-world scenarios,
such as toxic molecule recognition [5] and pathogenic brain mechanism discovery [6]. Recently,
GLAD has drawn increasing research attention, with advanced techniques being applied to this task,
e.g., knowledge distillation [4] and one-class classification [7].
Despite their promising performance, existing works [4, 7, 8, 9] mainly aim to answer how to
predict abnormal graphs by designing various GLAD architectures; however, they fail to provide
explanations for the prediction, i.e., illustrating why these graphs are recognized as anomalies. In
real-world applications, it is of great significance to make anomaly detection models explainable [10].
From the perspective of models, valid explainability makes GLAD models trustworthy to meet
safety and security requirements [11]. For example, an explainable fraud detection model can
pinpoint specific fraudulent behaviors when identifying defrauders, which enhances the reliability
of predictions. From the perspective of data, an anomaly detection model with explainability can
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

