Survival Instinct in Offline Reinforcement Learning

Anqi Li
University of Washington

Dipendra Misra
Microsoft Research

Andrey Kolobov
Microsoft Research

Ching-An Cheng
Microsoft Research

Abstract
We present a novel observation about the behavior of offline reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithms: on many benchmark datasets, offline RL can produce wellperforming and safe policies even when trained with “wrong” reward labels, such
as those that are zero everywhere or are negatives of the true rewards. This phenomenon cannot be easily explained by offline RL’s return maximization objective.
Moreover, it gives offline RL a degree of robustness that is uncharacteristic of its
online RL counterparts, which are known to be sensitive to reward design. We
demonstrate that this surprising robustness property is attributable to an interplay
between the notion of pessimism in offline RL algorithms and certain implicit
biases in common data collection practices. As we prove in this work, pessimism
endows the agent with a survival instinct, i.e., an incentive to stay within the
data support in the long term, while the limited and biased data coverage further
constrains the set of survival policies. Formally, given a reward class — which
may not even contain the true reward — we identify conditions on the training data
distribution that enable offline RL to learn a near-optimal and safe policy from any
reward within the class. We argue that the survival instinct should be taken into
account when interpreting results from existing offline RL benchmarks and when
creating future ones. Our empirical and theoretical results suggest a new paradigm
for offline RL, whereby an agent is “nudged” to learn a desirable behavior with
imperfect reward but purposely biased data coverage. Please visit our website
https://survival-instinct.github.io for accompanied code and videos.

1

Introduction

In offline reinforcement learning (RL), an agent optimizes its performance given an offline dataset.
Despite being its main objective, we find that return maximization is not sufficient for explaining
some of its empirical behaviors. In particular, in many existing benchmark datasets, we observe that
offline RL can produce surprisingly good policies even when trained on utterly wrong reward labels.
In Fig. 1, we present such results on the hopper task from D4RL [1], a popular offline RL benchmark,
using a state-of-the-art offline RL algorithm ATAC [2]. The goal of an RL agent in the hopper task
is to move forward as fast as possible while avoiding falling down. We trained ATAC agents on
the original datasets and on three modified versions of each dataset, with “wrong” rewards: 1) zero:
assigning a zero reward to all transitions, 2) random: labeling each transition with a reward sampled
uniformly from [0, 1], and 3) negative: using the negation of the true reward. Although these wrong
rewards contain no information about the underlying task or are even misleading, the policies learned
from them in Fig. 1 (left) often perform significantly better than the behavior (data collection) policy
and the behavior cloning (BC) policy. They even outperform policies trained with the true reward
(denoted as original in Fig. 1) in some cases. This is puzzling, since RL is notorious for being
sensitive to reward mis-specification [3–6]: in general, maximizing the wrong rewards with RL
leads to sub-optimal performance that can be worse than simply performing BC. In addition, these
wrong-reward policies demonstrate a “safe” behavior, which keeps the hopper from falling down for
a longer period than other comparators in Fig. 1 (right). This is yet another peculiarity hard to link to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

