Optimal Time Complexities of
Parallel Stochastic Optimization Methods
Under a Fixed Computation Model

Alexander Tyurin
KAUST
Saudi Arabia
alexandertiurin@gmail.com

Peter Richtárik
KAUST
Saudi Arabia
richtarik@gmail.com

Abstract
Parallelization is a popular strategy for improving the performance of iterative
algorithms. Optimization methods are no exception: design of efficient parallel
optimization methods and tight analysis of their theoretical properties are important
research endeavors. While the minimax complexities are well known for sequential
optimization methods, the theory of parallel optimization methods is less explored.
In this paper, we propose a new protocol that generalizes the classical oracle framework approach. Using this protocol, we establish minimax complexities for parallel
optimization methods that have access to an unbiased stochastic gradient oracle
with bounded variance. We consider a fixed computation model characterized
by each worker requiring a fixed but worker-dependent time to calculate stochastic gradient. We prove lower bounds and develop optimal algorithms that attain
them. Our results have surprising consequences for the literature of asynchronous
optimization methods.

1

Introduction

We consider the nonconvex optimization problem
n
o
min f (x) := Eξ∼D [f (x; ξ)] ,
x∈Q

(1)

where f : Rd × Sξ → R, Q ⊆ Rd , and ξ is a random variable with some distribution D on Sξ . In
machine learning, Sξ could be the space of all possible data, D is the distribution of the training
dataset, and f (·, ξ) is the loss of a data sample ξ. In this paper we address the following natural setup:
(i) n workers are available to work in parallel,
(ii) the ith worker requires τi seconds1 to calculate a stochastic gradient of f .
The function f is L–smooth and lower-bounded (see Assumptions 7.1–7.2), and stochastic gradients
are unbiased and σ 2 -variance-bounded (see Assumption 7.3).
1.1

Classical theory

In the nonconvex setting, gradient descent (GD) is an optimal method with respect to the number of
gradient (∇f ) calls (Lan, 2020; Nesterov, 2018; Carmon et al., 2020) for finding an approximately
stationary point of f . Obviously, a key issue with GD is that it requires access to the exact gradients
1

Or any other unit of time.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

