PTQD: Accurate Post-Training Quantization for
Diffusion Models
Yefei He1

Luping Liu1

Jing Liu2

Weijia Wu1

Hong Zhou1†

Bohan Zhuang2†

1

2

Zhejiang University, China
ZIP Lab, Monash University, Australia

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently dominated image synthesis and other related generative tasks. However, the iterative denoising process is expensive in computations
at inference time, making diffusion models less practical for low-latency and scalable real-world applications. Post-training quantization of diffusion models can
significantly reduce the model size and accelerate the sampling process without
requiring any re-training. Nonetheless, applying existing post-training quantization
methods directly to low-bit diffusion models can significantly impair the quality of
generated samples. Specifically, for each denoising step, quantization noise leads to
deviations in the estimated mean and mismatches with the predetermined variance
schedule. Moreover, as the sampling process proceeds, the quantization noise
may accumulate, resulting in a low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) during the later
denoising steps. To address these challenges, we propose a unified formulation
for the quantization noise and diffusion perturbed noise in the quantized denoising
process. Specifically, we first disentangle the quantization noise into its correlated
and residual uncorrelated parts regarding its full-precision counterpart. The correlated part can be easily corrected by estimating the correlation coefficient. For
the uncorrelated part, we subtract the bias from the quantized results to correct the
mean deviation and calibrate the denoising variance schedule to absorb the excess
variance resulting from quantization. Moreover, we introduce a mixed-precision
scheme for selecting the optimal bitwidth for each denoising step, which prioritizes lower bitwidths to expedite early denoising steps, while ensuring that higher
bitwidths maintain a high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the later steps. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms previous post-training quantized diffusion models in generating high-quality samples, with only a 0.06 increase
in FID score compared to full-precision LDM-4 on ImageNet 256 × 256, while
saving 19.9× bit operations. Code is available at https://github.com/ziplab/PTQD.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable ability in generating high-quality samples in multiple
fields [10, 5, 58, 18, 38, 30, 13, 52, 8, 49]. Compared to generative adversarial networks (GANs) [15]
and variational autoencoders (VAEs) [27], diffusion models do not face the issue of mode collapse
and posterior collapse, thus training is more stable. Nonetheless, the application of diffusion models
is limited by two major bottlenecks. Firstly, diffusion models typically require hundreds of denoising
steps to generate high-quality samples, making the process significantly slower than that of GANs.
To address this, many studies [50, 36, 2, 28, 34] have proposed advanced training-free sampler to
reduce the number of denoising iterations. Among them, a recent study DPM-solver [36] curtails
the denoising process to ten steps by analytically computing the linear part of the diffusion ordinary
†

Corresponding author. Email: zhouh@mail.bme.zju.edu.cn, bohan.zhuang@gmail.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

