STREAMER: Streaming Representation Learning and
Event Segmentation in a Hierarchical Manner

Ramy Mounir
Sujal Vijayaraghavan
Sudeep Sarkar
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Florida, Tampa
{ramy, sujal, sarkar}@usf.edu

Abstract
We present a novel self-supervised approach for hierarchical representation learning and segmentation of perceptual inputs in a streaming fashion. Our research
addresses how to semantically group streaming inputs into chunks at various levels
of a hierarchy while simultaneously learning, for each chunk, robust global representations throughout the domain. To achieve this, we propose STREAMER,
an architecture that is trained layer-by-layer, adapting to the complexity of the
input domain. In our approach, each layer is trained with two primary objectives:
making accurate predictions into the future and providing necessary information to
other levels for achieving the same objective. The event hierarchy is constructed
by detecting prediction error peaks at different levels, where a detected boundary triggers a bottom-up information flow. At an event boundary, the encoded
representation of inputs at one layer becomes the input to a higher-level layer.
Additionally, we design a communication module that facilitates top-down and
bottom-up exchange of information during the prediction process. Notably, our
model is fully self-supervised and trained in a streaming manner, enabling a single
pass on the training data. This means that the model encounters each input only
once and does not store the data. We evaluate the performance of our model
on the egocentric EPIC-KITCHENS dataset, specifically focusing on temporal
event segmentation. Furthermore, we conduct event retrieval experiments using
the learned representations to demonstrate the high quality of our video event
representations. Illustration videos and code are available on our project page:
https://ramymounir.com/publications/streamer.

1

Computational theory

In temporal event analysis, an event is defined as “a segment in time that is perceived by an observer
to have a beginning and an end” [59]. Events could be described by a sequence of constituent events
of relatively finer detail, thus forming a hierarchical structure. The end of an event and the beginning
of the next is a segmentation boundary, marking an event transition. Segmentation boundaries in
the lower levels of the hierarchy represent event transitions at relatively granular scales, whereas
boundaries in higher levels denote higher-level event transitions.
We propose a structurally self-evolving model to learn the hierarchical representation of such events
in a self-supervised streaming fashion through predictive learning. Structural evolution refers to the
model’s capability to create learnable layers ad hoc during training. One may argue that existing
deep learning architectures are compositional in nature, where high-level features are composed of
lower-level features, forming a hierarchy of features. However, it is important to distinguish between
a feature hierarchy and an event hierarchy: an event hierarchy is similar to a part/whole hierarchy in
the sense that each event has clear boundaries that reflect the beginning and the end of a coherent
chunk of information. One may also view the hierarchy as a redundancy pooling mechanism, where
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

