On the Size and Approximation Error of Distilled Sets

Alaa Maalouf∗
MIT CSAIL

Murad Tukan∗
DataHeroes

Noel Loo
MIT CSAIL

Ramin Hasani
MIT CSAIL

Mathias Lechner
MIT CSAIL

Daniela Rus
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
Dataset Distillation is the task of synthesizing small datasets from large ones while
still retaining comparable predictive accuracy to the original uncompressed dataset.
Despite significant empirical progress in recent years, there is little understanding
of the theoretical limitations/guarantees of dataset distillation, specifically, what
excess risk is achieved by distillation compared to the original dataset, and how
large are distilled datasets? In this work, we take a theoretical view on kernel ridge
regression (KRR) based methods of dataset distillation such as Kernel Inducing
Points. By transforming ridge regression in random Fourier features (RFF) space,
we provide the first proof of the existence of small (size) distilled datasets and
their corresponding excess risk for shift-invariant kernels. We prove that a small
set of instances exists in the original input space such that its solution in the RFF
space coincides with the solution of the original data. We further show that a
KRR solution can be generated using this distilled set of instances which gives an
approximation towards the KRR solution optimized on the full input data. The size
of this set is linear in the dimension of the RFF space of the input set or alternatively
near linear in the number of effective degrees of freedom, which is a function of
the kernel, number of datapoints, and the regularization parameter λ. The error
bound of this distilled set is also a function of λ. We verify our bounds analytically
and empirically.

1

Introduction

Motivated by the growing data demands of modern deep learning, dataset distillation [ZB21,
NNXL21, ZNB22, WZTE18] aims to summarize large datasets into significantly smaller synthetic
distilled datasets, which when trained on retain high predictive accuracy, comparable to the original
dataset. These distilled datasets have applications in continual learning [ZNB22, SCCB22], architecture search [SRL+ 19], and privacy preservation [CKF22]. Recent years have seen the development
of numerous distillation algorithms, but despite this progress, the field has remained largely empirical.
Specifically, there is little understanding of what makes one dataset “easier to distill" than another, or
whether such small synthetic datasets even exist.
This work aims to fill this gap by providing the first bounds on the sufficient size and relative error
associated with distilled datasets. Noting prior work relating neural network training to kernel
ridge regression (KRR), we consider dataset distillation in the kernel ridge regression settings with
shift-invariant kernels. By casting the problem into the Random Fourier Feature (RFF) space, we
show that: The size and relative error of distilled datasets is governed by the kernel’s “number
of effective degrees of freedom", dλk . Specifically, in Section 4, we show that distilled sets of size
Ω(dλk log dλk ), exist, with 12λ + 2Lλ predictive error on the training dataset, and only 8λ error with
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence E-mail: alaam@mit.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

