Implicit Contrastive Representation Learning with
Guided Stop-gradient

Byeongchan Lee∗
Gauss Labs
Seoul, Korea
byeongchan.lee@gausslabs.ai

Sehyun Lee∗
KAIST
Daejeon, Korea
sehyun.lee@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In self-supervised representation learning, Siamese networks are a natural architecture for learning transformation-invariance by bringing representations of positive
pairs closer together. But it is prone to collapse into a degenerate solution. To
address the issue, in contrastive learning, a contrastive loss is used to prevent
collapse by moving representations of negative pairs away from each other. But it
is known that algorithms with negative sampling are not robust to a reduction in
the number of negative samples. So, on the other hand, there are algorithms that do
not use negative pairs. Many positive-only algorithms adopt asymmetric network
architecture consisting of source and target encoders as a key factor in coping with
collapse. By exploiting the asymmetric architecture, we introduce a methodology
to implicitly incorporate the idea of contrastive learning. As its implementation, we
present a novel method guided stop-gradient. We apply our method to benchmark
algorithms SimSiam and BYOL and show that our method stabilizes training and
boosts performance. We also show that the algorithms with our method work well
with small batch sizes and do not collapse even when there is no predictor. The
code is available in the supplementary material.

1

Introduction

Representation learning has been a critical topic in machine learning. In visual representation learning,
image representations containing high-level semantic information (e.g., visual concept) are learned
for efficient training in downstream tasks. Because human annotation is labor-intensive and imperfect,
learning representations without labels is getting more attention. In many cases, unsupervised or
self-supervised learning (SSL) has surpassed its supervised counterpart.
In SSL [Jaiswal et al., 2020, Jing and Tian, 2020, Liu et al., 2021], there are roughly two branches of
algorithms. One branch is a set of algorithms trained on pretext tasks with pseudo labels. Examples
of the pretext tasks are predicting relative positions [Doersch et al., 2015], solving jigsaw puzzles
[Noroozi and Favaro, 2016], colorization [Zhang et al., 2016], and identifying different rotations
[Gidaris et al., 2018]. However, relying on a specific pretext task can restrict the generality of the
learned representations. The other branch is a set of algorithms trained by maximizing the agreement
of representations of randomly augmented views from the same image. Many algorithms in this
branch adopt Siamese networks with two parallel encoders as their architecture. Siamese networks are
natural architecture with a minimal inductive bias to learn transformation-invariant representations.
However, naïve use of Siamese networks can result in collapse, i.e., a constant representation for all
images.
To tackle the collapse problem, there have been four strategies. The first strategy is contrastive
learning [Bachman et al., 2019, Ye et al., 2019, Chen et al., 2020a,b, He et al., 2020, Misra and
Maaten, 2020, Chen et al., 2021]. Contrastive learning uses positive pairs (views of the same
∗
These authors contributed equally to this work.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

