Grounded Decoding: Guiding Text Generation with
Grounded Models for Embodied Agents

Wenlong Huang1∗, Fei Xia2 , Dhruv Shah3 , Danny Driess2 , Andy Zeng2 ,
Yao Lu , Pete Florence2 , Igor Mordatch2 , Sergey Levine2,3 , Karol Hausman2 , Brian Ichter2
1
Stanford University, 2 Google Deepmind, 3 UC Berkeley
grounded-decoding.github.io
2

Abstract
Recent progress in large language models (LLMs) has demonstrated the ability
to learn and leverage Internet-scale knowledge through pre-training with autoregressive models. Unfortunately, applying such models to settings with embodied
agents, such as robots, is challenging due to their lack of experience with the
physical world, inability to parse non-language observations, and ignorance of rewards or safety constraints that robots may require. On the other hand, languageconditioned robotic policies that learn from interaction data can provide the necessary grounding that allows the agent to be correctly situated in the real world,
but such policies are limited by the lack of high-level semantic understanding due
to the limited breadth of the interaction data available for training them. Thus,
if we want to make use of the semantic knowledge in a language model while
still situating it in an embodied setting, we must construct an action sequence
that is both likely according to the language model and also realizable according
to grounded models of the environment. We frame this as a problem similar to
probabilistic filtering: decode a sequence that both has high probability under the
language model and high probability under a set of grounded model objectives.
We demonstrate how such grounded models can be obtained across three simulation and real-world domains, and that the proposed decoding strategy is able to
solve complex, long-horizon embodiment tasks in a robotic setting by leveraging
the knowledge of both models.

1

Introduction

Recent works have demonstrated robots that are increasingly proficient at understanding and acting upon natural language, whether through planning or conditioned policies. Complementing such
progress, the field of natural language processing has recently seen large language models (LLMs)
become ubiquitously used as pre-trained or few-shot prompted models, due to their impressive fewshot performance and vast knowledge-base. These LLMs have efficiently learned from web-scale
data through autoregressively modeling the probability distribution over text tokens and thus generate text. However, the nature of this process is such that applying such models to embodied settings
remains a challenge. They have not interacted with their environment, lack observability of nonlanguage observation modalities (e.g., images), and may not know what is safe or possible for a
particular embodiment.
Determining how to execute long-horizon behaviors based on high-level verbal commands is one
particular area of robotics where the rich semantic knowledge in large language models can be especially useful. This problem combines elements of semantic reasoning and planning: the robot
∗

Work done as an intern at Google.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

