FouriDown: Factoring Down-Sampling into
Shuffling and Superposing

Qi Zhu 1∗, Man Zhou 2,3∗, Jie Huang 1 , Naishan Zheng 1 , Hongzhi Gao 1 ,
Chongyi Li 4 , Yuan Xv 3 , Feng Zhao 1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China,
2
S-Lab, 3 Nanyang Technological University, 4 Nankai University
{zqcrafts,hj0117,nszheng, hongzhigao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{man.zhou, xu.yuan}@ntu.edu.sg, lichongyi25@gmail.com, fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Spatial down-sampling techniques, such as strided convolution, Gaussian, and
Nearest down-sampling, are essential in deep neural networks. In this paper, we
revisit the working mechanism of the spatial down-sampling family and analyze
the biased effects caused by the static weighting strategy employed in previous
approaches. To overcome the bias limitation, we propose a novel down-sampling
paradigm in the Fourier domain, abbreviated as FouriDown, which unifies existing
down-sampling techniques. Drawing inspiration from the signal sampling theorem,
we parameterize the non-parameter static weighting down-sampling operator as a
learnable and context-adaptive operator within a unified Fourier function. Specifically, we organize the corresponding frequency positions of the 2D plane in a
physically-closed manner within a single channel dimension. We then perform
point-wise channel shuffling based on an indicator that determines whether a channel’s signal frequency bin is susceptible to aliasing, ensuring the consistency of the
weighting parameter learning. FouriDown, as a general operator, comprises four
key components: 2D discrete Fourier transform, context shuffling rules, Fourier
weighting-adaptively superposing rules, and 2D inverse Fourier transform. These
components can be easily integrated into existing image restoration networks. To
demonstrate the efficacy of FouriDown, we conduct extensive experiments on
image de-blurring and low-light image enhancement. The results consistently show
that FouriDown can provide significant performance improvements. The code is
publicly available to facilitate further exploration and application of FouriDown at
https://github.com/zqcrafts/FouriDown.

1

Introduction

Down-sampling technique [1, 2, 3] plays a vital role in deep neural networks because of its benefits in
enlarging the receptive field, extracting hierarchical features, improving computational efficiency, and
handling scale and translation variations. However, based on the signal sampling theorem, existing
down-sampling techniques such as strided convolution, Gaussian, and Nearest down-sampling
[1, 4, 5, 6] unavoidably reduce the sampling frequency of discrete signals, leading to unexpected
frequency aliasing where high frequencies are folded into low frequencies.
To address the aliasing problem, several strategies [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] have been developed.
They pre-process the signals applying the low-pass filtering mechanism, which aims to filter out highfrequency information by employing different types of low-pass designs. There are two commonly
* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

