Pseudo-Likelihood Inference
Theo Gruner 1,2 Boris Belousov 3 Fabio Muratore 4
Daniel Palenicek 1,2 Jan Peters 1,2,3,5
1
Intelligent Autonomous Systems Group, Technical University of Darmstadt
2
hessian.AI 3 German Research Center for AI (DFKI)
4
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence 5 Centre for Cognitive Science
theo_sunao.gruner@tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Simulation-Based Inference (SBI) is a common name for an emerging family of
approaches that infer the model parameters when the likelihood is intractable. Existing SBI methods either approximate the likelihood, such as Approximate Bayesian
Computation (ABC), or directly model the posterior, such as Sequential Neural
Posterior Estimation (SNPE). While ABC is efficient on low-dimensional problems, on higher-dimensional tasks, it is generally outperformed by SNPE which
leverages function approximation. In this paper, we propose Pseudo-Likelihood
Inference (PLI), a new method that brings neural approximation into ABC, making
it competitive on challenging Bayesian system identification tasks. By utilizing
integral probability metrics, we introduce a smooth likelihood kernel with an adaptive bandwidth that is updated based on information-theoretic trust regions. Thanks
to this formulation, our method (i) allows for optimizing neural posteriors via
gradient descent, (ii) does not rely on summary statistics, and (iii) enables multiple
observations as input. In comparison to SNPE, it leads to improved performance
when more data is available. The effectiveness of PLI is evaluated on four classical
SBI benchmark tasks and on a highly dynamic physical system, showing particular
advantages on stochastic simulations and multi-modal posterior landscapes.

1

Introduction

Parametric stochastic simulators are a well-established tool for predicting the behavior of real-world
phenomena. These statistical models find widespread use in various scientific fields such as physics,
economics, biology, ecology, computer science, and robotics, where they help to gain knowledge about
the underlying stochastic processes [27, 34] or generate additional data for subsequent downstream
tasks [38]. In both cases, the practitioner seeks to explain the observations as accurately as possible
while incorporating all available information. The output of such a simulator is largely determined by
its parameters and their values. When estimating these parameters using Bayesian inference, given
observations from a physical system, which are inevitably subject to measurement noise, we obtain a
distribution over values instead of a point estimate. Additionally, there might be several parameter
configurations yielding the same observation, hence rendering the resulting distribution to be multimodal. Moreover, the likelihood function might be unknown or too expensive to evaluate for many
practical use cases. The combination of these difficulties makes obtaining a posterior distribution over
simulator parameters challenging for state-of-the-art inference methods, both regarding effectiveness
and efficiency.
SBI approaches address the issue of intractable likelihoods by using (stochastic) simulators as forward
models to generate observations from proposal distributions over parameters. The approaches are
also often called likelihood-free, which can be easily misunderstood since some of them directly
approximate the likelihood [7]. ABC is a family of SBI methods that approximate the posterior with
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

