Punctuation-level Attack: Single-shot and Single
Punctuation Attack Can Fool Text Models
Wenqiang Wang1

Chongyang Du1

Wenhan Luo1∗ Lin Ma4
1

Tao Wang2

Wei Liu5

Kaihao Zhang3

Xiaochun Cao1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Nanjing University
3
Australian National University 4 Meituan 5 Tencent

Abstract
The adversarial attacks have attracted increasing attention in various fields including natural language processing. The current textual attacking models primarily
focus on fooling models by adding character-/word-/sentence-level perturbations,
ignoring their influence on human perception. In this paper, for the first time in the
community, we propose a novel mode of textual attack, punctuation-level attack.
With various types of perturbations, including insertion, displacement, deletion,
and replacement, the punctuation-level attack achieves promising fooling rates
against SOTA models on typical textual tasks and maintains minimal influence on
human perception and understanding of the text by mere perturbation of single-shot
single punctuation. Furthermore, we propose a search method named Text Position Punctuation Embedding and Paraphrase (TPPEP) to accelerate the pursuit of
optimal position to deploy the attack, without exhaustive search, and we present a
mathematical interpretation of TPPEP. Thanks to the integrated Text Position Punctuation Embedding (TPPE), the punctuation attack can be applied at a constant cost
of time. Experimental results on public datasets and SOTA models demonstrate the
effectiveness of the punctuation attack and the proposed TPPE. We additionally
apply the single punctuation attack to summarization, semantic-similarity-scoring,
and text-to-image tasks, and achieve encouraging results.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved tremendous success in the NLP community and have
spawned a series of well-known applications such as ChatGPT [13]. However, more attention should
be paid to the vulnerability of NLP models under adversarial attacks to protect them. Adversarial
examples have been shown to have a devastating impact in the image domain [39, 12, 38]. Unlike
the image domain, text is a discrete domain [45], which means that any small perturbations, such
as sentence, word, or even character perturbations in text, would be easily perceived by humans.
It is difficult to achieve imperceptible perturbations. Additionally, the text is a non-differentiable
domain, which results in traditional optimization-based methods being ineffective in the NLP domain.
Recent research on textual adversarial attacks can be mainly classified into character-level, wordlevel, sentence-level, and multi-level attacks [41]. Character-level attacks modify words by inserting,
deleting, misspelling, replacing, or swapping characters. These attacks are easily detectable by
humans and some apps can correct them automatically. However, character-level attacks require
multiple queries to determine which characters to attack based on function gradient or score. Wordlevel attacks modify words by adding, deleting, or replacing important words in a text. Similar to
character-level attacks, word-level attacks also require multiple queries to determine which words to
∗

Corresponding Author: < whluo.china@gmail.com >

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

