Strategyproof Voting under Correlated Beliefs

Daniel Halpern
Harvard University
dhalpern@g.harvard.edu

Rachel Li
Harvard University
rachelli@college.harvard.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia
Harvard University
arielpro@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
In voting theory, when voters have ranked preferences over candidates, the celebrated Gibbard-Satterthwaite Theorem essentially rules out the existence of reasonable strategyproof methods for picking a winner. What if we weaken strategyproofness to only hold for Bayesian voters with beliefs over others’ preferences?
When voters believe other participants’ rankings are drawn independently from a
fixed distribution, the impossibility persists. However, it is quite reasonable for
a voter to believe that other votes are correlated, either to each other or to their
own ranking. We consider such beliefs induced by classic probabilistic models in
social choice such as the Mallows, Placket-Luce, and Thurstone-Mosteller models.
We single out the plurality rule (choosing the candidate ranked first most often)
as a particularly promising choice as it is strategyproof for a large class of beliefs
containing the specific ones we introduce. Further, we show that plurality is unique
among positional scoring rules in having this property: no other scoring rule is
strategyproof for beliefs induced by the Mallows model when there are a sufficient
number of voters. Finally, we give examples of prominent non-scoring voting rules
failing to be strategyproof on beliefs in this class, further bolstering the case for
plurality.

1

Introduction

One of the most celebrated results in voting theory is the Gibbard-Satterthwaite Theorem [8, 22]. It
states that when voters express ordinal preferences over at least 3 candidates, there is no “reasonable”
aggregation rule that is strategy-proof : there will always exist instances where voters will be
incentivized to manipulate and lie about their preferences to achieve a better outcome.
However, one caveat about this strong negative result is that, a priori, a voter may need perfect
information about how others vote to manipulate successfully. Perhaps, if the voter is slightly
uncertain, no manipulation helps consistently enough to be worthwhile. Majumdar and Sen [13]
analyzed exactly this question when voters have independent beliefs. That is, when a voter is
considering whether or not to manipulate, they assume all others have rankings drawn independently
from a fixed distribution. The classic notion of strategyproofness no longer makes sense in this
probabilistic Bayesian setting, so they instead use the natural extension known as ordinally Bayesian
incentive compatible (OBIC), essentially that the rules are strategyproof in expectation no matter what
underlying cardinal values voters have. Their results, unfortunately, are widely negative. They show
that for a “large” set of distributions, Gibbard-Satterthwaite still holds. There do exist distributions
where many rules are OBIC, e.g., the uniform distribution over all rankings. Still, these positive
examples are extremely brittle: even a slight perturbation leads back to the impossibility.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

