Scaling Riemannian Diffusion Models

Aaron Lou, Minkai Xu, Adam Farris, Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
{aaronlou, minkai, adfarris, ermon}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Riemannian diffusion models draw inspiration from standard Euclidean space
diffusion models to learn distributions on general manifolds. Unfortunately, the
additional geometric complexity renders the diffusion transition term inexpressible
in closed form, so prior methods resort to imprecise approximations of the score
matching training objective that degrade performance and preclude applications
in high dimensions. In this work, we reexamine these approximations and propose several practical improvements. Our key observation is that most relevant
manifolds are symmetric spaces, which are much more amenable to computation.
By leveraging and combining various ansätze, we can quickly compute relevant
quantities to high precision. On low dimensional datasets, our correction produces
a noticeable improvement, allowing diffusion to compete with other methods. Additionally, we show that our method enables us to scale to high dimensional tasks
on nontrivial manifolds. In particular, we model QCD densities on SU (n) lattices
and contrastively learned embeddings on high dimensional hyperspheres.

1

Introduction

By learning to faithfully capture high-dimensional probability distributions, modern deep generative
models have transformed countless fields such as computer vision [19] and natural language processing [41]. However, these models are built primarily for geometrically simple data spaces, such
as Euclidean space for images and discrete space for text. For many applications such as protein
structure prediction [13], contrastive learning [12], and high energy physics [6], the support of the
data distribution is instead a Riemannian manifold such as the sphere or torus. Here, naïvely applying
a standard generative model on the ambient space results in poor performance as it doesn’t properly
incorporate the geometric inductive bias and can suffer from singularities [7].
As such, a longstanding goal within Geometric Deep Learning has been the development of principled, general, and scalable generative models on manifolds [8, 18]. One promising method is
the Riemannian Diffusion Model [4, 25], the natural generalization of standard Euclidean space
score-based diffusion models [46, 48]. These learn to reverse a diffusion process on a manifold–in
particular, the heat equation–through Riemannian score matching methods. While this approach is
principled and general, it is not scalable. In particular, the additional geometric complexity renders
the denoising score matching loss intractable. Because of this, previous work resorts to inaccurate
approximations or sliced score matching [47], but these degrade performance and can’t be scaled to
high dimensions. We emphasize that this fundamental problem causes Riemannian Diffusion Models
to fail for even trivial distributions on high dimensional manifolds, which limits their applicability to
relatively simple low-dimensional examples.
In our work, we propose several improvements to Riemannian Diffusion Models to stabilize their
performance and enable scaling to high dimensions. In particular, we reexamine the heat kernel [21],
which is the core building block for the denoising score matching objective. To enable denoising
Code found at https://github.com/louaaron/Scaling-Riemannian-Diffusion
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

