Binarized Spectral Compressive Imaging

Yuanhao Cai 1 , Yuxin Zheng 1 , Jing Lin 1 ,
Xin Yuan 2 , Yulun Zhang 3,∗ , Haoqian Wang 1,∗
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Westlake University, 3 ETH Zürich

Abstract
Existing deep learning models for hyperspectral image (HSI) reconstruction achieve
good performance but require powerful hardwares with enormous memory and
computational resources. Consequently, these methods can hardly be deployed
on resource-limited mobile devices. In this paper, we propose a novel method,
Binarized Spectral-Redistribution Network (BiSRNet), for efficient and practical
HSI restoration from compressed measurement in snapshot compressive imaging
(SCI) systems. Firstly, we redesign a compact and easy-to-deploy base model to be
binarized. Then we present the basic unit, Binarized Spectral-Redistribution Convolution (BiSR-Conv). BiSR-Conv can adaptively redistribute the HSI representations
before binarizing activation and uses a scalable hyperbolic tangent function to closer
approximate the Sign function in backpropagation. Based on our BiSR-Conv, we
customize four binarized convolutional modules to address the dimension mismatch
and propagate full-precision information throughout the whole network. Finally,
our BiSRNet is derived by using the proposed techniques to binarize the base model.
Comprehensive quantitative and qualitative experiments manifest that our proposed
BiSRNet outperforms state-of-the-art binarization algorithms. Code and models
are publicly available at https://github.com/caiyuanhao1998/BiSCI

1

Introduction

Compared to normal RGB images, hyperspectral images (HSIs) have more spectral bands to capture
richer information of the desired scenes. Thus, HSIs have wide applications in agriculture [1, 2, 3],
medical image analysis [4, 5, 6], object tracking [7, 8, 9], remote sensing [10, 11, 12], etc.
To capture HSIs, conventional imaging systems leverage 1D or 2D spectrometers to scan the desired
scenes along the spatial or spectral dimension. Yet, this process is very time-consuming and thus
fails in measuring dynamic scenes. In recent years, snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) systems [13,
14, 15, 16, 17] have been developed to capture HSI cubes in real time. Among these SCI systems,
the coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) [14, 18, 19] demonstrates its outstanding
effectiveness and efficiency. The CASSI systems firstly employ a coded aperture (physical mask) to
modulate the 3D HSI cube, then use a disperser to shift spectral information of different wavelengths,
and finally integrate these HSI signals on a detector array to capture a 2D compressed measurement.
We study the inverse problem, i.e., restoring the original 3D HSI cube from the 2D measurement.
Existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) SCI reconstruction methods are based on deep learning. Convolutional neural network (CNN) [18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25] and Transformer [26, 27, 28, 29] have been
used to implicitly learn the mapping from compressed measurements to HSIs. Although superior
performance is achieved, these CNN-/Transformer-based methods require powerful hardwares with
abundant computing and memory resources, such as high-end graphics processing units (GPUs).
However, edge devices (e.g., mobile phones, hand-held cameras, small drones, etc.) evidently cannot
meet the requirements of these expensive algorithms because edge devices have very limited memory,
computational power, and battery. As mobile devices are more and more widely used, the demands
of running and storing HSI restoration models on edge devices grow significantly. This motivates us
to reduce the memory and computational burden of HSI reconstruction methods while preserving the
performance as much as possible so that the algorithms can be deployed on resource-limited devices.
∗

Yulun Zhang and Haoqian Wang are the corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

