Faster Margin Maximization Rates for Generic
Optimization Methods

Guanghui Wang1 , Zihao Hu1 , Vidya Muthukumar2,3 , Jacob Abernethy1,4
1
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
2
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
3
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
4
Google Research, Atalanta
{gwang369,zihaohu,vmuthukumar8}@gatech.edu, abernethyj@google.com

Abstract
First-order optimization methods tend to inherently favor certain solutions over
others when minimizing a given training objective with multiple local optima. This
phenomenon, known as implicit bias, plays a critical role in understanding the
generalization capabilities of optimization algorithms. Recent research has revealed
that gradient-descent-based methods exhibit an implicit bias for the ℓ2 -maximal
margin classifier in the context of separable binary classification. In contrast,
generic optimization methods, such as mirror descent and steepest descent, have
been shown to converge to maximal margin classifiers defined by alternative
geometries. However, while gradient-descent-based algorithms demonstrate fast
implicit bias rates, the implicit bias rates of generic optimization methods have been
relatively slow. To address this limitation, in this paper, we present a series of stateof-the-art implicit bias rates for mirror descent and steepest descent algorithms.
Our primary technique involves transforming a generic optimization algorithm into
an online learning dynamic that solves a regularized bilinear game, providing a
unified framework for analyzing the implicit bias of various optimization methods.
The accelerated rates are derived leveraging the regret bounds of online learning
algorithms within this game framework.

1

Introduction

The training objective in the optimization of modern over-parametrized ML models typically presents
various local optima with low training error. Despite this, empirical studies have demonstrated that
first-order optimization methods generally converge to the solution with strong generalization, even
without any explicit regularization (Neyshabur et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2021). This observation
has spurred interest in the study of the implicit bias of the algorithm. In other words, among all
potential parameter choices with low training error, which ones are inherently favored by optimization
methods?
For the classical linear classification problem with separable data, the pioneering works (Soudry
et al., 2018; Ji & Telgarsky, 2018) reveal that minimizing the (unregularized) empirical risk with
exponential loss by the classical gradient descent (GD) automatically maximizes the ∥ · ∥2 -margin,
meaning its margin converges to that of the best classifier within an ℓ2 -norm ball (referred to as the
∥ · ∥2 -maximal margin classifier). This finding implies that GD exhibits an implicit bias towards the
∥ · ∥2 -maximal margin classifier, which helps account for its favorable generalization performance.


log n
However, these works show that GD only maximizes the ∥ · ∥2 -margin at a slow O log
rate,
T
where T is the time horizon, and n is the cardinality of the data set. Since then, several faster margin
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

