Sparsity-Preserving Differentially Private Training
of Large Embedding Models

Badih Ghazi
Google Research
Mountain View, CA

Yangsibo Huang∗
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ

Pritish Kamath
Google Research
Mountain View, CA

badihghazi@gmail.com

yangsibo@princeton.edu

pritishk@google.com

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
Mountain View, CA

Pasin Manurangsi
Google Research
Mountain View, CA

Amer Sinha
Google Research
Mountain View, CA

Chiyuan Zhang
Google Research
Mountain View, CA

ravi.k53@gmail.com

pasin@google.com

amersinha@google.com

chiyuan@google.com

Abstract
As the use of large embedding models in recommendation systems and language
applications increases, concerns over user data privacy have also risen. DP-SGD,
a training algorithm that combines differential privacy with stochastic gradient
descent, has been the workhorse in protecting user privacy without compromising model accuracy by much. However, applying DP-SGD naively to embedding
models can destroy gradient sparsity, leading to reduced training efficiency. To
address this issue, we present two new algorithms, DP-FEST and DP-AdaFEST,
that preserve gradient sparsity during private training of large embedding models. Our algorithms achieve substantial reductions (106 ×) in gradient size, while
maintaining comparable levels of accuracy, on benchmark real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Large embedding models have emerged as a fundamental tool for various applications in recommendation systems [CKH+ 16, WFFW17, GTY+ 17, ZZS+ 18, NMS+ 19, WSC+ 21] and natural language
processing [MSC+ 13, PSM14, DCLT19]. Those models map categorical or string-valued input attributes with large vocabularies to fixed-length vector representations using embedding layers, which
enable integrating non-numerical data into deep learning models. These models are widely deployed
in personalized recommendation systems and achieve state-of-the-art performance in language tasks
such as language modeling, sentiment analysis, and question-answering.
In the meantime, the use of large embedding models raises significant concerns about privacy
violations, as it often entails the processing of sensitive individual information such as personally
identifiable information, browsing habits, and dialogues [CTW+ 21, HSC22, GHZ+ 22]. Various
techniques have been proposed to enable private data analysis. Among those, differential privacy
(DP) [DMNS06, DKM+ 06] is a widely adopted notion that could formally bound the privacy
leakage of individual user information while still allowing for the analysis of population-level
patterns. For training deep neural networks with DP guarantees, the most widely used algorithm
is DP-SGD [ACG+ 16]. It works by clipping the per-example gradient contribution, and noising the
average gradient updates during each iteration of stochastic gradient descent (SGD). DP-SGD has
*This work was partially done while the author was interning at Google Research.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

