Randomized Sparse Neural Galerkin Schemes for
Solving Evolution Equations with Deep Networks

Jules Berman
Courant Institute for Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY 10012
jmb1174@nyu.edu

Benjamin Peherstorfer
Courant Institute for Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY 10012
pehersto@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Training neural networks sequentially in time to approximate solution fields of timedependent partial differential equations can be beneficial for preserving causality
and other physics properties; however, the sequential-in-time training is numerically
challenging because training errors quickly accumulate and amplify over time. This
work introduces Neural Galerkin schemes that update randomized sparse subsets
of network parameters at each time step. The randomization avoids overfitting
locally in time and so helps prevent the error from accumulating quickly over the
sequential-in-time training, which is motivated by dropout that addresses a similar
issue of overfitting due to neuron co-adaptation. The sparsity of the update reduces
the computational costs of training without losing expressiveness because many
of the network parameters are redundant locally at each time step. In numerical
experiments with a wide range of evolution equations, the proposed scheme with
randomized sparse updates is up to two orders of magnitude more accurate at a
fixed computational budget and up to two orders of magnitude faster at a fixed
accuracy than schemes with dense updates.

1

Introduction

In science and engineering, partial differential equations (PDEs) are frequently employed to model
the behavior of systems of interest. For many PDEs that model complicated processes, an analytic
solution remains elusive and so computational techniques are required to compute numerical solutions.
Global-in-time training There have been many developments in using nonlinear parameterizations
based on neural networks for numerically approximating PDE solutions. These include techniques
such as the Deep Galerkin Method [46], physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) [41], and others
[4, 21, 53, 15]; as well as early works such as [11, 42]. In most of these methods, a neural network is
used to represent the solution of a (time-dependent) PDE over the whole space-time domain. For this
reason they are termed global-in-time methods in the following. To approximate the solution, the
neural network is trained to minimize the PDE residual on collocation points sampled from the spacetime domain, which requires solving a large-scale optimization problem that can be computationally
expensive. Additionally, the solutions learned by global-in-time methods can violate causality, which
can become an issue for complex problems that rely on preserving physics [27]. We note that neural
networks have been used for approximating PDE solutions in various other ways, such as learning
specific component functions [23, 31, 43], finding closure models [2, 25, 50], de-noising [44], and
for surrogate modeling [33, 32, 18]. However, we are interested in this work in using neural networks
for directly approximating PDE solutions.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

