Composable Coresets for Determinant Maximization:
Greedy is Almost Optimal*

Siddharth Gollapudi
Microsoft Research
sgollapu@berkeley.edu

Sepideh Mahabadi
Microsoft Research
smahabadi@microsoft.com

Varun Sivashankar
Microsoft Research
varunsiva@princeton.edu

Abstract
Given a set of n vectors in Rd , the goal of the determinant maximization problem
is to pick k vectors with the maximum volume. Determinant maximization is
the MAP-inference task for determinantal point processes (DPP) and has recently
received considerable attention for modeling diversity. As most applications for the
problem use large amounts of data, this problem has been studied in the relevant
composable coreset setting. In particular, [IMGR20] showed that one can get
composable coresets with optimal approximation factor of Õ(k)k for the problem,
and that a local search algorithm achieves an almost optimal approximation guarantee of O(k)2k . In this work, we show that the widely-used Greedy algorithm
also provides composable coresets with an almost optimal approximation factor of
2
O(k)3k , which improves over the previously known guarantee of C k , and supports
the prior experimental results showing the practicality of the greedy algorithm as a
coreset. Our main result follows by showing a local optimality property for Greedy:
swapping a single point from the greedy solution with a vector that was not picked
√
by the greedy algorithm can increase the volume by a factor of at most (1 + k).
This is tight up to the additive constant 1. Finally, our experiments show that the
local optimality of the greedy algorithm is even lower than the theoretical bound
on real data sets.

1

Introduction

In the determinant maximization problem, we are given a set P of n vectors in Rd , and a parameter
k ≤ d. The objective is to find a subset S = {v1 , . . . , vk } ⊆ P consisting of k vectors such that
that the volume squared of the parallelepiped spanned by the points in the subset S is maximized.
Equivalently, the volume squared of a set S, denoted by vol(S), is equal to the determinant of the
Gram matrix of the vectors in S. Determinant maximization is the MAP-inference of determinantal
point processes, and both of these problems as well as their variants have found numerous applications
in data summarization, machine learning, experimental design, and computational geometry. In
particular, the determinant of a subset of points is one way to measure the diversity of the subset,
and thus they have been studied extensively over the last decade in this context [MJK17, GCGS14,
KT+ 12, CGGS15, KT11, YFZ+ 16, LCYO16].
The best approximation factor for the problem in this regime is due to the work of [Nik15] who shows
a factor of ek , and it is known that an exponential dependence on k is necessary [CMI13] unless
P = NP. However, the most common algorithm used for this problem in practical applications is a
natural greedy algorithm. In this setting, the algorithm first picks the vector with the largest norm,
*This is an equal contribution paper
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

