Clustering the Sketch: Dynamic Compression for
Embedding Tables

Henry Ling-Hei Tsang∗
Meta
henrylhtsang@meta.com

Thomas Dybdahl Ahle∗
Meta†
Normal Computing
thomas@ahle.dk

Abstract
Embedding tables are used by machine learning systems to work with categorical
features. In modern Recommendation Systems, these tables can be very large,
necessitating the development of new methods for fitting them in memory, even
during training. We suggest Clustered Compositional Embeddings (CCE) which
combines clustering-based compression like quantization to codebooks with dynamic methods like The Hashing Trick and Compositional Embeddings [Shi et al.,
2020]. Experimentally CCE achieves the best of both worlds: The high compression rate of codebook-based quantization, but dynamically like hashing-based
methods, so it can be used during training. Theoretically, we prove that CCE is
guaranteed to converge to the optimal codebook and give a tight bound for the
number of iterations required.

1

Introduction

Neural networks can efficiently handle various data types, including continuous, sparse, and sequential
features. However, categorical features present a unique challenge as they require embedding a
typically vast vocabulary into a smaller vector space for further calculations. Examples of these
features include user IDs, post IDs on social networks, video IDs, and IP addresses commonly
encountered in Recommendation Systems.
In some domains where embeddings are employed, such as Natural Language Processing [Mikolov
et al., 2013], the vocabulary can be significantly reduced by considering “subwords” or “byte pair
encodings”. In Recommendation Systems like Matrix Factorization or DLRM (see Figure 2) it is
typically not possible to factorize the vocabulary this way, leading to large embedding tables that
demand hundreds of gigabytes of GPU memory [Naumov et al., 2019]. This necessitates splitting
models across multiple GPUs, increasing cost and creating a communication bottleneck during both
training and inference.
The traditional solution is to hash the IDs down to a manageable size using the Hashing Trick [Weinberger et al., 2009], accepting the possibility that unrelated IDs may share the same representation.
Excessively aggressive hashing can impair the model’s ability to distinguish its inputs, as it may mix
up unrelated concepts, ultimately reducing model performance.
Another option for managing embedding tables is quantization. This typically involves reducing the
precision to 4 or 8 bits or using multi-dimensional methods like Product Quantization and Residual
Vector Quantization, which rely on clustering (e.g., K-means) to identify representative “code words”
for each original ID. (See Gray and Neuhoff [1998] for a survey of quantization methods.) For
instance, vectors representing “red”, “orange”, and “blue” may be stored as simply “dark orange”
and “blue”, with the first two concepts pointing to the same average embedding. See Section 1 for
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done mostly at Probability at Meta.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

