A3FL: Adversarially Adaptive Backdoor Attacks to
Federated Learning

Hangfan Zhang, Jinyuan Jia, Jinghui Chen, Lu Lin, Dinghao Wu
{hbz5148,jinyuan,jzc5917,lulin,dinghao}@psu.edu
The Pennsylvania State University

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning paradigm that allows
multiple clients to train a global model collaboratively without sharing their local
training data. Due to its distributed nature, many studies have shown that it is vulnerable to backdoor attacks. However, existing studies usually used a predetermined,
fixed backdoor trigger or optimized it based solely on the local data and model
without considering the global training dynamics. This leads to sub-optimal and
less durable attack effectiveness, i.e., their attack success rate is low when the attack
budget is limited and decreases quickly if the attacker can no longer perform attacks
anymore. To address these limitations, we propose A3FL, a new backdoor attack
which adversarially adapts the backdoor trigger to make it less likely to be removed
by the global training dynamics. Our key intuition is that the difference between
the global model and the local model in FL makes the local-optimized trigger much
less effective when transferred to the global model. We solve this by optimizing the
trigger to even survive the scenario where the global model was trained to directly
unlearn the trigger. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets are conducted
for twelve existing defenses to comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of our
A3FL. Our code is available at https://github.com/hfzhang31/A3FL.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of Federated Learning (FL) [1, 2, 3], an advanced
distributed learning paradigm. With the assistance of a cloud server, multiple clients such as
smartphones or IoT devices train a global model collaboratively based on their private training data
through multiple communication rounds. In each communication round, the cloud server selects
a part of the clients and sends the current global model to them. Each selected client first uses the
received global model to initialize its local model, then trains it based on its local dataset, and finally
sends the trained local model back to the cloud server. The cloud server aggregates local models from
selected clients to update the current global model. FL has been widely used in many safety- and
privacy-critical applications [4, 5, 6, 7].
Numerous studies [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14] have shown that the distributed nature of FL provides
a surface to backdoor attacks, where an attacker can compromise some clients and utilize them to
inject a backdoor into the global model such that the model’s behaviors are the attacker desired. In
particular, the backdoored global model behaves normally on clean testing inputs but predicts any
testing inputs stamped with an attacker-chosen backdoor trigger as a specific target class.
Depending on whether the backdoor trigger is optimized, we can categorize existing attacks
into fixed-trigger attacks [12, 11, 13, 8] and trigger-optimization attacks [10, 9]. In a fixedtrigger attack, an attacker pre-selects a fixed backdoor trigger and thus does not utilize any information from FL training process. CWhile a fixed-trigger attack can be more efficient and
straightforward, it usually suffers from limited effectiveness and more obvious utility drops.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

