Multi-Agent Meta-Reinforcement Learning: Sharper
Convergence Rates with Task Similarity

Weichao Mao
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
weichao2@illinois.edu
Chen Wang
IBM Research
chen.wang1@ibm.com

Haoran Qiu
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
haoranq4@illinois.edu

Hubertus Franke
IBM Research
frankeh@us.ibm.com

Ravishankar K. Iyer
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
rkiyer@illinois.edu

Zbigniew Kalbarczyk
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
kalbarcz@illinois.edu
Tamer Başar
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
basar1@illinois.edu

Abstract
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has primarily focused on solving a
single task in isolation, while in practice the environment is often evolving, leaving many related tasks to be solved. In this paper, we investigate the benefits of
meta-learning in solving multiple MARL tasks collectively. We establish the first
line of theoretical results for meta-learning in a wide range of fundamental MARL
settings, including learning Nash equilibria in two-player zero-sum Markov games
and Markov potential games, as well as learning coarse correlated equilibria in
general-sum Markov games. Under natural notions of task similarity, we show that
meta-learning achieves provable sharper convergence to various game-theoretical
solution concepts than learning each task separately. As an important intermediate
step, we develop multiple MARL algorithms with initialization-dependent convergence guarantees. Such algorithms integrate optimistic policy mirror descents
with stage-based value updates, and their refined convergence guarantees (nearly)
recover the best known results even when a good initialization is unknown. To our
best knowledge, such results are also new and might be of independent interest.
We further provide numerical simulations to corroborate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Many real-world sequential decision-making problems involve multiple agents interacting in a
shared environment, a scenario commonly captured by game theory and addressed using multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL). Existing research in MARL has primarily focused on solving a
single task (i.e., a game) independently. In practice, however, one often needs to collectively solve a
set of similar tasks due to the dynamically evolving environment. For example, in sponsored search
auctions [48], the advertising spaces and search results are dynamic, and each bidder with an active
bid will participate in a sequence of related auctions. In multi-robot cooperation [31, 26], the learning
agents are often first pre-trained in simplified environments and are then asked to quickly adapt to
more complicated ones. In cloud computing [53, 70], a learning-based autoscaling policy needs to
achieve fast model adaptation to deal with varied application workloads or constantly evolving cloud
infrastructures. All of these intriguing applications call for the development of intelligent multi-agent
systems that can continuously build on previous experiences to enhance the learning of new tasks.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

