Neural Lighting Simulation for Urban Scenes
Ava Pun1,3∗† Gary Sun1,3∗† Jingkang Wang1,2∗ Yun Chen1,2 Ze Yang1,2
Sivabalan Manivasagam1,2 Wei-Chiu Ma1,4 Raquel Urtasun1,2
Waabi1

University of Toronto2

University of Waterloo3

MIT4

Abstract
Different outdoor illumination conditions drastically alter the appearance of urban scenes, and they can harm the performance of image-based robot perception
systems if not seen during training. Camera simulation provides a cost-effective
solution to create a large dataset of images captured under different lighting conditions. Towards this goal, we propose LightSim, a neural lighting camera simulation
system that enables diverse, realistic, and controllable data generation. LightSim
automatically builds lighting-aware digital twins at scale from collected raw sensor
data and decomposes the scene into dynamic actors and static background with
accurate geometry, appearance, and estimated scene lighting. These digital twins
enable actor insertion, modification, removal, and rendering from a new viewpoint,
all in a lighting-aware manner. LightSim then combines physically-based and
learnable deferred rendering to perform realistic relighting of modified scenes,
such as altering the sun location and modifying the shadows or changing the sun
brightness, producing spatially- and temporally-consistent camera videos. Our
experiments show that LightSim generates more realistic relighting results than
prior work. Importantly, training perception models on data generated by LightSim can significantly improve their performance. Our project page is available at
https://waabi.ai/lightsim/.

1

Introduction

Humans can perceive their surroundings under different lighting conditions, such as identifying traffic
participants while driving on a dimly lit road or under mild sun glare. Unfortunately, modern camerabased perception systems, such as those in self-driving vehicles (SDVs), are not as robust [52, 32].
They typically only perform well in the canonical setting they were trained in, and their performance
drops significantly under different unseen scenarios, such as in low-light conditions [52, 59, 32]. To
reduce distribution shift, we could collect data under various lighting conditions for each area in
which we want to deploy the SDVs, generating a diverse dataset on which to train the perception
system. Unfortunately, this is not scalable as it is too expensive and time-consuming.
Simulation is a cost-effective alternative for generating large-scale data with diverse lighting. To be
effective, a simulator should be realistic, controllable, and diverse. Realistic simulation of camera data
enables generalization to the real world. Controllable actor placement and lighting allow the simulator
to generate the desired training scenarios. Diverse backgrounds, actor assets, and lighting conditions
allow simulation to cover the full real-world distribution. While existing game-engine-based selfdriving simulators such as CARLA [18, 68] are controllable, they provide a limited number of
manually designed assets and lighting conditions. Perception systems trained on this data generalize
poorly to the real world [26, 1, 61].
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Work done while a research intern at Waabi.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

