Long Sequence Hopfield Memory

Hamza Tahir Chaudhry1,2 , Jacob A. Zavatone-Veth2,3 ,
Dmitry Krotov5 , Cengiz Pehlevan1,2,4
1
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
2
Center for Brain Science, 3 Department of Physics,
4
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence,
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
5
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research,
Cambridge, MA 02142
hchaudhry@g.harvard.edu, jzavatoneveth@g.harvard.edu,
krotov@ibm.com, cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Sequence memory is an essential attribute of natural and artificial intelligence that
enables agents to encode, store, and retrieve complex sequences of stimuli and
actions. Computational models of sequence memory have been proposed where
recurrent Hopfield-like neural networks are trained with temporally asymmetric
Hebbian rules. However, these networks suffer from limited sequence capacity
(maximal length of the stored sequence) due to interference between the memories.
Inspired by recent work on Dense Associative Memories, we expand the sequence
capacity of these models by introducing a nonlinear interaction term, enhancing
separation between the patterns. We derive novel scaling laws for sequence capacity
with respect to network size, significantly outperforming existing scaling laws for
models based on traditional Hopfield networks, and verify these theoretical results
with numerical simulation. Moreover, we introduce a generalized pseudoinverse
rule to recall sequences of highly correlated patterns. Finally, we extend this model
to store sequences with variable timing between states’ transitions and describe a
biologically-plausible implementation, with connections to motor neuroscience.

1

Introduction

Memory is an essential ability of intelligent agents that allows them to encode, store, and retrieve
information and behaviors they have learned throughout their lives. In particular, the ability to recall
sequences of memories is necessary for a large number of cognitive tasks with temporal or causal
structure, including navigation, reasoning, and motor control [1–9].
Computational models with varying degrees of biological plausibility have been proposed for how
neural networks can encode sequence memory [1–3, 10–22]. Many of these are based on the concept
of associative memory, also known as content-addressable memory, which refers to the ability of a
system to recall a set of objects or ideas when prompted by a distortion or subset of them. Modeling
associative memory has been an extremely active area of research in computational neuroscience and
deep learning for many years, with the Hopfield network becoming the canonical model [23–25].
Unfortunately, a major limitation of the traditional Hopfield Network and related associative memory
models is its capacity: the number of memories it can store and reliably retrieve scales linearly
with the number of neurons in the network. This limitation is due to interference between different
memories during recall, also known as crosstalk, which decreases the signal-to-noise ratio. Large
amounts of crosstalk results in the recall of undesired attractor states of the network [26–29].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

