Compositional Sculpting of
Iterative Generative Processes
Timur Garipov1∗ Sebastiaan De Peuter2
Vikas Garg2,5
Samuel Kaski2,3

Ge Yang1,4
Tommi Jaakkola1

1 MIT CSAIL
2 Aalto University
3 University of Manchester
4 Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions
5 YaiYai Ltd

Abstract
High training costs of generative models and the need to fine-tune them for specific
tasks have created a strong interest in model reuse and composition. A key challenge
in composing iterative generative processes, such as GFlowNets and diffusion models, is that to realize the desired target distribution, all steps of the generative process
need to be coordinated, and satisfy delicate balance conditions. In this work, we
propose Compositional Sculpting: a general approach for defining compositions of
iterative generative processes. We then introduce a method for sampling from these
compositions built on classifier guidance. We showcase ways to accomplish compositional sculpting in both GFlowNets and diffusion models. We highlight two binary
operations — the harmonic mean (𝑝1 ⊗ 𝑝2 ) and the contrast (𝑝1 ◑ 𝑝2 ) between pairs,
and the generalization of these operations to multiple component distributions. We
offer empirical results on image and molecular generation tasks. Project codebase:
https://github.com/timgaripov/compositional-sculpting.

1

Introduction

Large-scale general-purpose pre-training of machine learning models has produced impressive results
in computer vision [1–3], image generation [4–6], natural language processing [7–11], robotics [12–
14], and basic sciences [15]. By distilling vast amounts of data, such models can produce powerful
inferences that lead to emergent capabilities beyond the specified training objective [16]. However,
generic pre-trained models are often insufficient for specialized tasks in engineering and basic
sciences. Field-adaptation via techniques such as explicit fine-tuning on bespoke datasets [17],
human feedback [18], or cleverly designed prompts [19, 20] is therefore often required. Alternatively,
capabilities of pre-trained models can be utilized and extended via model composition.

Compositional generation [21–28] views a complex target distribution in terms of simpler pre-trained
building blocks which can be mixed and matched into a tailored solution to a specialized task. Given
a set of base models capturing different properties of the data, composition provides a way to fuse
these models into a single composite model with capacity greater than any individual base model. In
this way it allows one to specify distributions over examples that exhibit multiple desired properties
simultaneously [22]. The need to construct complex distributions adhering to multiple constraints
arises in numerous practical multi-objective design problems such as molecule generation [29–31].
In this context, compositional modeling provides mechanisms for control of the resulting distribution
and exploration of different trade-offs between the objectives and constraints.
Prior work on generative model composition [21, 22, 24] has developed operations for piecing
together Energy-Based Models (EBMs) via algebraic manipulations of their energy functions. For
example, consider two distributions 𝑝1 (𝑥) ∝ exp(−𝐸1 (𝑥)) and 𝑝2 (𝑥) ∝ exp(−𝐸2 (𝑥)) induced by energy
∗

Correspondence to Timur Garipov (timur@csail.mit.edu).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

