Calibrated Stackelberg Games: Learning Optimal
Commitments Against Calibrated Agents
Nika Haghtalab1 , Chara Podimata2 , and Kunhe Yang1
1

University of California, Berkeley, {nika,kunheyang}@berkeley.edu
2
MIT & Archimedes, podimata@mit.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a generalization of the standard Stackelberg Games
(SGs) framework: Calibrated Stackelberg Games (CSGs). In CSGs, a principal
repeatedly interacts with an agent who (contrary to standard SGs) does not have direct access to the principal’s action but instead best-responds to calibrated forecasts
about it. CSG is a powerful modeling tool that goes beyond assuming that agents
use ad hoc and highly specified algorithms for interacting in strategic settings
and thus more robustly addresses real-life applications that SGs were originally
intended to capture. Along with CSGs, we also introduce a stronger notion of
calibration, termed adaptive calibration, that provides fine-grained any-time calibration guarantees against adversarial sequences. We give a general approach for
obtaining adaptive calibration algorithms and specialize them for finite CSGs. In
our main technical result, we show that in CSGs, the principal can achieve utility
that converges to the optimum Stackelberg value of the game both in finite and
continuous settings, and that no higher utility is achievable. Two prominent and
immediate applications of our results are the settings of learning in Stackelberg
Security Games and strategic classification, both against calibrated agents.

1

Introduction

Stackelberg games (SGs) are a canonical model for strategic principal-agent interactions, considering
a principal (or “leader”) that commits to a strategy h and an agent (or “follower”) who observes
this strategy and best respond by taking action BR(h). These games are inspired by real-world
applications such as economic policy design (where a tax policymaker establishes rules for triggering
audits before taxes are filed), defense (where a principal allocates security resources to high-risk
targets before vulnerabilities are exploited) and many more, see e.g., [7, 22, 49, 35, 21, 15, 17].
By anticipating the agent’s best-response, a principal who knows the agent’s payoff function can
calculate the optimal Stackelberg strategy guaranteeing her utility V ⋆ . In recent years, repeated SGs
have gained popularity in addressing settings where the agent’s payoff function is unknown to the
principal. In this setting, the principal, who can only observe the agents’ actions, aims to deploy a
sequence of strategies h1 , . . . , hT over T rounds whose average payoff is at least as good as V ⋆ , i.e.,
the value of her optimal strategy had she known the agent’s payoffs in advance.
Despite the original intent, repeated SGs are often studied under strict assumptions on the agent’s
knowledge and algorithmic behavior. Examples include requiring the agent to best respond per round
using yt = BR(ht ) [7, 21], necessitating the agent to precisely know the principal’s strategy at all
times (e.g., the attacker must anticipate the exact probabilistic allocation of the defender’s security
resources), or employing one of many online optimization algorithms whose every detail (down to
the learning step size) can significantly impact the principal’s utility [51].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

