Energy-Based Learning Algorithms
for Analog Computing:
A Comparative Study

Benjamin Scellier
Rain AI
benjamin@rain.ai

Maxence Ernoult
Rain AI
maxence@rain.ai

Jack Kendall
Rain AI
jack@rain.ai

Suhas Kumar
Rain AI
suhas@rain.ai

Abstract
Energy-based learning algorithms have recently gained a surge of interest due
to their compatibility with analog (post-digital) hardware. Existing algorithms
include contrastive learning (CL), equilibrium propagation (EP) and coupled learning (CpL), all consisting in contrasting two states, and differing in the type of
perturbation used to obtain the second state from the first one. However, these
algorithms have never been explicitly compared on equal footing with same models
and datasets, making it difficult to assess their scalability and decide which one
to select in practice. In this work, we carry out a comparison of seven learning
algorithms, namely CL and different variants of EP and CpL depending on the signs
of the perturbations. Specifically, using these learning algorithms, we train deep
convolutional Hopfield networks (DCHNs) on five vision tasks (MNIST, F-MNIST,
SVHN, CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100). We find that, while all algorithms yield comparable performance on MNIST, important differences in performance arise as the
difficulty of the task increases. Our key findings reveal that negative perturbations
are better than positive ones, and highlight the centered variant of EP (which uses
two perturbations of opposite sign) as the best-performing algorithm. We also
endorse these findings with theoretical arguments. Additionally, we establish new
SOTA results with DCHNs on all five datasets, both in performance and speed. In
particular, our DCHN simulations are 13.5 times faster with respect to Laborieux
et al. [2021], which we achieve thanks to the use of a novel energy minimisation
algorithm based on asynchronous updates, combined with reduced precision (16
bits).

1

Introduction

Prior to the dominance of backpropagation-based machine learning, Hopfield, Hinton and others
proposed an alternative ‘energy-based’ learning (EBL) approach [Hopfield, 1984, Hinton et al., 1984].
In this approach, the learning model is described by a state variable whose dynamics is governed by
an energy function. An EBL model can be used to compute as follows: 1) clamp the model input,
2) let the model settle to equilibrium (that is, the configuration of lowest energy), and 3) read the
model output. The objective is to modify the weights of the model so that it computes a desired
input-to-output function. This is achieved thanks to an EBL algorithm. One of the earliest EBL
algorithms was constrastive learning (CL)[Movellan, 1991, Baldi and Pineda, 1991], which adjusts
the model weights by contrasting two states: a ‘free’ state where the model outputs are free, and a
perturbed (or ‘clamped’) state where the model outputs are clamped to desired values. In the machine
learning literature, interest in EBL algorithms has remained limited due to the widespread success of
backpropagation running on graphics processing units (GPUs). However, EBL algorithms have more
recently revived interest as a promising learning framework for analog learning machines [Kendall
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

