Distributionally Robust Skeleton Learning of Discrete
Bayesian Networks

Yeshu Li˚
Alibaba Group
liyeshu.lys@alibaba-inc.com

Brian D. Ziebart
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
bziebart@uic.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning the exact skeleton of general discrete Bayesian
networks from potentially corrupted data. Building on distributionally robust optimization and a regression approach, we propose to optimize the most adverse
risk over a family of distributions within bounded Wasserstein distance or KL
divergence to the empirical distribution. The worst-case risk accounts for the effect
of outliers. The proposed approach applies for general categorical random variables
without assuming faithfulness, an ordinal relationship or a specific form of conditional distribution. We present efficient algorithms and show the proposed methods
are closely related to the standard regularized regression approach. Under mild
assumptions, we derive non-asymptotic guarantees for successful structure learning
with logarithmic sample complexities for bounded-degree graphs. Numerical study
on synthetic and real datasets validates the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

A Bayesian network is a prominent class of probabilistic graphical models that encodes the conditional
dependencies among variables with a directed acyclic graph (DAG). It provides a mathematical
framework for formally understanding the interaction among variables of interest, together with
computationally attractive factorization for modeling multivariate distributions. If we impose causal
relationships on the edges between variables, the model becomes a causal Bayesian network that
encodes the more informative causation. Without such interpretation, a Bayesian network serves as
a dependency graph for factorization of a multivariate distribution. We focus on discrete Bayesian
networks with purely categorical random variables that are not ordinal, but will discuss related work
on both discrete and continuous Bayesian networks for completeness.
The DAG structure of a Bayesian network is typically unknown in practice [Natori et al., 2017,
Kitson et al., 2023]. Structure learning is therefore an important task that infers the structure from
data. The score-based approach defines a scoring function that measures the goodness-of-fit of
each structure and aims to find an optimal DAG that maximizes the score. Unfortunately, the
resulting combinatorial optimization problem is known to be NP-hard [Chickering et al., 2004]
without distributional assumptions. Representative approaches include those based on heuristic
search [Chickering, 2002], dynamic programming [Silander and Myllymäki, 2006], integer linear
programming [Jaakkola et al., 2010] or continuous optimization [Zheng et al., 2018], which either
yields an approximate solution or an exact solution in worst-case exponential time. The constraintbased approach [Spirtes and Glymour, 1991, Spirtes et al., 1999, Colombo et al., 2014] performs
conditional independence tests to determine the existence and directionality of edges. The time
complexity is, however, exponential with the maximum in-degree. Furthermore, the independence
test results may be unreliable or inconsistent with the true distribution because of finite samples or
˚

Work done when Yeshu was a PhD student at UIC.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

