Online Adaptive Policy Selection in Time-Varying
Systems: No-Regret via Contractive Perturbations
Yiheng Lin
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
yihengl@caltech.edu
Emile Anand
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
eanand@caltech.edu

James A. Preiss
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
japreiss@caltech.edu
Yingying Li
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL, USA
yl101@illinois.edu

Yisong Yue
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
yyue@caltech.edu

Adam Wierman
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
adamw@caltech.edu

Abstract
We study online adaptive policy selection in systems with time-varying costs and
dynamics. We develop the Gradient-based Adaptive Policy Selection (GAPS)
algorithm together with a general analytical framework for online policy selection
via online optimization. Under our proposed notion of contractive policy classes,
we show that GAPS approximates the behavior of an ideal online gradient descent
algorithm on the policy parameters while requiring less information and computation. When convexity holds, our algorithm is the first to achieve optimal policy
regret. When convexity does not hold, we provide the first local regret bound for
online policy selection. Our numerical experiments show that GAPS can adapt to
changing environments more quickly than existing benchmarks.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of online adaptive policy selection for nonlinear time-varying discrete-time
dynamical systems. The dynamics are given by xt+1 = gt (xt , ut ), where xt is the state and ut is
the control input at time t. The policy class is a time-varying mapping ⇡t from the state xt and a
policy parameter ✓t to a control input ut . At every time step t, the online policy incurs a stage cost
ct = ft (xt , ut ) that depends on the current state and control input. The goal of policy selection is to
pick the parameter ✓t online to minimize the total stage costs over a finite horizon T .
Online adaptive policy selection and general online control have received significant attention recently
[1–8] because many control tasks require running the policy on a single trajectory, as opposed to
restarting the episode to evaluate a different policy from the same initial state. Adaptivity is also
important when the dynamics and cost functions are time-varying. For example, in robotics, timevarying dynamics arise when we control an aircraft under changing wind conditions [9].
†
This work is supported by NSF Grants CNS-2146814, CPS-2136197, CNS-2106403, NGSDI-2105648, CCF1918865, and Gift from Latitude AI, with additional support for Yiheng Lin provided by Amazon AI4Science
Fellowship and PIMCO Graduate Fellowship in Data Science.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

