Provable benefits of score matching
Chirag Pabbaraju

Dhruv Rohatgi

Anish Sevekari

Stanford University

MIT

Carnegie Mellon University

cpabbara@cs.stanford.edu

drohatgi@mit.edu

asevekar@andrew.cmu.edu

Holden Lee

Ankur Moitra

Andrej Risteski

Johns Hopkins University

MIT

Carnegie Mellon University

hlee283@jhu.edu

moitra@mit.edu

aristesk@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Score matching is an alternative to maximum likelihood (ML) for estimating a
probability distribution parametrized up to a constant of proportionality. By fitting
the “score” of the distribution, it sidesteps the need to compute this constant of
proportionality (which is often intractable). While score matching and variants
thereof are popular in practice, precise theoretical understanding of the benefits and
tradeoffs with maximum likelihood—both computational and statistical—are not
well understood. In this work, we give the first example of a natural exponential
family of distributions such that the score matching loss is computationally efficient
to optimize, and has a comparable statistical efficiency to ML, while the ML loss
is intractable to optimize using a gradient-based method. The family consists
of exponentials of polynomials of fixed degree, and our result can be viewed as
a continuous analogue of recent developments in the discrete setting. Precisely,
we show: (1) Designing a zeroth-order or first-order oracle for optimizing the
maximum likelihood loss is NP-hard. (2) Maximum likelihood has a statistical
efficiency polynomial in the ambient dimension and the radius of the parameters of
the family. (3) Minimizing the score matching loss is both computationally and
statistically efficient, with complexity polynomial in the ambient dimension.

1

Introduction

Energy-based models are a flexible class of probabilistic models with wide-ranging applications.
They are parameterized by a class of energies Eθ (x) which in turn determines the distribution
exp(−Eθ (x))
pθ (x) =
Zθ
up to a constant of proportionality Zθ that is called the partition function. One of the major challenges
of working with energy-based models is designing efficient algorithms for fitting them to data.
Statistical theory tells us that the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE)—i.e., the parameters θ which
maximize the likelihood—enjoys good statistical properties including consistency and asymptotic
efficiency.
However, there is a major computational impediment to computing the MLE: Both evaluating
the log-likelihood and computing its gradient with respect to θ (i.e., implementing zeroth and
first order oracles, respectively) seem to require computing the partition function, which is often
computationally intractable. More precisely, the gradient of the negative log-likelihood depends on
∇θ log Zθ = Epθ [∇θ Eθ (x)]. A popular approach is to estimate this quantity by using a Markov
chain to approximately sample from pθ . However in high-dimensional settings, Markov chains often
require many, sometimes even exponentially many, steps to mix.
Score matching (Hyvärinen, 2005) is a popular alternative that sidesteps needing to compute the
partition function of sample from pθ . The idea is to fit the score of the distribution, in the sense that
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

