Sample-efficient Multi-objective Molecular
Optimization with GFlowNets

Yiheng Zhu1∗, Jialu Wu2∗, Chaowen Hu3 , Jiahuan Yan1 ,
Chang-Yu Hsieh2†, Tingjun Hou2†, Jian Wu4,5,6†
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University
3
Polytechnic Institute, Zhejiang University
4
Second Affiliated Hospital School of Medicine, Zhejiang University
5
School of Public Health, Zhejiang University
6
Institute of Wenzhou, Zhejiang University
{zhuyiheng2020, jialuwu, ChaowenHu, jyansir, kimhsieh, tingjunhou, wujian2000}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Many crucial scientific problems involve designing novel molecules with desired
properties, which can be formulated as a black-box optimization problem over
the discrete chemical space. In practice, multiple conflicting objectives and
costly evaluations (e.g., wet-lab experiments) make the diversity of candidates
paramount. Computational methods have achieved initial success but still struggle
with considering diversity in both objective and search space. To fill this gap,
we propose a multi-objective Bayesian optimization (MOBO) algorithm leveraging the hypernetwork-based GFlowNets (HN-GFN) as an acquisition function
optimizer, with the purpose of sampling a diverse batch of candidate molecular
graphs from an approximate Pareto front. Using a single preference-conditioned
hypernetwork, HN-GFN learns to explore various trade-offs between objectives.
We further propose a hindsight-like off-policy strategy to share high-performing
molecules among different preferences in order to speed up learning for HNGFN. We empirically illustrate that HN-GFN has adequate capacity to generalize
over preferences. Moreover, experiments in various real-world MOBO settings
demonstrate that our framework predominantly outperforms existing methods
in terms of candidate quality and sample efficiency. The code is available at
https://github.com/violet-sto/HN-GFN.

1

Introduction

Designing novel molecular structures with desired properties, also referred to as molecular optimization, is a crucial task with great application potential in scientific fields ranging from drug discovery
to material design. Molecular optimization can be naturally formulated as a black-box optimization
problem over the discrete chemical space, which is combinatorially large [52]. Recent years have
witnessed the trend to leverage computational methods, such as deep generative models [31] and
combinatorial optimization algorithms [62, 30], to facilitate optimization. However, the applicability
of most prior approaches in real-world scenarios is hindered by two practical constraints: (i) Chemists
commonly seek to optimize multiple properties of interest simultaneously [60, 33]. For example, in
addition to effectively inhibiting a disease-associated target, an ideal drug is desired to be easily synthesizable and non-toxic. Unfortunately, as objectives often conflict, in most cases, there is no single
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

