Distilling Out-of-Distribution Robustness from
Vision-Language Foundation Models
Andy Zhou1, 3 , Jindong Wang2 , Yu-Xiong Wang1 , and Haohan Wang1
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Microsoft Research
3
AI@UIUC

{andyz3, yxw, haohanw}@illinois.edu, jindong.wang@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose a conceptually simple and lightweight framework for improving the
robustness of vision models through the combination of knowledge distillation
and data augmentation. We address the conjecture that larger models do not
make for better teachers by showing strong gains in out-of-distribution robustness
when distilling from pretrained foundation models. Following this finding, we
propose Discrete Adversarial Distillation (DAD), which leverages a robust teacher
to generate adversarial examples and a VQGAN to discretize them, creating more
informative samples than standard data augmentation techniques. We provide a
theoretical framework for the use of a robust teacher in the knowledge distillation
with data augmentation setting and demonstrate strong gains in out-of-distribution
robustness and clean accuracy across different student architectures. Notably, our
method adds minor computational overhead compared to similar techniques and
can be easily combined with other data augmentations for further improvements.

1

Introduction

One of the goals of machine learning is to develop systems that can generalize effectively across
diverse populations and environments, much like human intelligence. Despite the impressive advancements in neural networks that surpass human performance in various tasks in computer vision,
their generalization capabilities remain inadequate when faced with out-of-distribution data, such as
adversarial perturbations [60], unusual colors and textures [17, 58, 68], or challenging contexts [29].
One major line of research addresses this issue with more sophisticated training strategies [37],
including adversarial training [39], data augmentation [18, 28, 79], or other regularizations [35, 46,
61, 73, 69]. In this paper, we focus on adversarial-training-based data augmentation [75], which can
enhance the quantity and diversity of training data. In addition, theoretical work suggests achieving
high robustness requires significantly more samples than clean accuracy [56]. This has also been
shown empirically [3, 24], most recently with transformers [14] which achieve robustness on a variety
of computer vision tasks. In addition to weak inductive bias, powerful model capacity, and grounding
with language, these models are often trained with large-scale datasets [12, 14, 48, 76], up to billions
of images [57] that encompass many real-world distribution shifts. As a result, these foundation
models [1] exhibit remarkable zero-shot generalization, especially on natural distribution shifts such
as artistic renderings, but require large amounts of compute and heavily parameterized models.
In this paper, we aim to connect these two lines of work. We investigate if it is possible to improve
robustness by introducing a foundation model as a teacher to distill robust representations and help
generate a diverse data augmentation. We conduct our analysis without requiring the teacher’s largescale dataset and focus on out-of-distribution robustness by introducing an image-to-image generative
model to discretize optimized perturbations. We aim to leverage in-distribution data to a greater
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

