MIM4DD: Mutual Information Maximization for
Dataset Distillation
Yuzhang Shang1 , Zhihang Yuan2 , Yan Yan1∗
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology
2
Huomo AI
yshang4@hawk.iit.edu, zhihang.yuan@huomo.ai, yyan34@iit.edu
1

Abstract
Dataset distillation (DD) aims to synthesize a small dataset whose test performance
is comparable to a full dataset using the same model. State-of-the-art (SoTA) methods optimize synthetic datasets primarily by matching heuristic indicators extracted
from two networks: one from real data and one from synthetic data (see Fig. 1,
Left), such as gradients and training trajectories. DD is essentially a compression
problem that emphasizes maximizing the preservation of information contained in
the data. We argue that well-defined metrics which measure the amount of shared
information between variables in information theory are necessary for success
measurement but are never considered by previous works. Thus, we introduce
mutual information (MI) as the metric to quantify the shared information between
the synthetic and the real datasets, and devise MIM4DD numerically maximizing
the MI via a newly designed optimizable objective within a contrastive learning
framework to update the synthetic dataset. Specifically, we designate the samples
in different datasets that share the same labels as positive pairs and vice versa
negative pairs. Then we respectively pull and push those samples in positive and
negative pairs into contrastive space via minimizing NCE loss. As a result, the
targeted MI can be transformed into a lower bound represented by feature maps of
samples, which is numerically feasible. Experiment results show that MIM4DD can
be implemented as an add-on module to existing SoTA DD methods.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has remarkably successful performance in computer vision tasks [25, 6], but
most deep-learning-based methods require enormous
amounts of data followed by extensive training resources. For example, in order to train a CLIP
model [31] in a self-supervised manner [8], a highresolution dataset with more than 10 million images
are collected for training, which consumes tens of
hundreds of GPU hours.

Loss

Real
Dataset

Optimize

Real
Dataset

Optimize

Matching
Loss

Mutual
Information

Loss
Synthetic
Dataset

Network
Forward Propagation

Synthetic
Dataset

Distribution

Backward Propagation

Figure 1: (Left) General framework of previous

A straightforward solution to eliminate the reliance SoTA DD methods: matching heuristic indicaon training DNNs on data is to construct small train- tors extracted by networks from real and syning sets. Before the deep learning era, coreset or thetic datasets; (Right) the motivation of MIM4DD:
subset selection is the most prevalent paradigm, in maximizing the mutual information between two
which one can obtain a subset of salient data points datasets for optimizing the synthetic dataset.
to represent the original dataset of interest [1, 12, 34]. In the era of deep learning, in contrast to
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

