Concept Algebra for (Score-Based) Text-Controlled
Generative Models
Zihao Wang1 , Lin Gui1 , Jeffrey Negrea2 , and Victor Veitch1,2,3
1

Department of Statistics, University of Chicago
2
Data Science Institute, University of Chicago
3
Google Research

Abstract
This paper concerns the structure of learned representations in text-guided
generative models, focusing on score-based models. A key property of such
models is that they can compose disparate concepts in a ‘disentangled’ manner.
This suggests these models have internal representations that encode concepts
in a ‘disentangled’ manner. Here, we focus on the idea that concepts are encoded
as subspaces of some representation space. We formalize what this means, show
there’s a natural choice for the representation, and develop a simple method
for identifying the part of the representation corresponding to a given concept.
In particular, this allows us to manipulate the concepts expressed by the model
through algebraic manipulation of the representation. We demonstrate the idea
with examples using Stable Diffusion.

1

Introduction

Large-scale text-controlled generative models are now dominant in many parts of modern machine
learning and artificial intelligence [e.g., Bro+20; Rad+21; Bom+21; Koj+22]. In these models,
the user provides a prompt in natural language and the model generates samples based on
this prompt—e.g., in large language models the sample is a natural language response, and
in text-to-image models the sample is an image. These models have a remarkable ability to
compose disparate concepts to generate coherent samples that were not seen during training.This
suggests that these models have some internal representation of high-level concepts that can be
manipulated in a ‘disentangled’ manner. Broadly, the goal of this paper is to shed light on how
this concept representation works, and how it can be manipulated. We focus on text-to-image
diffusion models, though many of the ideas are generally applicable.
Our starting point is the following commonly observed structure of representations:
1. Each data point x is mapped to some representation vector Rep(x) 2 R p .

2. High-level concepts correspond to subspaces (directions) of the representation space.
Perhaps the best known example of this structure is in word embeddings, where semantic relationships such as Rep(“king”) Rep(“queen”) ⇡ Rep(“man”) Rep(“woman”) suggest that high-level
concepts (here, sex) are encoded as directions in the representation space [Mik+13]. This kind
of encoding of concepts has been argued to occur in many contexts, including in the latent
space of variational autoencoders [ZW20; Khe+20; MFM21] and in the latent space of language
models [Bol+16; GG19; Rad+21; Elh+22]. We’ll call representations of this kind arithmetically
composable, because composition corresponds to arithmetic operations on the representation
vectors. The goal of this paper is to develop arithmetically composable representations of text for
score-based text to image models.
There are two main motivations. First, understanding the structure of the representation space is
important for foundational progress on understanding the emergent behavior of text-controlled
generative models. It is particularly interesting to study this question in the text-to-image setting
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

