Robustness Guarantees for Adversarially Trained
Neural Networks
Poorya Mianjy
Johns Hopkins University

Raman Arora
Johns Hopkins University
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
We study robust adversarial training of two-layer neural networks as a bi-level
optimization problem. In particular, for the inner loop that implements the adversarial attack during training using projected gradient descent (PGD), we propose
maximizing a lower bound on the 0/1-loss by reflecting a surrogate loss about the
origin. This allows us to give a convergence guarantee for the inner-loop PGD
attack. Furthermore, assuming the data is linearly separable, we provide precise
iteration complexity results for end-to-end adversarial training, which holds for any
width and initialization. We provide empirical evidence to support our theoretical
results.

1

Introduction

Despite the tremendous success of deep learning, neural network-based models are highly susceptible to small, imperceptible, adversarial perturbations of data at test time [Szegedy et al., 2014].
Such vulnerability to adversarial examples imposes severe limitations on the deployment of neural
networks-based systems, especially in critical high-stakes applications such as autonomous driving,
where safe and reliable operation is paramount.
An abundance of studies demonstrating adversarial examples across different tasks and application
domains [Goodfellow et al., 2014, Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016, Carlini and Wagner, 2017] has led to
a renewed focus on robust learning as an active area of research within machine learning. The goal of
robust learning is to find models that yield reliable predictions on test data notwithstanding adversarial
perturbations. A principled approach to training models that are robust to adversarial examples that
has emerged in recent years is that of adversarial training [Madry et al., 2018]. Adversarial training
formulates learning as a min-max optimization problem wherein the 0-1 classification loss is replaced
by a convex surrogate such as the cross-entropy loss, and alternating optimization techniques are
used to solve the resulting saddle point problem.
Despite empirical success of adversarial training, our understanding of its theoretical underpinnings
remain limited. From a practical standpoint, it is remarkable that gradient based techniques can
efficiently solve both inner maximization problem to find adversarial examples and outer minimization
problem to impart robust generalization. On the other hand, a theoretical analysis is challenging
because (1) both the inner- and outer-level optimization problems are non-convex, and (2) it is unclear
a-priori if solving the min-max optimization problem would even guarantee robust generalization.
In this work, we seek to understand adversarial training better. In particular, under a margin
separability assumption, we provide robust generalization guarantees for two-layer neural networks
with Leaky ReLU activation trained using adversarial training. Our key contributions are as follows.
1. We identify a disconnect between the robust learning objective and the min-max formulation
of adversarial training. This observation inspires a simple modification of adversarial training –
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

