DiT-3D: Exploring Plain Diffusion Transformers
for 3D Shape Generation

Shentong Mo1 Enze Xie2∗ Ruihang Chu3 Lewei Yao2
Lanqing Hong2 Matthias Nießner4 Zhenguo Li2
1

MBZUAI, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 3 CUHK, 4 TUM
https://DiT-3D.github.io

Abstract
Recent Diffusion Transformers (e.g. DiT [1]) have demonstrated their powerful
effectiveness in generating high-quality 2D images. However, it is still being
determined whether the Transformer architecture performs equally well in 3D
shape generation, as previous 3D diffusion methods mostly adopted the U-Net
architecture. To bridge this gap, we propose a novel Diffusion Transformer for
3D shape generation, namely DiT-3D, which can directly operate the denoising
process on voxelized point clouds using plain Transformers. Compared to existing
U-Net approaches, our DiT-3D is more scalable in model size and produces much
higher quality generations. Specifically, the DiT-3D adopts the design philosophy
of DiT [1] but modifies it by incorporating 3D positional and patch embeddings
to adaptively aggregate input from voxelized point clouds. To reduce the computational cost of self-attention in 3D shape generation, we incorporate 3D window
attention into Transformer blocks, as the increased 3D token length resulting from
the additional dimension of voxels can lead to high computation. Finally, linear and
devoxelization layers are used to predict the denoised point clouds. In addition, our
transformer architecture supports efficient fine-tuning from 2D to 3D, where the
pre-trained DiT-2D checkpoint on ImageNet can significantly improve DiT-3D on
ShapeNet. Experimental results on the ShapeNet dataset demonstrate that the proposed DiT-3D achieves state-of-the-art performance in high-fidelity and diverse 3D
point cloud generation. In particular, our DiT-3D decreases the 1-Nearest Neighbor
Accuracy of the state-of-the-art method by 4.59 and increases the Coverage metric
by 3.51 when evaluated on Chamfer Distance.

1

Introduction

In recent times, there has been a growing interest in exploring the potential of diffusion transformers
for high-fidelity image generation, as evinced by a series of scholarly works [1, 2, 3, 4]. Notably, a
seminal work by Peebles et al. [1] proposed the replacement of the widely-used U-Net backbone
with a scalable transformer. Specifically, the proposed method operates on latent patches by training
latent 2D diffusion models. However, the efficacy of plain diffusion transformers for 3D shape
generation has yet to be explored, as most existing 3D diffusion approaches continue to adopt the
U-Net backbone.
Generating high-fidelity point clouds for 3D shape generation is a challenging and significant
problem. Early generative methods [5, 6, 7] addressed this problem by directly optimizing heuristic
loss objectives, such as Chamfer Distance (CD) and Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD). More recent
works [8, 9, 10, 11] have explored the usage of the generative adversarial network (GAN)-based
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

