Building Socio-culturally Inclusive Stereotype
Resources with Community Engagement

Sunipa Dev
Google Research
sunipadev@google.com
Dinesh Tewari
Google Research
dineshtewari@google.com

Jaya Goyal
Circadian Connect
jaya@circadianconnect.com

Shachi Dave*
Google Research
shachi@google.com

Vinodkumar Prabhakaran*
Google Research
vinodkpg@google.com

Abstract
With rapid development and deployment of generative language models in global
settings, there is an urgent need to also scale our measurements of harm, not just in
the number and types of harms covered, but also how well they account for local
cultural contexts, including marginalized identities and the social biases experienced by them. Current evaluation paradigms are limited in their abilities to address
this, as they are not representative of diverse, locally situated but global, sociocultural perspectives. Our evaluation resources must be enhanced and calibrated by
including people and experiences from different cultures and societies worldwide,
to prevent gross underestimations or skewed measurements of harm. In this work,
we demonstrate a socio-culturally aware expansion of evaluation resources in the
Indian societal context, specifically for the harm of stereotyping. We devise a
community engaged effort to build a resource that contains stereotypes for axes of
disparity uniquely present in India. The resultant resource increases the number of
stereotypes known for and in the Indian context by over 1000 stereotypes across
many unique identities. We also demonstrate the utility and effectiveness of such
expanded resources for evaluations of language models. CONTENT WARNING:
This paper contains examples of stereotypes that may be offensive.

1

Introduction

Generative Artificial Intelligence has seen immense progress in recent years [11, 42, 13, 39], leading
to their accelerated integration into a myriad of applications, including writing assistance [21], and
story telling [45]. Alongside, there is also growing awareness and concerns about the responsibility
and safety aspects of these models [4, 17]. One particular challenge is that generative models may
learn, perpetuate, and even amplify social stereotypes in the data [46], either reproducing them
explicitly in generated language or images, or reflecting them in distributional differences in the
outputs generated. While the exact harms of such propagation of stereotypes will depend on the
specific application contexts, it is crucial to be able to reliably detect them in the generated outputs.
A growing body of work looks into detecting and mitigating these harms [8, 38], through interventions
such as data augmentation [48] or adversarial training [38, 19]. While these techniques are useful,
they are entirely reliant on underlying resources such as lists of words, phrases, and sentences, which
are markers of the specific stereotype [12, 31, 32, 23]. These resources in turn are lacking in many
ways: first, there is a Western bias in that, these resources mostly cover stereotype harms about and
from the Western perspective[40, 35]. Secondly, they are built based on researchers’ world views
and rarely represent diverse community perspectives. In the pipeline towards the creation of such
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

