Differentially Private Approximate Near Neighbor
Counting in High Dimensions

Alexandr Andoni
Columbia University
andoni@cs.columbia.edu

Piotr Indyk
MIT
indyk@mit.edu

Sepideh Mahabadi
Microsoft Research
smahabadi@microsoft.com

Shyam Narayanan
MIT
shyamsn@mit.edu

Abstract
Range counting (e.g., counting the number of data points falling into a given query
ball) under differential privacy has been studied extensively. However, the current
algorithms for this problem are subject to the following dichotomy. One class of
algorithms suffers from an additive error that is a fixed polynomial in the number
of points. Another class of algorithms allows for polylogarithmic additive error, but
the error grows exponentially in the dimension. To achieve the latter, the problem
is relaxed to allow a “fuzzy” definition of the range boundary, e.g., a count of the
points in a ball of radius r might also include points in a ball of radius cr for some
c > 1. In this paper we present an efficient algorithm that offers a sweet spot
between these two classes. The algorithm has an additive error that is an arbitrary
small power of the data set size, depending on how fuzzy the range boundary is,
as well as a small (1 + o(1)) multiplicative error. Crucially, the amount of noise
added has no dependence on the dimension. Our algorithm introduces a variant of
Locality-Sensitive Hashing, utilizing it in a novel manner.

1

Introduction

Differential Privacy (DP) [DMNS06, DKM+ 06, DMNS16] is a widely used tool for preserving the
privacy of sensitive personal information. It allows a data structure to provide approximate answers
to queries about the data it holds, while ensuring that the removal or addition of a single database
entry does not significantly affect the outcome of any analysis. The latter guarantee is accomplished
by adding some amount of noise to the answers, so that the data cannot be "reverse-engineered" from
the answers to the queries. See Definition 2.1 for the formal setup. The notion has been deployed in
many important scenarios in industry [DKY17, EPK14, BEM+ 17, Sha14, G+ 16] as well as the U.S.
census [Abo18].
One of the key data analysis problems studied under differential privacy is range counting. Here, the
goal is to construct a data structure that answers queries about the total number of data items in a
database satisfying a given property. Formally, given a multiset X of n elements from a universe U,
the goal of range counting queries is to report the number of points within a given range Q ∈ Q from
a prespecified class of query ranges Q. For example, this could correspond to retrieving the number
of users in a particular geographic location, or a number of patients with given symptoms.
Differentially private range counting has been studied extensively, for many classes of queries. For
example, the case of Q = U, i.e., when the queries ask for the number of occurrences of a given
element in the database, this correspond to the well-known histogram problem [HKR12, EPK14].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

