Minimum Description Length and Generalization
Guarantees for Representation Learning

Milad Sefidgaran ∤ , Abdellatif Zaidi : ∤ , Piotr Krasnowski ∤
:
Paris Research Center, Huawei Technologies France
Université Gustave Eiffel, France
{milad.sefidgaran2,piotr.g.krasnowski}@huawei.com, abdellatif.zaidi@univ-eiffel.fr
∤

Abstract
A major challenge in designing efficient statistical supervised learning algorithms is
finding representations that perform well not only on available training samples but also
on unseen data. While the study of representation learning has spurred much interest,
most existing such approaches are heuristic; and very little is known about theoretical
generalization guarantees. For example, the information bottleneck method seeks a
good generalization by finding a minimal description of the input that is maximally
informative about the label variable, where minimality and informativeness are both
measured by Shannon’s mutual information.
In this paper, we establish a compressibility framework that allows us to derive upper
bounds on the generalization error of a representation learning algorithm in terms
of the “Minimum Description Length” (MDL) of the labels or the latent variables
(representations). Rather than the mutual information between the encoder’s input
and the representation, which is often believed to reflect the algorithm’s generalization
capability in the related literature but in fact, falls short of doing so, our new bounds
involve the “multi-letter” relative entropy between the distribution of the representations
(or labels) of the training and test sets and a fixed prior. In particular, these new bounds
reflect the structure of the encoder and are not vacuous for deterministic algorithms.
Our compressibility approach, which is information-theoretic in nature, builds upon
that of Blum-Langford for PAC-MDL bounds and introduces two essential ingredients:
block-coding and lossy-compression. The latter allows our approach to subsume the
so-called geometrical compressibility as a special case. To the best knowledge of the
authors, the established generalization bounds are the first of their kind for Information
Bottleneck type encoders and representation learning. Finally, we partly exploit the
theoretical results by introducing a new data-dependent prior. Numerical simulations
illustrate the advantages of well-chosen such priors over classical priors used in IB.

1

Introduction

A key performance indicator of stochastic learning algorithms is their capability to generalize, i.e., perform
equally well on training and unseen data. However, designing learning algorithms with good generalization
guarantees remains a major challenge. A popular approach involves learning an encoder part and a decoder
part. The encoder aims at generating a suitable representation of the input (referred to as “latent variable”)
by extracting relevant features from the input data. The decoder aims at optimizing the performance of the
learning task for the given training dataset, known as empirical risk minimization (ERM), based only on the
learned latent variables. This approach is grounded on the idea that performing ERM on the latent variable
(instead of the input itself) prevents overfitting.
Information Bottleneck. Several approaches have attempted to formalize the concept of a “good representation” [SST10, AFDM17, VDOV` 17, DKSV20]. Perhaps, the most prominent is the information
bottleneck (IB) method which was first introduced in [TPB00] and then extended in several directions
[SST10, AFDM17, AZ19, KTW19, Fis20, RGTS20, KASK22]. The IB approach was deemed useful
to analyze deep neural networks [SZT17, ZEAS20, GP20, Gei21] and guide their training process. For
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

