Towards Test-Time Refusals via Concept Negation

Peiran Dong1

Song Guo2∗ Junxiao Wang3∗ Bingjie Wang1
Jiewei Zhang1 Ziming Liu1
1
Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology & SDAIA-KAUST AI
{peiran.dong,bingjie.wang,jiewei.zhang,ziming.liu}@connect.polyu.hk
songguo@cse.ust.hk
junxiao.wang@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Generative models produce unbounded outputs, necessitating the use of refusal
techniques to confine their output space. Employing generative refusals is crucial
in upholding the ethical and copyright integrity of synthesized content, particularly
when working with widely adopted diffusion models. “Concept negation” presents
a promising paradigm to achieve generative refusals, as it effectively defines and
governs the model’s output space based on concepts, utilizing natural language
interfaces that are readily comprehensible to humans. However, despite the valuable contributions of prior research to the field of concept negation, it still suffers
from significant limitations. The existing concept negation methods, which operate
based on the composition of score or noise predictions from the diffusion process,
are limited to independent concepts (e.g., “a blonde girl” without “glasses”) and fail
to consider the interconnected nature of concepts in reality (e.g., “Mickey mouse
eats ice cream” without “Disney characters”). Keeping the limitations in mind, we
propose a novel framework, called P ROTO R E, to improve the flexibility of concept
negation via test-time negative concept identification along with purification in
the feature space. P ROTO R E works by incorporating CLIP’s language-contrastive
knowledge to identify the prototype of negative concepts, extract the negative
features from outputs using the prototype as a prompt, and further refine the attention maps by retrieving negative features. Our evaluation on multiple benchmarks
shows that P ROTO R E outperforms state-of-the-art methods under various settings,
in terms of the effectiveness of purification and the fidelity of generative images.

1

Introduction

The family of diffusion models [1, 2] has achieved remarkable performance in image synthesis
[3, 4, 5]. Recent advancements in text-conditional diffusion models [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] have further
improved the ability to generate images with precise control over their content. In text-conditional
diffusion models, text prompts2 are used as input during the diffusion process to guide the creation of
images that align with the desired content. Glide [6] and Semantic Diffusion Guidance (SDG) [7]
have explored the use of pre-trained vision-language models like CLIP [11] to encode text conditions
into latent features. Latent diffusion [8], including its large-scale implementation (Stable Diffusion),
efficiently leverages and expands the design of latent vectors throughout the denoising process, where
convolutional neural networks and cross-attention mechanisms merge multi-modal latent features.
∗

Corresponding authors: Song Guo, Junxiao Wang.
Text prompts can take various forms, such as sentences, phrases, or single words, and serve as descriptions
of desired image content. They provide a natural language interface to specify image attributes like style, color,
and texture, enabling the generation of objects, scenes, and abstract concepts.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

