A Finite-Sample Analysis of Payoff-Based Independent
Learning in Zero-Sum Stochastic Games

Zaiwei Chen1,∗ , Kaiqing Zhang2 , Eric Mazumdar1,† , Asuman Ozdaglar3 , Adam Wierman1,‡
1
CMS, Caltech, * zchen458@caltech.edu,† mazumdar@caltech.edu,‡ adamw@caltech.edu
2
ECE & ISR, University of Maryland, College Park, kaiqing@umd.edu
3
EECS, MIT, asuman@mit.edu

Abstract
In this work, we study two-player zero-sum stochastic games and develop a variant of the smoothed best-response learning dynamics that combines independent
learning dynamics for matrix games with the minimax value iteration for stochastic
games. The resulting learning dynamics are payoff-based, convergent, rational,
and symmetric between the two players. Our theoretical results present to the best
of our knowledge the first last-iterate finite-sample analysis of such independent
learning dynamics. To establish the results, we develop a coupled Lyapunov drift
approach to capture the evolution of multiple sets of coupled and stochastic iterates,
which might be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen remarkable successes in reinforcement learning (RL) in a variety of applications, such as board games [1], autonomous driving [2], robotics [3], and city navigation [4]. A
common feature of these applications is that there are multiple decision makers interacting with
each other in a common environment. Although empirical successes have shown the potential of
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) [5, 6], the training of MARL agents is largely based on
heuristics and parameter tuning and, therefore, is not always reliable. In particular, many practical
MARL algorithms are directly extended from their single-agent counterparts and lack guarantees
because of the adaptive strategies of multiple agents.
A growing literature seeks to provide theoretical insights to substantiate the empirical success of
MARL and inform the design of efficient and provably convergent algorithms. Work along these lines
can be broadly categorized into work on cooperative MARL where agents seek to reach a common
goal [7–10], and work on competitive MARL where agents have individual (and possibly misaligned)
objectives [11–22]. While some earlier work focused on providing guarantees on the asymptotic
convergence, the more recent ones share an increasing interest in understanding the finite-time/sample
behavior. This follows from a line of recent advances in establishing finite-sample guarantees of
single-agent RL algorithms, see e.g., [23–26] and many others.
In this paper, we focus on the benchmark setting of two-player1 zero-sum stochastic games, and
develop best-response-type learning dynamics with provable finite-sample guarantees. Crucially,
our learning dynamics are independent (requiring no coordination between the agents in learning)
and rational (each agent will converge to the best response to the opponent if the opponent plays
an (asymptotically) stationary policy [27]), and therefore capture learning in settings with multiple
game-theoretic agents. Indeed, learning dynamics with self-interested agents should not enforce
information communication or coordination among agents. Furthermore, we focus on the more
challenging but practically relevant setting of payoff-based learning, where each agent can only
1

Hereafter, we may use player and agent interchangeably.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

