Meta-Learning with Neural Bandit Scheduler

Yunzhe Qi ∗
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL
yunzheq2@illinois.edu

Yikun Ban∗
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL
yikunb2@illinois.edu

Tianxin Wei
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL
twei10@illinois.edu

Jiaru Zou
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL
jiaruz2@illinois.edu

Huaxiu Yao
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC
huaxiu@cs.unc.edu

Jingrui He
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL
jingrui@illinois.edu

Abstract
Meta-learning has been proven an effective learning paradigm for training machine
learning models with good generalization ability. Apart from the common practice
of uniformly sampling the meta-training tasks, existing methods working on task
scheduling strategies are mainly based on pre-defined sampling protocols or the
assumed task-model correlations, and greedily make scheduling decisions, which
can lead to sub-optimal performance bottlenecks of the meta-model. In this paper,
we propose a novel task scheduling framework under Contextual Bandits settings,
named BASS, which directly optimizes the task scheduling strategy based on the
status of the meta-model. By balancing the exploitation and exploration in metalearning task scheduling, BASS can help tackle the challenge of limited knowledge
about the task distribution during the early stage of meta-training, while simultaneously exploring potential benefits for forthcoming meta-training iterations through
an adaptive exploration strategy. Theoretical analysis and extensive experiments
are presented to show the effectiveness of our proposed framework.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning algorithms [19] have been receiving increased attention due to their strong generalization performance across a wide range of tasks [32, 20]. Most existing meta-learning methods
often assume a uniform distribution when drawing meta-training tasks, treating each task as equally
important [19]. However, this assumption can possibly fail in real-world scenarios. For example,
during data collection, candidate training tasks can be subject to noise perturbation, leading to performance bottlenecks in the meta-model if noisy and clean tasks are treated on an equal footing [43, 45].
In addition, some tasks can pose greater challenges for the meta-model to adapt to, necessitating a
more flexible allocation of computational resources during the meta-training process. Furthermore,
the task distribution may be skewed, with "tail" tasks receiving inadequate attention under uniform
sampling. As a result, the task scheduling methods [14, 51, 31, 24, 29] have been proposed for a
refined meta-training strategy.
∗

Equal Contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

