Equivariant flow matching

Leon Klein
Freie Universität Berlin
leon.klein@fu-berlin.de

Andreas Krämer
Freie Universität Berlin
andreas.kraemer@fu-berlin.de

Frank Noé
Microsoft Research AI4Science
Freie Universität Berlin
Rice University
franknoe@microsoft.com

Abstract
Normalizing flows are a class of deep generative models that are especially interesting for modeling probability distributions in physics, where the exact likelihood
of flows allows reweighting to known target energy functions and computing unbiased observables. For instance, Boltzmann generators tackle the long-standing
sampling problem in statistical physics by training flows to produce equilibrium
samples of many-body systems such as small molecules and proteins. To build
effective models for such systems, it is crucial to incorporate the symmetries of
the target energy into the model, which can be achieved by equivariant continuous
normalizing flows (CNFs). However, CNFs can be computationally expensive to
train and generate samples from, which has hampered their scalability and practical
application. In this paper, we introduce equivariant flow matching, a new training
objective for equivariant CNFs that is based on the recently proposed optimal transport flow matching. Equivariant flow matching exploits the physical symmetries
of the target energy for efficient, simulation-free training of equivariant CNFs.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of flow matching on rotation and permutation
invariant many-particle systems and a small molecule, alanine dipeptide, where for
the first time we obtain a Boltzmann generator with significant sampling efficiency
without relying on tailored internal coordinate featurization. Our results show
that the equivariant flow matching objective yields flows with shorter integration
paths, improved sampling efficiency, and higher scalability compared to existing
methods.

1

Introduction

Generative models have achieved remarkable success across various domains, including images
[1, 2, 3, 4], language [5, 6, 7], and applications in the physical sciences [8, 9, 10]. Among the rapidly
growing subfields in generative modeling, normalizing flows have garnered significant interest.
Normalizing flows [11, 12, 13, 14] are powerful exact-likelihood generative neural networks that
transform samples from a simple prior distribution into samples that follow a desired target probability
distribution. Previous studies [15, 16, 17, 18, 19] have emphasized the importance of incorporating
symmetries of the target system into the flow model. In this work, we focus specifically on many-body
systems characterized by configurations x ∈ RN ×D of N particles in D spatial dimensions. The
symmetries of such systems arise from the invariances of the potential energy function U (x). The

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

