On the Ability of Graph Neural Networks to
Model Interactions Between Vertices
Noam Razin, Tom Verbin, Nadav Cohen
Tel Aviv University
{noamrazin,tomverbin}@mail.tau.ac.il, cohennadav@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are widely used for modeling complex interactions
between entities represented as vertices of a graph. Despite recent efforts to
theoretically analyze the expressive power of GNNs, a formal characterization of
their ability to model interactions is lacking. The current paper aims to address
this gap. Formalizing strength of interactions through an established measure
known as separation rank, we quantify the ability of certain GNNs to model
interaction between a given subset of vertices and its complement, i.e. between
the sides of a given partition of input vertices. Our results reveal that the ability
to model interaction is primarily determined by the partition’s walk index — a
graph-theoretical characteristic defined by the number of walks originating from
the boundary of the partition. Experiments with common GNN architectures
corroborate this finding. As a practical application of our theory, we design
an edge sparsification algorithm named Walk Index Sparsification (WIS), which
preserves the ability of a GNN to model interactions when input edges are removed.
WIS is simple, computationally efficient, and in our experiments has markedly
outperformed alternative methods in terms of induced prediction accuracy.1 More
broadly, it showcases the potential of improving GNNs by theoretically analyzing
the interactions they can model.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) are a family of deep learning architectures, designed to model
complex interactions between entities represented as vertices of a graph. In recent years, GNNs have
been successfully applied across a wide range of domains, including social networks, biochemistry,
and recommender systems (see, e.g., [36, 59, 45, 49, 96, 104, 101, 18]). Consequently, significant
interest in developing a mathematical theory behind GNNs has arisen.
One of the fundamental questions a theory of GNNs should address is expressivity, which concerns
the class of functions a given architecture can realize. Existing studies of expressivity largely fall
into three categories. First, and most prominent, are characterizations of ability to distinguish nonisomorphic graphs [103, 74, 72, 70, 6, 15, 10, 17, 43, 42, 80], as measured by equivalence to classical
Weisfeiler-Leman graph isomorphism tests [99]. Second, are proofs for universal approximation of
continuous permutation invariant or equivariant functions, possibly up to limitations in distinguishing
some classes of graphs [73, 55, 25, 69, 3, 42]. Last, are works examining specific properties of GNNs
such as frequency response [77, 5] or computability of certain graph attributes, e.g. moments, shortest
paths, and substructure multiplicity [35, 9, 26, 39, 69, 23, 17, 105].
A major drawback of many existing approaches — in particular proofs of equivalence to WeisfeilerLeman tests and those of universality — is that they operate in asymptotic regimes of unbounded
1

An implementation of WIS is available at https://github.com/noamrazin/gnn_interactions.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

