DP-Mix: Mixup-based Data Augmentation for
Differentially Private Learning

Wenxuan Bao1

Francesco Pittaluga2

Vijay Kumar B G2

1

2

University of Florida

Vincent Bindschaedler1

NEC Labs America

Abstract
Data augmentation techniques, such as image transformations and combinations,
are highly effective at improving the generalization of computer vision models,
especially when training data is limited. However, such techniques are fundamentally incompatible with differentially private learning approaches, due to the
latter’s built-in assumption that each training image’s contribution to the learned
model is bounded. In this paper, we investigate why naive applications of multisample data augmentation techniques, such as mixup, fail to achieve good performance and propose two novel data augmentation techniques specifically designed for the constraints of differentially private learning. Our first technique,
DP-M IX S ELF , achieves SoTA classification performance across a range of datasets
and settings by performing mixup on self-augmented data. Our second technique,
DP-M IX D IFF , further improves performance by incorporating synthetic data from a
pre-trained diffusion model into the mixup process. We open-source the code at
https://github.com/wenxuan-Bao/DP-Mix.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) [11, 12] is a well-established paradigm for protecting data privacy, which
ensures that the output of computation over a dataset does not reveal sensitive information about
individuals in the dataset. However, training models with DP often incur significant performance
degradation, especially when strong privacy guarantees are required or the amount of training data
available is limited.
One class of techniques to overcome limited training data in classical (non-private) learning is data
augmentation. Unfortunately, the analysis of differentially private learning mechanisms requires that
the influence of each training example be limited, so naively applying data augmentation techniques
is fundamentally incompatible with existing differential private learning approaches. Therefore, new
approaches are required to leverage data augmentation.
Recently, De et al. [9] showed one way to incorporate simple data augmentation techniques, such
as horizontal flips and cropping, into differentially private training. Their approach creates several
self-augmentations of a training example and averages their gradients before clipping. This procedure
is compatible with differential privacy because each training example only impacts the gradients of
the self-augmentations which are aggregated together before clipping, thus preserving the sensitivity
bound. However, this requires using data augmentation techniques that operate on a single input
example, thus excluding large classes of multi-sample techniques such as mixup [46, 16, 38, 47, 6]
and cutmix [44, 8]. Furthermore, as shown in [9] their approach quickly hits diminishing returns after
8 or 16 self-augmentations.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

