Information Maximization Perspective of Orthogonal
Matching Pursuit with Applications to Explainable AI

†

Aditya Chattopadhyay†∗ Ryan Pilgrim†∗
René Vidal‡
Johns Hopkins University, USA, {achatto1, rpilgri1}@jhu.edu
‡
University of Pennsylvania, USA, vidalr@upenn.edu

Abstract
Information Pursuit (IP) is a classical active testing algorithm for predicting an
output by sequentially and greedily querying the input in order of information
gain. However, IP is computationally intensive since it involves estimating mutual
information in high-dimensional spaces. This paper explores Orthogonal Matching
Pursuit (OMP) as an alternative to IP for greedily selecting the queries. OMP is a
classical signal processing algorithm for sequentially encoding a signal in terms
of dictionary atoms chosen in order of correlation gain. In each iteration, OMP
selects the atom that is most correlated with the signal residual (the signal minus
its reconstruction thus far). Our first contribution is to establish a fundamental
connection between IP and OMP, where we prove that IP with random projections
of dictionary atoms as queries “almost” reduces to OMP, with the difference being
that IP selects atoms in order of normalized correlation gain. We call this version
IP-OMP and present simulations indicating that this difference does not have
any appreciable effect on the sparse code recovery rate of IP-OMP compared to
that of OMP for random Gaussian dictionaries. Inspired by this connection, our
second contribution is to explore the utility of IP-OMP for generating explainable
predictions, an area in which IP has recently gained traction. More specifically, we
propose a simple explainable AI algorithm which encodes an image as a sparse
combination of semantically meaningful dictionary atoms that are defined as text
embeddings of interpretable concepts. The final prediction is made using the
weights of this sparse combination, which serve as an explanation. Empirically, our
proposed algorithm is not only competitive with existing explainability methods
but also computationally less expensive.

1

Introduction

Information Pursuit (IP), first proposed by Geman and Jedynak [1], is a classical algorithm for active
testing: Given a set of queries whose answers are informative about some target variable, IP proceeds
by adaptively selecting queries in order of information gain. Specifically, in each iteration, IP selects
the query whose answer has maximum mutual information about the target variable given the history
of query-answers observed so far. IP has found numerous applications in machine learning such as
tracking roads in satellite images [1], face detection & localization [2], detecting & tracking surgical
instruments [3], and scene interpretation [4]. More recently, IP has been touted as a framework for
explainable AI [5]. Despite its utility, a major limitation for IP is its reliance on mutual information,
which is challenging to compute in high dimensions [6]. In light of this, we ask the question, are
there alternative sequential algorithms that could replace IP by employing a simpler objective in their
selection step? One such algorithm is Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (OMP), which we describe next.
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

