AllSim: Simulating and Benchmarking
Resource Allocation Policies in Multi-User Systems
Jeroen Berrevoets
University of Cambridge

Daniel Jarrett
University of Cambridge

Alex J. Chan
University of Cambridge

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge

Abstract
Numerous real-world systems, ranging from healthcare to energy grids, involve
users competing for finite and potentially scarce resources. Designing policies
for repeated resource allocation in such real-world systems is challenging for
many reasons, including the changing nature of user types and their (possibly urgent) need for resources. Researchers have developed numerous machine learning
solutions for determining repeated resource allocation policies in these challenging settings. However, a key limitation has been the absence of good methods
and test-beds for benchmarking these policies; almost all resource allocation
policies are benchmarked in environments which are either completely synthetic
or do not allow any deviation from historical data. In this paper we introduce
AllSim, which is a benchmarking environment for realistically simulating the
impact and utility of policies for resource allocation in systems in which users
compete for such scarce resources. Building such a benchmarking environment
is challenging because it needs to successfully take into account the entire collective of potential users and the impact a resource allocation policy has on all
the other users in the system. AllSim’s benchmarking environment is modular (each component being parameterized individually), learnable (informed by
historical data), and customizable (adaptable to changing conditions). These,
when interacting with an allocation policy, produce a dataset of simulated outcomes for evaluation and comparison of such policies. We believe AllSim is
an essential step towards a more systematic evaluation of policies for scarce resource allocation compared to current approaches for benchmarking such methods.

1

Introduction

The problem of repeated resource allocation to users with timeliness constraints is ubiquitous in
settings ranging from healthcare to engineering systems and even labour markets. This problem
becomes even more challenging when the resources are diverse and users may derive different benefits
from obtaining a specific resource. In these applications, a resource coordinator or decision maker, is
tasked with allocating these diverse resources to a pool of diverse users which arrive or leave over time.
When a new resource arrives, it is the decision maker’s task to assign this coveted resource to one of the
users in their current pool. Making such a decision has an enormous impact on the complete system:
(i) when a resource is allocated to a user, other users now need to wait for the next resource to arrive,
thereby impacting their utility (since they are delay-sensitive), (ii) the match between the resource
and the user recipient has different valuations, (iii) assigning a resource to a specific user in the pool
influences the utilities of all the other users in the pool as well, and thereby impacting any subsequent
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

