Pairwise GUI Dataset Construction Between Android
Phones and Tablets
Han Hu, Haolan Zhan∗, Yujin Huang, Di Liu
Monash University
Melbourne, Australia
{han.hu, haolan.zhan, yujin.huang}@monash.edu, dliu0024@student.monash.edu

Abstract
In the current landscape of pervasive smartphones and tablets, apps frequently exist
across both platforms. Although apps share most graphic user interfaces (GUIs)
and functionalities across phones and tablets, developers often rebuild from scratch
for tablet versions, escalating costs and squandering existing design resources.
Researchers are attempting to collect data and employ deep learning in automated
GUIs development to enhance developers’ productivity. There are currently several
publicly accessible GUI page datasets for phones, but none for pairwise GUIs
between phones and tablets. This poses a significant barrier to the employment of
deep learning in automated GUI development. In this paper, we introduce the Papt
dataset, a pioneering pairwise GUI dataset tailored for Android phones and tablets,
encompassing 10,035 phone-tablet GUI page pairs sourced from 5,593 unique
app pairs. We propose novel pairwise GUI collection approaches for constructing
this dataset and delineate its advantages over currently prevailing datasets in the
field. Through preliminary experiments on this dataset, we analyze the present
challenges of utilizing deep learning in automated GUI development.

1

Introduction

Mobile apps are ubiquitous in our daily life for supporting different tasks such as reading, chatting,
and banking. Smartphones and tablets are the two types of portable devices with the most available
apps [49]. To conquer the market, one app is often available on both smartphones and tablets [41].
Due to comparable functionalities, the smartphone and tablet versions of the same app have a
highly similar Graphical User Interface (GUI). Popular apps always share a similar GUI design
between phone apps and tablet apps, for example, YouTube [55] and Spotify [48]. If a tool can
automatically recommend a GUI design for the appropriate tablet platform based on existing mobile
GUIs, it can significantly minimise the developer’s engineering effort and accelerate the development
process. From the user side, a comparable design could provide data or study on user preferences
for consistency across different devices. It reduces the need for them to learn new navigation and
interaction patterns [44]. Therefore, automated GUI development tasks, such as the cross-platform
conversion of GUI designs, GUI recommendations, etc., are gradually gaining attention from industry
and academia [57, 37, 12]. However, the field of automatic GUI development is still in a research
bottleneck, lacking breakthroughs and widely recognized tools or methods. If a present developer
needs to develop a tablet-compatible version of their app, they usually start from scratch, resulting in
needless cost increases and wasted existing design resources.
According to our observations, the growth of automated GUI development is hindered by two reasons.
First, as deep learning approaches, particularly generative models [50], become more widespread in
the field of automated GUI development, researchers increasingly need a pairwise, high-quality GUI
∗

corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

