UP-NeRF: Unconstrained Pose-Prior-Free
Neural Radiance Fields
Injae Kim∗
Korea University
dna9041@korea.ac.kr

Minhyuk Choi∗
Korea University
sodlqnf123@korea.ac.kr

Hyunwoo J. Kim†
Korea University
hyunwoojkim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has enabled novel view synthesis with high fidelity
given images and camera poses. Subsequent works even succeeded in eliminating
the necessity of pose priors by jointly optimizing NeRF and camera pose. However, these works are limited to relatively simple settings such as photometrically
consistent and occluder-free image collections or a sequence of images from a
video. So they have difficulty handling unconstrained images with varying illumination and transient occluders. In this paper, we propose UP-NeRF (Unconstrained
Pose-prior-free Neural Radiance Fields) to optimize NeRF with unconstrained
image collections without camera pose prior. We tackle these challenges with surrogate tasks that optimize color-insensitive feature fields and a separate module for
transient occluders to block their influence on pose estimation. In addition, we introduce a candidate head to enable more robust pose estimation and transient-aware
depth supervision to minimize the effect of incorrect prior. Our experiments verify
the superior performance of our method compared to the baselines including BARF
and its variants in a challenging internet photo collection, Phototourism dataset.
The code of UP-NeRF is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/UP-NeRF.

1

Introduction

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [1] opened up a new chapter in novel view synthesis by demonstrating
its capacity to generate high-quality novel view images given only a set of 2D images. Its powerful
performance has enabled many practical applications including virtual/augmented reality (VR/AR) [2,
3], autonomous systems [4, 5], and robotics [6–8]. Various follow-up studies have developed NeRF
by addressing its limitations, such as the necessity of dense input views [9–11] and long training
time [12–17]. Also, there have been efforts [18, 19] to deal with unconstrained images with varying
illuminations and transient occluders to relieve the burden of collecting clean images or establishing a
specialized setting to capture them. For instance, NeRF-W [18] introduces an appearance embedding
to handle varying illumination and a transient head to filter transient occluders.
One of the popular research topics in NeRF is joint optimization for pose and neural scene representation. Originally, NeRF requires accurate camera pose priors which are generally obtained with
classic methods like structure from motion (SfM) [20]. Although the poses obtained from such a
method are treated as ground truth in many works, it does not always give optimal results or even
fails to converge. Hence recent works [21–23] have proposed a method so-called unposed-NeRF
that simultaneously trains camera poses and NeRF. This eliminates the necessity of pose priors and
burdensome preprocessing. While these methods have only succeeded in forward-facing scenes,
NoPe-NeRF [24] further improved the method to even outdoor scenes with continuous images from
videos. These previous works, however, are based on the photometric loss which is not reliable for
∗
†

First two authors have an equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

