Convergent Bregman Plug-and-Play Image
Restoration for Poisson Inverse Problems
Samuel Hurault
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, INRIA, Bordeaux INP, IMB, UMR 5251
samuel.hurault@math.u-bordeaux.fr
Ulugbek Kamilov
Washington University in St. Louis
kamilov@wustl.edu
Arthur Leclaire
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, INRIA, Bordeaux INP, IMB, UMR 5251
LTCI, Télécom Paris, IP Paris
arthur.leclaire@telecom-paris.fr
Nicolas Papadakis
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, INRIA, Bordeaux INP, IMB, UMR 5251
nicolas.papadakis@math.u-bordeaux.fr

Abstract
Plug-and-Play (PnP) methods are efficient iterative algorithms for solving ill-posed
image inverse problems. PnP methods are obtained by using deep Gaussian denoisers instead of the proximal operator or the gradient-descent step within proximal
algorithms. Current PnP schemes rely on data-fidelity terms that have either Lipschitz gradients or closed-form proximal operators, which is not applicable to
Poisson inverse problems. Based on the observation that the Gaussian noise is not
the adequate noise model in this setting, we propose to generalize PnP using the
Bregman Proximal Gradient (BPG) method. BPG replaces the Euclidean distance
with a Bregman divergence that can better capture the smoothness properties of
the problem. We introduce the Bregman Score Denoiser specifically parametrized
and trained for the new Bregman geometry and prove that it corresponds to the
proximal operator of a nonconvex potential. We propose two PnP algorithms based
on the Bregman Score Denoiser for solving Poisson inverse problems. Extending
the convergence results of BPG in the nonconvex settings, we show that the proposed methods converge, targeting stationary points of an explicit global functional.
Experimental evaluations conducted on various Poisson inverse problems validate
the convergence results and showcase effective restoration performance.

1

Introduction

Ill-posed image inverse problems are classically formulated with a minimization problem of the form
arg min λf (x) + g(x)

(1)

x∈Rn

where f is a data-fidelity term, g a regularization term, and λ > 0 a regularization parameter. The
data-fidelity term is generally written as the negative log-likelihood f (x) = − log p(y|x) of the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

