Fine-Tuning Language Models with Just
Forward Passes
Sadhika Malladi∗
Jason D. Lee

Tianyu Gao∗

Eshaan Nichani

Danqi Chen

Alex Damian

Sanjeev Arora

Princeton University
{smalladi, tianyug, eshnich, ad27, jasonlee, danqic, arora}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Fine-tuning language models (LMs) has yielded success on diverse downstream
tasks, but as LMs grow in size, backpropagation requires a prohibitively large
amount of memory. Zeroth-order (ZO) methods can in principle estimate gradients
using only two forward passes but are theorized to be catastrophically slow for
optimizing large models. In this work, we propose a memory-efficient zerothorder optimizer (MeZO), adapting the classical ZO-SGD method to operate inplace, thereby fine-tuning LMs with the same memory footprint as inference. For
example, with a single A100 80GB GPU, MeZO can train a 30-billion parameter
model, whereas fine-tuning with backpropagation can train only a 2.7B LM with
the same budget. We conduct comprehensive experiments across model types
(masked and autoregressive LMs), model scales (up to 66B), and downstream
tasks (classification, multiple-choice, and generation). Our results demonstrate
that (1) MeZO significantly outperforms in-context learning and linear probing;
(2) MeZO achieves comparable performance to fine-tuning with backpropagation
across multiple tasks, with up to 12× memory reduction and up to 2× GPU-hour
reduction in our implementation; (3) MeZO is compatible with both full-parameter
and parameter-efficient tuning techniques such as LoRA and prefix tuning; (4)
MeZO can effectively optimize non-differentiable objectives (e.g., maximizing
accuracy or F1). We support our empirical findings with theoretical insights,
highlighting how adequate pre-training and task prompts enable MeZO to fine-tune
huge models, despite classical ZO analyses suggesting otherwise.1

1

Introduction

Fine-tuning pre-trained language models (LMs) has been the dominant methodology for solving many
language tasks [28], adapting to specialized domains [42], or incorporating human instructions and
preferences [73]. However, as LMs are scaled up [13, 72], computing gradients for backpropagation
requires a prohibitive amount of memory – in our test, up to 12× the memory required for inference –
because it needs to cache activations during the forward pass, gradients during the backward pass,
and, in the case of Adam [52], also store gradient history (see Section 3.4 for a detailed analysis).
As a result, while it is possible to run inference with a 30-billion (30B) parameter LM on a single
Nvidia A100 GPU (with 80GB memory), backpropagation with Adam is feasible only for a 2.7B LM.
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods (PEFT [46, 57, 54]) update just a fraction of the network
∗
1

Equal contribution and corresponding authors.
Our code is available at https://github.com/princeton-nlp/MeZO.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

