Improving the Knowledge Gradient Algorithm

Le Yang
Department of Systems Engineering
City University of Hong Kong
lyang272-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Siyang Gao
Department of Systems Engineering
City University of Hong Kong
siyangao@cityu.edu.hk

Chin Pang Ho
School of Data Science
City University of Hong Kong
clint.ho@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
The knowledge gradient (KG) algorithm is a popular policy for the best arm
identification (BAI) problem. It is built on the simple idea of always choosing
the measurement that yields the greatest expected one-step improvement in the
estimate of the best mean of the arms. In this research, we show that this policy
has limitations, causing the algorithm not asymptotically optimal. We next provide
a remedy for it, by following the manner of one-step look ahead of KG, but instead
choosing the measurement that yields the greatest one-step improvement in the
probability of selecting the best arm. The new policy is called improved knowledge
gradient (iKG). iKG can be shown to be asymptotically optimal. In addition, we
show that compared to KG, it is easier to extend iKG to variant problems of BAI,
with the ϵ-good arm identification and feasible arm identification as two examples.
The superior performances of iKG on these problems are further demonstrated
using numerical examples.

1

Introduction

The best arm identification (BAI) is a sequential decision problem where in each stage, the agent pulls
one out of k given arms and observes a noisy sample of the chosen arm. At the end of the sampling
stage, the agent needs to select the arm that is believed to be the best according to the samples. In
this research, we let the best arm be the one with the largest mean. BAI is a useful abstraction of
issues faced in many practical settings [1, 2] and has been widely studied in the machine learning
community [3, 4]. Since in practical problems, the target arm(s) (to be identified) is not necessarily
the best arm, some variant models of BAI have also been proposed in the literature, e.g., top-m
arm identification [5, 6], Pareto front identification [7], ϵ-good arm identification [8], feasible arm
identification [9, 10], etc.
In this research, we focus on the fixed-budget BAI, in which the total number of samples (budget)
is fixed and known by the agent. The goal is to correctly identify the best arm when the budget is
used up. To solve this problem, many methods have been proposed, e.g., successive rejects (SR)
[4], expected improvements (EI) [11], top-two sampling [12, 13], knowledge gradient (KG) [14, 15],
optimal computing budget allocation (OCBA)[16, 17, 18], etc. Among these methods, KG has been
prevailing. It was first proposed in [19] and further analyzed in [20, 21]. It is built on the simple
idea of always pulling the arm that yields the greatest expected one-step improvement in the estimate
of the best mean of the arms. This improvement measure is analytical, making the algorithm easily
implementable. KG often offers reasonable empirical performances and has been successfully applied
in a number of real applications [22, 23].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

