Quantifying the Cost of Learning in Queueing Systems

Daniel Freund
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
dfreund@mit.edu

Thodoris Lykouris
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
lykouris@mit.edu

Wentao Weng
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
wweng@mit.edu

Abstract
Queueing systems are widely applicable stochastic models with use cases in communication networks, healthcare, service systems, etc. Although their optimal
control has been extensively studied, most existing approaches assume perfect
knowledge of the system parameters. Of course, this assumption rarely holds in
practice where there is parameter uncertainty, thus motivating a recent line of work
on bandit learning for queueing systems. This nascent stream of research focuses
on the asymptotic performance of the proposed algorithms.
In this paper, we argue that an asymptotic metric, which focuses on late-stage
performance, is insufficient to capture the intrinsic statistical complexity of learning
in queueing systems which typically occurs in the early stage. Instead, we propose
the Cost of Learning in Queueing (CLQ), a new metric that quantifies the maximum
increase in time-averaged queue length caused by parameter uncertainty. We
characterize the CLQ of a single-queue multi-server system, and then extend
these results to multi-queue multi-server systems and networks of queues. In
establishing our results, we propose a unified analysis framework for CLQ that
bridges Lyapunov and bandit analysis, provides guarantees for a wide range of
algorithms, and could be of independent interest.1

1

Introduction

Queueing systems are widely used stochastic models that capture congestion when services are
limited. These models have two main components: jobs and servers. Jobs wait in queues and have
different types. Servers differ in capabilities and speed. For example, in content moderation of online
platforms [28], jobs are user posts with types defined by contents, languages and suspected violation
types; servers are human reviewers who decide whether a post is benign or harmful. Moreover, job
types can change over time upon receiving service. For instance, in a hospital, patients and doctors
can be modeled as jobs and servers. A patient in the queue for emergent care can become a patient
in the queue for surgery after seeing a doctor at the emergency department [3]. That is, queues can
form a network due to jobs transitioning in types. Queueing systems also find applications in other
domains such as call centers [16], communication networks [36] and computer systems [17].
The single-queue multi-server model is a simple example to illustrate the dynamics and decisions in
queueing systems. In this model, there is one queue and K servers operating in discrete periods. In
each period, a new job arrives with probability λ. Servers have different service rates µ1 , . . . , µK .
The decision maker (DM) selects a server to serve the first job in the queue if there is any. If server j
is selected, the first job in the queue leaves with probability µj . The DM aims to minimize the
average wait of each job, which is equivalent to minimizing the queue length. The optimal policy
thus selects the server with the highest service rate µ⋆ = maxj µj ; the usual regime of interest is one
where the system is stabilizable, i.e., µ⋆ > λ, which ensures that the queue length does not grow to
1

A full version of this paper [12] can be found at https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.07817v2.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

