What Planning Problems Can
A Relational Neural Network Solve?
Jiayuan Mao1 Tomás Lozano-Pérez1 Joshua B. Tenenbaum1,2,3 Leslie Pack Kaelbling1
1
MIT Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2
MIT Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
3
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines

Abstract
Goal-conditioned policies are generally understood to be “feed-forward” circuits,
in the form of neural networks that map from the current state and the goal specification to the next action to take. However, under what circumstances such a policy
can be learned and how efficient the policy will be are not well understood. In
this paper, we present a circuit complexity analysis for relational neural networks
(such as graph neural networks and transformers) representing policies for planning
problems, by drawing connections with serialized goal regression search (S-GRS).
We show that there are three general classes of planning problems, in terms of
the growth of circuit width and depth as a function of the number of objects and
planning horizon, providing constructive proofs. We also illustrate the utility of
this analysis for designing neural networks for policy learning.

1

Introduction

Goal-conditioned policies are generally understood to be “feed-forward” circuits, in the form of
neural networks such as multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) or transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017]. They
take a representation of the current world state and the goal as input, and generate an action as output.
Previous work has proposed methods for learning such policies for particular problems via imitation
or reinforcement learning [Wang et al., 2018, Dong et al., 2019, Li et al., 2020]; recently, others have
tried probing current large-language models to understand the extent to which they already embody
policies for a wide variety of problems [Liang et al., 2022, Carta et al., 2023].
However, a major theoretical challenge remains. In general, we understand that planning problems
are PSPACE-hard with respect to the size of the state space [Bylander, 1994], but there seem to
exist efficient (possibly suboptimal) policies for many problems such as block stacking [Dong et al.,
2019] that generalize to arbitrarily sized problem instances. In this paper, we seek to understand and
clarify the circuit complexity of goal-conditioned policies for classes of “classical” discrete planning
problems: under what circumstances can a polynomial-sized policy circuit be constructed, and what
is its size? Specifically, we highlight a relationship between a problem hardness measure (regression
width, related to the notion of “width” in the forward planning literature [Chen and Giménez, 2007])
and circuit complexity. We concretely provide upper bounds on the policy circuit complexity as a
function of the problem’s regression width, using constructive proofs that yield algorithms for directly
compiling a planning problem description into a goal-conditioned policy. We further show that such
policies can be learned with conventional policy gradient methods from environment interactions
only, with the theoretical results predicting the necessary size of the network.
There are several useful implications of these results. First, by analyzing concrete planning domains,
we show that for many domains, there do exist simple policies that will generalize to problem
instances with an arbitrary number of objects. Second, our theory predicts the circuit complexity
of policies for these problems. Finally, our analysis suggests insights into why certain planning
Project page: https://concepts-ai.com/p/goal-regression-width/
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

