An NLP Benchmark Dataset for Assessing Corporate
Climate Policy Engagement

Gaku Morio∗ and Christopher D. Manning
Stanford University
{gaku,manning}@stanford.edu

Abstract
As societal awareness of climate change grows, corporate climate policy engagements are attracting attention. We propose a dataset to estimate corporate climate
policy engagement from various PDF-formatted documents. Our dataset comes
from LobbyMap (a platform operated by global think tank InfluenceMap) that
provides engagement categories and stances on the documents. To convert the
LobbyMap data into the structured dataset, we developed a pipeline using text
extraction and OCR. Our contributions are: (i) Building an NLP dataset including 10K documents on corporate climate policy engagement. (ii) Analyzing the
properties and challenges of the dataset. (iii) Providing experiments for the dataset
using pre-trained language models. The results show that while Longformer outperforms baselines and other pre-trained models, there is still room for significant
improvement. We hope our work begins to bridge research on NLP and climate
change.

1

Introduction

Climate change is one of the most critical challenges confronting our society today [24]. As societal
awareness of climate change heightens, how corporations minimize their environmental impact has
come under tight scrutiny by the public [12]. Consumers are increasingly warming up to “eco-friendly”
products [3] and investors are placing a premium on investments yielding environmental benefits, as
evidenced by the popularity of Environment, Social, and Governance (ESG) funds [1].
Nonetheless, skepticism about whether companies that claim environmental benefits are truly effective
in mitigating the impact of climate change persists. Controversies have been sparked by dubious
practices such as using vague terms to guide consumers to certain irrelevant conclusions (e.g., using
‘all-natural’ to imply beneficial to the environment) [12] or engaging in lobbying activities to mislead
the public and policy-makers [4]. Such practices are often known as greenwashing [28, 12, 30, 13] –
more formally defined as “behavior or activities that make people believe that a company is doing
more to protect the environment than it really is”[8]. Greenwashing can help a company to enhance
their corporate legitimacy, if it is not exposed [36]. To prevent that from happening, instances of
corporate greenwashing have been flagged by environmental, non-profit, and non-governmental
organizations. The ongoing public scrutiny deters corporate attempts to mislead stakeholders with
deceptive messages [36] and encourages truthful engagement with the public.
Monitoring and identifying greenwashing at scale is difficult as it requires experts with domain
knowledge to analyze corporate documents. Natural language processing (NLP) can help to alleviate
the issue by automating the process of extracting relevant data quickly. As Stammbach et al.
[38] mentioned, the initial step in identifying greenwashing would involve recognizing corporate
environmental claims – something that NLP would be well-suited to handle. Previous NLP efforts
∗

Also a researcher of Hitachi America, Ltd., Santa Clara, California.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

