Exploiting Hidden Structures in Non-Convex Games
for Convergence to Nash Equilibrium

Iosif Sakos∗
Engineering Systems and Design (SUTD)
iosif_sakos@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

Emmanouil V. Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis∗
UC Berkeley
emvlatakis@cs.columbia.edu

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP
LIG & Archimedes RU, NKUA
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Georgios Piliouras
Engineering Systems and Design (SUTD)
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
A wide array of modern machine learning applications – from adversarial models to
multi-agent reinforcement learning – can be formulated as non-cooperative games
whose Nash equilibria represent the system’s desired operational states. Despite
having a highly non-convex loss landscape, many cases of interest possess a latent
convex structure that could potentially be leveraged to yield convergence to an
equilibrium. Driven by this observation, our paper proposes a flexible first-order
method that successfully exploits such “hidden structures” and achieves convergence under minimal assumptions for the transformation connecting the players’
control variables to the game’s latent, convex-structured layer. The proposed
method – which we call preconditioned hidden gradient descent (PHGD) – hinges
on a judiciously chosen gradient preconditioning scheme related to natural gradient methods. Importantly, we make no separability assumptions for the game’s
hidden structure, and we provide explicit convergence rate guarantees for both
deterministic and stochastic environments.

1

Introduction

Many powerful AI architectures are based on the idea of combining conceptually straightforward
settings coming from game theory with the expressive power of neural nets. Some prominent
examples of this type include generative adversarial networks (GANs) [14], robust reinforcement
learning [36], adversarial training [26], multi-agent reinforcement learning in games [35, 39, 40], and
even multi-player games that include free-form natural-language communication [4]. Intuitively, in
all these cases, the game-theoretic abstraction serves to provide a palpable, easy-to-understand target,
i.e., an equilibrium solution with strong axiomatic justification. However, from a complexity-theoretic
standpoint, such targets are excessively ambitious, requiring huge amounts of data to express and
compute, even approximately. Because of this, the agents’ policies must be encoded via a universal
function approximator (such as a neural net) and training this architecture boils down to iteratively
updating these parameters until the process – hopefully! – converges to the target equilibrium.
Unfortunately, despite the ubiquitousness of these settings, the design of algorithms with provable
convergence guarantees is still relatively lacking. This deficit is not surprising if one considers
that even the – comparatively much simpler – problem of equilibrium learning in finite games is
hindered by numerous computational hardness [9, 10] as well as dynamic impossibility results
∗

Equal Contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

