Similarity-based cooperative equilibrium

Caspar Oesterheld1∗ Johannes Treutlein2 Roger Grosse3,4,5
Vincent Conitzer1,6 Jakob Foerster7
∗
oesterheld@cmu.edu 1 FOCAL, Carnegie Mellon University 2 CHAI, UC Berkeley
3
Anthropic 4 Vector Institute 5 University of Toronto
6
Institute for Ethics in AI, University of Oxford 7 FLAIR, University of Oxford

Abstract
As machine learning agents act more autonomously in the world, they will increasingly interact with each other. Unfortunately, in many social dilemmas like the
one-shot Prisoner’s Dilemma, standard game theory predicts that ML agents will
fail to cooperate with each other. Prior work has shown that one way to enable
cooperative outcomes in the one-shot Prisoner’s Dilemma is to make the agents
mutually transparent to each other, i.e., to allow them to access one another’s source
code (Rubinstein, 1998; Tennenholtz, 2004) – or weights in the case of ML agents.
However, full transparency is often unrealistic, whereas partial transparency is commonplace. Moreover, it is challenging for agents to learn their way to cooperation
in the full transparency setting. In this paper, we introduce a more realistic setting
in which agents only observe a single number indicating how similar they are to
each other. We prove that this allows for the same set of cooperative outcomes as
the full transparency setting. We also demonstrate experimentally that cooperation
can be learned using simple ML methods.

1

Introduction

As AI systems start to autonomously interact with the world, they will also increasingly interact
with each other. We already see this in contexts such as trading agents (CFTC & SEC, 2010), but
the number of domains where separate AI agents interact with each other in the world is sure to
grow; for example, consider autonomous vehicles. In the language of game theory, AI systems will
play general-sum games with each other. For example, autonomous vehicles may find themselves in
Game-of-Chicken-like dynamics with each other (cf. Fox et al., 2018). In many of these interactions,
cooperative or even peaceful outcomes are not a given. For example, standard game theory famously
predicts and recommends defecting in the one-shot Prisoner’s Dilemma. Even when cooperative
equilibria exist, there are typically many equilibria, including uncooperative and asymmetric ones.
For instance, in the infinitely repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma, mutual cooperation is played in some
equilibria, but so is mutual defection, and so is the strategy profile in which one player cooperates
70% of the time while the other cooperates 100% of the time. Moreover, the strategies from different
equilibria typically do not cooperate with each other. A recent line of work at the intersection of
AI/(multi-agent) ML and game theory aims to increase AI/ML systems’ ability to cooperate with
each other (Stastny et al., 2021; Dafoe et al., 2020; Conitzer & Oesterheld, 2023).
Prior work has proposed to make AI agents mutually transparent to allow for cooperation in equilibrium (McAfee 1984; Howard 1988; Rubinstein 1998, Section 10.4; Tennenholtz 2004; Barasz
et al. 2014; Critch 2019; Oesterheld 2019b). Roughly, this literature considers for any given 2-player
normal-form game Γ the following program meta game: Both players submit a computer program,
e.g., some neural net, to choose actions in Γ on their behalf. The computer program then receives as
input the computer program submitted by the other player. The aforecited works have shown that the
program meta game has cooperative equilibria in the Prisoner’s Dilemma.
Unfortunately, there are multiple obstacles to cooperation based on full mutual transparency. 1)
Settings of full transparency are rare in the real world. 2) Games played with full transparency in
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

