Generate What You Prefer: Reshaping Sequential
Recommendation via Guided Diffusion
Zhengyi Yang‡ Jiancan Wu‡∗ Zhicai Wang‡ Yancheng Yuan§∗ Xiang Wang‡† Xiangnan He‡†
‡
University of Science and Technology of China
§
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{yangzhy,wangzhic}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{wujcan,xiangwang1223,xiangnanhe}@gmail.com
yancheng.yuan@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Sequential recommendation aims to recommend the next item that matches a user’s
interest, based on the sequence of items he/she interacted with before. Scrutinizing
previous studies, we can summarize a common learning-to-classify paradigm —
given a positive item, a recommender model performs negative sampling to add
negative items and learns to classify whether the user prefers them or not, based on
his/her historical interaction sequence. Although effective, we reveal two inherent
limitations: (1) it may differ from human behavior in that a user could imagine
an oracle item in mind and select potential items matching the oracle; and (2)
the classification is limited in the candidate pool with noisy or easy supervision
from negative samples, which dilutes the preference signals towards the oracle
item. Yet, generating the oracle item from the historical interaction sequence is
mostly unexplored. To bridge the gap, we reshape sequential recommendation
as a learning-to-generate paradigm, which is achieved via a guided diffusion
model, termed DreamRec. Specifically, for a sequence of historical items, it
applies a Transformer encoder to create guidance representations. Noising target
items explores the underlying distribution of item space; then, with the guidance of
historical interactions, the denoising process generates an oracle item to recover
the positive item, so as to cast off negative sampling and depict the true preference
of the user directly. We evaluate the effectiveness of DreamRec through extensive
experiments and comparisons with existing methods. Codes and data are opensourced at https://github.com/YangZhengyi98/DreamRec.

1

Introduction

Sequential recommendation has long been a fundamental and important topic in many online platforms, such as e-commerce, streaming media, and social networking [1–3]. Its core task is to
recommend the next item that matches user preference, based on the sequence of items he/she
interacted with before. Scrutinizing recent research on sequential recommendation [4–9], we may
discern a common learning-to-classify paradigm: given a sequence of historical items and a target
(truly positive) item, a recommender model first performs negative sampling to append the historical
interactions with some non-interacted (possibly negative) items, and then learns to classify the positive instance from the sampled negatives. Along with this line, extensive studies are conducted on
evolving the model architecture (e.g., recurrent neural networks [4], convolutional neural networks
∗

Jiancan Wu and Yancheng Yuan are corresponding authors.
Xiang Wang and Xiangnan He are also affiliated with Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Institute of
Dataspace, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

