Rethinking the Role of Token Retrieval in
Multi-Vector Retrieval
∗

Jinhyuk Lee
Tao Lei

Zhuyun Dai

Iftekhar Naim

Sai Meher Karthik Duddu

Ming-Wei Chang

Vincent Y. Zhao

Google DeepMind

Abstract
Multi-vector retrieval models such as ColBERT [Khattab and Zaharia, 2020]
allow token-level interactions between queries and documents, and hence achieve
state of the art on many information retrieval benchmarks. However, their nonlinear scoring function cannot be scaled to millions of documents, necessitating a
three-stage process for inference: retrieving initial candidates via token retrieval,
accessing all token vectors, and scoring the initial candidate documents. The
non-linear scoring function is applied over all token vectors of each candidate
document, making the inference process complicated and slow. In this paper, we
aim to simplify the multi-vector retrieval by rethinking the role of token retrieval.
We present XTR, ConteXtualized Token Retriever, which introduces a simple, yet
novel, objective function that encourages the model to retrieve the most important
document tokens first. The improvement to token retrieval allows XTR to rank
candidates only using the retrieved tokens rather than all tokens in the document,
and enables a newly designed scoring stage that is two-to-three orders of magnitude
cheaper than that of ColBERT. On the popular BEIR benchmark, XTR advances
the state-of-the-art by 2.8 nDCG@10 without any distillation. Detailed analysis
confirms our decision to revisit the token retrieval stage, as XTR demonstrates
much better recall of the token retrieval stage compared to ColBERT.

1

Introduction

The performance of a dense retrieval model is largely affected by how it defines expressive representations over queries and documents, and whether it can efficiently retrieve and score a document
using these vector representations. For example, dual encoder models [Yih et al., 2011, Lee et al.,
2019, Karpukhin et al., 2020, Ni et al., 2021] encode queries and documents into single vectors and
compute query-document similarities using dot products. While these models are very efficient for
retrieval, their expressivity is limited due to the absence of token-level modeling for scoring. In
contrast, multi-vector models such as ColBERT [Khattab and Zaharia, 2020, Santhanam et al., 2022b]
are directly designed to capture token-level interactions. By utilizing a (non-linear) scoring function
over all query and document token representations, multi-vector models enjoy much better model
expressivity and often achieve superior results across various benchmarks [Thakur et al., 2021].
The enhanced model expressivity, however, comes at a great cost of inference complexity. Unlike the
case in dual encoders, the non-linear scoring function in multi-vector retrieval models prohibits the
use of efficient Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) [Ram and Gray, 2012, Shrivastava and Li,
2014, 2015, Shen et al., 2015] for finding the maximum scoring documents. As a result, models such
as ColBERT adopt an intricate and resource-intensive inference pipeline, which typically consists
∗

Correspondence: jinhyuklee@google.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

