Promises and Pitfalls of Threshold-based Auto-labeling

Harit Vishwakarma
hvishwakarma@cs.wisc.edu

Heguang Lin
hglin@seas.upenn.edu

University of Wisconsin-Madison

University of Pennsylvania

Frederic Sala
fredsala@cs.wisc.edu

Ramya Korlakai Vinayak
ramya@ece.wisc.edu

University of Wisconsin-Madison

University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Creating large-scale high-quality labeled datasets is a major bottleneck in
supervised machine learning workflows. Threshold-based auto-labeling (TBAL),
where validation data obtained from humans is used to find a confidence threshold
above which the data is machine-labeled, reduces reliance on manual annotation.
TBAL is emerging as a widely-used solution in practice. Given the long shelf-life
and diverse usage of the resulting datasets, understanding when the data obtained
by such auto-labeling systems can be relied on is crucial. This is the first
work to analyze TBAL systems and derive sample complexity bounds on the
amount of human-labeled validation data required for guaranteeing the quality of
machine-labeled data. Our results provide two crucial insights. First, reasonable
chunks of unlabeled data can be automatically and accurately labeled by seemingly
bad models. Second, a hidden downside of TBAL systems is potentially prohibitive
validation data usage. Together, these insights describe the promise and pitfalls
of using such systems. We validate our theoretical guarantees with extensive
experiments on synthetic and real datasets1 .

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models with millions or even billions of parameters are used to obtain
state-of-the-art performance in many applications, e.g., object identification [53], machine
translation [63], and fraud detection [71]. Such large-scale models require training on large-scale
labeled datasets. As an outcome, the typical supervised ML workflow begins with the construction of
a large-scale high quality dataset. Datasets with up to millions of labeled data points have played a
pivotal role in the advancement of computer vision. However, collecting labeled data is an expensive
and time consuming process. A common approach is to rely on the services of crowdsourcing
platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) to get groundtruth labels.
Even with crowdsourcing, obtaining labels for the entire dataset is expensive. To reduce costs, data
labeling systems that partially rely on using a model’s predictions as labels have been developed.
Such systems date back to teacher-less training [21]. Modern examples include Amazon Sagemaker
Ground Truth [58] and others [61, 55, 2, 64]. These approaches can be broadly termed auto-labeling.
Auto-labeling systems aim to label unlabeled data using predictions from ML models that are often
trained on small amounts of human labeled data which can produce incorrect labels. The shelf
life of datasets is longer than those of models, e.g., ImageNet continues to be a benchmark for
many computer vision tasks [14] fifteen years after its initial development. As a result, to reliably
train new models on auto-labeled datasets and deploy them, we need a thorough understanding of
how reliable the datasets output by these auto-labeling systems are. Unfortunately, many widely
1

https://github.com/harit7/TBAL

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

