Neural Latent Geometry Search:
Product Manifold Inference via
Gromov-Hausdorff-Informed Bayesian Optimization

Haitz Sáez de Ocáriz Borde˚
Oxford Robotics Institute
University of Oxford
Ismael Morales López
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford

Ingmar Posner
Oxford Robotics Institute
University of Oxford

Álvaro Arroyo˚
Oxford-Man Institute
University of Oxford
Xiaowen Dong
Machine Learning Research Group
University of Oxford

Abstract
Recent research indicates that the performance of machine learning models can
be improved by aligning the geometry of the latent space with the underlying
data structure. Rather than relying solely on Euclidean space, researchers have
proposed using hyperbolic and spherical spaces with constant curvature, or combinations thereof, to better model the latent space and enhance model performance.
However, little attention has been given to the problem of automatically identifying the optimal latent geometry for the downstream task. We mathematically
define this novel formulation and coin it as neural latent geometry search (NLGS).
More specifically, we introduce an initial attempt to search for a latent geometry
composed of a product of constant curvature model spaces with a small number
of query evaluations, under some simplifying assumptions. To accomplish this,
we propose a novel notion of distance between candidate latent geometries based
on the Gromov-Hausdorff distance from metric geometry. In order to compute
the Gromov-Hausdorff distance, we introduce a mapping function that enables
the comparison of different manifolds by embedding them in a common highdimensional ambient space. We then design a graph search space based on the
notion of smoothness between latent geometries, and employ the calculated distances as an additional inductive bias. Finally, we use Bayesian optimization to
search for the optimal latent geometry in a query-efficient manner. This is a general method which can be applied to search for the optimal latent geometry for a
variety of models and downstream tasks. We perform experiments on synthetic and
real-world datasets to identify the optimal latent geometry for multiple machine
learning problems.

1

Introduction

There has been a recent surge of research employing ideas from differential geometry and topology to
improve the performance of learning algorithms [Bortoli et al., 2022, Hensel et al., 2021, Chamberlain
et al., 2021, Huang et al., 2022, Barbero et al., 2022a,b]. Traditionally, Euclidean spaces have been the
preferred choice to model the geometry of latent spaces in the ML community [Weber, 2019, Bronstein
et al., 2021]. However, recent work has found that representing the latent space with a geometry
that better matches the structure of the data can provide significant performance enhancements in
˚

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

