Bicriteria Multidimensional Mechanism Design with
Side Information
Siddharth Prasad
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
sprasad2@cs.cmu.edu

Maria-Florina Balcan
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Optimized Markets, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Strategic Machine, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We develop a versatile new methodology for multidimensional mechanism design
that incorporates side information about agent types to generate high social welfare
and high revenue simultaneously. Prominent sources of side information in practice
include predictions from a machine-learning model trained on historical agent
data, advice from domain experts, and even the mechanism designer’s own gut
instinct. In this paper we adopt a prior-free perspective that makes no assumptions
on the correctness, accuracy, or source of the side information. First, we design
a meta-mechanism that integrates input side information with an improvement of
the classical VCG mechanism. The welfare, revenue, and incentive properties of
our meta-mechanism are characterized by novel constructions we introduce based
on the notion of a weakest competitor, which is an agent that has the smallest
impact on welfare. We show that our meta-mechanism, when carefully instantiated,
simultaneously achieves strong welfare and revenue guarantees parameterized by
errors in the side information. When the side information is highly informative
and accurate, our mechanism achieves welfare and revenue competitive with the
total social surplus, and its performance decays continuously and gradually as the
quality of the side information decreases. Finally, we apply our meta-mechanism
to a setting where each agent’s type is determined by a constant number of parameters. Specifically, agent types lie on constant-dimensional subspaces (of the
potentially high-dimensional ambient type space) that are known to the mechanism designer. We use our meta-mechanism to obtain the first known welfare and
revenue guarantees in this setting.

1

Introduction

Mechanism design is a high-impact branch of economics and computer science that studies the
implementation of socially desirable outcomes among strategic self-interested agents. Major realworld use cases include combinatorial auctions (e.g., strategic sourcing, radio spectrum auctions),
matching markets (e.g., housing allocation, ridesharing), project fundraisers, and many more. The
two most commonly studied objectives in mechanism design are welfare maximization and revenue
maximization. In many settings, welfare maximization, or efficiency, is achieved by the classic
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

