Aleatoric and Epistemic Discrimination:
Fundamental Limits of Fairness Interventions
Hao Wang
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
hao@ibm.com

Luxi (Lucy) He
Harvard College
luxihe@college.harvard.edu

Rui Gao
The University of Texas at Austin
rui.gao@mccombs.utexas.edu

Flavio P. Calmon
Harvard University
flavio@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Machine learning (ML) models can underperform on certain population groups
due to choices made during model development and bias inherent in the data. We
categorize sources of discrimination in the ML pipeline into two classes: aleatoric
discrimination, which is inherent in the data distribution, and epistemic discrimination, which is due to decisions made during model development. We quantify
aleatoric discrimination by determining the performance limits of a model under
fairness constraints, assuming perfect knowledge of the data distribution. We
demonstrate how to characterize aleatoric discrimination by applying Blackwell’s
results on comparing statistical experiments. We then quantify epistemic discrimination as the gap between a model’s accuracy when fairness constraints are
applied and the limit posed by aleatoric discrimination. We apply this approach
to benchmark existing fairness interventions and investigate fairness risks in data
with missing values. Our results indicate that state-of-the-art fairness interventions
are effective at removing epistemic discrimination on standard (overused) tabular
datasets. However, when data has missing values, there is still significant room for
improvement in handling aleatoric discrimination.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic discrimination may occur in different stages of the machine learning (ML) pipeline. For
example, historical biases in the data-generating process can propagate to downstream tasks; human
biases can influence a ML model through inductive bias; optimizing solely for accuracy can lead to
disparate model performance across groups in the data (Suresh and Guttag, 2019; Mayson, 2019).
The past years have seen a rapid increase in algorithmic interventions that aim to mitigate biases
in ML models (see e.g., Zemel et al., 2013; Feldman et al., 2015; Calmon et al., 2017; Menon and
Williamson, 2018; Zhang et al., 2018; Zafar et al., 2019; Friedler et al., 2019; Bellamy et al., 2019;
Kim et al., 2019; Celis et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020; Jiang and Nachum, 2020; Jiang et al., 2020;
Martinez et al., 2020; Lowy et al., 2021; Alghamdi et al., 2022). A recent survey (Hort et al., 2022)
found nearly 400 fairness-intervention algorithms, including 123 pre-processing, 212 in-processing,
and 56 post-processing algorithms introduced in the past decade.
Which sources of biases are (the hundreds of) existing fairness interventions trying to control? In order
to create effective strategies for reducing algorithmic discrimination, it is critical to disentangle where
biases in model performance originate. For instance, if a certain population group has significantly
more missing features in training data, then it is more beneficial to collect data than selecting a more
complex model class or training strategy. Conversely, if the model class does not accurately represent
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

