Counterfactually Comparing Abstaining Classifiers

Yo Joong Choe∗
Data Science Institute
University of Chicago
yjchoe@uchicago.edu

Aditya Gangrade
Department of EECS
University of Michigan
aditg@umich.edu

Aaditya Ramdas
Dept. of Statistics and Data Science
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
aramdas@cmu.edu

Abstract
Abstaining classifiers have the option to abstain from making predictions on inputs
that they are unsure about. These classifiers are becoming increasingly popular in
high-stakes decision-making problems, as they can withhold uncertain predictions
to improve their reliability and safety. When evaluating black-box abstaining
classifier(s), however, we lack a principled approach that accounts for what the
classifier would have predicted on its abstentions. These missing predictions matter
when they can eventually be utilized, either directly or as a backup option in a failure
mode. In this paper, we introduce a novel approach and perspective to the problem
of evaluating and comparing abstaining classifiers by treating abstentions as missing
data. Our evaluation approach is centered around defining the counterfactual score
of an abstaining classifier, defined as the expected performance of the classifier
had it not been allowed to abstain. We specify the conditions under which the
counterfactual score is identifiable: if the abstentions are stochastic, and if the
evaluation data is independent of the training data (ensuring that the predictions
are missing at random), then the score is identifiable. Note that, if abstentions are
deterministic, then the score is unidentifiable because the classifier can perform
arbitrarily poorly on its abstentions. Leveraging tools from observational causal
inference, we then develop nonparametric and doubly robust methods to efficiently
estimate this quantity under identification. Our approach is examined in both
simulated and real data experiments.

1

Introduction

Abstaining classifiers (Chow, 1957; El-Yaniv and Wiener, 2010), also known as selective classifiers or
classifiers with a reject option, are classifiers that have the option to abstain from making predictions
on certain inputs. As their use continues to grow in safety-critical applications, such as medical
imaging and autonomous driving, it is natural to ask how a practitioner should evaluate and compare
the predictive performance of abstaining classifiers under black-box access to their decisions.
In this paper, we introduce the counterfactual score as a new evaluation metric for black-box
abstaining classifiers. The counterfactual score is defined as the expected score of an abstaining
classifier’s predictions, had it not been allowed to abstain. This score is of intrinsic importance when
the potential predictions on abstaining inputs are relevant. We proceed with an illustrative example:
Example 1.1 (Free-trial ML APIs). Suppose we compare different image classification APIs. Each
API has two versions: a free version that abstains, and a paid one that does not. Before paying for the
full service, the user can query the free version for up to n predictions on a user-provided dataset,
although it may choose to reject any input that it deems as requiring the paid service. Given two such
APIs, how can the practitioner determine which of the two paid (non-abstaining) versions would be
better on the population data source, given their abstaining predictions on a sample?
∗

This work was submitted while this author was at Carnegie Mellon University.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

