NeRF Revisited: Fixing Quadrature Instability in
Volume Rendering
Mikaela Angelina Uy1
George Kiyohiro Nakayama1
Guandao Yang1,2
1
1
Rahul Krishna Thomas
Leonidas Guibas
Ke Li3,4
1
2
3
Stanford University Cornell University Simon Fraser University 4 Google
{mikacuy, w4756677, guandao, rt03mas, guibas}@stanford.edu, keli@sfu.ca

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) rely on volume rendering to synthesize novel views.
Volume rendering requires evaluating an integral along each ray, which is numerically approximated with a finite sum that corresponds to the exact integral along
the ray under piecewise constant volume density. As a consequence, the rendered
result is unstable w.r.t. the choice of samples along the ray, a phenomenon that
we dub quadrature instability. We propose a mathematically principled solution
by reformulating the sample-based rendering equation so that it corresponds to
the exact integral under piecewise linear volume density. This simultaneously
resolves multiple issues: conflicts between samples along different rays, imprecise
hierarchical sampling, and non-differentiability of quantiles of ray termination
distances w.r.t. model parameters. We demonstrate several benefits over the classical sample-based rendering equation, such as sharper textures, better geometric
reconstruction, and stronger depth supervision. Our proposed formulation can be
also be used as a drop-in replacement to the volume rendering equation for existing
methods like NeRFs. Our project page can be found at pl-nerf.github.io.

1

Introduction

The advent of neural radiance fields (NeRF) [18] has sparked a flurry of work on neural rendering
and has opened the way to many exciting applications [5, 11, 8, 20]. One of the key underpinnings of
NeRF is volume rendering [14] – it is especially well-suited to end-to-end differentiable rendering [9],
since the rendered image is a smooth function of the model parameters. This has made it possible to
learn the 3D geometry and appearance solely from a 2D photometric loss on rendered images.
In volume rendering, the rendered colour ŷ for every pixel is an expectation of the colours along the
ray cast through the pixel w.r.t. the distribution over ray termination distance s [6].
Z ∞
ŷ = Es∼p(s) [c(s)] =
p(s)c(s) ds
(1)
0

where p(s) denotes the probability density function (PDF) of the distribution over ray termination
distance s and c(s) denotes the the colour as a function of different points along the ray.
In general, p(s) and c(s) can be of arbitrary forms, so evaluating this integral analytically is not
possible. Therefore, in practice, Es∼p(s) [c(s)] is approximated with quadrature. The quadrature
formula that is most commonly used in the NeRF literature takes the following form:
Es∼p(s) [c(s)] =

N
X



Tj 1 − e−τj (sj+1 −sj ) cj ,

(2)

j=0

 P

j
where Tj = exp − k=0 −τk (sk+1 − sk ) and τk is the opacity evaluated at a sample sk along
the ray.
This expression is derived from the exact integral under a piecewise constant assumption to the
opacity and colour along the given ray [14].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

