The Equivalence of Dynamic and Strategic Stability
under Regularized Learning in Games

Victor Boone
Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France
{victor.boone,panayotis.mertikopoulos}@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we examine the long-run behavior of regularized, no-regret learning in
finite games. A well-known result in the field states that the empirical frequencies
of no-regret play converge to the game’s set of coarse correlated equilibria; however,
our understanding of how the players’ actual strategies evolve over time is much
more limited – and, in many cases, non-existent. This issue is exacerbated by
a series of recent results showing that only strict Nash equilibria are stable and
attracting under regularized learning, thus making the relation between learning
and pointwise solution concepts particularly elusive. In lieu of this, we take a more
general approach and instead seek to characterize the setwise rationality properties
of the players’ day-to-day play. To that end, we focus on one of the most stringent
criteria of setwise strategic stability, namely that any unilateral deviation from the
set in question incurs a cost to the deviator – a property known as closedness under
better replies (club). In so doing, we obtain a far-reaching equivalence between
strategic and dynamic stability: a product of pure strategies is closed under better
replies if and only if its span is stable and attracting under regularized learning.
In addition, we estimate the rate of convergence to such sets, and we show that
methods based on entropic regularization (like the exponential weights algorithm)
converge at a geometric rate, while projection-based methods converge within a
finite number of iterations, even with bandit, payoff-based feedback.

1

Introduction

Background. The question of whether players can learn to emulate rational behavior through
repeated interactions has been one of the mainstays of non-cooperative game theory, and it has
recently gained increased momentum owing to a surge of breakthrough applications to machine
learning and data science, from online ad auctions to multi-agent reinforcement learning. Informally,
this question can be stated as follows:
If each player follows an iterative procedure aiming to increase their individual payoff,
does the players’ long-run behavior converge to a rationally admissible state?
A natural setting for studying this question is to assume that each player is following a no-regret
algorithm, i.e., a policy which is asymptotically as good against a given sequence of payoff functions
as the best fixed strategy in hindsight. In this framework, the link between learning and rationality
is provided by a folk result which states that, under no-regret learning, the empirical frequency of
play converges to the game’s set of coarse correlated equilibria (CCE) – also known as the game’s
Hannan set [26]. This result has been of seminal importance to the field because no-regret play
can be achieved via a wide class of “regularized learning” policies, as exemplified by the “followthe-regularized-leader” (FTRL) family of algorithms [45, 46] and its variants – optimistic methods
[15, 28, 41, 42, 47], H EDGE / EXP3 [4, 6, 10, 11], implicitly normalized forecasters [1, 3], etc.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

