EvoPrompting: Language Models for Code-Level
Neural Architecture Search
Angelica Chen∗
New York University
angelica.chen@nyu.edu

David M. Dohan†
OpenAI
david@ddohan.com

David R. So†
Jane Street
david.r.so.ai@gmail.com

Abstract
Given the recent impressive accomplishments of language models (LMs) for code
generation, we explore the use of LMs as general adaptive mutation and crossover
operators for an evolutionary neural architecture search (NAS) algorithm. While
NAS still proves too difficult a task for LMs to succeed at solely through prompting,
we find that the combination of evolutionary prompt engineering with soft prompttuning, a method we term E VO P ROMPTING, consistently finds diverse and high
performing models. We first demonstrate that E VO P ROMPTING is effective on the
computationally efficient MNIST-1D dataset, where E VO P ROMPTING produces
convolutional architecture variants that outperform both those designed by human
experts and naive few-shot prompting in terms of accuracy and model size. We then
apply our method to searching for graph neural networks on the CLRS Algorithmic
Reasoning Benchmark, where E VO P ROMPTING is able to design novel architectures that outperform current state-of-the-art models on 21 out of 30 algorithmic
reasoning tasks while maintaining similar model size. E VO P ROMPTING is successful at designing accurate and efficient neural network architectures across a variety
of machine learning tasks, while also being general enough for easy adaptation to
other tasks beyond neural network design.

1

Introduction

Scaling of Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) has produced language models (LM) with impressive
performance. Beyond achieving state-of-the-art results on conventional natural language processing
tasks, these LMs demonstrate breakthrough technical capabilities, such as learning how to code
(Chen et al., 2021), doing math (Noorbakhsh et al., 2021), and solving reasoning problems (Wei
et al., 2022). Yet, despite these strides, several works have noted LMs’ current limitations in solving
complex problems and creating novel solutions (Qian et al., 2022; Dakhel et al., 2022). In this work,
we improve upon a base LM’s ability to propose novel and diverse solutions to complex reasoning
problems by iteratively evolving in-context prompts and prompt-tuning the LM. We call this technique
E VO P ROMPTING and demonstrate its success on the difficult task of deep learning architecture design.
Our key finding is that, while LMs perform poorly at designing novel and effective neural architectures
via naive few-shot prompting, E VO P ROMPTING enables LMs to create novel and effective deep
neural architectures, particularly when combined with prompt-tuning methods.
∗
†

Work done while a Student Researcher at Google DeepMind.
Work done while at Google DeepMind.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

