Accelerated Training via Incrementally
Growing Neural Networks using
Variance Transfer and Learning Rate Adaptation

Xin Yuan
University of Chicago
yuanx@uchicago.edu

Pedro Savarese
TTI-Chicago
savarese@ttic.edu

Michael Maire
University of Chicago
mmaire@uchicago.edu

Abstract
We develop an approach to efficiently grow neural networks, within which parameterization and optimization strategies are designed by considering their effects
on the training dynamics. Unlike existing growing methods, which follow simple
replication heuristics or utilize auxiliary gradient-based local optimization, we craft
a parameterization scheme which dynamically stabilizes weight, activation, and
gradient scaling as the architecture evolves, and maintains the inference functionality of the network. To address the optimization difficulty resulting from imbalanced
training effort distributed to subnetworks fading in at different growth phases, we
propose a learning rate adaption mechanism that rebalances the gradient contribution of these separate subcomponents. Experiments show that our method achieves
comparable or better accuracy than training large fixed-size models, while saving a
substantial portion of the original training computation budget. We demonstrate
that these gains translate into real wall-clock training speedups.

1

Introduction

Modern neural network design typically follows a “larger is better” rule of thumb, with models
consisting of millions of parameters achieving impressive generalization performance across many
tasks, including image classification [22, 32, 30, 46], object detection [13, 26, 11], semantic segmentation [27, 3, 24] and machine translation [34, 7]. Within a class of network architecture, deeper or
wider variants of a base model typically yield further improvements to accuracy. Residual networks
(ResNets) [15] and wide residual networks [45] illustrate this trend in convolutional neural network
(CNN) architectures. Dramatically scaling up network size into the billions of parameter regime has
recently revolutionized transformer-based language modeling [34, 7, 1].
The size of these models imposes prohibitive training costs and motivates techniques that offer
cheaper alternatives to select and deploy networks. For example, hyperparameter tuning is notoriously
expensive as it commonly relies on training the network multiple times, and recent techniques aim to
circumvent this by making hyperparameters transferable between models of different sizes, allowing
them to be tuned on a small network prior to training an original large model once [41].
Our approach incorporates these ideas, but extends the scope of transferability to include the parameters of the model itself. Rather than view training small and large models as separate events,
we grow a small model into a large one through many intermediate steps, each of which introduces
additional parameters to the network. Our contribution is to do so in a manner that preserves the
function computed by the model at each growth step (functional continuity) and offers stable training
dynamics, while also saving compute by leveraging intermediate solutions. More specifically, we
use partially trained subnetworks as scaffolding that accelerates training of newly added parameters,
yielding greater overall efficiency than training a large static model from scratch.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

