Dream the Impossible:
Outlier Imagination with Diffusion Models

Xuefeng Du, Yiyou Sun, Xiaojin Zhu, Yixuan Li
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin, Madison
{xfdu,sunyiyou,jerryzhu,sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Utilizing auxiliary outlier datasets to regularize the machine learning model has
demonstrated promise for out-of-distribution (OOD) detection and safe prediction.
Due to the labor intensity in data collection and cleaning, automating outlier data
generation has been a long-desired alternative. Despite the appeal, generating
photo-realistic outliers in the high dimensional pixel space has been an open
challenge for the field. To tackle the problem, this paper proposes a new framework
D REAM - OOD, which enables imagining photo-realistic outliers by way of diffusion
models, provided with only the in-distribution (ID) data and classes. Specifically,
D REAM - OOD learns a text-conditioned latent space based on ID data, and then
samples outliers in the low-likelihood region via the latent, which can be decoded
into images by the diffusion model. Different from prior works [1, 2], D REAM - OOD
enables visualizing and understanding the imagined outliers, directly in the pixel
space. We conduct comprehensive quantitative and qualitative studies to understand
the efficacy of D REAM - OOD, and show that training with the samples generated by
D REAM - OOD can benefit OOD detection performance. Code is publicly available
at https://github.com/deeplearning-wisc/dream-ood.

1

Introduction

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is critical for deploying machine learning models in the wild,
where samples from novel classes can naturally emerge and should be flagged for caution. Concerningly, modern neural networks are shown to produce overconfident and therefore untrustworthy
predictions for unknown OOD inputs [3]. To mitigate the issue, recent works have explored training
with an auxiliary outlier dataset, where the model is regularized to learn a more conservative decision
boundary around in-distribution (ID) data [4–7]. These methods have demonstrated encouraging
OOD detection performance over the counterparts without auxiliary data.
Despite the promise, preparing auxiliary data can be labor-intensive and inflexible, and necessitates
careful human intervention, such as data cleaning, to ensure the auxiliary outlier data does not
overlap with the ID data. Automating outlier data generation has thus been a long-desired alternative.
Despite the appeal, generating photo-realistic outliers has been extremely challenging due to the high
dimensional space. Recent works including VOS and NPOS [1, 2] proposed sampling outliers in the
low-dimensional feature space and directly employed the latent-space outliers to regularize the model.
However, these latent-space methods do not allow us to understand the outliers in a human-compatible
way. Today, the field still lacks an automatic mechanism to generate high-resolution outliers in the
pixel space.
In this paper, we propose a new framework D REAM - OOD that enables imagining photo-realistic
outliers by way of diffusion models, provided with only ID data and classes (see Figure 1). Harnessing
the power of diffusion models for outlier imagination is non-trivial, since one cannot easily describe
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

