Unsupervised Learning for Solving the Travelling
Salesman Problem
Yimeng Min∗
Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
min@cs.cornell.edu

Yiwei Bai∗
Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
bywbilly@gmail.com

Carla P. Gomes
Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
gomes@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
We propose UTSP, an Unsupervised Learning (UL) framework for solving the
Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP). We train a Graph Neural Network (GNN) using a surrogate loss. The GNN outputs a heat map representing the probability for
each edge to be part of the optimal path. We then apply local search to generate
our ﬁnal prediction based on the heat map. Our loss function consists of two parts:
one pushes the model to ﬁnd the shortest path and the other serves as a surrogate
for the constraint that the route should form a Hamiltonian Cycle. Experimental results show that UTSP outperforms the existing data-driven TSP heuristics.
Our approach is parameter efﬁcient as well as data efﬁcient: the model takes ∼
10% of the number of parameters and ∼ 0.2% of training samples compared with
Reinforcement Learning or Supervised Learning methods.

1

Introduction

Euclidean Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP) is one of the most famous and intensely studied
NP-hard problems in the combinatorial optimization community. Exact methods, such as Concorde Applegate et al. [2006], use the cutting-plane method, iteratively solving linear programming
relaxations of the TSP. These methods are usually implemented within a branch-and-cut framework,
integrating the cutting-plane algorithm into a branch-and-bound search. While these exact methods
can ﬁnd solutions with guaranteed optimality for up to tens of thousands of nodes, the execution
time can be exceedingly expensive. A different strategy is using heuristics such as LKH Helsgaun
[2000]. These heuristics aim to ﬁnd near-optimal solutions with a notable reduction in time complexity. Typically, they are manually crafted, drawing upon expert insights and domain-speciﬁc
knowledge.
Recently, the success of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for a variety of machine learning tasks has
sparked interests in building data-driven heuristics for approximating TSP solutions. For example,
Kwon et al. [2020] uses a data-driven approach known as Policy Optimization with Multiple Optima
(POMO), POMO relies on Reinforcement Learning (RL) and avoids the utilization of hand-crafted
heuristics. Qiu et al. [2022] proposes a Meta-Learning framework which enhances the stability of RL
training. Sun and Yang [2023] applies Supervised Learning (SL) and adopts a graph-based diffusion
framework. Additionally, the authors use a cosine inference schedule to improve the efﬁciency of
their model. Joshi et al. [2019a] trains their GNN model in a SL fashion, and the model outputs an
edge adjacency matrix that indicates the likelihood of edges being part of the TSP tour. The edge
predictions form a heat map, which is transformed into a valid tour through a beam search method.
Similarly, Fu et al. [2021] trains the GNN model on small sub-graphs to generate the corresponding
heat maps using SL. These small heat maps are then integrated to build a large ﬁnal heat map.
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

