Dynamic Context Pruning for Efficient and
Interpretable Autoregressive Transformers

Sotiris Anagnostidisµ,∗

Dario Pavlloµ,∗

Aurelien Lucchiτ

Luca Biggioµ,ν

Lorenzo Nociµ

Thomas Hofmannµ

µ

ETH Zürich
ML, CSEM SA
τ
University of Basel
ν

Abstract
Autoregressive Transformers adopted in Large Language Models (LLMs) are hard
to scale to long sequences. Despite several works trying to reduce their computational cost, most of LLMs still adopt attention layers between all pairs of
tokens in the sequence, thus incurring a quadratic cost. In this study, we present
a novel approach that dynamically prunes contextual information while preserving the model’s expressiveness, resulting in reduced memory and computational
requirements during inference. Our method employs a learnable mechanism that
determines which uninformative tokens can be dropped from the context at any
point across the generation process. By doing so, our approach not only addresses
performance concerns but also enhances interpretability, providing valuable insight
into the model’s decision-making process. Our technique can be applied to existing
pre-trained models through a straightforward fine-tuning process, and the pruning
strength can be specified by a sparsity parameter. Notably, our empirical findings
demonstrate that we can effectively prune up to 80% of the context without significant performance degradation on downstream tasks, offering a valuable tool
for mitigating inference costs. Our reference implementation achieves up to 2×
increase in inference throughput and even greater memory savings.

1

Introduction

The introduction of Transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017] in Large Language Models (LLMs) has
profoundly influenced the landscape of Natural Language Processing (NLP), due to their appealing
scaling properties [Kaplan et al., 2020] and their ability to train efficiently on modern hardware
architectures designed for extensive parallel computing. As LLMs grow larger and more complex,
the challenges associated with training and deploying them become more prominent. Especially
challenging is the quest for processing increasingly longer sequences, as pure self-attention layers
scale quadratically in sequence length during train and inference.
To address this limitation, several efforts focus on efficient implementations of the attention mechanism on dedicated hardware [Dao et al., 2022, Touvron et al., 2023], or on algorithmic procedures to
directly tackle the quadratic complexity. The latter direction has led to numerous variants sacrificing
the generality of the standard attention mechanism in favor of more efficient alternatives [Tay et al.,
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence sotirios.anagnostidis@inf.ethz.ch.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

