Fast Scalable and Accurate Discovery of DAGs Using
the Best Order Score Search and Grow-Shrink Trees
Bryan Andrews
Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55454
andr1017@umn.edu

Joseph Ramsey
Department of Philosophy
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
jdramsey@andrew.cmu.edu

Rubén Sánchez-Romero
Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience
Rutgers University
Newark, NJ 07102
ruben.saro@rutgers.edu
Jazmin Camchong
Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55454
camch002@umn.edu

Erich Kummerfeld
Institute for Health Informatics
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55454
erichk@umn.edu

Abstract
Learning graphical conditional independence structures is an important machine
learning problem and a cornerstone of causal discovery. However, the accuracy and
execution time of learning algorithms generally struggle to scale to problems with
hundreds of highly connected variables—for instance, recovering brain networks
from fMRI data. We introduce the best order score search (BOSS) and growshrink trees (GSTs) for learning directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) in this paradigm.
BOSS greedily searches over permutations of variables, using GSTs to construct
and score DAGs from permutations. GSTs efficiently cache scores to eliminate
redundant calculations. BOSS achieves state-of-the-art performance in accuracy
and execution time, comparing favorably to a variety of combinatorial and gradientbased learning algorithms under a broad range of conditions. To demonstrate its
practicality, we apply BOSS to two sets of resting-state fMRI data: simulated
data with pseudo-empirical noise distributions derived from randomized empirical
fMRI cortical signals and clinical data from 3T fMRI scans processed into cortical
parcels. BOSS is available for use within the TETRAD project which includes
Python and R wrappers.

1

Introduction

We present a permutation-based algorithm, Best Order Score Search (BOSS), for learning a Markov
equivalence class of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). A novel method for caching intermediate
calculations for permutation-based algorithms, Grow-Shrink Trees (GSTs), is also developed and
presented in this paper. Our implementation of BOSS using GSTs scales well in both accuracy and
time to higher numbers of variables and graph densities. We demonstrate that in particular, this
method scales at least to the complexity of dense cortical parcellations of fMRI data.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

