Protein Design with Guided Discrete Diffusion

Nate Gruver˚1 Samuel Stanton˚2 Nathan Frey2 Tim G. J. Rudner1 Isidro Hotzel3
Julien Lafrance-Vanasse3 Arvind Rajpal3 Kyunghyun Cho1,2 Andrew Gordon Wilson1

Abstract
A popular approach to protein design is to combine a generative model with a
discriminative model for conditional sampling. The generative model samples
plausible sequences while the discriminative model guides a search for sequences
with high fitness. Given its broad success in conditional sampling, classifier-guided
diffusion modeling is a promising foundation for protein design, leading many
to develop guided diffusion models for structure with inverse folding to recover
sequences. In this work, we propose diffusioN Optimized Sampling (NOS), a
guidance method for discrete diffusion models that follows gradients in the hidden
states of the denoising network. NOS makes it possible to perform design directly
in sequence space, circumventing significant limitations of structure-based methods,
including scarce data and challenging inverse design. Moreover, we use NOS to
generalize LaMBO, a Bayesian optimization procedure for sequence design that
facilitates multiple objectives and edit-based constraints. The resulting method,
LaMBO-2, enables discrete diffusions and stronger performance with limited edits
through a novel application of saliency maps. We apply LaMBO-2 to a realworld protein design task, optimizing antibodies for higher expression yield and
binding affinity to several therapeutic targets under locality and developability
constraints, attaining a 99% expression rate and 40% binding rate in exploratory in
vitro experiments.

1

Introduction

Optimizing protein sequences for improved function has the potential for widespread impact [63].
Among many potential applications in engineering and medicine, engineered antibodies can be used to
create cancer therapeutics that are much less harmful to the patient than radiotherapy or chemotherapy.
Because the space of possible proteins is vast and discrete, and experimental validation is slow and
expensive, all practical methods for protein design must restrict themselves to a small enriched library
of candidates to find a viable option in as few measurements as possible [44]. In practice these
enriched libraries are usually obtained through massive high-throughput in vitro screening [67], or in
the case of antibodies by injecting a live animal with the target antigen and sequencing the animal’s
immune response [52]. Generative protein models offer the tantalizing prospect of enriched libraries
produced nearly instantly at a fraction of the cost. Success in real-world applications, however, has
proven elusive, in part because naive generative models produce outputs that are similar to their
training data and are therefore unlikely to improve target qualities [53].
There are many approaches to guided generation of proteins, but one broad and important distinction
is between methods that search in sequence space and those that search in structure space. A basic
tenet of molecular biology is “sequence determines structure, structure determines function” [9].
Hence when optimizing a protein for a desired function, it may seem more direct to design the protein
in structure space, where gradient-based sampling methods can be used in tandem with carefully
˚

Equal contribution. 1 New York University, {2 Prescient Design, 3 Antibody Engineering} Genentech.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

