How Does Adaptive Optimization Impact Local
Neural Network Geometry?

Kaiqi Jiang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
kaiqij@princeton.edu

Dhruv Malik
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
dhruvm@andrew.cmu.edu

Yuanzhi Li
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Adaptive optimization methods are well known to achieve superior convergence
relative to vanilla gradient methods. The traditional viewpoint in optimization,
particularly in convex optimization, explains this improved performance by arguing
that, unlike vanilla gradient schemes, adaptive algorithms mimic the behavior of a
second-order method by adapting to the global geometry of the loss function. We
argue that in the context of neural network optimization, this traditional viewpoint
is insufficient. Instead, we advocate for a local trajectory analysis. For iterate
trajectories produced by running a generic optimization algorithm OPT, we introOPT
duce Rmed
, a statistic that is analogous to the condition number of the loss Hessian
evaluated at the iterates. Through extensive experiments on language models where
adaptive algorithms converge faster than vanilla gradient methods like SGD, we
show that adaptive methods such as Adam bias the trajectories towards regions
Adam
where Rmed
is small, where one might expect faster optimization. By contrast,
SGD
SGD (with momentum) biases the trajectories towards regions where Rmed
is comparatively large. We complement these empirical observations with a theoretical
result that provably demonstrates this phenomenon in the simplified setting of
a two-layer linear network. We view our findings as evidence for the need of a
new explanation of the success of adaptive methods, one that is different than the
conventional wisdom.

1

Introduction

The efficient minimization of a parameterized loss function is a core primitive in statistics, optimization and machine learning. Gradient descent (GD), which iteratively updates a parameter vector
with a step along the gradient of the loss function evaluated at that vector, is a simple yet canonical
algorithm which has been applied to efficiently solve such minimization problems with enormous
success. However, in modern machine learning, and especially deep learning, one frequently encounters problems where the loss functions are high dimensional, non-convex and non-smooth. The
optimization landscape of such problems is thus extremely challenging, and in these settings gradient
descent often suffers from prohibitively high iteration complexity.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

