OFCOURSE: A Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Environment for Order Fulfillment
Yiheng Zhu1 , Yang Zhan2,3∗, Xuankun Huang1 , Yuwei Chen1 , Yujie Chen1 ,
Jiangwen Wei1 , Wei Feng1 , Yinzhi Zhou1 , Haoyuan Hu1 , Jieping Ye4
1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Cainiao Network.
2
Zhejiang University of Technology. 3 Hailiang Group Co., Ltd. 4 DAMO Academy.
{zyh171911,huangxuankun.hxk,chenyuwei.chenyuwe,aisling.cyj,
jiangwen.wjw,fw222241,yinzhi.zyz,haoyuan.huhy}@cainiao.com,
zhanyang@zjut.edu.cn, yejieping.ye@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
The dramatic growth of global e-commerce has led to a surge in demand for efficient
and cost-effective order fulfillment which can increase customers’ service levels
and sellers’ competitiveness. However, managing order fulfillment is challenging
due to a series of interdependent online sequential decision-making problems. To
clear this hurdle, rather than solving the problems separately as attempted in some
recent researches, this paper proposes a method based on multi-agent reinforcement
learning to integratively solve the series of interconnected problems, encompassing
order handling, packing and pickup, storage, order consolidation, and last-mile
delivery. In particular, we model the integrated problem as a Markov game,
wherein a team of agents learns a joint policy via interacting with a simulated
environment. Since no simulated environment supporting the complete order
fulfillment problem exists, we devise Order Fulfillment COoperative mUlti-agent
Reinforcement learning Scalable Environment (OFCOURSE) in the OpenAI Gym
style, which allows reproduction and re-utilization to build customized applications.
By constructing the fulfillment system in OFCOURSE, we optimize a joint policy
that solves the integrated problem, facilitating sequential order-wise operations
across all fulfillment units and minimizing the total cost of fulfilling all orders
within the promised time. With OFCOURSE, we also demonstrate that the joint
policy learned by multi-agent reinforcement learning outperforms the combination
of locally optimal policies. The source code of OFCOURSE is available at: https:
//github.com/GitYiheng/ofcourse.

1

Introduction

The growth of e-commerce has increased the need for efficient and cost-effective Order Fulfillment
(OF) services which are essential for upgrading customers’ service levels and enhancing the sellers’
competitiveness [Houde et al., 2017]. OF covers the entire process from order placement to order
delivery, involving a series of online sequential decision-making problems across different fulfillment
stages, including order handling, packing and pickup, storage, order consolidation, and last-mile
delivery [Lin and Shaw, 1998, Croxton, 2003]. To reduce the overall cost of the complete OF problem,
it is pivotal to approach it holistically, which poses two challenges. Firstly, order information is
revealed progressively over time, while decisions must be made once the requests arrive without
future information. Secondly, as OF involves managing numerous orders over multiple interconnected
fulfillment units, all constituent decision-making stages are interdependent and require collective
∗

Yang Zhan (zhanyang@zjut.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

