Med-UniC: Unifying Cross-Lingual Medical
Vision-Language Pre-Training by Diminishing Bias

Zhongwei Wan1∗ , Che Liu2∗, Mi Zhang1† , Jie Fu5†, Benyou Wang4 , Sibo Cheng2 ,
Lei Ma3 , César Quilodrán-Casas2 , Rossella Arcucci2
1
The Ohio State University 2 Imperial College London
3
Peking University 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
5
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{wan.512, mizhang.1}@osu.edu, lei.ma@pku.edu.cn, wangbenyou@cuhk.edu.cn
{che.liu21, sibo.cheng, c.quilodran, r.arcucci}@imperial.ac.uk, jiefu@ust.hk

Abstract
The scarcity of data presents a critical obstacle to the efficacy of medical visionlanguage pre-training (VLP). A potential solution lies in the combination of datasets
from various language communities. Nevertheless, the main challenge stems from
the complexity of integrating diverse syntax and semantics, language-specific
medical terminology, and culture-specific implicit knowledge. Therefore, one
crucial aspect to consider is the presence of community bias caused by different
languages. This paper presents a novel framework named Unifying Cross-Lingual
Medical Vision-Language Pre-Training (Med-UniC), designed to integrate multimodal medical data from the two most prevalent languages, English and Spanish.
Specifically, we propose Cross-lingual Text Alignment Regularization (CTR) to
explicitly unify cross-lingual semantic representations of medical reports originating from diverse language communities. CTR is optimized through latent
language disentanglement, rendering our optimization objective to not depend
on negative samples, thereby significantly mitigating the bias from determining
positive-negative sample pairs within analogous medical reports. Furthermore,
it ensures that the cross-lingual representation is not biased toward any specific
language community. Med-UniC reaches superior performance across 5 medical
image tasks and 10 datasets encompassing over 30 diseases, offering a versatile
framework for unifying multi-modal medical data within diverse linguistic communities. The experimental outcomes highlight the presence of community bias
in cross-lingual VLP. Reducing this bias enhances the performance not only in
vision-language tasks but also in uni-modal visual tasks. The source code has been
released at https://github.com/SUSTechBruce/Med-UniC.

1

Introduction

English, despite not being the primary native language for a vast majority of the global population,
remains the dominant language in vision-language pre-training (VLP) datasets. Uni-lingual VLP
models not only demonstrate restricted performance in cross-lingual tasks, but also bring the community bias on non-English speaking populations (displayed in Fig 1), particularly in the context of
medical applications.
Researchers have used machine-translated non-English corpora and techniques like masked
language model (MLM) and contrastive learning to unify cross-lingual representations [1–
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

