Conservative State Value Estimation for Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Liting Chen∗
McGill University
Montreal, Canada
98chenliting@gmail.com
Zhengdao Shao∗
University of Sci. and Tech. of China
Hefei, China
zhengdaoshao@mail.ustc.edu.cn
Saravan Rajmohan
Microsoft 365
Seattle, USA
saravar@microsoft.com

Jie Yan †
Microsoft
Beijing, China
dasistyanjie@gmail.com
Lu Wang
Microsoft
Beijing, China
wlu@microsoft.com

Thomas Moscibroda
Microsoft
Redmond, USA
moscitho@microsoft.com

Qingwei Lin
Microsoft
Beijing, China
qlin@microsoft.com

Dongmei Zhang
Microsoft
Beijing, China
dongmeiz@microsoft.com

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning faces a significant challenge of value over-estimation
due to the distributional drift between the dataset and the current learned policy,
leading to learning failure in practice. The common approach is to incorporate a
penalty term to reward or value estimation in the Bellman iterations. Meanwhile,
to avoid extrapolation on out-of-distribution (OOD) states and actions, existing
methods focus on conservative Q-function estimation. In this paper, we propose
Conservative State Value Estimation (CSVE), a new approach that learns conservative V-function via directly imposing penalty on OOD states. Compared to
prior work, CSVE allows more effective state value estimation with conservative
guarantees and further better policy optimization. Further, we apply CSVE and
develop a practical actor-critic algorithm in which the critic does the conservative
value estimation by additionally sampling and penalizing the states around the
dataset, and the actor applies advantage weighted updates extended with state
exploration to improve the policy. We evaluate in classic continual control tasks of
D4RL, showing that our method performs better than the conservative Q-function
learning methods and is strongly competitive among recent SOTA methods.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) learns to act by interacting with the environment and has shown great
success in various tasks. However, in many real-world situations, it is impossible to learn from scratch
online as exploration is often risky and unsafe. Instead, offline RL([1, 2]) avoids this problem by
learning the policy solely from historical data. Yet, simply applying standard online RL techniques
to static datasets can lead to overestimated values and incorrect policy decisions when faced with
unfamiliar or out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios.
∗

Work done during the internship at Microsoft. † Work done during full-time employment at Microsoft.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

