Video-Mined Task Graphs
for Keystep Recognition in Instructional Videos

Kumar Ashutosh
UT Austin and FAIR, Meta

Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan
UT Austin

Triantafyllos Afouras
FAIR, Meta

Kristen Grauman
UT Austin and FAIR, Meta

Abstract
Procedural activity understanding requires perceiving human actions in terms of
a broader task, where multiple keysteps are performed in sequence across a long
video to reach a final goal state—such as the steps of a recipe or a DIY fix-it
task. Prior work largely treats keystep recognition in isolation of this broader
structure, or else rigidly confines keysteps to align with a predefined sequential
script. We propose discovering a task graph automatically from how-to videos to
represent probabilistically how people tend to execute keysteps, and then leverage
this graph to regularize keystep recognition in novel videos. On multiple datasets
of real-world instructional videos, we show the impact: more reliable zero-shot
keystep localization and improved video representation learning, exceeding the
state of the art. Project Page: https://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/task_graph/

1

Introduction

Instructional “how-to” videos online allow users to master new skills and everyday DIY tasks, from
cooking to crafts to sports [51]. In the future, AR assistants able to parse such procedural activities
could augment human skills by providing interactive guidance throughout the task in sync with
the user’s visual context [25, 56, 64], or by automatically creating video summaries of the most
important information [2, 23, 54]. Similarly, human expert demonstration videos have the potential
to steer robot behavior in the right direction for complex sequential tasks that have notoriously sparse
rewards [52, 62, 81].
In a procedural activity, there is a single task goal that a person accomplishes by executing a series of
keysteps, some of which have causal dependencies. For example, to make tiramisu, keysteps include
whisk the eggs, lay out the ladyfingers, sprinkle the cocoa—and the cocoa must be sprinkled only after
laying ladyfingers in the pan; to replace a bike tube, the wheel needs to be removed from the bicycle,
then the old tube deflated and removed before the new one is fitted in. Thus, unlike mainstream
video recognition tasks focused on naming an action in a short video clip [13, 14] like shaking hands,
playing instruments, etc., procedural activity understanding requires perceiving actions in terms of
the broader goal, breaking down a long-form video into its component keysteps.
To address keystep recognition, prior work has proposed creative ideas to either match video clips
to keystep names based on the transcribed narrations [45, 55] or align visual steps to a rigid linear
script (e.g., with dynamic time warping) [15, 18, 19, 36]. Other methods pose keystep recognition as
a classification problem and label each fixed-sized chunk into one of the possible classes [48, 50, 77,
79, 80, 88]. However, these existing approaches face important limitations. Simple feature-keystep
similarity matching and classification assume all actions are independent and can appear anywhere
throughout the video, while the existing alignment models assume every keystep will match some
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

