Temperature Balancing, Layer-wise Weight Analysis,
and Neural Network Training
Yefan Zhou∗* 1 , Tianyu Pang*2 , Keqin Liu2 , Charles H. Martin3 , Michael W. Mahoney4 , and
Yaoqing Yang1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College
National Center for Applied Mathematics and Department of Mathematics, Nanjing University
3
Calculation Consulting
4
ICSI, LBNL, and Department of Statistics, University of California at Berkeley
{yefan.zhou.gr, yaoqing.yang}@dartmouth.edu
tianyupang628@gmail.com, kqliu@nju.edu.cn
charles@CalculationConsulting.com, mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Regularization in modern machine learning is crucial, and it can take various forms
in algorithmic design: training set, model family, error function, regularization
terms, and optimizations. In particular, the learning rate, which can be interpreted
as a temperature-like parameter within the statistical mechanics of learning, plays
a crucial role in neural network training. Indeed, many widely adopted training
strategies basically just define the decay of the learning rate over time. This process
can be interpreted as decreasing a temperature, using either a global learning
rate (for the entire model) or a learning rate that varies for each parameter. This
paper proposes TempBalance, a straightforward yet effective layer-wise learning
rate method. TempBalance is based on Heavy-Tailed Self-Regularization (HT-SR)
Theory, an approach which characterizes the implicit self-regularization of different
layers in trained models. We demonstrate the efficacy of using HT-SR-motivated
metrics to guide the scheduling and balancing of temperature across all network
layers during model training, resulting in improved performance during testing. We
implement TempBalance on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, SVHN, and TinyImageNet
datasets using ResNets, VGGs and WideResNets with various depths and widths.
Our results show that TempBalance significantly outperforms ordinary SGD and
carefully-tuned spectral norm regularization. We also show that TempBalance
outperforms a number of state-of-the-art optimizers and learning rate schedulers.

1

Introduction

Having a learning rate schedule that gradually decreases over time is crucial for the convergence and
performance of state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms. Indeed, many optimization algorithms
essentially boil down to designing a progression of parameter updates, as realized by different learning
rate schedules [1–4]. Common schedules assign a global learning rate per epoch, where the same
learning rate is used for all layers in the model. This includes the family of cyclical learning rates [3],
and parameter-wise learning rate schedules like Adam [2] and its variants [5, 6]. However, such
a global learning rate schedule does not take into account the structural characteristics of neural
networks (NNs). At the same time, parameter-wise learning rate schedules are sometimes used,
but they have long been conjectured to have worse generalization performance than carefully tuned
∗

First two authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

