Visual Instruction Inversion:
Image Editing via Visual Prompting

Thao Nguyen

Yuheng Li Utkarsh Ojha Yong Jae Lee
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Visual Prompting

Text-conditioned

https://thaoshibe.github.io/visii/
Instruction

+ “… husky”

+ “… pit bull”

+ “… tiger”

+ “… monkey” + “… squirrel”

“Turn it into
a watercolor painting”
Instruction

Test Image

InstructPix2Pix
<ins>

Before

After

+ “… husky”

Test Image

+ “… pit bull”

+ “… tiger”

+ “… monkey” + “… squirrel”

Ours

Figure 1: Image editing via visual prompting. Given a pair of before-and-after images of an edit, our approach
(bottom) can learn and apply that edit along with the user’s text prompt to enable a more accurate and intuitive
image editing process compared to text-only conditioned approaches (top).

Abstract
Text-conditioned image editing has emerged as a powerful tool for editing images.
However, in many situations, language can be ambiguous and ineffective in describing specific image edits. When faced with such challenges, visual prompts can
be a more informative and intuitive way to convey the desired edit. We present a
method for image editing via visual prompting. Given example pairs that represent
the “before” and “after” images of an edit, our approach learns a text-based editing
direction that can be used to perform the same edit on new images. We leverage
the rich, pretrained editing capabilities of text-to-image diffusion models by inverting visual prompts into editing instructions. Our results show that even with just
one example pair, we can achieve competitive results compared to state-of-the-art
text-conditioned image editing frameworks.

1

Introduction

In the past few years, diffusion models [37, 38, 6, 29, 40, 8] have emerged as a powerful framework
for image generation. In particular, text-to-image diffusion models can generate stunning images
conditioned on a text prompt. Such models have also been developed for image editing [27, 4, 19, 30,
54, 13, 16, 39, 9, 26]; i.e., transforming an image into another based on a text specification. As these
models rely on textual guidance, significant effort has been made in prompt engineering [49, 12, 48],
which aims to find well-designed prompts for text-to-image generation and editing.
But what if the desired edit is difficult to describe in words? For example, describing your drawing
style of your cat can be challenging to put into a sentence (Fig. 2a). Or imagine that you want to
transform a roadmap image into an aerial one – it could be difficult to know what the different colored
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

