Re-Think and Re-Design Graph Neural Networks in
Spaces of Continuous Graph Diffusion Functionals

Tingting Dan
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
tdan@email.unc.edu

Jiaqi Ding
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
jiaqid@cs.unc.edu

Ziquan Wei
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
ziquanw@email.unc.edu

Shahar Z Kovalsky
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
shaharko@unc.edu

Minjeong Kim
University of North Carolina at Greensboro
mkim@uncg.edu

Won Hwa Kim
Pohang University of Science and Technology
wonhwa@postech.ac.kr

Guorong Wu∗
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
grwu@med.unc.edu

Abstract
Graphs are ubiquitous in various domains, such as social networks and biological
systems. Despite the great successes of graph neural networks (GNNs) in modeling
and analyzing complex graph data, the inductive bias of locality assumption, which
involves exchanging information only within neighboring connected nodes, restricts
GNNs in capturing long-range dependencies and global patterns in graphs. Inspired
by the classic Brachistochrone problem, we seek how to devise a new inductive
bias for cutting-edge graph application and present a general framework through
the lens of variational analysis. The backbone of our framework is a two-way
mapping between the discrete GNN model and continuous diffusion functional,
which allows us to design application-specific objective function in the continuous
domain and engineer discrete deep model with mathematical guarantees. First, we
address over-smoothing in current GNNs. Specifically, our inference reveals that
the existing layer-by-layer models of graph embedding learning are equivalent to a
ℓ2 -norm integral functional of graph gradients, which is the underlying cause of
the over-smoothing problem. Similar to edge-preserving filters in image denoising,
we introduce the total variation (TV) to promote alignment of the graph diffusion
pattern with the global information present in community topologies. On top of this,
we devise a new selective mechanism for inductive bias that can be easily integrated
into existing GNNs and effectively address the trade-off between model depth and
over-smoothing. Second, we devise a novel generative adversarial network (GAN)
to predict the spreading flows in the graph through a neural transport equation.
To avoid the potential issue of vanishing flows, we tailor the objective function
to minimize the transportation within each community while maximizing the
inter-community flows. Our new GNN models achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance on graph learning benchmarks such as Cora, Citeseer, and Pubmed.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

