Exact Bayesian Inference on Discrete Models via
Probability Generating Functions:
A Probabilistic Programming Approach

Fabian Zaiser
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
fabian.zaiser@cs.ox.ac.uk
Andrzej S. Murawski
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
andrzej.murawski@cs.ox.ac.uk

C.-H. Luke Ong
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
luke.ong@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We present an exact Bayesian inference method for discrete statistical models, which
can find exact solutions to a large class of discrete inference problems, even with infinite
support and continuous priors. To express such models, we introduce a probabilistic programming language that supports discrete and continuous sampling, discrete observations,
affine functions, (stochastic) branching, and conditioning on discrete events. Our key tool
is probability generating functions: they provide a compact closed-form representation
of distributions that are definable by programs, thus enabling the exact computation of
posterior probabilities, expectation, variance, and higher moments. Our inference method
is provably correct and fully automated in a tool called Genfer, which uses automatic
differentiation (specifically, Taylor polynomials), but does not require computer algebra.
Our experiments show that Genfer is often faster than the existing exact inference tools
PSI, Dice, and Prodigy. On a range of real-world inference problems that none of these
exact tools can solve, Genfer’s performance is competitive with approximate Monte Carlo
methods, while avoiding approximation errors.

1

Introduction

Bayesian statistics is a highly successful framework for reasoning under uncertainty that has found
widespread use in a variety of fields, such as AI/machine learning, medicine and healthcare, finance
and risk management, social sciences, climate science, astrophysics, and many other disciplines. At
its core is the idea of representing uncertainty as probability, and updating prior beliefs based on
observed data via Bayes’ law, to arrive at posterior beliefs. A key challenge in Bayesian statistics
is computing this posterior distribution: analytical solutions are usually impossible or intractable,
which necessitates the use of approximate methods, such as Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
or variational inference. In this work, we identify a large class of discrete models for which exact
inference is in fact possible, in particular time series models of count data, such as autoregressive
models, hidden Markov models, switchpoint models. We achieve this by leveraging probability
generating functions (GFs) as a representation of distributions. The GF of a random variable X
is defined to be the function G(x) := E[xX ]. In probability theory, it is a well-known tool to study
random variables and their distributions, related to the moment generating and the characteristic
functions [14, Chapter 4]. In computer science, GFs have previously been used for the analysis of
probabilistic programs [17, 4] and for exact inference on certain classes of graphical models [26, 27].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

