Debiasing Scores and Prompts of 2D Diffusion for
View-consistent Text-to-3D Generation
Susung Hong∗

Donghoon Ahn∗

Seungryong Kim†

Korea University, Seoul, Korea

Abstract
Existing score-distilling text-to-3D generation techniques, despite their considerable promise, often encounter the view inconsistency problem. One of the
most notable issues is the Janus problem, where the most canonical view of
an object (e.g., face or head) appears in other views. In this work, we explore
existing frameworks for score-distilling text-to-3D generation and identify the
main causes of the view inconsistency problem—the embedded bias of 2D diffusion models. Based on these findings, we propose two approaches to debias
the score-distillation frameworks for view-consistent text-to-3D generation. Our
first approach, called score debiasing, involves cutting off the score estimated
by 2D diffusion models and gradually increasing the truncation value throughout
the optimization process. Our second approach, called prompt debiasing, identifies conflicting words between user prompts and view prompts using a language
model, and adjusts the discrepancy between view prompts and the viewing direction of an object. Our experimental results show that our methods improve
the realism of the generated 3D objects by significantly reducing artifacts and
achieve a good trade-off between faithfulness to the 2D diffusion models and
3D consistency with little overhead. Our project page is available at https:
//susunghong.github.io/Debiased-Score-Distillation-Sampling/.

Baseline

Debiased (Ours)

Baseline

Debiased (Ours)

“a kangaroo wearing boxing gloves”

“a colorful toucan with a large beak”

“a flamingo standing on one leg in shallow water”

“a small kitten”

Figure 1: Comparison between the baseline (SJC [27]) and ours (Debiased Score Distillation
Sampling; D-SDS). Our debiasing methods qualitatively reduce view inconsistencies in zero-shot
text-to-3D generation and the so-called Janus problem.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

