Momentum Provably Improves Error Feedback!

Ilyas Fatkhullin
ETH AI Center & ETH Zurich

Alexander Tyurin
KAUST*

Peter Richtárik
KAUST

Abstract
Due to the high communication overhead when training machine learning models
in a distributed environment, modern algorithms invariably rely on lossy communication compression. However, when untreated, the errors caused by compression
propagate, and can lead to severely unstable behavior, including exponential divergence. Almost a decade ago, Seide et al. [2014] proposed an error feedback (EF)
mechanism, which we refer to as EF14, as an immensely effective heuristic for
mitigating this issue. However, despite steady algorithmic and theoretical advances
in the EF field in the last decade, our understanding is far from complete. In this
work we address one of the most pressing issues. In particular, in the canonical nonconvex setting, all known variants of EF rely on very large batch sizes to converge,
which can be prohibitive in practice. We propose a surprisingly simple fix which
removes this issue both theoretically, and in practice: the application of Polyak’s
momentum to the latest incarnation of EF due to Richtárik et al. [2021] known as
EF21. Our algorithm, for which we coin the name EF21-SGDM, improves the communication and sample complexities of previous error feedback algorithms under
standard smoothness and bounded variance assumptions, and does not require any
further strong assumptions such as bounded gradient dissimilarity. Moreover, we
propose a double momentum version of our method that improves the complexities
even further. Our proof seems to be novel even when compression is removed from
the method, and as such, our proof technique is of independent interest in the study
of nonconvex stochastic optimization enriched with Polyak’s momentum.

1

Introduction

Since the practical utility of modern machine learning models crucially depends on our ability to
train them on large quantities of training data, it is imperative to perform the training in a distributed
storage and compute environment. In federated learning (FL) [Konečný et al., 2016, Kairouz, 2019],
for example, data is naturally stored in a distributed fashion across a large number of clients (who
capture and own the data in the first place), and the goal is to train a single machine learning model
from the wealth of all this distributed data, in a private fashion, directly on their devices.
1.1 Formalism. We consider the problem of collaborative training of a single model by several
clients in a data-parallel fashion. In particular, we aim to solve the distributed nonconvex stochastic
optimization problem
[︂
]︂
𝑛
∑︀
𝑓𝑖 (𝑥) ,
𝑓𝑖 (𝑥) := E𝜉𝑖 ∼𝒟𝑖 [𝑓𝑖 (𝑥, 𝜉𝑖 )] ,
𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑛,
(1)
min 𝑓 (𝑥) := 𝑛1
𝑥∈R𝑑

𝑖=1

where 𝑛 is the number of clients, 𝑥 ∈ R𝑑 represents the parameters of the model we wish to train,
and 𝑓𝑖 (𝑥) is the (typically nonconvex) loss of model parameterized by the vector 𝑥 on the data 𝒟𝑖
owned by client 𝑖. Unlike most works in federated learning, we do not assume the datasets to be
similar, i.e., we allow the distributions 𝒟1 , . . . , 𝒟𝑛 to be arbitrarily different.
*

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

