Penalising the biases in norm regularisation enforces
sparsity

Etienne Boursier
INRIA CELESTE, LMO, Orsay, France
etienne.boursier@inria.fr

Nicolas Flammarion
TML Lab, EPFL, Switzerland
nicolas.flammarion@epfl.ch

Abstract
Controlling the parameters’ norm often yields good generalisation when training
neural networks. Beyond simple intuitions, the relation between regularising
parameters’ norm and obtained estimators remains theoretically misunderstood.
For one hidden ReLU layer networks with unidimensional data, this work shows the
parameters’ norm required to represent
√ a function is given by the total variation of
its second derivative, weighted by a 1 + x2 factor. Notably, this weighting factor
disappears when the norm of bias terms is not regularised. The presence of this
additional weighting factor is of utmost significance as it is shown to enforce the
uniqueness and sparsity (in the number of kinks) of the minimal norm interpolator.
Conversely, omitting the bias’ norm allows for non-sparse solutions. Penalising the
bias terms in the regularisation, either explicitly or implicitly, thus leads to sparse
estimators.

1

Introduction

Although modern neural networks are not particularly limited in terms of their number of parameters,
they still demonstrate remarkable generalisation capabilities when applied to real-world data [Belkin
et al., 2019, Zhang et al., 2021]. Intriguingly, both theoretical and empirical studies have indicated
that the crucial factor determining the network’s generalisation properties is not the sheer number of
parameters, but rather the norm of these parameters [Bartlett, 1996, Neyshabur et al., 2014]. This
norm is typically controlled through a combination of explicit regularisation techniques, such as
weight decay [Krogh and Hertz, 1991], and some form of implicit regularisation resulting from the
training algorithm employed [Soudry et al., 2018, Lyu and Li, 2019, Ji and Telgarsky, 2019, Chizat
and Bach, 2020].
Neural networks with a large number of parameters can approximate any continuous function
on a compact set [Barron, 1993]. Thus, without norm control, the space of estimated functions
encompasses all continuous functions. In the parameter space, this implies considering neural
networks with infinite width and unbounded weights [Neyshabur et al., 2014]. Yet, when weight
control is enforced, the exact correspondence between the parameter space (i.e., the parameters θ of
the network) and the function space (i.e., the estimated function fθ produced by the network’s output)
becomes unclear. Establishing this correspondence is pivotal for comprehending the generalisation
properties of overparameterised neural networks. Two fundamental questions arise.
Question 1. What quantity in the function space, does the parameters’ norm of a neural network
correspond to?
Question 2. What functions are learnt when fitting training data with minimal parameters’ norm?
We study these questions in the context of a one-hidden ReLU layer network with a skip connection. Previous research [Kurková and Sanguineti, 2001, Bach, 2017] has examined generalisation
guarantees for small representational cost functions, where the representational cost refers to the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

