A Scalable Neural Network for DSIC Afﬁne
Maximizer Auction Design

Zhijian Duan
CFCS, School of Computer Science
Peking University
zjduan@pku.edu.cn

Haoran Sun
Peking University
sunhaoran0301@stu.pku.edu.cn

Yurong Chen
CFCS, School of Computer Science
Peking University
chenyurong@pku.edu.cn

Xiaotie Deng
CFCS, School of Computer Science
& CMAR, Institute for AI
Peking University
xiaotie@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Automated auction design aims to ﬁnd empirically high-revenue mechanisms
through machine learning. Existing works on multi item auction scenarios can
be roughly divided into RegretNet-like and afﬁne maximizer auctions (AMAs)
approaches. However, the former cannot strictly ensure dominant strategy incentive compatibility (DSIC), while the latter faces scalability issue due to the large
number of allocation candidates. To address these limitations, we propose AMenuNet, a scalable neural network that constructs the AMA parameters (even including the allocation menu) from bidder and item representations. AMenuNet
is always DSIC and individually rational (IR) due to the properties of AMAs,
and it enhances scalability by generating candidate allocations through a neural
network. Additionally, AMenuNet is permutation equivariant, and its number of
parameters is independent of auction scale. We conduct extensive experiments to
demonstrate that AMenuNet outperforms strong baselines in both contextual and
non-contextual multi-item auctions, scales well to larger auctions, generalizes well
to different settings, and identiﬁes useful deterministic allocations. Overall, our
proposed approach offers an effective solution to automated DSIC auction design,
with improved scalability and strong revenue performance in various settings.

1

Introduction

One of the central topics in auction design is to construct a mechanism that is both dominant strategy
incentive compatible (DSIC) and individually rational (IR) while bringing high expected revenue to
the auctioneer. The seminal work by Myerson [1981] characterizes the revenue-maximizing mechanism for single-parameter auctions. However, after four decades, the optimal auction design problem in multi-parameter scenarios remains incompletely understood, even in simple settings such as
two bidders and two items [Dütting et al., 2019]. To solve the problem, recently, there has been
signiﬁcant progress in automated auction design [Sandholm and Likhodedov, 2015b, Dütting et al.,
2019]. Such a paradigm formulates auction design as an optimization problem subject to DSIC and
IR constraints and then ﬁnds optimal or near-optimal solutions using machine learning.
The works of automated auction design can be roughly divided into two categories. The ﬁrst category is the RegretNet-like approach [Curry et al., 2020, Peri et al., 2021, Rahme et al., 2021b,a,
Duan et al., 2022, Ivanov et al., 2022], pioneered by RegretNet [Dütting et al., 2019]. These works
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

