GenS: Generalizable Neural Surface Reconstruction
from Multi-View Images

Rui Peng1,2 Xiaodong Gu3 Luyang Tang1 Shihe Shen1 Fanqi Yu1 Ronggang Wang
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 Alibaba Group
ruipeng@stu.pku.edu.cn rgwang@pkusz.edu.cn

,1,2

Abstract
Combining the signed distance function (SDF) and differentiable volume rendering
has emerged as a powerful paradigm for surface reconstruction from multi-view
images without 3D supervision. However, current methods are impeded by requiring long-time per-scene optimizations and cannot generalize to new scenes. In this
paper, we present GenS, an end-to-end generalizable neural surface reconstruction
model. Unlike coordinate-based methods that train a separate network for each
scene, we construct a generalized multi-scale volume to directly encode all scenes.
Compared with existing solutions, our representation is more powerful, which can
recover high-frequency details while maintaining global smoothness. Meanwhile,
we introduce a multi-scale feature-metric consistency to impose the multi-view
consistency in a more discriminative multi-scale feature space, which is robust
to the failures of the photometric consistency. And the learnable feature can be
self-enhanced to continuously improve the matching accuracy and mitigate aggregation ambiguity. Furthermore, we design a view contrast loss to force the model
to be robust to those regions covered by few viewpoints through distilling the
geometric prior from dense input to sparse input. Extensive experiments on popular
benchmarks show that our model can generalize well to new scenes and outperform existing state-of-the-art methods even those employing ground-truth depth
supervision. Code will be available at https://github.com/prstrive/GenS.

1

Introduction

Surface reconstruction from multi-view images is a cornerstone task in computer vision with many
applications in virtual reality, autonomous driving, robotics, etc. Typical solutions [15, 16, 7,
43, 58, 56, 10, 36] in the past were mostly based on a multi-step pipeline, which includes depth
estimation, depth fusion and meshing. Although they have demonstrated their excellent performance,
the procedure is cumbersome and inevitably introduces cumulative errors. While several early
works [31, 61] used differentiable surface rendering to directly reconstruct surfaces, recent works
[34, 49, 60], inspired by the huge success of neural radiance field (NeRF) [27] in synthesizing novel
views, follow the volume rendering [24] to represent the 3D geometry with an occupancy field [25]
or signed distance function (SDF) [35] and can achieve more impressive results.
The key idea of these approaches is to train a compact multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to predict the
implicit representation (e,g., SDF) of each sampled point on camera rays. The density of volume
rendering is then regarded as a function of this implicit representation, and alpha-composition of
samples is performed to produce the corresponding pixel color and geometry information. However,
existing methods are hampered by requiring a lengthy per-scene optimization procedure and cannot
generalize to new scenes, which makes them infeasible for many application scenarios. A recent
method [23] attempts to address these issues through conditioning the SDF-induced model with
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

