ANTN: Bridging Autoregressive Neural Networks and
Tensor Networks for Quantum Many-Body Simulation

Zhuo Chen123 Laker Newhouse4∗ Eddie Chen3∗ Di Luo1235† Marin Soljačić13
1
NSF AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions
2
Center for Theoretical Physics, Massachusetts Institue of Technology
3
Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
4
Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
5
Department of Physics, Harvard University
{chenzhuo,lakern,ezchen,diluo,soljacic}@mit.edu

Abstract
Quantum many-body physics simulation has important impacts on understanding
fundamental science and has applications to quantum materials design and quantum technology. However, due to the exponentially growing size of the Hilbert
space with respect to the particle number, a direct simulation is intractable. While
representing quantum states with tensor networks and neural networks are the two
state-of-the-art methods for approximate simulations, each has its own limitations
in terms of expressivity and inductive bias. To address these challenges, we develop
a novel architecture, Autoregressive Neural TensorNet (ANTN), which bridges
tensor networks and autoregressive neural networks. We show that Autoregressive
Neural TensorNet parameterizes normalized wavefunctions, allows for exact sampling, generalizes the expressivity of tensor networks and autoregressive neural
networks, and inherits a variety of symmetries from autoregressive neural networks. We demonstrate our approach on quantum state learning as well as finding
the ground state of the challenging 2D J1 -J2 Heisenberg model with different
systems sizes and coupling parameters, outperforming both tensor networks and
autoregressive neural networks. Our work opens up new opportunities for quantum many-body physics simulation, quantum technology design, and generative
modeling in artificial intelligence.

1

Introduction

Quantum many-body physics is fundamental to our understanding of the universe. It appears in
high energy physics where all the fundamental interactions in the Standard Model, such as quantum
electrodynamics (QED) and quantum chromodynamics (QCD), are described by quantum mechanics.
In condensed matter physics, quantum many-body physics has led to a number of rich phenomena
and exotic quantum matters, including superfluids, superconductivity, the quantum Hall effect, and
topological ordered states (Girvin & Yang, 2019). As an application, quantum many-body physics is
crucial for new materials design. The electronic structure problem and chemical reactions in quantum
chemistry are governed by quantum many-body physics. The recent development of quantum
computers is also deeply connected to quantum many-body physics. A multi-qubit quantum device is
intrinsically a quantum many-body system, such that progress on quantum computer engineering is
tied to our understanding of quantum many-body physics (Preskill, 2021).
∗
†

equal contribution
corresponding author: diluo@mit.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

