S-CLIP: Semi-supervised Vision-Language
Learning using Few Specialist Captions

Sangwoo Mo1,2 Minkyu Kim1,3 Kyungmin Lee1 Jinwoo Shin1
1
KAIST 2 University of Michigan 3 KRAFTON

Abstract
Vision-language models, such as contrastive language-image pre-training (CLIP),
have demonstrated impressive results in natural image domains. However, these
models often struggle when applied to specialized domains like remote sensing, and
adapting to such domains is challenging due to the limited number of image-text
pairs available for training. To address this, we propose S-CLIP, a semi-supervised
learning method for training CLIP that utilizes additional unpaired images. SCLIP employs two pseudo-labeling strategies specifically designed for contrastive
learning and the language modality. The caption-level pseudo-label is given by a
combination of captions of paired images, obtained by solving an optimal transport
problem between unpaired and paired images. The keyword-level pseudo-label
is given by a keyword in the caption of the nearest paired image, trained through
partial label learning that assumes a candidate set of labels for supervision instead
of the exact one. By combining these objectives, S-CLIP significantly enhances
the training of CLIP using only a few image-text pairs, as demonstrated in various
specialist domains, including remote sensing, fashion, scientific figures, and comics.
For instance, S-CLIP improves CLIP by 10% for zero-shot classification and 4% for
image-text retrieval on the remote sensing benchmark, matching the performance
of supervised CLIP while using three times fewer image-text pairs.1

1

Introduction

Pre-trained vision-language models have achieved remarkable success, providing a foundation for
numerous downstream tasks [1]. However, these models often struggle when applied to specialized
domains such as remote sensing or medical imaging [2]. This is because the models are trained on
web-crawled data that may not fully capture the diversity and complexity of these domains [3, 4]. To
address this issue, previous research has focused on constructing large-scale pre-training datasets for
each domain [5, 6]. However, annotating caption for each specialized domain can be expensive and
time-consuming, which limits their applicability across various domains.
Several studies have attempted to reduce the number of image-text pairs used for vision-language
pre-training. However, these approaches often rely on additional information, such as pre-trained
object detectors [7–9], or class-annotated images [10], which may not be applicable to specialized
domains. Other approaches leverage self-supervised learning to utilize unpaired data [11–14], but
they do not fully exploit the information provided by image-text pairs. Research on leveraging a few
image-text pairs to improve vision-language pre-training remains underexplored.
In various areas of machine learning, particularly in image classification, semi-supervised learning
[15] is a popular approach for training a model using limited annotations. This technique typically
relies on pseudo-labeling [16], which predicts labels for unlabeled data by propagating information
*Work done at KAIST. Corresponds to: swmo@umich.edu
1

Code: https://github.com/alinlab/s-clip

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

