FACE: Evaluating Natural Language Generation with
Fourier Analysis of Cross-Entropy

Zuhao Yang1∗, Yingfang Yuan2∗, Yang Xu3∗†, Shuo Zhan1 , Huajun Bai4 , Kefan Chen2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
2
School of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, Heriot-Watt University
3
Department of Computer Science, Southern University of Science and Technology
4
Genify

Abstract
Measuring the distance between machine-produced and human language is a
critical open problem. Inspired by empirical findings from psycholinguistics on the
periodicity of entropy in language, we propose FACE, a set of metrics based on
Fourier Analysis of the estimated Cross-Entropy of language, for measuring the
similarity between model-generated and human-written languages. Based on an
open-ended generation task and the experimental data from previous studies, we
find that FACE can effectively identify the human-model gap, scales with model
size, reflects the outcomes of different sampling methods for decoding, correlates
well with other evaluation metrics and with human judgment scores.

1

Introduction

The concept of entropy from Information Theory is broadly applied in Natural Language Processing
(NLP) technology and computational linguistic studies. The most notable example is the use of
cross-entropy in training and evaluating language models, where the exponentiation of cross-entropy,
perplexity, is adopted to measure models’ performance in next-word (or masked-word) prediction
task. However, low perplexity alone does not guarantee good performance in language generation
tasks, which not only depend on model sizes but are also closely related to the sampling techniques
used in decoding stage. The complexity of the generation task makes it especially important to
have different metrics that can reflect the generation quality from multiple angles. One particular
perspective is that the language generated from a good model should have a similar distribution of
words/tokens as in the “natural” human language.
Recent advances in psycholinguistics put forward new directions for developing more sophisticated
metrics other than Zipf’s coefficient. In particular, studies on temporal and spectral patterns in
dialogue [7, 47] reveal that cross-entropy (or referred to as surprisal, information density in the
psycholinguistics literature) changes periodically in natural language, which points out the potentials
of using fine-grained transformation of cross-entropy to quantify the differences in language data
(see Section 3 for a detailed review). It motivates the basic idea of this study: Can we effectively
quantify the periodical pattern of the cross-entropy, and use it as an indicator to distinguish human
and model-generated languages?
We summarize our contributions as follows: 1. We propose a set of metrics based on the frequency
spectra obtained from the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of the cross-entropy sequences of language
data, named FACE (Fourier Analysis of Cross-Entropy). 2. We empirically show FACE’s performance
on identifying human-model gap and how it scales with model sizes in Section 4.1. 3. We explore
∗
†

Equal contribution, in random order
Corresponding author, email: xuyang@sustech.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

