Contextual Gaussian Process Bandits with Neural
Networks
Haoting Zhang Jinghai He Rhonda Righter Zuo-Jun Max Shen Zeyu Zheng
Department of Industrial Engineering & Operations Research
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
haoting_zhang,jinghai_he,rrighter,maxshen,zyzheng@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Contextual decision-making problems have witnessed extensive applications in
various fields such as online content recommendation, personalized healthcare, and
autonomous vehicles, where a core practical challenge is to select a suitable surrogate model for capturing unknown complicated reward functions. It is often the
case that both high approximation accuracy and explicit uncertainty quantification
are desired. In this work, we propose a neural network-accompanied Gaussian
process (NN-AGP) model, which leverages neural networks to approximate the
unknown and potentially complicated reward function regarding the contextual
variable, and maintains a Gaussian process metamodel with respect to the decision
variable. Our model is shown to outperform existing approaches by offering better
approximation accuracy thanks to the use of neural networks and possessing explicit uncertainty quantification from the Gaussian process. We also analyze the
maximum information gain of the NN-AGP model and prove regret bounds for the
corresponding algorithms. Moreover, we conduct experiments on both synthetic
and practical problems, illustrating the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Various applications, including online content recommendation [1], healthcare [37, 15, 36], and
autonomous vehicles [7], demand the sequential selection of a decision variable, conditional on
the observed contextual variable representing the state of the environment in each round. These
applications can generally be framed as contextual bandit problems [5, 59, 63, 2], especially when
the reward function associated with each pair of decision and contextual variables is unknown. When
both the decision and contextual variables are drawn from continuous sets, a significant challenge
is selecting an appropriate surrogate model to approximate the reward function, considering both
approximation accuracy and uncertainty quantification. A common approach to alleviate this issue
is to employ a Gaussian process (GP) to model the reward function [61, 46], yielding the GP
bandit method [80, 81]. Indeed, GP has proven to be an effective surrogate model to address the
exploration-exploitation trade-off in estimating the unknown function while optimizing over it; see
[88, 75, 90, 43, 51]. On the other hand, most of the existing GP bandit literature does not take the
exogenous contextual variable into consideration, despite its critical role in capturing effects beyond
the decision variable that influence the reward – effects that are integral to many of the applications
previously mentioned [50, 62]. When the contextual variable is included in GP bandit problems,
previous work largely adopts a GP to jointly model the reward function with both contextual and
decision variables, employing a composite kernel that is either the sum or product of two separate
kernels; see [57, 9].
While GP-based bandit methods have proven effective in various applications [3, 8, 92, 93, 86, 6],
they may fall short in scenarios where the reward function exhibits intricate dependence on complex
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

