Lexinvariant Language Models

Qian Huang1
qhwang@cs.stanford.edu

Eric Zelikman1
ezelikman@cs.stanford.edu

Yuhuai Wu12
yuhuai@cs.stanford.edu

Gregory Valiant1
gvaliant@cs.stanford.edu
1

Sarah Li Chen1
sachen@stanford.edu
Percy Liang1
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Stanford University
2
Google Research

Abstract
Token embeddings, a mapping from discrete lexical symbols to continuous vectors,
are at the heart of any language model (LM). However, lexical symbol meanings
can also be determined and even redefined by their structural role in a long context.
In this paper, we ask: is it possible for a language model to be performant without
any fixed token embeddings? Such a language model would have to rely entirely
on the co-occurence and repetition of tokens in the context rather than the a priori
identity of any token. To answer this, we study lexinvariant language models that
are invariant to lexical symbols and therefore do not need fixed token embeddings
in practice. First, we prove that we can construct a lexinvariant LM to converge to
the true language model at a uniform rate that is polynomial in terms of the context
length, with a constant factor that is sublinear in the vocabulary size. Second, to build
a lexinvariant LM, we simply encode tokens using random Gaussian vectors, such
that each token maps to the same representation within each sequence but different
representations across sequences. Empirically, we demonstrate that it can indeed
attain perplexity comparable to that of a standard language model, given a sufficiently long context. We further explore two properties of the lexinvariant language
models: First, given text generated from a substitution cipher of English, it implicitly
implements Bayesian in-context deciphering and infers the mapping to the underlying real tokens with high accuracy. Second, it has on average 4X better accuracy
over synthetic in-context reasoning tasks. Finally, we discuss regularizing standard
language models towards lexinvariance and potential practical applications.

1

Introduction

All language processing systems rely on a stable lexicon, which assumes that a token (a word or
subword such as tree) has a consistent contribution to the meaning of a text (though of course this
meaning is mediated by context). In neural language models (LMs), this contribution is the token
embedding, which stably maps each token into a continuous vector [21, 16, 17, 7, 6]. However, in
real language, a token’s contribution might be determined by its structural role; in math and code, novel
variable names are arbitrarily defined to carry new meaning, and poems such as Jabberwocky exploit
humans’ lexical flexibility in interpreting novel words such as vorpal. Besides standard language
understanding, this lexical flexibility also correlates with a stronger in-context reasoning performance.
For example, GPT-3 [6] and other large language models that demonstrate high lexical flexibility show
strong performance on tasks involving in-context reasoning over new concepts and rules.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

