Transformers learn through gradual rank increase

Enric Boix-Adserà∗1,2 Etai Littwin∗1
Emmanuel Abbe1,3 Samy Bengio1 Joshua Susskind1
1
Apple 2 MIT 3 EPFL
eboix@mit.edu,emmanuel.abbe@epfl.ch
{elittwin,bengio,jsusskind}@apple.com

Abstract
We identify incremental learning dynamics in transformers, where the difference
between trained and initial weights progressively increases in rank. We rigorously
prove this occurs under the simplifying assumptions of diagonal weight matrices
and small initialization. Our experiments support the theory and also show that
phenomenon can occur in practice without the simplifying assumptions.

1

Introduction

The transformer architecture achieves state of the art performance in various domains, yet we still lack
a solid theoretical understanding of its training dynamics [VSP+ 17, DCLT19, LOG+ 19, DBK+ 20].
Nevertheless, the theoretical toolbox has matured over the last years and there are promising new
approaches. One important line of work examines the role that initialization scale plays on the
trajectory taken by gradient descent [JGH18, COB18, GSJW19, MGW+ 20, JGS+ 21, SS21, KC22].
When the weights are initialized small, it has been shown for simple networks that an incremental
learning behaviour occurs, where functions of increasing complexity are learned in stages. This
regime is known to be richer than the large-initialization regime1 , but the incremental learning
dynamics are difficult to analyze, and are so far understood only for extremely simple architectures.
Can we apply this analysis to transformers? Namely:
Are there incremental learning dynamics when training a transformer architecture?
An obstacle is that past work on incremental learning has mainly studied linear networks
[Ber22, ACHL19, MKAA21, LLL20, WGL+ 19, JGS+ 21, GSSD19, SKZ+ 23, PF23], with one
paper studying nonlinear 2-layer fully-connected networks [BPVF22]. In contrast, transformers have
nonlinear attention heads that do not fall under previous analyses: given X ∈ Rn×d , an attention
head computes
attention(X; WK , WQ , WV , WO ) = smax(XWK WQ⊤ X ⊤ )XWV WO⊤

(1)

′

where WK , WQ , WV , WO ∈ Rd×d are trainable matrices, and the softmax is applied row-wise. A
transformer is even more complex, since it is formed by stacking alternating layers of attention heads
and feedforward networks, along with residual connections.
Main finding Our main finding is that transformers exhibit incremental learning dynamics, where
the difference between the trained and initial weights incrementally increases in rank. Our results
have a theoretical component and an experimental component.
1

In the large-initialization regime, deep learning behaves as a kernel method [JGH18, COB18]. Various
separations with kernels are known for smaller initialization: e.g., [GMMM19, ABM22, MKAS21].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

