C-Disentanglement: Discovering
Causally-Independent Generative Factors under
an Inductive Bias of Confounder
Xiaoyu Liu1 , Jiaxin Yuan2 , Bang An1 , Yuancheng Xu 2 , Yifan Yang1 , Furong Huang1
1
Department of Computer Science, 2 Department of Mathematics
University of Maryland, College Park
{xliu1231, jyuan98, bangan, ycxu, yang7832, furongh}@umd.edu

Abstract
Representation learning assumes that real-world data is generated by a few semantically meaningful generative factors (i.e., sources of variation) and aims to
discover them in the latent space. These factors are expected to be causally disentangled, meaning that distinct factors are encoded into separate latent variables,
and changes in one factor will not affect the values of the others. Compared to
statistical independence, causal disentanglement allows more controllable data
generation, improved robustness, and better generalization. However, most existing works assume unconfoundedness (i.e., there are no common causes to the
generative factors) in the discovery process, and thus obtain only statistical independence. In this paper, we recognize the importance of modeling confounders in
discovering causal generative factors. Unfortunately, such factors are not identifiable without proper inductive bias. We fill the gap by introducing a framework
named Confounded-Disentanglement (C-Disentanglement), the first framework
that explicitly introduces the inductive bias of confounder via labels/knowledge
from domain expertise. In addition, we accordingly propose an approach to sufficiently identify the causally-disentangled factors under any inductive bias of the
confounder. We conduct extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world
datasets. Our method demonstrates competitive results compared to various SOTA
baselines in obtaining causally disentangled features and downstream tasks under
domain shifts. code available here

1

Introduction

Causally disentangled representation learning methods endeavour to identify and manipulate the underlying explanatory causes of variation (i.e., generative factors) within observational data through obtaining causally disentangled
representations [24, 8]. Such a representation encodes
these factors separately in different random variables in
the latent space, where changes in one variable do not
causally affect the others. Pursuing causal independence1
makes it possible to identify the ground truth generative Figure 1: Causally independent generafactors that are not statistically independent, such as the tive factors (color, shape, size) may apcolor, shape and size in a fruit dataset as shown in Figure 1, pear statistically correlated in observawhich is more realistic and allows more controlled data tional data.
generation, improved robustness, and better generalization in out-of-distribution problems.
1

We will use causally disentangled and causally independent interchangeably.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

