ProPILE: Probing Privacy Leakage in Large
Language Models

Siwon Kim1,∗
1

Sangdoo Yun3
Sungroh Yoon1,2,†

Hwaran Lee3
Martin Gubri4,5
5,6,†
Seong Joon Oh

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
3
NAVER AI Lab 4 University of Luxembourg 5 Parameter Lab
6
Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen

2

Abstract
The rapid advancement and widespread use of large language models (LLMs)
have raised significant concerns regarding the potential leakage of personally
identifiable information (PII). These models are often trained on vast quantities
of web-collected data, which may inadvertently include sensitive personal data.
This paper presents ProPILE, a novel probing tool designed to empower data
subjects, or the owners of the PII, with awareness of potential PII leakage in
LLM-based services. ProPILE lets data subjects formulate prompts based on their
own PII to evaluate the level of privacy intrusion in LLMs. We demonstrate its
application on the OPT-1.3B model trained on the publicly available Pile dataset.
We show how hypothetical data subjects may assess the likelihood of their PII
being included in the Pile dataset being revealed. ProPILE can also be leveraged
by LLM service providers to effectively evaluate their own levels of PII leakage
with more powerful prompts specifically tuned for their in-house models. This
tool represents a pioneering step towards empowering the data subjects for their
awareness and control over their own data on the web. The demo can be found
here: https://parameterlab.de/research/propile

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen staggering advances in large language models (LLMs) [25, 3, 31, 6, 28,
32, 22]. The remarkable improvement is commonly attributed to the massive scale of training data
crawled indiscriminately from the web. The web-collected data is likely to contain sensitive personal
information crawled from personal web pages, social media, personal profiles on online forums,
and online databases such as collections of in-house emails [13]. They include various types of
personally identifiable information (PII) for the data subjects [8], including their names, phone
numbers, addresses, education, career, family members, and religion, to name a few.
This poses an unprecedented level of privacy concern not matched by prior web-based products
like social media. In social media, the affected data subjects were precisely the users who have
consciously shared their private data with the awareness of associated risks. In contrast, products
based on LLMs trained on uncontrolled, web-scaled data have quickly expanded the scope of the
affected data subjects far beyond the actual users of the LLM products. Virtually anyone who has left
some form of PII on the world-wide-web is now relevant to the question of PII leakage.
∗
†

Work done while interning at Parameter Lab (tuslkkk@snu.ac.kr)
Corresponding authors (sryoon@snu.ac.kr and coallaoh@gmail.com)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

