SafeDICE: Offline Safe Imitation Learning
with Non-Preferred Demonstrations
Youngsoo Jang1 , Geon-Hyeong Kim1 , Jongmin Lee2 ,
Sungryull Sohn1 , Byoungjip Kim1 , Honglak Lee1 , Moontae Lee1,3
1
LG AI Research
2
University of California, Berkeley
3
University of Illinois Chicago

Abstract
We consider offline safe imitation learning (IL), where the agent aims to learn the
safe policy that mimics preferred behavior while avoiding non-preferred behavior
from non-preferred demonstrations and unlabeled demonstrations. This problem
setting corresponds to various real-world scenarios, where satisfying safety constraints is more important than maximizing the expected return. However, it is very
challenging to learn the policy to avoid constraint-violating (i.e. non-preferred)
behavior, as opposed to standard imitation learning which learns the policy to
mimic given demonstrations. In this paper, we present a hyperparameter-free
offline safe IL algorithm, SafeDICE, that learns safe policy by leveraging the
non-preferred demonstrations in the space of stationary distributions. Our algorithm directly estimates the stationary distribution corrections of the policy that
imitate the demonstrations excluding the non-preferred behavior. In the experiments, we demonstrate that our algorithm learns a more safe policy that satisfies the
cost constraint without degrading the reward performance, compared to baseline
algorithms.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [28] aims to learn the optimal policy that maximizes the expected
cumulative rewards through interacting with the environment. Recently, RL has achieved remarkable
successes in various domains, but its application to real-world tasks is yet challenging mainly due
to the following two reasons: First, since the interaction with the environment is costly in most
real-world tasks, the policy should be learned solely from the pre-collected dataset (i.e. offline
learning). Second, reward annotation, which is essential for applying the RL algorithm, is a very
strong requirement that is difficult to obtain in real-world tasks.
Imitation learning (IL) [26, 1, 25] is a more realistic framework to deal with real-world tasks, where
the expert’s demonstrations are solely given without reward annotations. Standard IL aims to mimic
the expert’s demonstrations generated from the optimal policy in terms of expected return. However,
in most real-world tasks, additional constraints should be considered in addition to maximizing
the expected return such as the safe driving for autonomous driving and toxicity degree for the
conversational agent. Fortunately, non-preferred demonstrations that violate constraints are often
naturally collected. For example, black box data of an accident vehicle and toxic content reported
by chatbot users are separately collected as non-preferred demonstrations. However, most existing
studies have focused only on imitating expert (i.e. preferred) behavior, and a safe imitation learning
method that avoids non-preferred behavior has not yet been explored.
In this paper, we are particularly interested in solving safe imitation learning in an offline setting:
Given scarce but labeled non-preferred demonstrations, and abundant but unlabeled demonstrations
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

