Reliable learning in challenging environments
Maria-Florina Balcan
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Steve Hanneke
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Rattana Pukdee
Carnegie Mellon University
rpukdee@cs.cmu.edu

Dravyansh Sharma
Carnegie Mellon University
dravyans@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
The problem of designing learners that provide guarantees that their predictions are
provably correct is of increasing importance in machine learning. However, learning theoretic guarantees have only been considered in very specific settings. In this
work, we consider the design and analysis of reliable learners in challenging testtime environments as encountered in modern machine learning problems: namely
‘adversarial’ test-time attacks (in several variations) and ‘natural’ distribution shifts.
In this work, we provide a reliable learner with provably optimal guarantees in such
settings. We discuss computationally feasible implementations of the learner and
further show that our algorithm achieves strong positive performance guarantees
on several natural examples: for example, linear separators under log-concave
distributions or smooth boundary classifiers under smooth probability distributions.

1

Introduction

The question of providing reliability guarantees on the output of learned classifiers has been studied
previously in the classical learning setting where the training and test data are independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) draws from the same distribution [RS88, EYW10, EYW12]. Conceptually, a reliable learner outputs a prediction and may output a correctness guarantee. We know that
the learner is correct on all points with the guarantee as long as the learning-theoretic assumptions
hold, e.g., realizability. While a trivial model that abstains from providing any guarantee is also a
reliable learner, we are interested in a reliable learner that provides the guarantee on as many points
as possible (useful in the sense of Rivest and Sloan [RS88]). [EYW10] provides a characterization of
optimal reliable learners in this classical learning setting.
However, the assumption that the training and test data are drawn from the same distribution is
often violated in practice. The mismatch may take the form of a ‘natural distribution shift’ when
the test distribution is different from the training distribution or ‘adversarial attacks’ when there is
an adversary that can perturb a test data point with the goal of changing the model prediction. This
is frequently accompanied by a significant performance drop, as well as the inability to guarantee
the usefulness of the algorithm. As a result, there is a significant interest in the study of test-time
attacks [GSS15, CW17, MMS+ 18] and distribution shift [LWS18, RRSS19, MTR+ 21] among the
applied machine learning community. Furthermore, recently there has been growing interest in
the theoretical machine learning community for designing approaches with provable guarantees
under test time attacks [AKM19, MHS19, MHS22] as well as renewed interest in distribution shift
[BDBCP06, MMR08, HK19]. All the prior theoretical work in the literature has mainly focused on
the effect of attacks or distribution shift on average error rate (e.g. [BDBCP06, AKM19]). However,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

