Learning to Parameterize Visual Attributes for
Open-set Fine-grained Retrieval

1

Shijie Wang1 , Jianlong Chang2 , Haojie Li3∗, Zhihui Wang1 , Wanli Ouyang4 , Qi Tian2
International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Huawei Cloud & AI, China
3
College of Computer and Engineering, Shandong University of Science and Technology, China
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, China

Abstract
Open-set fine-grained retrieval is an emerging challenging task that allows to
retrieve unknown categories beyond the training set. The best solution for handling
unknown categories is to represent them using a set of visual attributes learnt from
known categories, as widely used in zero-shot learning. Though important, attribute
modeling usually requires significant manual annotations and thus is labor-intensive.
Therefore, it is worth to investigate how to transform retrieval models trained by
image-level supervision from category semantic extraction to attribute modeling. To
this end, we propose a novel Visual Attribute Parameterization Network (VAPNet)
to learn visual attributes from known categories and parameterize them into the
retrieval model, without the involvement of any attribute annotations. In this
way, VAPNet could utilize its parameters to parse a set of visual attributes from
unknown categories and precisely represent them. Technically, VAPNet explicitly
attains some semantics with rich details via making use of local image patches
and distills the visual attributes from these discovered semantics. Additionally, it
integrates the online refinement of these visual attributes into the training process
to iteratively enhance their quality. Simultaneously, VAPNet treats these attributes
as supervisory signals to tune the retrieval models, thereby achieving attribute
parameterization. Extensive experiments on open-set fine-grained retrieval datasets
validate the superior performance of our VAPNet over existing solutions.

1

Introduction

Fine-grained image retrieval attempts to build a well-generalized embedding space where the visual discrepancies among categories are clearly reflected. It plays a vital role in numerous vision
applications from fashion industry, e.g., retrieval of different types of shoe or clothes [22; 1], to
environmental conservation, e.g., retrieval endangered species [6; 38; 36; 32]. However, real-world
applications probably face the input of unknown categories, and the model will treat them as known
ones. As a result, the retrieval performance decays, which is unbearable in real-world applications.
Open-set fine-grained retrieval is thus proposed to conduct training on known categories but retrieve
unknown ones during evaluation.
Facing the unknown inputs of novel categories, an intuitive way to identify them is to capture the
discriminative discrepancies of unknown categories from these inputs for identifying them. However,
most existing works [19; 24; 28; 20] still focus on discriminative concepts of known categories
and only capture them from unknown instances, consequently making it hard to precisely identify
unknown categories. Interestingly, zero-shot learning [11; 18; 47] has proven that an unknown
instance can be described integrally using a variety of visual attributes, and these attributes can be
∗

Corresponding author: hjli@sdust.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

