CWCL: Cross-Modal Transfer with Continuously
Weighted Contrastive Loss

Rakshith S Srinivasa
Yashas Malur Saidutta

Jaejin Cho

Ching-Hua Lee

Chouchang Yang
Yilin Shen

Hongxia Jin

Samsung Research America, Mountain View, CA
{r.srinivasa, jaejin.cho, c.yang1}@samsung.com
{ym.saidutta, chinghua.l, yilin.shen, hongxia.jin}@samsung.com

Abstract
This paper considers contrastive training for cross-modal zero-shot transfer wherein
a pre-trained model in one modality is used for representation learning in another
domain using pairwise data. The learnt models in the latter domain can then be used
for a diverse set of tasks in a zero-shot way, similar to “Contrastive Language-Image
Pre-training (CLIP)” [1] and “Locked-image Tuning (LiT)” [2] that have recently
gained considerable attention. Most existing works for cross-modal representation
alignment (including CLIP and LiT) use the standard contrastive training objective,
which employs sets of positive and negative examples to align similar and repel
dissimilar training data samples. However, similarity amongst training examples
has a more continuous nature, thus calling for a more non-binary treatment. To
address this, we propose a novel loss function called Continuously Weighted
Contrastive Loss (CWCL) that employs a continuous measure of similarity. With
CWCL, we seek to align the embedding space of one modality with another. Owing
to the continuous nature of similarity in the proposed loss function, these models
outperform existing methods for zero-shot transfer across multiple models, datasets
and modalities. Particularly, we consider the modality pairs of image-text and
speech-text and our models achieve 5-8% (absolute) improvement over previous
state-of-the-art methods in 0-shot image classification and 20-30% (absolute)
improvement in 0-shot speech-to-intent classification and keyword classification.

1

Cross-modal alignment and transfer

Learning visual representations using natural language supervision has proven to be a powerful way
to unlock impressive zero-shot performance on a number of downstream tasks [1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6]. In
this paper, we draw inspiration from these works and study the task of cross-modal alignment for
zero-shot transfer for pairs of modalities. Let U and V denote a pair of modalities. For example,
U may be text modality, and V maybe image modality. We are interested in the following: given a
pre-trained model fθ : V → Q for data in V (where Q denotes the embedding space), how can we
use a paired dataset of the form {u, v}, u ∈ U, v ∈ V, to best learn a model gϕ : U → P (where P
is the embedding space corresponding to U) such that the learnt structure in the embedding space Q
can be aligned with that of P? Once trained, the models gϕ and fθ can be used on a diverse set of
downstream tasks including interfacing with Large Language Models (LLMs) (see [7]) in a zero-shot
way, thus avoiding the need for costly, task-specific, labeled datasets.
Our motivation in studying the above problem lies in the fact that powerful pre-trained models
existing in certain modalities, but are lacking in other modalities. For example, the recent advances
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

