Federated Learning with Client Subsampling, Data
Heterogeneity, and Unbounded Smoothness: A New
Algorithm and Lower Bounds

Michael Crawshaw∗
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
mcrawsha@gmu.edu

Yajie Bao∗
School of Mathematical Sciences
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
baoyajie2019stat@sjtu.edu.cn

Mingrui Liu†
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
mingruil@gmu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of Federated Learning (FL) under client subsampling and data
heterogeneity with an objective function that has potentially unbounded smoothness. This problem is motivated by empirical evidence that the class of relaxed
smooth functions, where the Lipschitz constant of the gradient scales linearly with
the gradient norm, closely resembles the loss functions of certain neural networks
such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with possibly exploding gradient. We
introduce EPISODE++, the first algorithm to solve this problem. It maintains
historical statistics for each client to construct control variates and decide clipping
behavior for sampled clients in the current round. We prove that EPISODE++
achieves linear speedup in the number of participating clients, reduced communication rounds, and resilience to data heterogeneity. Our upper bound proof relies
on novel techniques of recursively bounding the client updates under unbounded
smoothness and client subsampling, together with a refined high probability analysis. In addition, we prove a lower bound showing that the convergence rate of
a special case of clipped minibatch SGD (without randomness in the stochastic
gradient and with randomness in client subsampling) suffers from an explicit
dependence on the maximum gradient norm of the objective in a sublevel set,
which may be large. This effectively demonstrates that applying gradient clipping
to minibatch SGD in our setting does not eliminate the problem of exploding
gradients. Our lower bound is based on new constructions of hard instances tailored to client subsampling and a novel analysis of the trajectory of the algorithm
in the presence of clipping. Lastly, we provide an experimental evaluation of
EPISODE++ when training RNNs on federated text classification tasks, demonstrating that EPISODE++ outperforms strong baselines in FL. The code is available
at https://github.com/MingruiLiu-ML-Lab/episode_plusplus.

∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

