Cross-Scale MAE: A Tale of Multi-Scale Exploitation
in Remote Sensing

Maofeng Tang1 , Andrei Cozma1 , Konstantinos Georgiou1 , Hairong Qi1
1
Min H. Kao Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Tennessee, Knoxville
{mtang4, acozma, kgeorgio}@vols.utk.edu, hqi@utk.edu,

Abstract
Remote sensing images present unique challenges to image analysis due to the
extensive geographic coverage, hardware limitations, and misaligned multi-scale
images. This paper revisits the classical multi-scale representation learning problem but under the general framework of self-supervised learning for remote sensing
image understanding. We present Cross-Scale MAE, a self-supervised model
built upon the Masked Auto-Encoder (MAE). During pre-training, Cross-Scale
MAE employs scale augmentation techniques and enforces cross-scale consistency
constraints through both contrastive and generative losses to ensure consistent
and meaningful representations well-suited for a wide range of downstream tasks.
Further, our implementation leverages the xFormers library to accelerate network
pre-training on a single GPU while maintaining the quality of learned representations. Experimental evaluations demonstrate that Cross-Scale MAE exhibits
superior performance compared to standard MAE and other state-of-the-art remote
sensing MAE methods.

1

Introduction

Remote sensing image understanding has been reaping the benefits of recent advances in computer
vision while at the same time posing unique challenges. First, remote sensing imagery usually covers
the Earth’s surface extensively for Earth observation purposes [52, 43, 31]. Compared to the vast
area the images cover, even a large amount of training samples would become sparse. Furthermore,
generating a set of representative training samples is challenging, especially in less-explored regions.
Hence, self-supervised learning (SSL) becomes a viable solution since no training data is required for
representation learning purposes. A recently published paper [46] provides a comprehensive review
of SSL in remote sensing.
The second challenge arises from the inherent hardware limitations of remote sensing devices,
where one can only expect to acquire images of high resolution in the spatial, spectral, or temporal
domain, but not all. These devices usually sacrifice spatial resolution to gain spectral and/or temporal
resolution for different functional and/or material analyses of the Earth’s surface. Ground Sample
Distance (GSD) measures the spatial resolution, denoting the physical distance between two adjacent
pixels. For example, Landsat-8 [45] has 8 spectral bands at 30 m GSD; Sentinel-2 [17] has 4 bands at
10 m, 6 bands at 20 m, and 3 bands at 60 m GSD; and WorldView-3 [29] has 8 multi-spectral bands
at 1.24 m GSD. These multi-scale images, although imaging the same site, might not be aligned at
all, and the alignment process can be both time-consuming and expensive.
It is worth noting that in remote sensing imagery, due to the rich and unique data provided along
the temporal and spectral domains, algorithms tend to exploit more on the spectral and temporal
organization but neglect the spatial characteristics, as pointed out in [4]. So, extracting effective
representations from these misaligned multi-scale images poses a significant challenge. In this
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

