Gaussian Membership Inference Privacy

Tobias Leemann∗
University of Tübingen
Technical University of Munich

Martin Pawelczyk∗
Harvard University

Gjergji Kasneci
Technical University of Munich

Abstract
We propose a novel and practical privacy notion called f -Membership Inference
Privacy (f -MIP), which explicitly considers the capabilities of realistic adversaries
under the membership inference attack threat model. Consequently, f -MIP offers
interpretable privacy guarantees and improved utility (e.g., better classification
accuracy). In particular, we derive a parametric family of f -MIP guarantees that
we refer to as µ-Gaussian Membership Inference Privacy (µ-GMIP) by theoretically analyzing likelihood ratio-based membership inference attacks on stochastic
gradient descent (SGD). Our analysis highlights that models trained with standard
SGD already offer an elementary level of MIP. Additionally, we show how f -MIP
can be amplified by adding noise to gradient updates. Our analysis further yields
an analytical membership inference attack that offers two distinct advantages over
previous approaches. First, unlike existing state-of-the-art attacks that require
training hundreds of shadow models, our attack does not require any shadow model.
Second, our analytical attack enables straightforward auditing of our privacy notion
f -MIP. Finally, we quantify how various hyperparameters (e.g., batch size, number
of model parameters) and specific data characteristics determine an attacker’s ability to accurately infer a point’s membership in the training set. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method on models trained on vision and tabular datasets.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) has seen a surge in popularity and effectiveness, leading to its widespread
application across various domains. However, some of these domains, such as finance and healthcare,
deal with sensitive data that cannot be publicly shared due to ethical or regulatory concerns. Therefore,
ensuring data privacy becomes crucial at every stage of the ML process, including model development
and deployment. In particular, the trained model itself [5, 31] or explanations computed to make
the model more interpretable [29, 32] may leak information about the training data if appropriate
measures are not taken. For example, this is a problem for recent generative Diffusion Models [7]
and Large Language models, where the data leakage seems to be amplified by model size [6].
Differential privacy (DP) [14] is widely acknowledged as the benchmark for ensuring provable privacy
in academia and industry [10]. DP utilizes randomized algorithms during training and guarantees
that the output of the algorithm will not be significantly influenced by the inclusion or exclusion
of any individual sample in the dataset. This provides information-theoretic protection against the
maximum amount of information that an attacker can extract about any specific sample in the dataset,
even when an attacker has full access to and full knowledge about the predictive model.
While DP is an appealing technique for ensuring privacy, DP’s broad theoretical guarantees often
come at the expense of a significant loss in utility for many ML algorithms. This utility loss cannot be
further reduced by applying savvier algorithms: Recent work [26, 27] confirms that an attacker can
∗
Equal contribution. Corresponding authors: tobias.leemann@uni-tuebingen.de and martin.
pawelczyk.1@gmail.com.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

