Approximate Allocation Matching for Structural
Causal Bandits with Unobserved Confounders
Muhammad Qasim Elahi
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
elahi0@purdue.edu

Lai Wei
Life Sciences Institute
University of Michigan
weilatim@gmail.com
Mahsa Ghasemi
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
mahsa@purdue.edu

Murat Kocaoglu
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
mkocaoglu@purdue.edu

Abstract
Structural causal bandit provides a framework for decision-making problems when
causal information is available. It models the stochastic environment with a structural causal model (SCM) that governs the causal relations between random variables. In each round, an agent applies an intervention (or no intervention) by
setting certain variables to some constants, and receives a stochastic reward from a
non-manipulable variable. Though the causal structure is given, the observational
and interventional distributions of these random variables are unknown beforehand,
and they can only be learned through interactions with the environment. Therefore,
to maximize the expected cumulative reward, it is critical to balance the explorationversus-exploitation tradeoff. We consider discrete random variables with a finite
domain and a semi-Markovian setting, where random variables are affected by
unobserved confounders. Using the canonical SCM formulation to discretize the
domains of unobserved variables, we efficiently integrate samples to reduce model
uncertainty, gaining an advantage over those in a classical multi-armed bandit setup.
We provide a logarithmic asymptotic regret lower bound for the structural causal
bandit problem. Inspired by the lower bound, we design an algorithm that can
utilize the causal structure to accelerate the learning process and take informative
and rewarding interventions. We establish that our algorithm achieves a logarithmic
regret and demonstrate that it outperforms the existing methods via simulations.

1

Introduction

Sequential decision-making in uncertain environments is one of the most fundamental problems across
scientific disciplines, including robotics, economics, social science, clinical trials, and agriculture [32,
26, 36, 7, 3]. In almost all these applications, it is required to implement interventions to control
some aspects of the system to optimize an outcome of interest. In economics and political science,
the government could use fiscal policy including changing the interest rate and taxation to achieve
regulation and control of a country’s economy. In this paper, we deal with designing an adaptive
policy in an uncertain stochastic environment to learn and apply optimal interventions.
In sequential decision-making problems, it is critical to balance the explore-versus-exploit tradeoff,
which deals with choosing between informative options and empirically more rewarding alternative
options. The multi-armed bandit (MAB) [33, 30, 18] is a classical problem formulation for achieving
such a tradeoff. In MAB, a decision-maker sequentially chooses an action corresponding to pulling
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

