The Graph Pencil Method:
Mapping Subgraph Densities to
Stochastic Block Models
Lee M. Gunderson
Gatsby Unit
University College London

Gecia Bravo-Hermsdorff
Department of Statistics
University College London

Peter Orbanz
Gatsby Unit
University College London

Abstract
In this work, we describe a method that determines an exact map from a finite set of
subgraph densities to the parameters of a stochastic block model (SBM) matching
these densities. Given a number K of blocks, the subgraph densities of a finite
number of stars and bistars uniquely determines a single element of the class of
all degree-separated stochastic block models with K blocks. Our method makes it
possible to translate estimates of these subgraph densities into model parameters,
and hence to use subgraph densities directly for inference. The computational
overhead is negligible; computing the translation map is polynomial in K, but
independent of the graph size once the subgraph densities are given.

1

Introduction

The class of infinitely exchangeable random graphs is a large class of network models that contains
all graphon models [6, 21] and stochastic block models (SBMs) [1, 2, 12]. The key statistics of such
random graphs are subgraph densities: each fixed, finite graph defines a subgraph density, and it is
well known that every exchangeable graph distribution is completely determined by the collection of
all its densities of finite subgraphs [12, 21].
In general, an infinite number of densities is required to uniquely determine an infinitely exchangeable
graph distribution. For a subclass of models, a finite number of densities suffice. In combinatorics,
these random graph distributions are called finitely forcible [21]. In particular, every stochastic block
model is completely determined by a finite number of subgraph densities [21]. Such a finite number
of subgraph densities can be consistently estimated at a guaranteed asymptotic rate from a single
graph-data as this graph grows large [3, 17, 30].
It has long been recognized that the role subgraph densities play for exchangeable network models is
analogous to that played by moments for estimation problems on Euclidean sample spaces [5, 7, 12,
22]. On Euclidean space, the method of moments [24, 26] is a powerful inference tool, in particular
for mixture models [4, 14]. This suggests that subgraph densities should be well-suited for inference
in stochastic block models in particular, since these models are a network analogue of mixture models
and only a finite number of densities must be estimated.
Nonetheless, most inference algorithms used in practice (e.g., [8, 9, 13, 18, 25]) do no rely on
subgraph densities, but rather on some combination of maximum likelihood estimation, MCMC
sampling, variational inference, clustering of the nodes, or other heuristics. The reason is that
estimating subgraph densities is only a first step in the inference process — once the densities are
known, they must be translated into an estimate of a graphon or stochastic block model.
This paper introduces a new method that does so by generalizing a classical strategy for inferring
latent sources (sometimes known as Prony’s method [26]) to graph data. The classical Prony’s
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

