Toward Better PAC-Bayes Bounds for Uniformly
Stable Algorithms

1

Sijia Zhou1 Yunwen Lei2∗ Ata Kabán1
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom
2
Department of Mathematics, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China
sxz115@student.bham.ac.uk leiyw@hku.hk a.kaban@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
We give sharper bounds for uniformly stable randomized algorithms in a PAC√
Bayesian framework, which improve the existing results by up to a factor of n
(ignoring a log factor), where n is the sample size. The key idea is to bound
the moment generating function of the generalization gap using concentration of
weakly dependent random variables due to Bousquet et al (2020). We introduce
an assumption of sub-exponential stability parameter, which allows a general
treatment that we instantiate in two applications: stochastic gradient descent and
randomized coordinate descent. Our results eliminate the requirement of strong
convexity from previous results, and hold for non-smooth convex problems.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimization methods are the workhorses of many modern machine learning problems. A
lot of progress has been made in reducing optimization errors with less training time in stochastic
settings [6, 21, 41, 46, 64]. One such method is stochastic gradient descent (SGD), which builds
a stochastic gradient estimator iteratively based on a randomly sampled example to approximate
the gradient for the next iteration. SGD is appealing for large-scale data analysis due to its cheap
computational cost, simplicity and efficiency.
Obtaining models that generalize well is the goal in machine learning and we undertake a theoretical
analysis of this problem. The generalization behavior of a model can be quantified by the excess
risk, which decomposes into two components: the optimization error and the generalization error (or
generalization gap). In this paper, we focus on the analysis of the generalization error of stochastic
optimization methods. We combine two useful approaches to bound the generalization error, that is
algorithmic stability [7, 16] and PAC-Bayes bounds [9, 26, 34, 53]. Our hope is to retain the benefits
of both approaches to derive powerful generalization bounds to better understand the behavior of
stochastic optimization methods.
Seminal work by Bousquet et al. [7] provided generalization bounds for uniformly stable algorithms
in the deterministic case. Sharper generalization bounds were obtained via a moment bound on the
generalization gap and a concentration inequality of weakly dependent random variables [8, 18].
Extending stability-based bounds to randomized algorithms is a challenge. In [16], where the stabilitybased bounds for the randomized algorithms were considered, the results hold for fixed distributions.
To give bounds uniformly for all distributions, we need to turn to PAC-Bayes analysis. A recent
work analyzed stable algorithms in the PAC-Bayes framework and derived generalization bounds that
hold for any distribution [32]. However, a comparison between [8] and [32] reveals that the error
convergence rate in the randomized case [32] is much slower than that for the deterministic case [8].
In more detail, it was shown that β-uniformly stable (β is decreasing w.r.t. n, where n is the sample
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

