A Dataset of Relighted 3D Interacting Hands

Gyeongsik Moon
mks0601@meta.com

Shunsuke Saito
shunsukesaito@meta.com

Weipeng Xu
xuweipeng@meta.com

Rohan Joshi
rohanjoshi@meta.com

Julia Buffalini
jbuffalini@meta.com

Harley Bellan
harleybellan@meta.com

Nicholas Rosen
nicholasrosen@meta.com

Jesse Richardson
jesserichardson@meta.com

Mallorie Mize
malloriemize@meta.com

Philippe de Bree
phillippedebree@meta.com

Tomas Simon
tsimon@meta.com

Bo Peng
bopeng@meta.com

Shubham Garg
ssgarg@meta.com

Kevyn McPhail
kmcphail@meta.com

Takaaki Shiratori
tshiratori@meta.com

Meta Reality Labs Research

Abstract
The two-hand interaction is one of the most challenging signals to analyze due to
the self-similarity, complicated articulations, and occlusions of hands. Although
several datasets have been proposed for the two-hand interaction analysis, all of
them do not achieve 1) diverse and realistic image appearances and 2) diverse
and large-scale groundtruth (GT) 3D poses at the same time. In this work, we
propose Re:InterHand, a dataset of relighted 3D interacting hands that achieve the
two goals. To this end, we employ a state-of-the-art hand relighting network with
our accurately tracked two-hand 3D poses. We compare our Re:InterHand with
existing 3D interacting hands datasets and show the benefit of it. Our Re:InterHand
is available in here.

1

Introduction

Humans often make two-hand interactions during daily conversation or when interacting with objects.
Self-similarity, complicated articulations, and small sizes of hands make analyzing such two-hand
interactions greatly challenging. In particular, when the input of an analyzing system is a single
image, the problem becomes much more difficult as in most cases, most of a hand is occluded by the
other hand.
One fundamental direction to successfully analyze interacting hands is collecting large-scale 3D
interacting hands datasets, which contain in-the-wild images and corresponding 3D groundtruth (GT).
Unfortunately, this is not trivial. Due to the inherent scale and depth ambiguity, true 3D data is
not obtainable from a single 2D observation. In addition, a single 2D observation does not provide
enough information of other viewpoints, necessary for the 3D data collection. Therefore, there have
been three alternative approaches to collect 3D hand data.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

