Improved Communication Efficiency in Federated
Natural Policy Gradient via ADMM-based Gradient
Updates

Guangchen Lan
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
lan44@purdue.edu
James Anderson
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
anderson@ee.columbia.edu

Han Wang
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
hw2786@columbia.edu

Christopher Brinton
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
cgb@purdue.edu

Vaneet Aggarwal
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
vaneet@purdue.edu

Abstract
Federated reinforcement learning (FedRL) enables agents to collaboratively train a
global policy without sharing their individual data. However, high communication
overhead remains a critical bottleneck, particularly for natural policy gradient
(NPG) methods, which are second-order. To address this issue, we propose the
FedNPG-ADMM framework, which leverages the alternating direction method
of multipliers (ADMM) to approximate global NPG directions efficiently. We
theoretically demonstrate that using ADMM-based gradient updates reduces communication complexity from O(d2 ) to O(d) at each iteration, where d is the number
of model parameters. Furthermore, we show that achieving an ϵ-error stationary
1
convergence requires O( (1−γ)
2 ϵ ) iterations for discount factor γ, demonstrating
that FedNPG-ADMM maintains the same convergence rate as the standard FedNPG. Through evaluation of the proposed algorithms in MuJoCo environments, we
demonstrate that FedNPG-ADMM maintains the reward performance of standard
FedNPG, and that its convergence rate improves when the number of federated
agents increases.

1

Introduction

Policy gradient methods are commonly used to solve reinforcement learning (RL) problems in
various applications, with recent popular examples being InstructGPT [30] and ChatGPT (GPT-4
[29]). Although first-order methods, such as Policy Gradient (PG) and Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) [40], are favored for their simplicity, second-order methods, such as Natural Policy Gradient
(NPG) [16, 36] and its practical version Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [38], are often
seen to exhibit superior convergence behavior, e.g., on the Swimmer [40] and Humanoid [10] tasks
in MuJoCo environments [44]. Furthermore, recent works have demonstrated that the convergence
guarantees of NPG with Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence constraints (second-order methods) are
superior to those of PG (first-order methods) [21, 23], motivating closer inspection for practical use.
Many contemporary RL applications are large-scale and rely on high volumes of data for model
training [20, 22, 33]. A conventional approach to enabling training on massive data is transmitting
data collected locally by different agents to a central server, which can then be used for policy
learning. However, this is not always feasible in real-world systems where communication bandwidth
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

