RECESS Vaccine for Federated Learning: Proactive
Defense Against Model Poisoning Attacks

Haonan Yan1,2 , Wenjing Zhang2 , Qian Chen1 , Xiaoguang Li1∗
Wenhai Sun3 , Hui Li1∗, Xiaodong Lin2
1
Xidian University, 2 University of Guelph, 3 Purdue University
yanhaonan.sec@gmail.com

Abstract
Model poisoning attacks greatly jeopardize the application of federated learning
(FL). The effectiveness of existing defenses is susceptible to the latest model
poisoning attacks, leading to a decrease in prediction accuracy. Besides, these
defenses are intractable to distinguish benign outliers from malicious gradients,
which further compromises the model generalization. In this work, we propose a
novel defense including detection and aggregation, named RECESS, to serve as a
“vaccine” for FL against model poisoning attacks. Different from the passive analysis in previous defenses, RECESS proactively queries each participating client
with a delicately constructed aggregation gradient, accompanied by the detection
of malicious clients according to their responses with higher accuracy. Further,
RECESS adopts a newly proposed trust scoring based mechanism to robustly
aggregate gradients. Rather than previous methods of scoring in each iteration,
RECESS takes into account the correlation of clients’ performance over multiple
iterations to estimate the trust score, bringing in a significant increase in detection fault tolerance. Finally, we extensively evaluate RECESS on typical model
architectures and four datasets under various settings including white/black-box,
cross-silo/device FL, etc. Experimental results show the superiority of RECESS
in terms of reducing accuracy loss caused by the latest model poisoning attacks
over five classic and two state-of-the-art defenses.

1

Introduction

Background and Problem. Recently, federated learning (FL) goes viral as a privacy-preserving
training solution with the distributed learning paradigm [1], since data privacy attracts increasing
attention from organizations like banks [2] and hospitals [3], governments like GDPR [4] and CPPA
[5], and commercial companies like Google [6]. FL allows data owners to collaboratively train
models under the coordination of a central server for better prediction performance by sharing local
gradient updates instead of their own private/proprietary datasets, preserving the privacy of each
participant’s raw data. FL is promising as a trending privacy training technology. However, FL is
vulnerable to various model poisoning attacks [7, 8]. The distributed structure of FL characterized
by the privacy-preserving local training paradigm makes it impossible to verify overall gradient
updates and distributions of local datasets. Accordingly, the attacker can corrupt the global model by
hijacking compromised participants, and then uploading malicious local gradient updates, leading to a
reduction in the final model’s prediction performance, which significantly jeopardizes the application
of FL.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

