Training-free Diffusion Model Adaptation for
Variable-Sized Text-to-Image Synthesis

1

Zhiyu Jin1 , Xuli Shen1,2 , Bin Li1∗, Xiangyang Xue1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
UniDT Technology

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have recently gained attention with state-of-the-art performance in text-to-image synthesis. Abiding by the tradition in deep learning,
DMs are trained and evaluated on the images with fixed sizes. However, users are
demanding for various images with specific sizes and various aspect ratio. This
paper focuses on adapting text-to-image diffusion models to handle such variety
while maintaining visual fidelity. First we observe that, during the synthesis, lower
resolution images suffer from incomplete object portrayal, while higher resolution
images exhibit repetitively disordered presentation. Next, we establish a statistical
relationship indicating that attention entropy changes with token quantity, suggesting that models aggregate spatial information in proportion to image resolution.
The subsequent interpretation on our observations is that objects are incompletely
depicted due to limited spatial information for low resolutions, while repetitively
disorganized presentation arises from redundant spatial information for high resolutions. From this perspective, we propose a scaling factor to alleviate the change
of attention entropy and mitigate the defective pattern observed. Extensive experimental results validate the efficacy of the proposed scaling factor, enabling models
to achieve better visual effects, image quality, and text alignment. Notably, these
improvements are achieved without additional training or fine-tuning techniques.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful technique for image synthesis [10, 15, 46], achieving
state-of-the-art performance in various applications [12, 28, 14]. Among them, text-to-image diffusion
models have garnered significant attention and witnessed a surge in demand [40, 37, 36]. Traditionally,
diffusion models have adhered to the typical deep learning approach of training and testing on images
with predetermined sizes, which generally leads to high-quality results. They still exhibit a range of
visual defects and diverse flaws when confronted with a novel synthesizing resolution (e.g., 5122 in
training while 2242 in testing). However, real-world scenarios often demand the generation of images
with diverse sizes and aspect ratios, necessitating models that can handle such variety with minimum
loss in visual fidelity. The necessity becomes even more severe in the generation of large models.
As the size of models continues to increase, the associated training costs experience a substantial
surge, thereby posing financial challenges for average programmers and emerging startups, making it
unfeasible for them to train specialized models tailored to their specific needs. Consequently, there is
an urgent demand to explore methodologies that facilitate the full utilization of open-sourced models
trained on fixed sizes.
In regard to this limitation, our first key observation reveals that most instances of poor performance
could be attributed to two prevalent patterns: incomplete or inadequately represented objects and
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

