Latent Space Translation
via Semantic Alignment
Valentino Maiorca1,∗ Luca Moschella1,∗
Antonio Norelli1
1

Marco Fumero1

Sapienza University of Rome

2

Francesco Locatello2

Emanuele Rodolà1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)

Abstract
While different neural models often exhibit latent spaces that are alike when exposed to semantically related data, this intrinsic similarity is not always immediately
discernible. Towards a better understanding of this phenomenon, our work shows
how representations learned from these neural modules can be translated between
different pre-trained networks via simpler transformations than previously thought.
An advantage of this approach is the ability to estimate these transformations using
standard, well-understood algebraic procedures that have closed-form solutions.
Our method directly estimates a transformation between two given latent spaces,
thereby enabling effective stitching of encoders and decoders without additional
training. We extensively validate the adaptability of this translation procedure
in different experimental settings: across various trainings, domains, architectures (e.g., ResNet, CNN, ViT), and in multiple downstream tasks (classification,
reconstruction). Notably, we show how it is possible to zero-shot stitch text encoders and vision decoders, or vice-versa, yielding surprisingly good classification
performance in this multimodal setting.

1

Introduction

Representation learning [Bengio et al., 2014] is a fundamental paradigm in the field of artificial
intelligence, aimed at uncovering the underlying structure of complex data. One of the main goals
of representation learning is to discover a robust representation of the data that is insensitive to
certain transformations of the input. The Manifold Hypothesis [Fefferman et al., 2013] posits that
real-world data lies on a low-dimensional non-linear manifold embedded in a high-dimensional space.
Yet, a complication arises in modeling these non-linear manifolds: the learning process is usually
influenced by stochasticities in the training dynamics and extrinsic factors that do not pertain to the
data’s core attributes, resulting in different representations for samples expected to be similar (e.g.,
different views of the same object, multiple translations of the same sentence, or even the exact same
input sample). This is critical as it hinders knowledge transfer between these networks. Recently,
the concept of relative representations [Moschella et al., 2023] has been proposed as a method for
zero-shot communication between latent spaces that is invariant to these extrinsic factors. The idea
is that latent spaces of neural networks trained on comparable data can be projected into the same
relative space, derived from the distances between the data points. One of the main contributions of
relative encoding is that it shows how the signal encoded in the angles with respect to a reduced set
of data points (called anchors) is enough to capture the intrinsic shape of the latent space, reaching
results on various benchmarks comparable to those using the original (absolute) encodings. As
a consequence, they empirically demonstrate that different latent spaces that share the same data
semantics (i.e., different representations of the same high-level concepts, such as images and their
captions), mostly differ only by an angle-preserving transformation.
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

