Neural Lad: A Neural Latent Dynamics Framework
for Times Series Modeling

Ting Li
Ant Group, Beijing, China
lt317068@antgroup.com

Jianguo Li
Ant Group, Beijing, China
lijg.zero@antgroup.com

Zhanxing Zhu
Changping National Lab & Peking University, Beijing, China
zhanxing.zhu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural ordinary differential equation (Neural ODE) is an elegant yet powerful
framework to learn the temporal dynamics for time series modeling. However, we
observe that existing Neural ODE forecasting models suffer from two disadvantages: i) controlling the latent states only through the linear transformation over
the local change of the observed signals may be inadequate; ii) lacking the ability
to capture the inherent periodical property in time series forecasting tasks; To overcome the two issues, we introduce a new neural ODE framework called Neural
Lad, a Neural Latent dynamics model, in which the latent representations evolve
with an ODE enhanced by the change of observed signal and seasonality-trend
characterization. We incorporate the local change of input signal into the latent
dynamics in an attention-based manner and design a residual architecture over basis
expansion to depict the periodicity in the underlying dynamics. To accommodate
the multivariate time series forecasting, we extend the Neural Lad by learning
an adaptive relationship between multiple time series. Experiments demonstrate
that our model can achieve better or comparable performance against existing
neural ODE families and transformer variants in various datasets. Remarkably, the
empirical superiority of Neural Lad is consistent across short and long-horizon
forecasting for both univariate and multivariate irregularly sampled time series.

1

Introduction

Achieving accurate time series forecasting has been a long-standing challenge for decades in various
applications, such as traffic flow prediction [36], weather forecasts [8], management of energy
consumption [1], economic analysis [10], etc. With their remarkable representation power, deep
learning-based approaches are capable of modeling the complex dynamics in time series, and thus
dominate in forecasting tasks recently. These methods range from recurrent neural network (RNN
[24, 28]), family of neural ordinary differential equations [3, 27, 13], Transformer variants [29, 40, 5,
19, 17, 34, 41] to basis-expansion-based models (e.g. N-Beats [23]).
Our design particularly follows the family of neural ODEs, since it is an elegant as well as powerful
framework to learn the temporal dynamics for time series modeling. Unfortunately, existing variants
of neural ODEs, e.g. vanilla neural ODE [3], ODE-RNN [27], neural CDEs [13, 22] do not sufficiently
characterize the local change of observed signal and ignore inherent seasonality-trend attributes in
time series forecasting tasks. To this end, we introduce a new member to the Neural ODE family,
Neural Lad, where the latent states’ dynamics evolve with a sophisticatedly designed neural ODE. It
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

