Pareto Frontiers in Deep Feature Learning:
Data, Compute, Width, and Luck

Benjamin L. Edelman1

Surbhi Goel2

Sham Kakade1

Eran Malach3

Cyril Zhang4

1

3

Harvard University 2 University of Pennsylvania
Hebrew University of Jerusalem 4 Microsoft Research NYC

bedelman@g.harvard.edu, surbhig@cis.upenn.edu, sham@seas.harvard.edu,
eran.malach@mail.huji.ac.il, cyrilzhang@microsoft.com

Abstract
In modern deep learning, algorithmic choices (such as width, depth, and learning
rate) are known to modulate nuanced resource tradeoffs. This work investigates
how these complexities necessarily arise for feature learning in the presence of
computational-statistical gaps. We begin by considering offline sparse parity
learning, a supervised classification problem which admits a statistical query lower
bound for gradient-based training of a multilayer perceptron. This lower bound can
be interpreted as a multi-resource tradeoff frontier: successful learning can only
occur if one is sufficiently rich (large model), knowledgeable (large dataset), patient
(many training iterations), or lucky (many random guesses). We show, theoretically
and experimentally, that sparse initialization and increasing network width yield
significant improvements in sample efficiency in this setting. Here, width plays
the role of parallel search: it amplifies the probability of finding “lottery ticket”
neurons, which learn sparse features more sample-efficiently. Finally, we show that
the synthetic sparse parity task can be useful as a proxy for real problems requiring
axis-aligned feature learning. We demonstrate improved sample efficiency on
tabular classification benchmarks by using wide, sparsely-initialized MLP models;
these networks sometimes outperform tuned random forests.

1

Introduction

Algorithm design in deep learning can appear to be more like “hacking” than an engineering practice.
Numerous architectural choices and training heuristics can affect various performance criteria and
resource costs in unpredictable ways. Moreover, it is understood that these multifarious hyperparameters all interact with each other; as a result, the task of finding the “best” deep learning algorithm for
a particular scenario is foremost empirically-driven. When this delicate balance of considerations
is achieved (i.e. when deep learning works well), learning is enabled by phenomena which cannot
be explained by statistics or optimization in isolation. It is natural to ask: is this heterogeneity of
methods and mechanisms necessary?
This work studies a single synthetic binary classification task in which the above complications are
recognizable, and, in fact, provable. This is the problem of offline (i.e. small-sample) sparse parity
learning: identify a k-way multiplicative interaction between n Boolean variables, given m random
examples. We begin by interpreting the standard statistical query lower bound for this problem as a
multi-resource tradeoff frontier for deep learning, balancing between the heterogeneous resources of
dataset size, network size, number of iterations, and success probability. We show that in different
regimes of simultaneous resource constraints (data, parallel computation, sequential computation,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

