Strategic Behavior in Two-sided Matching Markets
with Recommendation-enhanced Preference-formation
Stefania Ionescu
Department of Informatics
University of Zürich
Andreasstr. 15 , Zürich, 8050
ionescu@ifi.uzh.ch

Yuhao Du
Department of CS and Engineering
University at Buffalo
Buffalo NY, 14260
yuhaodu@buffalo.edu

Kenneth Joseph
Department of CS and Engineering
University at Buffalo
Buffalo NY, 14260
kjoseph@buffalo.edu

Anikó Hannák
Department of Informatics
University of Zürich
Andreasstr. 15 , Zürich, 8050
hannak@ifi.uzh.ch

Abstract
Two-sided matching markets have long existed to pair agents in the absence of
regulated exchanges. A common example is school choice, where a matching
mechanism uses student and school preferences to assign students to schools. In
such settings, forming preferences is both difficult and critical. Prior work has
suggested various prediction mechanisms that help agents make decisions about
their preferences. Although often deployed together, these matching and prediction
mechanisms are almost always analyzed separately. The present work shows that at
the intersection of the two lies a previously unexplored type of strategic behavior:
agents returning to the market (e.g., schools) can attack future predictions by
interacting short-term non-optimally with their matches. Here, we first introduce
this type of strategic behavior, which we call an adversarial interaction attack. Next,
we construct a formal economic model that captures the feedback loop between
prediction mechanisms designed to assist agents and the matching mechanism used
to pair them. Finally, in a simplified setting, we prove that returning agents can
benefit from using adversarial interaction attacks and gain progressively more as
the trust in and accuracy of predictions increases. We also show that this attack
increases inequality in the student population.

1

Introduction

In two-sided matching markets, agents are partitioned in two disjoint sets (e.g., students and schools)
and want to get paired with agents from the other set for future bilateral exchanges (e.g., a student
learns at a school and the school provides instruction to the student) [26]. In such markets, agents
typically report their preferences over potential matches and a matching mechanism uses those
preferences to produce an assignment, i.e. a pairing between agents. Because forming one’s
preference is hard, agents benefit from external recommendations.
Since predictive models have become increasingly accessible, reliable, and trusted [17], they also
became more frequently used to inform preference-formation in matching markets. One such example
is school choice. After the introduction of the No Child Left Behind Act, in 2001, students from lowperforming schools were allowed to transfer to better-performing schools. However, initially, only a
few students took advantage of this opportunity, partly because it was hard for parents to assess which
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

