LOVM: Language-Only Vision Model Selection

Orr Zohar
Stanford Univeristy
orrzohar@stanford.edu

Shih-Cheng Huang
Stanford Univeristy
mschuang@stanford.edu

Kuan-Chieh Wang
Stanford Univeristy
wangkua1@stanford.edu

Serena Yeung
Stanford Univeristy
syyeung@stanford.edu

Abstract
Pre-trained multi-modal vision-language models (VLMs) are becoming increasingly popular due to their exceptional performance on downstream vision applications, particularly in the few- and zero-shot settings. However, selecting the
best-performing VLM for some downstream applications is non-trivial, as it is
dataset and task-dependent. Meanwhile, the exhaustive evaluation of all available
VLMs on a novel application is not only time and computationally demanding but
also necessitates the collection of a labeled dataset for evaluation. As the number of
open-source VLM variants increases, there is a need for an efficient model selection
strategy that does not require access to a curated evaluation dataset. This paper proposes a novel task and benchmark for efficiently evaluating VLMs’ zero-shot performance on downstream applications without access to the downstream task dataset.
Specifically, we introduce a new task LOVM: Language- Only Vision Model Selection, where methods are expected to perform both model selection and performance
prediction based solely on a text description of the desired downstream application.
We then introduced an extensive LOVM benchmark consisting of ground-truth
evaluations of 35 pre-trained VLMs and 23 datasets, where methods are expected
to rank the pre-trained VLMs and predict their zero-shot performance. Our code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/orrzohar/LOVM

1

Introduction

Advancements in artificial intelligence (AI) have permeated diverse sectors, but applications in areas
such as medicine or those with long-tail distributions often struggle to collect the sizable training
datasets required for the standard supervised learning framework. Pre-trained vision-language models
(VLMs) offer a promising solution, demonstrating robust performance on diverse downstream vision
tasks without the necessity of large-scale labeled datasets [Radford et al., 2021, Jia et al., 2021].
However, the performance of VLMs can vary substantially across different tasks and domains, which
undermines the reliance solely on benchmark dataset performance for effective VLM selection.
Consequently, users aiming to select a VLM for custom downstream applications frequently face a
predicament: the lack of established performance rankings for these specific, non-conventional tasks.
As the number of pre-trained VLMs increases (see Fig. 1 [Ilharco et al., 2021] ), the challenge
of model selection escalates. Exhaustive evaluation of all available VLMs on a novel application
requires first the collection of a labeled dataset for evaluation, and is also time and computationally
demanding. However, many users lack the resources or technical proficiency to collect and label an
evaluation dataset and subsequently evaluate all available VLMs. Consequently, the development of
methods that efficiently select the most suitable model for a given task without relying on access to
the downstream task dataset has become critically important.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

