Adapting Fairness Interventions to Missing Values

Raymond Feng1 , Flavio P. Calmon1 , Hao Wang2
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
raymond_feng@college.harvard.edu, flavio@seas.harvard.edu, hao@ibm.com
1

Abstract
Missing values in real-world data pose a significant and unique challenge to algorithmic fairness. Different demographic groups may be unequally affected by
missing data, and the standard procedure for handling missing values where first
data is imputed, then the imputed data is used for classification—a procedure
referred to as “impute-then-classify”—can exacerbate discrimination. In this paper,
we analyze how missing values affect algorithmic fairness. We first prove that
training a classifier from imputed data can worsen the achievable values of group
fairness and average accuracy. This is because imputing data results in the loss
of the missing pattern of the data, which often conveys information about the
predictive label. We present scalable and adaptive algorithms for fair classification with missing values. These algorithms can be combined with any preexisting
fairness-intervention algorithm to handle missing data while preserving information
encoded within the missing patterns. Numerical experiments with state-of-the-art
fairness interventions demonstrate that our adaptive algorithms consistently achieve
higher fairness and accuracy than impute-then-classify across different datasets.

1

Introduction

Missing values exist in many datasets across a wide range of real-world contexts. Sources of missing
values include underreporting in medical information [18], structural missingness from data collection
setups [43], and human error. Missing data poses a challenge to algorithmic fairness because the
mechanisms behind missing values in a dataset can depend on demographic attributes such as race,
sex, and socioeconomic class. For example, in housing data, non-white housing applicants or sellers
may be less likely to report their race due to concerns of discrimination [51]. Real-world data
collection and aggregation processes can also lead to disparate missingness between population
groups. If missing data is not handled carefully, there is a high risk of discrimination between
demographic groups with different rates or patterns of missing data. For example, low-income
patients can have more missing values in medical data involving the results of costly medical tests
[37], making them less likely to qualify for early interventions or get treatment for insufficiently
severe conditions [17].
The issue of missing values has not been sufficiently addressed in current fairness literature. Most
fairness-intervention algorithms that have been proposed are designed for complete data and cannot
be directly applied to data with missing values [e.g., 1, 2, 7, 10, 25, 32, 60, 61]. A common approach
to handle missing values is to first perform imputation, filling in missing entries with appropriate
values, and then apply an off-the-shelf fairness-intervention algorithm to the imputed data (imputethen-classify). However, this standard procedure has several limitations. In many contexts and
data formats, imputation is not an appropriate method for handling missing values. In healthcare
data, some missing data is categorized as “intended missing data,” which, for example, the National
Cancer Institute does not recommend imputing [43]. For instance, if a respondent answers NO to
the question “Were you seen for an illness or injury?”, they should skip the question “How often
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

