Enhancing Adaptive History Reserving by Spiking
Convolutional Block Attention Module in Recurrent
Neural Networks
Qi Xu1
Yuyuan Gao1
Jiangrong Shen2*
Yaxin Li1
1
2
Xuming Ran
Huajin Tang
Gang Pan2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) serve as one type of efficient model to process
spatio-temporal patterns in time series, such as the Address-Event Representation
data collected from Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS). Although convolutional SNNs
have achieved remarkable performance on these AER datasets, benefiting from
the predominant spatial feature extraction ability of convolutional structure, they
ignore temporal features related to sequential time points. In this paper, we develop
a recurrent spiking neural network (RSNN) model embedded with an advanced
spiking convolutional block attention module (SCBAM) component to combine
both spatial and temporal features of spatio-temporal patterns. It invokes the
history information in spatial and temporal channels adaptively through SCBAM,
which brings the advantages of efficient memory calling and history redundancy
elimination. The performance of our model was evaluated in DVS128-Gesture
dataset and other time-series datasets. The experimental results show that the
proposed SRNN-SCBAM model makes better use of the history information in
spatial and temporal dimensions with less memory space, and achieves higher
accuracy compared to other models.

1

Introduction

Neurons in the human brain maintain preceding activity traces on the molecular level [1, 2]. Especially,
the eligibility traces are induced by the fading memory of spike events where the presynaptic neuron
fired before the postsynapstic neuron [3]. Inspired by the loop behaviors of neurons, Recurrent spiking
neural networks (RSNNs), have been proposed and proven to have potential in processing spatiotemporal patterns through learning from the historical context. Many of those existing approaches
suggest memory preserving and extraction mechanisms play a crucial role in exploiting historical
context underlying spatio-temporal dynamics. Although the current recurrent structures of RSNNs
can capture the spatial and temporal variations at each level of the networks, the importance of
different channels at different time points is ignored [4–6] which contributes the memory preservation
and extraction can not focus on the small and important channels at specific time points.
Different recurrent structures of SNNs have been proposed to capture the memory. Like Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) cells in ANNs, the LSTM spiking networks [7] preserve valuable historical
information by latching the gradients of a hidden state, proficient in processing time series data. To
enhance the spatial feature extraction ability further of LSTM, its extension, named ConvLSTM, with
*

Corresponding authors: jrshen@zju.edu.cn.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

