Pretraining task diversity and the emergence of
non-Bayesian in-context learning for regression

Allan Raventós∗ Mansheej Paul∗ Feng Chen Surya Ganguli
Stanford University
{aravento, mansheej, fengc, sganguli}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Pretrained transformers exhibit the remarkable ability of in-context learning (ICL):
they can learn tasks from just a few examples provided in the prompt without updating any weights. This raises a foundational question: can ICL solve fundamentally
new tasks that are very different from those seen during pretraining? To probe this
question, we examine ICL’s performance on linear regression while varying the
diversity of tasks in the pretraining dataset. We empirically demonstrate a task
diversity threshold for the emergence of ICL. Below this threshold, the pretrained
transformer cannot solve unseen regression tasks, instead behaving like a Bayesian
estimator with the non-diverse pretraining task distribution as the prior. Beyond
this threshold, the transformer significantly outperforms this estimator; its behavior
aligns with that of ridge regression, corresponding to a Gaussian prior over all
tasks, including those not seen during pretraining. Thus, when pretrained on data
with task diversity greater than the threshold, transformers can optimally solve
fundamentally new tasks in-context. Importantly, this capability hinges on it deviating from the Bayes optimal estimator with the pretraining distribution as the
prior. This study also explores the effect of regularization, model capacity and task
structure and underscores, in a concrete example, the critical role of task diversity,
alongside data and model scale, in the emergence of ICL.

1

Introduction

Pretrained transformers (PTs) can learn new tasks from just a few examples provided in the prompt
without taking any gradient steps on those examples [1]. This ability, called in-context learning
(ICL), has unlocked the widspread use of language models by making it efficient to adapt general
purpose models to bespoke tasks without explicit training. Though remarkable, what makes ICL
mysterious, and potentially harmful [2], is that the learning algorithm implemented by the PT in its
forward pass is not built into its architecture or training process; instead it emerges from pretraining
on large-scale data with a next token prediction objective. This raises a foundational question: can
ICL really solve fundamentally new tasks that are very different from those seen during pretraining?
If so, what learning algorithm does ICL implement? To answer these questions, we need to better
understand how the different ingredients that go into pretraining influence this ability.
Towards this end, we explore how the diversity of tasks in the pretraining data affects the emergence
of ICL. Prior work [3] has proposed that ICL works by performing Bayesian inference. During
pretraining, transformers learn a prior over latent tasks represented in the pretraining data. When
prompted with examples at inference time, they "retrieve" relevant pretraining tasks and generate
subsequent tokens from the posterior distribution conditioned on the query and inferred tasks. This
suggests that ICL performance on a new task is influenced by its similarity to tasks implicitly learned
during pretraining. However, the distribution of tasks in our pretraining data, TPretrain , is usually a
∗

Equal Contribution. Code released at https://github.com/mansheej/icl-task-diversity

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

