Normalization-Equivariant Neural Networks with
Application to Image Denoising

Sébastien Herbreteau

Emmanuel Moebel

Charles Kervrann
Centre Inria de l’Université de Rennes, France
{sebastien.herbreteau, emmanuel.moebel, charles.kervrann}@inria.fr

Abstract
In many information processing systems, it may be desirable to ensure that any
change of the input, whether by shifting or scaling, results in a corresponding
change in the system response. While deep neural networks are gradually replacing
all traditional automatic processing methods, they surprisingly do not guarantee
such normalization-equivariance (scale + shift) property, which can be detrimental
in many applications. To address this issue, we propose a methodology for adapting
existing neural networks so that normalization-equivariance holds by design. Our
main claim is that not only ordinary convolutional layers, but also all activation
functions, including the ReLU (rectified linear unit), which are applied elementwise to the pre-activated neurons, should be completely removed from neural
networks and replaced by better conditioned alternatives. To this end, we introduce
affine-constrained convolutions and channel-wise sort pooling layers as surrogates
and show that these two architectural modifications do preserve normalizationequivariance without loss of performance. Experimental results in image denoising
show that normalization-equivariant neural networks, in addition to their better
conditioning, also provide much better generalization across noise levels.

1

Introduction

Sometimes wrongly confused with the invariance property which designates the characteristic of a
function f not to be affected by a specific transformation T applied beforehand, the equivariance
property, on the other hand, means that f reacts in accordance with T . Formally, invariance is
f ◦ T = f whereas equivariance reads f ◦ T = T ◦ f , where ◦ denotes the function composition
operator. Both invariance and equivariance play a crucial role in many areas of study, including
physics, computer vision, signal processing and have recently been studied in various settings for
deep learning-based models [3, 6, 10, 13, 14, 16, 21, 23, 31, 38, 40, 41, 43].
In this paper, we focus on the equivariance of neural networks fθ to a specific transformation T ,
namely normalization. Although highly desirable in many applications and in spite of its omnipresence in machine learning, current neural network architectures do not equivary to normalization. With
application to image denoising, for which normalization-equivariance is generally guaranteed for a
lot of conventional methods [5, 18, 20, 37], we propose a methodology for adapting existing neural
networks, and in particular denoising CNNs [8, 30, 46–48], so that normalization-equivariance holds
by design. In short, the proposed adaptation is based on two innovations:
1. affine convolutions: the weights from one layer to each neuron from the next layer, i.e. the
convolution kernels in a CNN, are constrained to encode affine combinations of neurons
(the sum of the weights is equal to 1).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

