Initialization Matters: Privacy-Utility Analysis of
Overparameterized Neural Networks
Jiayuan Ye† , Zhenyu Zhu‡ , Fanghui Liu♮∗, Reza Shokri† , Volkan Cevher‡
†

National University of Singapore
†

‡

EPFL, Switzerland

♮

University of Warwick

{jiayuan,reza}@comp.nus.edu.sg ‡ {zhenyu.zhu, volkan.cevher}@epfl.ch
♮
fanghui.liu@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
We analytically investigate how over-parameterization of models in randomized
machine learning algorithms impacts the information leakage about their training
data. Specifically, we prove a privacy bound for the KL divergence between model
distributions on worst-case neighboring datasets, and explore its dependence on
the initialization, width, and depth of fully connected neural networks. We find
that this KL privacy bound is largely determined by the expected squared gradient
norm relative to model parameters during training. Notably, for the special setting
of linearized network, our analysis indicates that the squared gradient norm (and
therefore the escalation of privacy loss) is tied directly to the per-layer variance of
the initialization distribution. By using this analysis, we demonstrate that privacy
bound improves with increasing depth under certain initializations (LeCun and
Xavier), while degrades with increasing depth under other initializations (He and
NTK). Our work reveals a complex interplay between privacy and depth that
depends on the chosen initialization distribution. We further prove excess empirical
risk bounds under a fixed KL privacy budget, and show that the interplay between
privacy utility trade-off and depth is similarly affected by the initialization.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) in the over-parameterized regime (i.e., more parameters than data)
perform well in practice but the model predictions can easily leak private information about the
training data under inference attacks such as membership inference attacks [44] and reconstruction
attacks [17, 7, 29]. This leakage can be mathematically measured by the extent to which the
algorithm’s output distribution changes if DNNs are trained on a neighboring dataset (differing only
in a one record), following the differential privacy (DP) framework [23].
To train differential private model, a typical way is to randomly perturb each gradient update in the
training process, such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD), which leads to the most widely applied
DP training algorithm in the literature: DP-SGD [2]. To be specific, in each step, DP-SGD employs
gradient clipping, adds calibrated Gaussian noise, and yields differential privacy guarantee that scales
with the noise multiplier (i.e., per-dimensional Gaussian noise standard deviation divided by the
clipping threshold) and number of training epochs. However, this privacy bound [2] is overly general
as its gradient clipping artificially neglects the network properties (e.g., width and depth) and training
schemes (e.g., initializations). Accordingly, a natural question arises in the community:
How does the over-parameterization of neural networks (under different initializations) affect the
privacy bound of the training algorithm over worst-case datasets?
∗

Work was done while Fanghui was at LIONS, EPFL.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

