Semantic HELM: A Human-Readable Memory
for Reinforcement Learning

Fabian Paischer 1 , Thomas Adler 1 , Markus Hofmarcher 2 , Sepp Hochreiter 1
1
ELLIS Unit Linz and LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning,
2
JKU LIT SAL eSPML Lab, Institute for Machine Learning,
Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria
paischer@ml.jku.at

Abstract
Reinforcement learning agents deployed in the real world often have to cope
with partially observable environments. Therefore, most agents employ memory
mechanisms to approximate the state of the environment. Recently, there have been
impressive success stories in mastering partially observable environments, mostly
in the realm of computer games like Dota 2, StarCraft II, or MineCraft. However,
existing methods lack interpretability in the sense that it is not comprehensible
for humans what the agent stores in its memory. In this regard, we propose a
novel memory mechanism that represents past events in human language. Our
method uses CLIP to associate visual inputs with language tokens. Then we feed
these tokens to a pretrained language model that serves the agent as memory and
provides it with a coherent and human-readable representation of the past. We train
our memory mechanism on a set of partially observable environments and find
that it excels on tasks that require a memory component, while mostly attaining
performance on-par with strong baselines on tasks that do not. On a challenging
continuous recognition task, where memorizing the past is crucial, our memory
mechanism converges two orders of magnitude faster than prior methods. Since
our memory mechanism is human-readable, we can peek at an agent’s memory and
check whether crucial pieces of information have been stored. This significantly
enhances troubleshooting and paves the way toward more interpretable agents.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL) an agent interacts with an environment and learns from feedback
provided in the form of a reward function. In many applications, especially in real-world scenarios,
the true state of the environment is not directly accessible to the agent, but rather approximated via
observations that reveal mere parts of it. In such environments, the capability to approximate the
true state by virtue of an agent’s perception is crucial (Åström, 1964; Kaelbling et al., 1998). To this
end, many approaches track events that occurred in the past. The brute-force strategy is to simply
store all past observations. However, this is often infeasible and it is much more efficient to store
more abstract representations of the history. Thus, many RL algorithms use memory mechanisms
such as LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) or Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) to compress
sequences of high-dimensional observations. This has led to impressive successes mostly in the realm
of mastering computer games on a human or even super-human level. Some examples are Dota 2
(Berner et al., 2019), StarCraft II (Vinyals et al., 2019), or MineCraft (Baker et al., 2022; Patil et al.,
2022).
Most state-of-the-art methods dealing with partial observability in RL employ a memory mechanism
that is not intelligible for humans. In this regard, we draw inspiration from the semantic memory
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

