From Cloze to Comprehension: Retrofitting
Pre-trained Masked Language Models to
Pre-trained Machine Reader∗
†

‡

†

Weiwen Xu12
Xin Li2
Wenxuan Zhang2 Meng Zhou3
1
Wai Lam
Luo Si2 Lidong Bing2
1The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3Carnegie Mellon University
{wwxu,wlam}@se.cuhk.edu.hk mengzhou@andrew.cmu.edu
{xinting.lx,saike.zwx,luo.si,l.bing}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
We present Pre-trained Machine Reader (PMR), a novel method for retrofitting
pre-trained masked language models (MLMs) to pre-trained machine reading
comprehension (MRC) models without acquiring labeled data. PMR can resolve
the discrepancy between model pre-training and downstream fine-tuning of existing MLMs. To build the proposed PMR, we constructed a large volume of
general-purpose and high-quality MRC-style training data by using Wikipedia
hyperlinks and designed a Wiki Anchor Extraction task to guide the MRC-style pretraining. Apart from its simplicity, PMR effectively solves extraction tasks, such
as Extractive Question Answering and Named Entity Recognition. PMR shows
tremendous improvements over existing approaches, especially in low-resource scenarios. When applied to the sequence classification task in the MRC formulation,
PMR enables the extraction of high-quality rationales to explain the classification
process, thereby providing greater prediction explainability. PMR also has the potential to serve as a unified model for tackling various extraction and classification
tasks in the MRC formulation.2

1

Introduction

Span extraction, such as Extractive Question Answering (EQA) and Named Entity Recognition
(NER), is a sub-topic of natural language understanding (NLU) with the goal of detecting token
spans from the input text according to specific requirements like task labels or questions [45, 54].
Discriminative methods were used to execute such tasks and achieved state-of-the-art performance.
As shown in the left part of Figure 1, these works tailored a task-specific fine-tuning head on top of
pre-trained language models (PLMs) to perform sequence tagging or machine reading comprehension
(MRC) [12, 36, 27]. The base PLMs are usually selected from pre-trained masked language models
(MLM), such as RoBERTa [36] or BART [29] due to their comprehensive bi-directional modeling
for the input text in the encoder. However, given the disparate nature of the learning objectives and
different model architectures of MLM pre-training and task-specific fine-tuning, the discriminative
∗
This work was supported by Alibaba Group through Alibaba Research Intern Program. The work described
in this paper was also partially supported by a grant from the Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, China (Project Code: 14200620). † This work was done when Weiwen Xu and Meng
Zhou interned at Alibaba DAMO Academy. ‡ Xin Li is the corresponding author.
2
The code, data, and checkpoints are released at https://github.com/DAMO-NLP-SG/PMR

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

