Testing the General Deductive Reasoning Capacity of
Large Language Models Using OOD Examples

Abulhair Saparov†

Richard Yuanzhe Pang†

Seyed Mehran Kazemi∆
†

Vishakh Padmakumar†

Najoung Kim∆,β,∗

Nitish Joshi†

He He†,∗

New York University, ∆ Google, β Boston University
as17582@nyu.edu

Abstract
Given the intractably large size of the space of proofs, any model that is capable of
general deductive reasoning must generalize to proofs of greater complexity. Recent studies have shown that large language models (LLMs) possess some abstract
deductive reasoning ability given chain-of-thought prompts. However, they have
primarily been tested on proofs using modus ponens or of a specific size, and from
the same distribution as the in-context examples. To measure the general deductive
reasoning ability of LLMs, we test on a broad set of deduction rules and measure
their ability to generalize to more complex proofs from simpler demonstrations
from multiple angles: depth-, width-, and compositional generalization. To facilitate systematic exploration, we construct a new synthetic and programmable
reasoning dataset that enables control over deduction rules and proof complexity.
Our experiments on four LLMs of various sizes and training objectives show that
they are able to generalize to compositional proofs. However, they have difficulty
generalizing to longer proofs, and they require explicit demonstrations to produce
hypothetical subproofs, specifically in proof by cases and proof by contradiction.

1

Introduction

In many tasks that require deductive reasoning, such as theorem proving or medical diagnosis,
the complexity of proofs can grow without bound via the use of multiple deduction rules and the
composition of subproofs. Given the large space of proofs, it is infeasible to find data to cover
proofs of all sizes. Therefore, a general reasoning model must extrapolate to complex proofs from
simpler ones. Recent work has shown that LLMs, combined with in-context learning (ICL) and
chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting, are capable of deductive reasoning to an extent [Huang and
Chang, 2022, Han et al., 2022, Wei et al., 2022b, Kojima et al., 2022, Lewkowycz et al., 2022, Nye
et al., 2021, Gontier et al., 2020]. However, much of the prior work focused on a limited set of
deduction rules such as modus ponens [Zhang et al., 2022a, Saparov and He, 2023, Tafjord et al.,
2021]. In addition, the evaluation is in-demonstration, where the test example comes from the same
distribution as the in-context demonstrations. In this work, we evaluate whether LLMs are capable of
general deductive reasoning by measuring how well they generalize to proofs that are more complex
∗

Equal contribution.
GPT and PaLM experiments in this paper were conducted independently. Authors affiliated with NYU†
were responsible for the GPT experiments, and authors affiliated with Google∆ were responsible for the PaLM
experiments.
†,∆

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

