Deconstructing Data Reconstruction:
Multiclass, Weight Decay and General Losses
Gon Buzaglo∗ 1
Yakir Oz1

Niv Haim∗ 1

Gilad Yehudai1

Yaniv Nikankin1

Gal Vardi2

Michal Irani1

1

2

Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
TTI-Chicago and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Abstract
Memorization of training data is an active research area, yet our understanding of
the inner workings of neural networks is still in its infancy. Recently, Haim et al.
[2022] proposed a scheme to reconstruct training samples from multilayer perceptron binary classifiers, effectively demonstrating that a large portion of training
samples are encoded in the parameters of such networks. In this work, we extend
their findings in several directions, including reconstruction from multiclass and
convolutional neural networks. We derive a more general reconstruction scheme
which is applicable to a wider range of loss functions such as regression losses.
Moreover, we study the various factors that contribute to networks’ susceptibility
to such reconstruction schemes. Intriguingly, we observe that using weight decay
during training increases reconstructability both in terms of quantity and quality.
Additionally, we examine the influence of the number of neurons relative to the
number of training samples on the reconstructability.
Code: https://github.com/gonbuzaglo/decoreco

1

Introduction

Neural networks are known to memorize training data despite their ability to generalize well to unseen
test data [Zhang et al., 2021, Feldman, 2020]. This phenomenon was observed in both supervised
settings [Haim et al., 2022, Balle et al., 2022, Loo et al., 2023] and in generative models [Carlini
et al., 2019, 2021, 2023]. These works shed an interesting light on generalization, memorization and
explainability of neural networks, while also posing a potential privacy risk.
Current reconstruction schemes from trained neural networks are still very limited and often rely
on unrealistic assumptions, or operate within restricted settings. For instance, Balle et al. [2022]
propose a reconstruction scheme based on the assumption of having complete knowledge of the
training set, except for a single sample. Loo et al. [2023] suggest a scheme which operates under the
NTK regime [Jacot et al., 2018], and assumes knowledge of the full set of parameters at initialization.
Reconstruction schemes for unsupervised settings are specifically tailored for generative models and
are not applicable for classifiers or other supervised tasks.
Recently, Haim et al. [2022] proposed a reconstruction scheme from feed-forward neural networks
under logistic or exponential loss for binary classification tasks. Their scheme requires only knowledge of the trained parameters, and relies on theoretical results about the implicit bias of neural
networks towards solutions of the maximum margin problem [Lyu and Li, 2019, Ji and Telgarsky,
2020]. Namely, neural networks are biased toward KKT points of the max-margin problem (see
Theorem 3.1). By utilizing the set of conditions that KKT points satisfy, they devise a novel loss function that allows for reconstruction of actual training samples. They demonstrate reconstruction from
models trained on common image datasets (CIFAR10 [Krizhevsky et al., 2009] and MNIST [LeCun
et al., 2010]).
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

