Finite Population Regression Adjustment and
Non-asymptotic Guarantees for Treatment Effect
Estimation
Mehrdad Ghadiri
MIT
mehrdadg@mit.edu

David Arbour
Adobe Research
arbour@adobe.com

Tung Mai
Adobe Research
tumai@adobe.com

Cameron Musco
UMass Amherst
cmusco@cs.umass.edu

Anup B. Rao
Adobe Research
anuprao@adobe.com

Abstract
The design and analysis of randomized experiments is fundamental to many areas,
from the physical and social sciences to industrial settings. Regression adjustment is
a popular technique to reduce the variance of estimates obtained from experiments,
by utilizing information contained in auxiliary covariates. While there is a large
literature within the statistics community studying various approaches to regression
adjustment and their asymptotic properties, little focus has been given to approaches
in the finite population setting with non-asymptotic accuracy bounds. Further, prior
work typically assumes that an entire population is exposed to an experiment,
whereas practitioners often seek to minimize the number of subjects exposed to an
experiment, for ethical and pragmatic reasons. In this work, we study the problems
of estimating the sample mean, individual treatment effects, and average treatment
effect with regression adjustment. We propose approaches that use techniques
from randomized numerical linear algebra to sample a subset of the population on
which to perform an experiment. We give non-asymptotic accuracy bounds for our
methods and demonstrate that they compare favorably with prior approaches.

1

Introduction

Randomized experiments play a crucial role in estimating counterfactual outcomes. The strength
of randomization lies in its ability to ensure independence between the treatment group and pretreatment covariates [14, 21]. This independence, in turn, results in unbiased estimation of treatment
effects through the comparison of sample averages. However, in finite sample settings, the use of
simple randomization techniques result in high variance of the estimated quantities. There have been
two broad approaches to address this issue by reducing the variance of the estimated effects when
subject level covariates are available: (1) design-based approaches, which focus on the mechanism
for assigning individuals to treatment and control groups in order to minimize imbalance (c.f.
[21, 18, 27, 34, 5, 15]), and (2) regression adjustment based approaches, which correct for imbalances
post hoc by incorporating a regression of the covariates on the outcome (c.f. [9, 24, 7, 13, 29]).
Much of the prior work examining variance reduction for experimentation has focused on asymptotic
properties of approaches [23, 24, 13, 21, 23]. Recently, there has been work focusing on design-based
variance reduction, which ties the treatment assignment problem to discrepancy minimization and
gives finite sample error bounds for estimating causal estimands such as the average treatment effect
(ATE) [18, 1, 5] and individual treatment effect (ITE) [1]. In particular, Harshaw et al. propose a
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

