Evolutionary Neural Architecture Search for
Transformer in Knowledge Tracing

Shangshang Yang1,3

Xiaoshan Yu1,3

Ye Tian1,3

Xueming Yan2

Haiping Ma1,3,4∗

Xingyi Zhang1,3∗
Anhui University
Guangdong University of Foreign Studies
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing of Ministry of Education
4
Department of Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province
{yangshang0308, yxsleo, field910921}@gmail.com xueming126@126.com
hpma@ahu.edu.cn xyzhanghust@gmail.com
1

2

Abstract
Transformer has achieved excellent performance in the knowledge tracing (KT)
task, but they are criticized for the manually selected input features for fusion and
the defect of single global context modelling to directly capture students’ forgetting
behavior in KT, when the related records are distant from the current record in
terms of time. To address the issues, this paper first considers adding convolution
operations to the Transformer to enhance its local context modelling ability used
for students’ forgetting behavior, then proposes an evolutionary neural architecture
search approach to automate the input feature selection and automatically determine
where to apply which operation for achieving the balancing of the local/global
context modelling. In the search space design, the original global path containing
the attention module in Transformer is replaced with the sum of a global path and
a local path that could contain different convolutions, and the selection of input
features is also considered. To search the best architecture, we employ an effective
evolutionary algorithm to explore the search space and also suggest a search space
reduction strategy to accelerate the convergence of the algorithm. Experimental
results on the two largest and most challenging education datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of the architecture found by the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of online education systems, such as Coursera and ASSISTment [10],
there have been a massive amount of available data about student-system interactions recorded in
these systems. Based on the students’ historical learning activities over time, knowledge tracing (KT),
as a fundamental task in intelligent education, aims to trace students’ knowledge states on knowledge
concepts, which plays an important role in both personalized learning and adaptive learning [28, 12]
and thus has received growing attention from the scientific community.
Since the concept of KT was first proposed by Corbett and Anderson in Bayesian knowledge tracing
(BKT) [9], considerable efforts have been devoted to developing various KT approaches, which
can mainly be split into two categories. The first type of KT approaches are traditional approaches
based on probabilistic models or logistic models, such as dynamic BKT [17], LFA [3], PFA [30], and
KTM [42]. The second type of approaches [21] have shown significantly better performance and
generalization since they utilize various deep neural networks (DNNs) to solve the KT task, such as
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

