Riemannian SAM: Sharpness-Aware Minimization on
Riemannian Manifolds
Jihun Yun
KAIST
arcprime@kaist.ac.kr

Eunho Yang
KAIST, AITRICS
eunhoy@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Contemporary advances in the field of deep learning have embarked upon an
exploration of the underlying geometric properties of data, thus encouraging the investigation of techniques that consider general manifolds, for example, hyperbolic
or orthogonal neural networks. However, the optimization algorithms for training
such geometric deep models still remain highly under-explored. In this paper, we
introduce Riemannian SAM by generalizing conventional Euclidean SAM to Riemannian manifolds. We successfully formulate the sharpness-aware minimization
on Riemannian manifolds, leading to one of a novel instantiation, Lorentz SAM. In
addition, SAM variants proposed in previous studies such as Fisher SAM can be
derived as special examples under our Riemannian SAM framework. We provide
the convergence analysis of Riemannian SAM under a less aggressively decaying
ascent learning rate than Euclidean SAM. Our analysis serves as a theoretically
sound contribution encompassing a diverse range of manifolds, also providing the
guarantees for SAM variants such as Fisher SAM, whose convergence analyses are
absent. Lastly, we illustrate the superiority of Riemannian SAM in terms of generalization over previous Riemannian optimization algorithms through experiments
on knowledge graph completion and machine translation tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep learning incorporating the underlying geometry of data, referred to as geometric deep learning
(GDL), has emerged as a significant research area in recent years due to its remarkable capability to
effectively capture intrinsic structural properties. As a significant direction in this line, hyperbolic
representation learning has been shown to offer several advantages over conventional Euclidean
geometry. For example, the hyperbolic space allows for more efficient representations of highdimensional data by offering a more flexible and natural way to model hierarchical structures,
which are commonly encountered in network embeddings [1, 2, 3], computer visions [4, 5], and
natural language processing [6, 7]. Adding to the fascinating array of approaches in geometric deep
learning, the orthogonal neural networks enforcing the orthogonality in model parameters emerge
as a promising research area. In another dimension, the orthogonal neural networks that constrain
the model parameter to satisfy the orthogonality (known as Stiefel manifold) are proposed [8, 9, 10]
under the motivation that they prevent the vanishing/exploding gradient problem and theoretically
enhance the model generalization [11]. Furthermore, more generally, the Riemannian extension
of deep learning technique on Euclidean space continues to be proposed in many fields including
Riemannian normalizing flows [12, 13], Riemannian diffusion models [14], Poincaré ResNet [15],
hyperbolic deep reinforcement learning [16].
Along with the attempts to learn non-Euclidean representations in deep learning, Riemannian optimization has also been greatly studied to train non-Euclidean deep models. As a pioneering example,
Riemannian (stochastic) gradient descent (R(S)GD) [17] is an extension of (stochastic) gradient
descent to Riemannian manifolds, which updates the gradient computed on (a random subset of) the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

