DFRD: Data-Free Robustness Distillation for
Heterogeneous Federated Learning

Kangyang Luo1 , Shuai Wang1 , Yexuan Fu1 , Xiang Li1∗, Yunshi Lan1 , Ming Gao1,2
School of Data Science & Engineering1
KLATASDS-MOE in School of Statistics2
East China Normal University
Shanghai, China
{52205901003, 51215903058,51215903042}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn
{xiangli, yslan, mgao}@dase.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a privacy-constrained decentralized machine learning
paradigm in which clients enable collaborative training without compromising
private data. However, how to learn a robust global model in the data-heterogeneous
and model-heterogeneous FL scenarios is challenging. To address it, we resort
to data-free knowledge distillation to propose a new FL method (namely DFRD).
DFRD equips a conditional generator on the server to approximate the training
space of the local models uploaded by clients, and systematically investigates
its training in terms of fidelity, transferability and diversity. To overcome the
catastrophic forgetting of the global model caused by the distribution shifts of
the generator across communication rounds, we maintain an exponential moving
average copy of the generator on the server. Additionally, we propose dynamic
weighting and label sampling to accurately extract knowledge from local models.
Finally, our extensive experiments on various image classification tasks illustrate
that DFRD achieves significant performance gains compared to SOTA baselines.
Our code is here: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/DFRD-0C83/.

1

Introduction

With the surge of data, deep learning algorithms have made significant progress in both established
and emerging fields [1–3]. However, in many real-world applications (e.g., mobile devices [4],
IoT [5], and autonomous driving [6], etc.), data is generally dispersed across different clients (i.e.,
data silos). Owing to the high cost of data collection and strict privacy protection regulations, the
centralized training that integrates data together is prohibited [7, 8]. Driven by this reality, Federated
Learning (FL) [9, 10] has gained considerable attention in industry and academia as a promising
distributed learning paradigm that allows multiple clients to participate in the collaborative training
of a global model without access to their private data, thereby ensuring the basic privacy.
Despite its remarkable success, the inevitable hurdle that plagues FL research is the vast heterogeneity
among real-world clients [11]. Specifically, the distribution of data among clients may be non-IID
(identical and independently distributed), resulting in data heterogeneity [42, 12, 13, 8, 41]. It has
been confirmed that the vanilla FL method FedAvg [14] suffers from client drift in this case, which
leads to severe performance degradation. To ameliorate this issue, a plethora of modifications [15–
21, 34, 39] for FedAvg focus on regularizing the objectives of the local models to align the global
optimization objective. All of the above methods follow the widely accepted assumption of model homogeneity, where local models have to share the same architecture as the global model. Nevertheless,
∗

corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

