Active Vision Reinforcement Learning under Limited
Visual Observability

Jinghuan Shang Michael S. Ryoo
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University
{jishang, mryoo}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
In this work, we investigate Active Vision Reinforcement Learning (ActiveVisionRL), where an embodied agent simultaneously learns action policy for the task
while also controlling its visual observations in partially observable environments.
We denote the former as motor policy and the latter as sensory policy. For example,
humans solve real world tasks by hand manipulation (motor policy) together
with eye movements (sensory policy). ActiveVision-RL poses challenges on
coordinating two policies given their mutual influence. We propose SUGARL,
Sensorimotor Understanding Guided Active Reinforcement Learning, a framework
that models motor and sensory policies separately, but jointly learns them using with
an intrinsic sensorimotor reward. This learnable reward is assigned by sensorimotor
reward module, incentivizes the sensory policy to select observations that are
optimal to infer its own motor action, inspired by the sensorimotor stage of humans.
Through a series of experiments, we show the effectiveness of our method across
a range of observability conditions and its adaptability to existed RL algorithms.
The sensory policies learned through our method are observed to exhibit effective
active vision strategies.

1

Introduction

Although Reinforcement Learning (RL) has demonstrated success across challenging tasks and games
in both simulated and real environments [2, 9, 11, 89, 97], the observation spaces for visual RL tasks
are typically predefined to offer the most advantageous views based on prior knowledge and can not
be actively adjusted by the agent itself. For instance, table-top robot manipulators often utilize a
fixed overhead camera view [51]. While such fixed viewpoints can potentially stabilize the training
of an image feature encoder [14], this form of perception is different from humans who actively
adjust their perception system to finish the task, e.g. eye movements [24]. The absence of active
visual perception poses challenges on learning in highly dynamic environments [59, 61], open-world
tasks [30] and partially observable environments with occlusions, limited field-of-views, or multiple
view angles [40, 83].
We study Active Reinforcement Learning (Active-RL) [102], the RL process that allows the embodied
agent to actively acquire new perceptual information in contrast to the standard RL, where the new
information could be reward signals [3, 23, 27, 50, 56, 62], visual observations [32, 33], and other
forms. Specifically, we are interested in visual Active-RL tasks, i.e. ActiveVision-RL, that an agent
controls its own views of visual observation, in an environment with limited visual observability [33].
Therefore, the goal of ActiveVision-RL is to learn two policies that still maximize the task return: the
motor policy to finish the task and the sensory policy to control the observation.
Our project page, code, and library are available at this link
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

