Adversarially Robust Distributed Count Tracking via
Partial Differential Privacy

Zhongzheng Xiong
School of Data Science
Fudan University
zzxiong21@m.fudan.edu.cn

Xiaoyi Zhu
School of Data Science
Fudan University
zhuxy22@m.fudan.edu.cn

Zengfeng Huang∗
School of Data Science
Fudan University
huangzf@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
We study the distributed tracking model, also known as distributed functional
monitoring. This model involves k sites each receiving a stream of items and
communicating with the central server. The server’s task is to track a function of
all items received thus far continuously, with
√ minimum communication cost. For
count tracking, it is known that there is a k gap in communication between deterministic and randomized algorithms. However, existing randomized algorithms
assume an "oblivious adversary" who constructs the entire input streams before
the algorithm starts. Here we consider adaptive adversaries who can choose new
items based on previous answers from the algorithm. Deterministic algorithms are
trivially robust to adaptive adversaries,
while randomized ones may not. Therefore,
√
we investigate whether the k advantage of randomized algorithms is from randomness itself or the oblivious adversary assumption. We provide an affirmative
answer to this question by giving a robust algorithm with optimal communication.
Existing robustification techniques do not yield optimal bounds due to the inherent
challenges of the distributed nature of the problem. To address this, we extend
the differential privacy framework by introducing "partial differential privacy" and
proving a new generalization theorem. This theorem may have broader applications
beyond robust count tracking, making it of independent interest.

1

Introduction

In the distributed tracking model there are k sites and a single central server. Each site i receives
items over time in a streaming fashion and can communicate with the server. Let Si (t) be the stream
that site i observes up to time t. The sever wants to track the value of a function f that is defined over
the multiset union of {Si (t) | i = 1, · · · k} at all times. The goal is to minimize the communication
cost, which is defined as the total number of words communicated between the server and all sites.
Due to strong motivations from distributed system applications, this model has been extensively
investigated, e.g., [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. The theoretical study of communication
complexity was initiated by [5]. Count tracking is the most basic problem in distributed tracking,
where f is simply the total number of items received so far. Since exact tracking requires sites to
communicate every time an item arrives, incurring too much communication, the objective is to track
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

