Adversarial Robustness through Random Weight
Sampling

Yanxiang Ma, Minjing Dong, Chang Xu∗
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney
{yama9404, mdon0736}@uni.sydney.edu.au
c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been found to be vulnerable in a variety of tasks. Adversarial attacks can manipulate network outputs, resulting in incorrect predictions.
Adversarial defense methods aim to improve the adversarial robustness of networks
by countering potential attacks. In addition to traditional defense approaches,
randomized defense mechanisms have recently received increasing attention from
researchers. These methods introduce different types of perturbations during the
inference phase to destabilize adversarial attacks. Although promising empirical results have been demonstrated by these approaches, the defense performance is quite
sensitive to the randomness parameters, which are always manually tuned without
further analysis. On the contrary, we propose incorporating random weights into
the optimization to exploit the potential of randomized defense fully. To perform
better optimization of randomness parameters, we conduct a theoretical analysis of
the connections between randomness parameters and gradient similarity as well as
natural performance. From these two aspects, we suggest imposing theoreticallyguided constraints on random weights during optimizations, as these weights play a
critical role in balancing natural performance and adversarial robustness. We derive
both the upper and lower bounds of random weight parameters by considering
prediction bias and gradient similarity. In this study, we introduce the Constrained
Trainable Random Weight (CTRW), which adds random weight parameters to the
optimization and includes a constraint guided by the upper and lower bounds to
achieve better trade-offs between natural and robust accuracy. We evaluate the
effectiveness of CTRW on several datasets and benchmark convolutional neural
networks. Our results indicate that our model achieves a robust accuracy approximately 16% to 17% higher than the baseline model under PGD-20 and 22% to
25% higher on Auto Attack.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have rapidly become valuable tools for processing complex information
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However, their widespread usage has also increased the risk of adversarial attacks [6],
making it essential to design robust learning techniques that can withstand such attacks [7]. Many
works have demonstrated that DNNs are highly sensitive to small changes in input, which has led to
the development of adversarial attack algorithms such as the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM)
[8], Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) [9] based attack, and Automatic Attack (AA) [10], among
others. These white-box attacks assume that the network structure and parameters are accessible at
the time of the attack, whereas they are black-box otherwise. Among them, white-box attacks are
always regarded as critical threats to DNNs since the gradients are available for attack generation.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

