Learning the Efficient Frontier

Philippe Chatigny∗
Riskfuel
Toronto
pc@riskfuel.com

Ivan Sergienko†
Beacon Platform
New York
ivan.sergienko@beacon.io

Jordan Weir
Riskfuel
Toronto
jw@riskfuel.com

Ryan Ferguson
Riskfuel
Toronto
rf@riskfuel.com

Maxime Bergeron
Riskfuel
Toronto
mb@riskfuel.com

Abstract
The efficient frontier (EF) is a fundamental resource allocation problem
where one has to find an optimal portfolio maximizing a reward at a given
level of risk. This optimal solution is traditionally found by solving a
convex optimization problem. In this paper, we introduce NeuralEF: a
fast neural approximation framework that robustly forecasts the result of
the EF convex optimization problem with respect to heterogeneous linear
constraints and variable number of optimization inputs. By reformulating
an optimization problem as a sequence to sequence problem, we show that
NeuralEF is a viable solution to accelerate large-scale simulation while
handling discontinuous behavior.

1

Introduction

Making the least risky decision to maximize a cumulative reward over time is a central
problem in machine learning and at the core of resource allocation optimization problems [26].
In modern portfolio theory [16], this problem is commonly referred to as the efficient frontier
(EF) [36]. It involves distributing resources among n risky assets to maximize return on
investment while respecting various constraints. These constraints (e.g., maximum allocation
allowable for an asset) are set to prevent aggressive or unrealistic allocations in practice.
Finding the optimal solution to this optimization problem given the expected risk and return
of each asset under a set of constraints can be done by solving a convex optimization problem
of quadratic programs (QP) and second-order cone programs (SOCP). Although a single
optimization problem is not time-consuming to solve, its current computational cost remains
the most significant bottleneck when performing the simulations necessary for financial
applications [22, 7].
Indeed, inputs to the EF problem such as future expectations of asset returns, co-variances,
and even simulated client preferences on asset allocation are stochastic (c.f. Table 1). Thus,
one needs to repeatedly solve the optimal allocation problem under a large number of different
scenarios and Monte Carlo (MC) simulations [39] are commonly used to estimate the expected
reward over Rtime. Given an allocation function g and stochastic input Z, we need to compute
E(g(Z)) = g(z)fZ (z) dz where fZ is the density function of Z. √
Sampling the empiric
mean of g(Z) approximates E(g(Z)) with a convergence rate of O(1/ N ) where N denotes
∗
†

Corresponding author
Contribution was made when working at Riskfuel

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

