When Does Optimizing a Proper Loss Yield
Calibration?
Jarosław Błasiok
Columbia University
jb4451@columbia.edu
Lunjia Hu
Stanford University
lunjia@stanford.edu

Parikshit Gopalan
Apple
parik.g@gmail.com
Preetum Nakkiran
Apple
preetum.nakkiran@gmail.com

Abstract
Optimizing proper loss functions is popularly believed to yield predictors with
good calibration properties; the intuition being that for such losses, the global
optimum is to predict the ground-truth probabilities, which is indeed calibrated.
However, typical machine learning models are trained to approximately minimize
loss over restricted families of predictors, that are unlikely to contain the ground
truth. Under what circumstances does optimizing proper loss over a restricted
family yield calibrated models? What precise calibration guarantees does it give?
In this work, we provide a rigorous answer to these questions. We replace the
global optimality with a local optimality condition stipulating that the (proper) loss
of the predictor cannot be reduced much by post-processing its predictions with a
certain family of Lipschitz functions. We show that any predictor with this local
optimality satisfies smooth calibration as defined in Kakade and Foster [2008],
Błasiok et al. [2023b]. Local optimality is plausibly satisfied by well-trained
DNNs, which suggests an explanation for why they are calibrated from proper loss
minimization alone. Finally, we show that the connection between local optimality
and calibration error goes both ways: nearly calibrated predictors are also nearly
locally optimal.

1

Introduction

In supervised prediction with binary labels, two basic criteria by which we judge the quality of a
predictor are accuracy and calibration. Given samples from a distribution D on X × {0, 1} that
corresponds to points x from X with binary labels y ∈ {0, 1}, we wish to learn a predictor f that
assigns each x a probability f (x) ∈ [0, 1] that the label is 1. Informally, accuracy measures how
close the predictor f is to the ground-truth f ∗ (x) = E[y|x].1 Calibration [Dawid, 1982, Foster
and Vohra, 1998] is an interpretability notion originating from the literature on forecasting, which
stipulates that the predictions of our model be meaningful as probabilities. For instance, on all points
where f (x) = 0.4, calibration requires the true label to be 1 about 40% of the time. Calibration and
accuracy are complementary notions: a reasonably accurate predictor (which is still far from optimal)
need not be calibrated, and calibrated predictors (e.g. predicting the average) can have poor accuracy.
The notions are complementary but not necessarily conflicting; for example, the ground truth itself is
both optimally accurate and perfectly calibrated.
Proper losses are central to the quest for accurate approximations of the ground truth. Informally a
proper loss ensures that under binary labels y drawn from the Bernoulli distribution with parameter v ∗ ,
1

Here we focus on the accuracy of the predictor f as opposed to the accuracy of a classifier induced by f .

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

