Dissecting Chain-of-Thought: Compositionality
through In-Context Filtering and Learning

Yingcong Li
University of California, Riverside
yli692@ucr.edu

Kartik Sreenivasan
Angeliki Giannou
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{ksreenivasa2,giannou}@wisc.edu

Dimitris Papailiopoulos
University of Wisconsin-Madison
dimitris@papail.io

Samet Oymak
University of Michigan & UC Riverside
oymak@umich.edu

Abstract
Chain-of-thought (CoT) is a method that enables language models to handle complex reasoning tasks by decomposing them into simpler steps. Despite its success,
the underlying mechanics of CoT are not yet fully understood. In an attempt to shed
light on this, our study investigates the impact of CoT on the ability of transformers
to in-context learn a simple to study, yet general family of compositional functions:
multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs). In this setting, we find that the success of CoT
can be attributed to breaking down in-context learning of a compositional function
into two distinct phases: focusing on and filtering data related to each step of the
composition and in-context learning the single-step composition function. Through
both experimental and theoretical evidence, we demonstrate how CoT significantly
reduces the sample complexity of in-context learning (ICL) and facilitates the
learning of complex functions that non-CoT methods struggle with. Furthermore,
we illustrate how transformers can transition from vanilla in-context learning to
mastering a compositional function with CoT by simply incorporating additional
layers that perform the necessary data-filtering for CoT via the attention mechanism.
In addition to these test-time benefits, we show CoT helps accelerate pretraining by
learning shortcuts to represent complex functions and filtering plays an important
role in this process. These findings collectively provide insights into the mechanics
of CoT, inviting further investigation of its role in complex reasoning tasks.

1

Introduction

The advent of transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017] has revolutionized natural language processing,
paving the way for remarkable performance in a wide array of tasks. LLMs, such as GPTs [Brown
et al., 2020], have demonstrated an unparalleled ability to capture and leverage vast amounts of data,
thereby facilitating near human-level performance across a variety of language generation tasks.
Despite this success, a deep understanding of their underlying mechanisms remains elusive.
Chain-of-thought prompting [Wei et al., 2022c] is an emergent ability of transformers where the model
solves a complex problem [Wei et al., 2022b], by decomposing it into intermediate steps. Intuitively,
this underlies the ability of general-purpose language models to accomplish previously-unseen
complex tasks by leveraging more basic skills acquired during the pretraining phase. Compositional
learning and CoT has enjoyed significant recent success in practical language modeling tasks spanning
question answering, code generation, and mathematical reasoning [Perez et al., 2021, Imani et al.,
2023, Yuan et al., 2023]. In this work, we attempt to demystify some of the mechanics underlying
this success and the benefits of CoT in terms of sample complexity and approximation power. To
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

