RanPAC: Random Projections and Pre-trained Models
for Continual Learning

Mark D. McDonnell1 , Dong Gong2 , Amin Parveneh1 ,
Ehsan Abbasnejad1 and Anton van den Hengel1
1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales
mark.mcdonnell@adelaide.edu.au, dong.gong@unsw.edu.au,
amin.parvaneh@adelaide.edu.au, ehsan.abbasnejad@adelaide.edu.au,
anton.vandenhengel@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) aims to incrementally learn different tasks (such as classification) in a non-stationary data stream without forgetting old ones. Most CL
works focus on tackling catastrophic forgetting under a learning-from-scratch
paradigm. However, with the increasing prominence of foundation models, pretrained models equipped with informative representations have become available
for various downstream requirements. Several CL methods based on pre-trained
models have been explored, either utilizing pre-extracted features directly (which
makes bridging distribution gaps challenging) or incorporating adaptors (which
may be subject to forgetting). In this paper, we propose a concise and effective
approach for CL with pre-trained models. Given that forgetting occurs during
parameter updating, we contemplate an alternative approach that exploits trainingfree random projectors and class-prototype accumulation, which thus bypasses
the issue. Specifically, we inject a frozen Random Projection layer with nonlinear activation between the pre-trained model’s feature representations and output
head, which captures interactions between features with expanded dimensionality, providing enhanced linear separability for class-prototype-based CL. We also
demonstrate the importance of decorrelating the class-prototypes to reduce the
distribution disparity when using pre-trained representations. These techniques
prove to be effective and circumvent the problem of forgetting for both class- and
domain-incremental continual learning. Compared to previous methods applied to
pre-trained ViT-B/16 models, we reduce final error rates by between 20% and 62%
on seven class-incremental benchmark datasets, despite not using any rehearsal
memory. We conclude that the full potential of pre-trained models for simple,
effective, and fast continual learning has not hitherto been fully tapped. Code is
available at https://github.com/RanPAC/RanPAC.

1

Introduction

Continual Learning (CL) is the subfield of machine learning within which models must learn from a
distribution of training samples and/or supervision signals that change over time (often divided into a
distinct set of T episodes/tasks/stages) while remaining performant on anything learned previously
during training [51, 53]. Traditional training methods do not work well for CL because parameter
updates become biased to newer samples, overwriting what was learned previously. Moreover, training
on sequential disjoint sets of data means there is no opportunity to learn differences between samples
from different stages [48]. These effects are often characterised as ‘catastrophic forgetting’ [51].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

