Jaccard Metric Losses: Optimizing the Jaccard Index
with Soft Labels
Zifu Wang1∗

Xuefei Ning2

Matthew B. Blaschko1

1

2

ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

Abstract
Intersection over Union (IoU) losses are surrogates that directly optimize the
Jaccard index. Leveraging IoU losses as part of the loss function have demonstrated
superior performance in semantic segmentation tasks compared to optimizing pixelwise losses such as the cross-entropy loss alone. However, we identify a lack of
flexibility in these losses to support vital training techniques like label smoothing,
knowledge distillation, and semi-supervised learning, mainly due to their inability
to process soft labels. To address this, we introduce Jaccard Metric Losses (JMLs),
which are identical to the soft Jaccard loss in standard settings with hard labels
but are fully compatible with soft labels. We apply JMLs to three prominent use
cases of soft labels: label smoothing, knowledge distillation and semi-supervised
learning, and demonstrate their potential to enhance model accuracy and calibration.
Our experiments show consistent improvements over the cross-entropy loss across 4
semantic segmentation datasets (Cityscapes, PASCAL VOC, ADE20K, DeepGlobe
Land) and 13 architectures, including classic CNNs and recent vision transformers.
Remarkably, our straightforward approach significantly outperforms state-of-theart knowledge distillation and semi-supervised learning methods. The code is
available at https://github.com/zifuwanggg/JDTLosses.

1

Introduction

The Jaccard index, also known as the intersection over union (IoU), is a widely used metric in the
evaluation of semantic segmentation models. Its appeal lies in its scale invariance and its superior
ability to reflect the perceptual quality of a model compared to pixel-wise accuracy [17, 40]. In line
with the principles of empirical risk minimization in statistical learning theory, the metric used for
evaluation should also be optimized during training [60]. Consequently, directly optimizing IoU via
differentiable surrogates has found considerable attention in the literature [46, 49, 2, 72, 17, 73].
Notably, IoU is only defined when both predictions and ground-truth labels are discrete binary
values, i.e., they reside on the vertices of a p-dimensional hypercube {0, 1}p . However, the output
of neural networks are soft probabilities that are in the interior of the hypercube [0, 1]p . To extend
the value of IoU from vertices to the entire hypercube, two popular strategies are currently in use.
The first strategy relaxes set counting with norm functions, exemplified by the soft Jaccard loss (SJL)
[46, 49] and the soft Dice loss (SDL) [57, 17]. The second strategy computes the Lovasz extension
of the IoU, such as the Lovasz hinge loss [72] and the Lovasz-Softmax loss (LSL) [2]. These losses
facilitate a plug-and-play use and have significantly enhanced the performance of segmentation
models, outperforming pixel-wise losses such as the cross-entropy loss (CE) and the focal loss [35].
For instance, Rakhlin et al. [50] won the land cover segmentation task of the DeepGlobe Challenge
[12] utilizing LSL. Additionally, SDL is becoming increasingly prominent in recent segmentation
works [5, 9, 8, 29], such as Segment Anything [29]. Moreover, SJL and SDL are now the standard
for training medical imaging models [17, 27].
∗

Correspondence to: zifu.wang@kuleuven.be

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

