Semi-Supervised Domain Generalization with
Known and Unknown Classes
Lei Zhang, Ji-Fu Li, Wei Wang∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{zhangl,lijf,wangw}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-Supervised Domain Generalization (SSDG) aims to learn a model that is
generalizable to an unseen target domain with only a few labels, and most existing SSDG methods assume that unlabeled training and testing samples are all
known classes. However, a more realistic scenario is that known classes may
be mixed with some unknown classes in unlabeled training and testing data. To
deal with such a scenario, we propose the Class-Wise Adaptive Exploration and
Exploitation (CWAEE) method. In particular, we explore unlabeled training data
by using one-vs-rest classifiers and class-wise adaptive thresholds to detect known
and unknown classes, and exploit them by adopting consistency regularization
on augmented samples based on Fourier Transformation to improve the unseen
domain generalization. The experiments conducted on real-world datasets verify
the effectiveness and superiority of our method.

1

Introduction
Source Domains

Target Domain

The machine learning community
Art
Cartoon
Photo
Sketch
has witnessed the great progress
of deep learning models and their
applications, e.g., computer vision
known classes
known classes
[1, 2], natural language processing
Labeled Samples
[3, 4]. Such a huge success is mostly
based on the i.i.d. assumption, i.e.,
the training data and testing data are
seen unknown classes
known classes
identically and independently distributed. However, when these popular models are evaluated on new
testing data, whose distribution is
seen unknown classes
unseen unknown classes
Testing Samples
Unlabeled Samples
slightly different from the training
data, a significant drop in perforFigure 1: Semi-supervised domain generalization with known
mance will be observed [5, 6].
and unknown classes. Labeled samples on source domains (Art,
In order to improve the general- Cartoon and Photo) are known classes (green box). Known
ization of the model under distri- classes (green box) and seen unknown classes (blue box) are
bution shifts, Domain Adaptation mixed in unlabeled samples on source domains, while known
(DA) [7, 8, 9] and Domain General- classes (green box), seen unknown classes (blue box) and
ization (DG) [10, 11, 12] have been unseen unknown classes (red box) are mixed in testing samples
widely studied. The goal of DA is on target domain (Sketch).
to transfer the knowledge learned
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

