Group Fairness in Peer Review

Haris Aziz
UNSW Sydney
haris.aziz@unsw.edu.au

Evi Micha
University of Toronto
emicha@cs.toronto.edu

Nisarg Shah
University of Toronto
nisarg@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Large conferences such as NeurIPS and AAAI serve as crossroads of various
AI fields, since they attract submissions from a vast number of communities.
However, in some cases, this has resulted in a poor reviewing experience for
some communities, whose submissions get assigned to less qualified reviewers
outside of their communities. An often-advocated solution is to break up any
such large conference into smaller conferences, but this can lead to isolation of
communities and harm interdisciplinary research. We tackle this challenge by
introducing a notion of group fairness, called the core, which requires that every
possible community (subset of researchers) to be treated in a way that prevents
them from unilaterally benefiting by withdrawing from a large conference.
We study a simple peer review model, prove that it always admits a reviewing assignment in the core, and design an efficient algorithm to find one such assignment.
We use real data from CVPR and ICLR conferences to compare our algorithm to
existing reviewing assignment algorithms on a number of metrics.

1

Introduction

Due to their large scale, conferences like NeurIPS and AAAI use an automated procedure to assign
submitted papers to reviewers. Popular such systems include the Toronto Paper Matching System [1],
Microsoft CMT1 , and OpenReview2 . The authors submitting their works are often very interested
in receiving meaningful and helpful feedback from their peers [2–4]. Thus, their overall experience
with the conference heavily depends on the quality of reviews that their submissions receive.
The typical procedure of assigning papers to reviewers is as follows. First, for each paper-reviewer
pair, a similarity score is calculated based on various parameters such as the subject area of the
paper and the reviewer, the bids placed by the reviewer, etc. [1, 5–8]. Then, an assignment is
calculated through an optimization problem, where the usual objectives are to maximize either the
utilitarian social welfare, which is the total similarity score of all matched paper-reviewer pairs, or
the egalitarian social welfare, which is the least total score of reviewers assigned to any submission.
Relevant constraints are imposed to ensure that each submission receives an appropriate number of
reviews, reviewer workloads are respected, and any conflicts of interest are avoided.
Peng et al. [9] recently mentioned that a major problem with the prestigious mega conferences
is that they constitute the main venues for several communities, and as a result, in some cases,
people are asked to review submissions that are beyond their main areas of work. They claim that a
reasonable solution is to move to a de-centralized publication process by creating more specialized
conferences appropriate for different communities. While specialized conferences definitely have
their advantages, the maintenance of large conferences that attract multiple communities is also
crucial for the emergence of interdisciplinary ideas that can be reviewed by diverse subject experts.
Therefore, it is important to ensure that no group has an incentive to break off due to a feeling of
being mistreated by the reviewing procedure of a large conference. In this work, we ask whether it
1
2

https://cmt3.research.microsoft.com/
https://github.com/openreview/openreview-matcher

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

