Focus on Query: Adversarial Mining Transformer for
Few-Shot Segmentation

1

Yuan Wang1∗, Naisong Luo1∗ , Tianzhu Zhang1†
Deep Space Exploration Laboratory/School of Information Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China.
{wy2016,lns6}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot segmentation (FSS) aims to segment objects of new categories given only
a handful of annotated samples. Previous works focus their efforts on exploring
the support information while paying less attention to the mining of the critical
query branch. In this paper, we rethink the importance of support information
and propose a new query-centric FSS model Adversarial Mining Transformer
(AMFormer), which achieves accurate query image segmentation with only rough
support guidance or even weak support labels. The proposed AMFormer enjoys
several merits. First, we design an object mining transformer (G) that can achieve
the expansion of incomplete region activated by support clue, and a detail mining
transformer (D) to discriminate the detailed local difference between the expanded
mask and the ground truth. Second, we propose to train G and D via an adversarial
process, where G is optimized to generate more accurate masks approaching ground
truth to fool D. We conduct extensive experiments on commonly used Pascal-5i
and COCO-20i benchmarks and achieve state-of-the-art results across all settings.
In addition, the decent performance with weak support labels in our query-centric
paradigm may inspire the development of more general FSS models. Code will be
available at https://github.com/Wyxdm/AMNet

1

Introduction

As a fundamental computer vision task, semantic segmentation [1] has drawn decades of research
interest in both academia and industry. However, the underlying driving force of fully supervised
segmentation models is massive, densely labeled data. The inherent category sensitivity of these
models leads to severe performance degradation when dealing with previously unseen categories. To
equip segmentation models with generalization to novel classes, few-shot segmentation (FSS) has
been proposed [2], which achieves segmentation of new category images (called query images) with
only a handful of annotated samples (called support images) without retraining the model.
The current top-performing FSS methods focus on adequately exploring the information contained
in the support samples to guide the segmentation of the query images. Among them, prototypical
learning methods [3–6] concentrate support features into one or several representative prototypes
to direct the classification of query pixels, while the affinity learning approaches [7–9] try to equip
the query features with support semantic clue of pixel granularity. Although considerable progress
has been made in the direction of probing support information, we noticed that significant intra-class
diversities (as illustrated in Figure 2) between support and query images are common occurrences.
In these cases, the target feature from the query image may be quite distinct from the support one.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

