SnapFusion: Text-to-Image Diffusion Model on Mobile
Devices within Two Seconds
Yanyu Li1,2,† Huan Wang1,2,† Qing Jin1,† Ju Hu1 Pavlo Chemerys1
Yun Fu2 Yanzhi Wang2 Sergey Tulyakov1 Jian Ren1,†
1
Snap Inc. 2 Northeastern University
Project Page: https://snap-research.github.io/SnapFusion

Figure 1: Example generated images by using our efficient text-to-image diffusion model.

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models can create stunning images from natural language
descriptions that rival the work of professional artists and photographers. However,
these models are large, with complex network architectures and tens of denoising
iterations, making them computationally expensive and slow to run. As a result,
high-end GPUs and cloud-based inference are required to run diffusion models at
scale. This is costly and has privacy implications, especially when user data is sent
to a third party. To overcome these challenges, we present a generic approach that,
for the first time, unlocks running text-to-image diffusion models on mobile devices
in less than 2 seconds. We achieve so by introducing efficient network architecture
and improving step distillation. Specifically, we propose an efficient UNet by
identifying the redundancy of the original model and reducing the computation of
the image decoder via data distillation. Further, we enhance the step distillation
by exploring training strategies and introducing regularization from classifier-free
guidance. Our extensive experiments on MS-COCO show that our model with 8
denoising steps achieves better FID and CLIP scores than Stable Diffusion v1.5
with 50 steps. Our work democratizes content creation by bringing powerful
text-to-image diffusion models to the hands of users.

1

Introduction

Diffusion-based text-to-image models [1, 2, 3, 4] show remarkable progress in synthesizing photorealistic content using text prompts. They profoundly impact the content creation [5, 6], image
†

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

