Multi-Object Representation Learning via Feature
Connectivity and Object-Centric Regularization
Alex Foo

Wynne Hsu
Mong Li Lee
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
{alexfoo,whsu,leeml}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Discovering object-centric representations from images has the potential to greatly
improve the robustness, sample efficiency and interpretability of machine learning
algorithms. Current works on multi-object images typically follow a generative
approach that optimizes for input reconstruction and fail to scale to real-world
datasets despite significant increases in model capacity. We address this limitation
by proposing a novel method that leverages feature connectivity to cluster neighboring pixels likely to belong to the same object. We further design two object-centric
regularization terms to refine object representations in the latent space, enabling our
approach to scale to complex real-world images. Experimental results on simulated,
real-world, complex texture and common object images demonstrate a substantial improvement in the quality of discovered objects compared to state-of-the-art
methods, as well as the sample efficiency and generalizability of our approach. We
also show that the discovered object-centric representations can accurately predict
key object properties in downstream tasks, highlighting the potential of our method
to advance the field of multi-object representation learning.

1

Introduction

Human understanding of the world relies on objects as compositional building blocks [24], and
emulating this through object-centric representations can improve robustness, sample efficiency,
generalization to out-of-domain distributions, and interpretability of machine learning algorithms
[18, 9]. Recent work utilizes a generative approach, optimizing pixel-based reconstruction to learn
object-centric representations [8, 17, 33, 4, 35, 12, 13, 11, 45, 46, 51]. This approach has limitations
as it prioritizes pixel accuracy over object discovery and functional feature extraction [30, 11]. This
may lead to the failure of discovering objects [35], or obtaining useful object features, such as position,
shape, or boundaries between overlapping objects [23]. Additionally, pixel-based reconstruction
tends to waste model capacity on less important visual features, such as complex backgrounds [25],
making scaling these methods to real-world images a challenge.
To address the fundamental limitations of pixel-based reconstruction, we propose a framework that
leverages feature connectivity and design two object-centric regularization terms to directly refine
object representations, ensuring sufficient separation and high disentanglement between dimensions.
Our method utilizes visual connectedness principles [38], where similar pixels that are connected
should belong to the same object, to guide object discovery. The two regularization terms promote
disentangled representations and prevent sub-optimal clustering.
We demonstrate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods in discovering multiple
objects from simulated, real-world, complex texture and common object images in a fine-grained
manner without supervision. The proposed solution attains sample efficiency and is generalizable
to out-of-domain images. The learned object representations also accurately predict key object
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

