Selectively Sharing Experiences Improves Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

Matthias Gerstgrasser
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
matthias@seas.harvard.edu

Tom Danino
Sarah Keren
The Taub Faculty of Computer Science
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
tom.danino@campus.technion.ac.il
sarahk@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We present a novel multi-agent RL approach, Selective Multi-Agent Prioritized
Experience Relay, in which agents share with other agents a limited number of
transitions they observe during training. The intuition behind this is that even a
small number of relevant experiences from other agents could help each agent learn.
Unlike many other multi-agent RL algorithms, this approach allows for largely
decentralized training, requiring only a limited communication channel between
agents. We show that our approach outperforms baseline no-sharing decentralized
training and state-of-the art multi-agent RL algorithms. Further, sharing only a
small number of highly relevant experiences outperforms sharing all experiences
between agents, and the performance uplift from selective experience sharing is
robust across a range of hyperparameters and DQN variants.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (RL) is often considered a hard problem: The environment
dynamics and returns depend on the joint actions of all agents, leading to significant variance and
non-stationarity in the experiences of each individual agent. Much recent work [29, 23] in multi-agent
RL has focused on mitigating the impact of these. Our work views multi-agent RL more positively, by
treating the presence of other agents can also be an asset that can be leveraged. In particular, we show
that groups of agents can collaboratively explore the environment more quickly than individually.
To this end, we present a novel multi-agent RL approach that allows agents to share a small number
of experiences with other agents. The intuition is that if one agent discovers something important
in the environment, then sharing this with the other agents should help them learn faster. However,
it is crucial that only important experiences are shared - we will see that sharing all experiences
indiscriminately will not improve learning. To this end, we make two crucial design choices:
Selectivity and priority. Selectivity means we only share a small fraction of experiences. Priority
is inspired by a well-established technique in single-agent RL, prioritized experience replay (PER)
[30]. With PER an off-policy algorithm such as DQN [24] will sample experiences not uniformly,
but proportionally to “how far off” the current policy’s predictions are in each state, formally the
temporal difference (td) error . We use this same metric to prioritize which experiences to share with
other agents.
We dub the resulting multiagent RL approach “Selective Multi-Agent Prioritized Experience Relay”
or “SUPER”. In this, agents independently use a DQN algorithm to learn, but with a twist: Each
agent relays its highest-td-error experiences to the other agents, who insert them directly into their
replay buffer, which they use for learning. This approach has several advantages:
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

