Rewrite Caption Semantics: Bridging Semantic Gaps
for Language-Supervised Semantic Segmentation

Yun Xing1

Jian Kang1

Aoran Xiao1 Jiahao Nie1 Ling Shao2
Nanyang Technological University
2
UCAS-Terminus AI Lab, UCAS, China

Shijian Lu1∗

1

Abstract
Vision-Language Pre-training has demonstrated its remarkable zero-shot recognition ability and potential to learn generalizable visual representations from language
supervision. Taking a step ahead, language-supervised semantic segmentation enables spatial localization of textual inputs by learning pixel grouping solely from
image-text pairs. Nevertheless, the state-of-the-art suffers from clear semantic gaps
between visual and textual modality: plenty of visual concepts appeared in images
are missing in their paired captions. Such semantic misalignment circulates in
pre-training, leading to inferior zero-shot performance in dense predictions due to
insufficient visual concepts captured in textual representations. To close such semantic gap, we propose Concept Curation (CoCu), a pipeline that leverages CLIP to
compensate for the missing semantics. For each image-text pair, we establish a concept archive that maintains potential visually-matched concepts with our proposed
vision-driven expansion and text-to-vision-guided ranking. Relevant concepts can
thus be identified via cluster-guided sampling and fed into pre-training, thereby
bridging the gap between visual and textual semantics. Extensive experiments over
a broad suite of 8 segmentation benchmarks show that CoCu achieves superb zeroshot transfer performance and greatly boosts language-supervised segmentation
baseline by a large margin, suggesting the value of bridging semantic gap in pretraining data. Code is available at https://github.com/xing0047/rewrite.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Pre-training [34, 21, 1, 10], which aims to learn visual representations directly from
natural language supervision, has endowed existing recognition systems with superior generality
and open-vocabulary understanding capability. As a representative, CLIP [34] performs contrastive
language-image pre-training on 400M web-crawled image-text pairs, whereby the learnt models may
effortlessly transfer to a wide spectrum of classification tasks in a zero-shot manner. Motivated by the
breakthrough, recent studies [43, 35, 44] extend the supervision paradigm to semantic segmentation,
enabling spatial localization of textual queries in images and pixel grouping with solely supervision
from image-text pairs. Distinct from conventional semantic segmentation, the language-supervised
paradigm obviates the need for costly manual pixel-level annotation and enables million-level pretraining scale with much less effort.
Despite the progresses [43, 35] in language-supervised semantic segmentation, the pre-training stage
still suffers heavily from clear semantic gap between visual and textual modality. In image-text
pairs used for pre-training, it is ubiquitous that visual concepts appeared in images are missing in
the corresponding textual captions. This happens largely because captions merely describe salient
concepts that are worthy of mention [16, 25], while naturally forgo full semantic coverage of images
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

