Fast Attention Over Long Sequences With Dynamic
Sparse Flash Attention

Matteo Pagliardini*
EPFL
matteo.pagliardini@epfl.ch
Martin Jaggi
EPFL
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Daniele Paliotta*
University of Geneva
daniele.paliotta@unige.ch
François Fleuret
University of Geneva
francois.fleuret@unige.ch

Abstract
Transformer-based language models have found many diverse applications requiring them to process sequences of increasing length. For these applications, the
causal self-attention—which is the only component scaling quadratically w.r.t. the
sequence length—becomes a central concern. While many works have proposed
schemes to sparsify the attention patterns and reduce the computational overhead
of self-attention, those are often limited by implementation concerns and end up
imposing a simple and static structure over the attention matrix. Conversely, implementing more dynamic sparse attention often results in runtimes significantly
slower than computing the full attention using the Flash implementation from
Dao et al. (2022). We extend FlashAttention to accommodate a large class of
attention sparsity patterns that, in particular, encompass key/query dropping and
hashing-based attention. This leads to implementations with no computational
complexity overhead and a multi-fold runtime speedup on top of FlashAttention.
Even with relatively low degrees of sparsity, our method improves visibly upon
FlashAttention as the sequence length increases. Without sacrificing perplexity, we
increase the training speed of a transformer language model by 2.0× and 3.3× for
sequences of respectively 8k and 16k tokens.

1

Introduction

Many methods have been developed to mitigate the quadratic cost of self-attention in Transformers
(Vaswani et al., 2017). Some methods attempt to linearize the attention (Beltagy et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2020) by for instance linearizing the softmax operator to take advantage of the associativity of
matrix products (Katharopoulos et al., 2020). Other methods rely on a predefined sparse masking of
the attention matrix, e.g. to constrain the attention to a local temporal neighborhood (Zaheer et al.,
2020; Child et al., 2019). While the structure is fixed, it is assumed that information from arbitrary
locations in the sequence can still flow through this structure over several layers. All those methods
impose static implicit or explicit constraints over the attention matrix.
Another promising line of work consists in computing a dynamic modulation of a sub-part of the
attention matrix. They are based, for instance, on dropping keys and queries (Kim et al., 2022) or
using geometric hashing of the keys and queries to identify linear cost sub-blocks of the attention
matrix that carry most of the weight (Kitaev et al., 2020).
* Equal contribution.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

