Multi-Head Adapter Routing
for Cross-Task Generalization
Lucas Caccia

Edoardo Ponti
Nicolas Le Roux

Zhan Su

Matheus Pereira

Alessandro Sordoni

Microsoft Research, McGill University, MILA,
University of Edinburgh, Université de Montréal, University of Copenhagen
lucas.page-caccia@mail.mcgill.ca,alsordon@microsoft.com

Abstract
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) for cross-task generalization consists in
pre-training adapters on a multi-task training set before few-shot adaptation to test
tasks. Polytropon [Ponti et al., 2023] (Poly) jointly learns an inventory of adapters
and a routing function that selects a (variable-size) subset of adapters for each task
during both pre-training and few-shot adaptation. In this paper, we investigate
the role that adapter routing plays in its success and design new variants based on
our findings. First, we build on the intuition that finer-grained routing provides
more expressivity. Hence, we propose MHR (Multi-Head Routing), which combines
subsets of adapter parameters and outperforms Poly under a comparable parameter
budget; by only fine-tuning the routing function and not the adapters (MHR-z),
we achieve competitive performance with extreme parameter efficiency. Second,
we find that Poly/MHR performance is a result of better multi-task optimization,
rather than modular inductive biases that facilitate adapter recombination and
local adaptation, as previously hypothesized. In fact, we find that MHR exhibits
high gradient alignment between training tasks. We find that routing is most
beneficial during multi-task pre-training rather than during few-shot adaptation and
propose MHR-µ, which discards routing and fine-tunes the average of the pre-trained
adapters on each downstream tasks. This establishes MHR-µ as an effective method
for single-adapter fine-tuning. We also show that MHR-µ can be used as an effective
zero-shot transfer method by training the average of the pre-trained adapters for a
few additional steps on the multi-task training set: this yields gains up to 3% on
absolute accuracy w.r.t. the baselines.

1

Introduction

The ability to train effective models with a relatively small number of training data is of paramount
importance due to the paucity of annotated examples for most tasks. One effective few-shot learning
approach is to leverage large models pre-trained on a vast amount of unlabelled data and fine-tune
them on the few examples available for each downstream task. To reduce the memory cost of
duplicating the entire array of parameters for each downstream task, recent approaches resort to
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods, such as LoRA [Hu et al., 2022], SFT [Ansell et al.,
2022], or (IA)3 [Liu et al., 2022]. These only fine-tune adapters while leaving the pre-trained model
‘frozen’.
Nevertheless, it remains unclear how to best exploit a set of training tasks to better generalize to a set
of unseen test tasks in a sample-efficient fashion, based on just a few examples. One straightforward
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

