Complexity of Derivative-Free Policy Optimization for
Structured H∞ Control

Xingang Guo
ECE, CSL
UIUC
xingang2@illinois.edu
Geir Dullerud
MSE, CSL
UIUC
dullerud@illinois.edu

Darioush Keivan
MSE, CSL
UIUC
dk12@illinois.edu

Peter Seiler
EECS
UMich
pseiler@umich.edu

Bin Hu
ECE, CSL
UIUC
binhu7@illinois.edu

Abstract
The applications of direct policy search in reinforcement learning and continuous
control have received increasing attention. In this work, we present novel theoretical
results on the complexity of derivative-free policy optimization on an important
class of robust control tasks, namely the structured H∞ synthesis with static
output feedback. Optimal H∞ synthesis under structural constraints leads to
a constrained nonconvex nonsmooth problem and is typically addressed using
subgradient-based policy search techniques that are built upon the concept of
Goldstein subdifferential or other notions of enlarged subdifferential. In this paper,
we study the complexity of finding (δ, ϵ)-stationary points for such nonsmooth
robust control design tasks using policy optimization methods which can only
access the zeroth-order oracle (i.e. the H∞ norm of the closed-loop system). First,
we study the exact oracle setting and identify the coerciveness of the cost function
to prove high-probability feasibility/complexity bounds for derivative-free policy
optimization on this problem. Next, we derive a sample complexity result for the
multi-input multi-output (MIMO) H∞ -norm estimation. We combine this with
our analysis to obtain the first sample complexity of model-free, trajectory-based,
zeroth-order policy optimization on finding (δ, ϵ)-stationary points for structured
H∞ control. Numerical results are also provided to demonstrate our theory.

1

Introduction

Policy optimization techniques have received increasing attention due to their impressive performance
in reinforcement Learning (RL) and continuous control tasks [65, 48, 64, 45]. Despite the empirical
successes, the theoretical properties of policy-based RL methods have not been fully understood,
even on relatively simple linear control benchmarks. This has motivated a line of recent work
developing sample complexity theory of model-free policy optimization on benchmark linear control
problems such as linear quadratic regulator (LQR) [22, 47, 72, 50, 24, 33], stabilization [57, 56],
linear robust/risk-sensitive control [30, 76, 77], Markov jump linear quadratic control [59], and
distributed LQR [44]. These existing sample complexity results heavily rely on the fact that the
cost functions in these benchmark problems are differentiable over the entire feasible set, and hence
cannot be applied to cover the H∞ robust control setting where the objective function is nonsmooth
in the first place [2, 3, 18]. In this paper, we make a meaningful initial step to bridge this gap by
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

