Amortized Reparametrization: Efficient and Scalable
Variational Inference for Latent SDEs
Kevin Course
University of Toronto
kevin.course@mail.utoronto.ca

Prasanth B. Nair
University of Toronto
prasanth.nair@utoronto.ca

Abstract
We consider the problem of inferring latent stochastic differential equations (SDEs)
with a time and memory cost that scales independently with the amount of data,
the total length of the time series, and the stiffness of the approximate differential
equations. This is in stark contrast to typical methods for inferring latent differential equations which, despite their constant memory cost, have a time complexity
that is heavily dependent on the stiffness of the approximate differential equation.
We achieve this computational advancement by removing the need to solve differential equations when approximating gradients using a novel amortization strategy
coupled with a recently derived reparametrization of expectations under linear
SDEs. We show that, in practice, this allows us to achieve similar performance to
methods based on adjoint sensitivities with more than an order of magnitude fewer
evaluations of the model in training.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen the rise of continuous time models for dynamical system modeling [1]. As
compared to traditional autoregressive style models [2], continuous time models are useful because
they can deal with non-evenly spaced observations, they enable multilevel/hierarchical and adaptive
prediction schemes, and because physics is (mostly) done in continuous time. For example, recent
developments in inferring continuous time differential equations from data has been met by a flurry
of work in endowing models with physics informed priors [3, 4, 5].
Despite their advantages, continuous time models remain significantly more computationally challenging to train than their autoregressive counterparts due to their reliance on adjoint methods for
estimating gradients. Adjoint methods introduce a significant computational burden in training
because they require solving a pair of initial value problems to estimate gradients. Solving such initial
value problems as a part of an iterative optimization procedure is computationally demanding for the
following reasons:
(i) Gradient based updates to models of differential equations can cause them to become extremely
stiff. This will have the effect of causing the cost per iteration to explode mid-optimization.
(ii) With the exception of parareal methods [6], differential equation solvers are fundamentally
iterative sequential methods. This makes them poorly suited to being parallelized on modern
parallel computing hardware.
In accordance with such challenges a number of methods have been introduced to speed up training
of continuous time models including regularizing dynamics [7, 8] and replacing ordinary differential
equation (ODE) solvers with integration methods where possible [9]. Despite the computational
advancements brought about by such innovations, continuous time models remain expensive to train
in comparison to discrete time models.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

