Transition-constant Normalization for Image
Enhancement
Jie Huang1∗, Man Zhou1,2∗, Jinghao Zhang1 , Gang Yang1 , Mingde Yao1 ,
Chongyi Li3 , Zhiwei Xiong1 , Feng Zhao1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Nankai University, China
{hj0117, manman, jhaozhang, mdyao, yg1997}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
lichongyi25@gmail.com, {zwxiong, fzhao956}@ustc.edu.cn,

Abstract
Normalization techniques that capture image style by statistical representation have
become a popular component in deep neural networks. Although image enhancement can be considered as a form of style transformation, there has been little
exploration of how normalization affect the enhancement performance. To fully
leverage the potential of normalization, we present a novel Transition-Constant
Normalization (TCN) for various image enhancement tasks. Specifically, it consists
of two streams of normalization operations arranged under an invertible constraint,
along with a feature sub-sampling operation that satisfies the normalization constraint. TCN enjoys several merits, including being parameter-free, plug-and-play,
and incurring no additional computational costs. We provide various formats to utilize TCN for image enhancement, including seamless integration with enhancement
networks, incorporation into encoder-decoder architectures for downsampling, and
implementation of efficient architectures. Through extensive experiments on multiple image enhancement tasks, like low-light enhancement, exposure correction,
SDR2HDR translation, and image dehazing, our TCN consistently demonstrates
performance improvements. Besides, it showcases extensive ability in other tasks
including pan-sharpening and medical segmentation. The code is available at
https://github.com/huangkevinj/TCNorm.

1

Introduction

Image enhancement is an important task in machine vision, which aims to improve the quality
of low-visibility images captured under unfavorable light conditions (i.e., low light) by adjusting
contrast and lightness. The last decades have witnessed quantities of approaches designed for image
enhancement based on various hand-crafted priors [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However, the complex and variant
adjustment procedures make it a challenging group of tasks. In addition to the common low-light
image enhancement, efforts have also been directed toward solving image enhancement-like tasks,
including exposure correction, image dehazing, and SDR2HDR translation.
Very recently, the deep-learning paradigm exhibits remarkable success in the image enhancement field
than traditional methods [6, 7, 8]. Despite the progress, most of them focus on roughly constructing
complex deep neural architectures and have not fully explored the intrinsic characterizes of lightness
in networks. In fact, the lightness variants could bring difficulties to their learning procedures. This
* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

