Hierarchical Semi-Implicit Variational Inference with
Application to Diffusion Model Acceleration

Longlin Yu1,∗ , Tianyu Xie1,∗ , Yu Zhu3,4,∗ , Tong Yang5 , Xiangyu Zhang5 , Cheng Zhang1,2,†
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Center for Statistical Science, Peking University
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
5
Megvii Technology Inc.
{llyu, tianyuxie}@pku.edu.cn, zhuyu2022@ia.ac.cn,
{yangtong, zhangxiangyu}@megvii.com, chengzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-implicit variational inference (SIVI) has been introduced to expand the analytical variational families by defining expressive semi-implicit distributions in
a hierarchical manner. However, the single-layer architecture commonly used in
current SIVI methods can be insufficient when the target posterior has complicated
structures. In this paper, we propose hierarchical semi-implicit variational inference, called HSIVI, which generalizes SIVI to allow more expressive multi-layer
construction of semi-implicit distributions. By introducing auxiliary distributions
that interpolate between a simple base distribution and the target distribution, the
conditional layers can be trained by progressively matching these auxiliary distributions one layer after another. Moreover, given pre-trained score networks,
HSIVI can be used to accelerate the sampling process of diffusion models with
the score matching objective. We show that HSIVI significantly enhances the
expressiveness of SIVI on several Bayesian inference problems with complicated
target distributions. When used for diffusion model acceleration, we show that
HSIVI can produce high quality samples comparable to or better than the existing
fast diffusion model based samplers with a small number of function evaluations
on various datasets.

1

Introduction

Variational inference (VI) is an approximate Bayesian inference method that is gaining in popularity,
where one tries to find an approximation to the target posterior distribution using an optimization
approach (Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright & Jordan, 2008; Blei et al., 2016). To do that, it first posits
a family of variational distributions and then seeks the closest member from this family that minimizes
some statistical distance to the target posterior, usually the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. As the
posterior is not analytically available, an equivalent formulation is often adopted in practice where
one maximizes the evidence lower bound (ELBO) instead (Jordan et al., 1999).
One classical VI method is mean-field VI, which assumes a factorizable structure of the variational
distributions over the parameters or latent variables (Bishop & Tipping, 2000). This often leads
to closed-form coordinate-ascent update rules when certain conditional conjugacy conditions are
satisfied. In practice, the conditional conjugacy may not hold and the true posterior could be much
∗
†

Equal contribution. This work was done during an internship at Megvii Technology Inc.
Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

