Enhancing User Intent Capture in Session-Based
Recommendation with Attribute Patterns
Xin Liu1∗ Zheng Li2 Yifan Gao2 Jingfeng Yang2
Tianyu Cao2 Zhengyang Wang2 Bing Yin2 Yangqiu Song1†
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST 2 Amazon.com Inc
{xliucr,yqsong}@cse.ust.hk
{amzzhe,yifangao,jingfe,caoty,zhengywa,alexbyin}@amazon.com

Abstract
The goal of session-based recommendation in E-commerce is to predict the next
item that an anonymous user will purchase based on the browsing and purchase
history. However, constructing global or local transition graphs to supplement
session data can lead to noisy correlations and user intent vanishing. In this work,
we propose the Frequent Attribute Pattern Augmented Transformer (FAPAT) that
characterizes user intents by building attribute transition graphs and matching
attribute patterns. Specifically, the frequent and compact attribute patterns are
served as memory to augment session representations, followed by a gate and a
transformer block to fuse the whole session information. Through extensive experiments on two public benchmarks and 100 million industrial data in three domains,
we demonstrate that FAPAT consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods by
an average of 4.5% across various evaluation metrics (Hits, NDCG, MRR). Besides
evaluating the next-item prediction, we estimate the models’ capabilities to capture
user intents via predicting items’ attributes and period-item recommendations.

1

Introduction

With the explosive demand for E-commerce services [44, 12, 23, 11, 43], numerous user behaviors are
emerging. Understanding these historical action records is critical in comprehending users’ interests
and intent evolution, particularly in a cold-start regime that lacks sufficient context. This has spurred
research on session-based recommendations (SBR) [8, 35, 37, 13] that capture user-side dynamics
from a short-time period (namely a session) using temporally historical information. Numerous SBR
algorithms have been proposed, ranging from sequence-based methods [27, 8, 16, 19, 31, 28, 9] to
graph-based methods [35, 38, 34, 37, 17, 30] for learning dynamic user characterization. However,
both lines of methods have their limitations. Specifically, sequence-based methods treat each
user behaviors in a session as an action sequence and model the local dependencies inside. This
can only capture users’ preference evolution via chronological order while failing to identify the
complex non-adjacent item correlation, especially when the session length is insufficient to support
temporal prediction [33]. To address this issue, graph-based methods adopt a higher perspective
by introducing a global item transition graph, which aggregates local session graphs constructed
from historical session sequences. Thus, a newly-emerging short session sequence can benefit from
the global topology (e.g., global co-occurrences) and representations (e.g., item semantics) [34].
Unfortunately, existing session graph construction ignores temporal signals. Figure 1 shows that two
different sessions result in the same session graph, leading to vanishing of user intent variation during
sequence-to-graph conversion. And such global graphs are fragile due to noise from random clicks.
∗
†

Work was done during Xin’s internship at Amazon. Corresponding author: Xin Liu and Zheng Li.
Prof. Yangqiu Song is a visiting academic scholar at Amazon.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

