Efficient Batched Algorithm for Contextual Linear
Bandits with Large Action Space via Soft Elimination
Osama A. Hanna
University of California, Los Angeles
ohanna@ucla.edu

Lin F. Yang
University of California, Los Angeles
linyang@ucla.edu

Christina Fragouli
University of California, Los Angeles
christina.fragouli@ucla.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we provide the first efficient batched algorithm for contextual linear
bandits with large action spaces. Unlike existing batched algorithms that rely
on action elimination, which are not implementable for large action sets, our
algorithm only uses a linear optimization oracle over the action set p
to design
the policy. The proposed algorithm achieves a regret upper bound Õ( T ) with
high probability, and uses O(log log T ) batches, matching the lower bound on
the number of batches [13]. When specialized to linear bandits, our algorithm
can achieve a high probability gap-dependent regret bound of Õ(1/ min ) with
the optimal log T number of batches, where min is the minimum reward gap
between a suboptimal arm and the optimal. Our result is achieved via a novel soft
elimination approach, that entails “shaping" the action sets at each batch so that we
can efficiently identify (near) optimal actions.

1

Introduction

In contextual linear bandits, a learner interacts with an environment over T rounds: in each round t
the learner observes a (possibly different due to context change) set of actions At ✓ Rd , plays one
of them, and receives a reward that follows a noisy linear function parametrized by an unknown
vector in Rd . The objective of the learner is to minimize regret - how much reward it loses over the T
rounds by not always playing the “highest reward" (optimal) action. To achieve this, the learner at
each round updates its policy (its method to select what action to play) based on what it has learned
from all past actions played and rewards observed. Linear bandits form the special case where the
action set is always the same, i.e., At = A for all rounds t. Contextual linear and linear bandits have
been widely investigated due to their significance in both theory and practice (eg., see [24]).
Batched Setting. In numerous real-world use cases, the learner may be restricted to change the
policy a limited (small) number of times.This constraint may stem from factors such as computation
or communication considerations, or may be imposed by the nature of the application, as is the case
in multi-stage clinical trials or online marketing campaigns with high response rates, where it is not
feasible to update the policy after each response. Similarly, the use of crowdsourcing platforms or the
need to conduct time-consuming simulations in reinforcement learning may require policies with
limited adaptivity. As a result, there has been significant interest in designing algorithms that can
achieve the optimal regret with limited policy switches [30, 3, 31, 13, 12, 21, 32, 16]. This setup is
known as the batched contextual linear bandit problem: the T rounds are partitioned into batches, and
the learner can collect rewards and update the action selection policy only at the end of each batch.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

