Two-Stage Learning to Defer with Multiple Experts

Anqi Mao
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
aqmao@cims.nyu.edu

Christopher Mohri
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
xmohri@stanford.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research & CIMS
New York, NY 10011
mohri@google.com

Yutao Zhong
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
yutao@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
We study a two-stage scenario for learning to defer with multiple experts, which is
crucial in practice for many applications. In this scenario, a predictor is derived in
a first stage by training with a common loss function such as cross-entropy. In the
second stage, a deferral function is learned to assign the most suitable expert to each
input. We design a new family of surrogate loss functions for this scenario both in
the score-based and the predictor-rejector settings and prove that they are supported
by H-consistency bounds, which implies their Bayes-consistency. Moreover, we
show that, for a constant cost function, our two-stage surrogate losses are realizable
H-consistent. While the main focus of this work is a theoretical analysis, we also
report the results of several experiments on CIFAR-10 and SVHN datasets.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved a remarkable performance on diverse tasks across
multiple domains, as reported in recent surveys [Wei et al., 2022, Bubeck et al., 2023]. However,
their practical application faces two critical challenges: the occurrence of hallucinations, that is
the generation of incorrect or misleading content, and an inefficient inference. Leveraging multiple
experts can address both issues. To reduce hallucinations, one can refrain from using the original
predictor in uncertain instances and defer to one of the more complex and more accurate experts.
To enhance efficiency, one can derive models of different sizes distilled from the original complex
model and use one of these more streamlined versions, while deferring to the more complex and
less efficient ones for suitable contexts. Both problems require assigning each instance to the most
suitable expert. This motivates the problem of learning to defer in the presence of multiple experts.
The scenario of single-stage learning to defer has been studied by several publications, starting with
the foundational framework introduced by Cortes, DeSalvo, and Mohri [2016a,b, 2023] for learning
to reject and followed by a series of studies on abstention and deferral [Madras et al., 2018, Raghu
et al., 2019, Mozannar and Sontag, 2020, Wilder et al., 2021, Pradier et al., 2021, Keswani et al.,
2021, Raman and Yee, 2021, Liu et al., 2022, Verma and Nalisnick, 2022, Charusaie et al., 2022, Cao
et al., 2022, Verma et al., 2023, Mao et al., 2023f,b,c, Mozannar et al., 2023]. In the single-stage
scenario, a predictor and a deferral function are learned simultaneously, with the deferral function
determining the best expert assigned to each input instance. However, in practice, a predictor such
as an LLM is already available and retraining one in conjunction with a deferral function could be
prohibitively costly: depending on its size and the amount of data used, retraining could take several
weeks or months. Thus, the single-stage learning to defer scenario and its solutions often do not align
with the practical challenges encountered in real-world applications.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

