Simplifying Neural Network Training Under
Class Imbalance
Ravid Shwartz-Ziv∗
New York University
ravid.shwartz.ziv@nyu.edu

Micah Goldblum∗
New York University
goldblum@nyu.edu

C. Bayan Bruss
Capital One
bayan.bruss@capitalone.com

Yucen Lily Li
New York University
yucenli@nyu.edu

Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University
andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Real-world datasets are often highly class-imbalanced, which can adversely impact
the performance of deep learning models. The majority of research on training
neural networks under class imbalance has focused on specialized loss functions,
sampling techniques, or two-stage training procedures. Notably, we demonstrate
that simply tuning existing components of standard deep learning pipelines, such
as the batch size, data augmentation, optimizer, and label smoothing, can achieve
state-of-the-art performance without any such specialized class imbalance methods.
We also provide key prescriptions and considerations for training under class
imbalance, and an understanding of why imbalance methods succeed or fail.

1

Introduction

Only a minuscule proportion of credit card transactions are fraudulent, and most cancer screenings
come back negative. In reality, some events are common while others are exceedingly rare. As a
result, machine learning systems, often developed in class-balanced settings [e.g., 48, 46, 16], are
routinely trained and deployed on class-imbalanced data where relatively few samples are associated
with certain minority classes, while majority classes dominate the datasets. Class-imbalanced training
data can negatively impact performance. Consequently, a wide body of literature focuses on specially
tailored loss functions and sampling methods for counteracting the negative effects of imbalance
[10, 14, 25, 27, 50, 61]. In striking contrast to such approaches, we instead show that simply
tuning existing components of standard neural network training routines can achieve state-of-the-art
performance on class-imbalanced image and tabular benchmarks at little implementation overhead
and without requiring any specialized loss functions or samplers designed specifically for imbalance.
Like Wightman et al. [69], who found that modern training routines allow ResNets to achieve
performance competitive with that of later architectures, we show that modern training techniques
cause the benefits of specialized class-imbalance methods to nearly vanish.
Moreover, our carefully tuned training routine can be combined with existing class imbalance
methods for additional performance boosts. Conducting evaluations on real-world datasets, we find
that existing methods, which performed well on web-scraped natural image benchmarks on which
they were designed, underperform in the real-world setting, whereas our approach is robust.
Our investigation provides key prescriptions and considerations for training under class imbalance:
∗

Authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

