Frequency-enhanced Data Augmentation for
Vision-and-Language Navigation

Keji He1,2,3

Chenyang Si∗ 4

Zhihe Lu3

Yan Huang1,2

Liang Wang∗1,2

Xinchao Wang∗3

1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
National Key Laboratory for Multi-modal Artificial Intelligence Systems
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
National University of Singapore
4
Nanyang Technological University
keji.he@cripac.ia.ac.cn
chenyang.si@ntu.edu.sg
{zhihelu, xinchao}@nus.edu.sg

{yhuang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) is a challenging task that requires an agent
to navigate through complex environments based on natural language instructions.
In contrast to conventional approaches, which primarily focus on the spatial domain
exploration, we propose a paradigm shift toward the Fourier domain. This alternative perspective aims to enhance visual-textual matching, ultimately improving the
agent’s ability to understand and execute navigation tasks based on the given instructions. In this study, we first explore the significance of high-frequency information
in VLN and provide evidence that it is instrumental in bolstering visual-textual
matching processes. Building upon this insight, we further propose a sophisticated
and versatile Frequency-enhanced Data Augmentation (FDA) technique to improve the VLN model’s capability of capturing critical high-frequency information.
Specifically, this approach requires the agent to navigate in environments where
only a subset of high-frequency visual information corresponds with the provided
textual instructions, ultimately fostering the agent’s ability to selectively discern
and capture pertinent high-frequency features according to the given instructions.
Promising results on R2R, RxR, CVDN and REVERIE demonstrate that our FDA
can be readily integrated with existing VLN approaches, improving performance
without adding extra parameters, and keeping models simple and efficient. The
code is available at https://github.com/hekj/FDA.

1

Introduction

Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) requires an embodied agent to navigate in complex environments following human instructions. This research area has garnered substantial attention due to
its potential applicability in human-robot interaction contexts, such as service and rescue robotics.
Despite the significant advancements [5, 12, 23, 25, 55, 34, 9, 42, 10, 37, 64, 50, 20, 68, 60] achieved
in devising deep learning models for VLN, the task remains arduous, primarily due to the complexities
involved in attaining precise visual-textual matching.
Recent studies in the field of VLN have focused on enhancing embodied agents’ ability to navigate
complex environments using natural language instructions. These studies aim to develop more robust
and efficient deep learning models that can tackle the challenges of visual-textual matching, thereby
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

