AVIDa-hIL6: A Large-Scale VHH Dataset
Produced from an Immunized Alpaca for
Predicting Antigen-Antibody Interactions

Hirofumi Tsuruta1∗, Hiroyuki Yamazaki1∗, Ryota Maeda1∗, Ryotaro Tamura1 ,
Jennifer N. Wei2 , Zelda Mariet2 , Poomarin Phloyphisut2 , Hidetoshi Shimokawa2 ,
Joseph R. Ledsam2 , Lucy Colwell2 , Akihiro Imura1∗
1
COGNANO Inc., 2 Google LLC
{tsuruta, yamazaki, maeda, ryotarotamura, akihiroimura}@cognano.co.jp
{weijennifer, zmariet, poomarin, simokawa, jledsam, lcolwell}@google.com

Abstract
Antibodies have become an important class of therapeutic agents to treat human
diseases. To accelerate therapeutic antibody discovery, computational methods,
especially machine learning, have attracted considerable interest for predicting
specific interactions between antibody candidates and target antigens such as
viruses and bacteria. However, the publicly available datasets in existing works
have notable limitations, such as small sizes and the lack of non-binding samples
and exact amino acid sequences. To overcome these limitations, we have developed
AVIDa-hIL6, a large-scale dataset for predicting antigen-antibody interactions in
the variable domain of heavy chain of heavy chain antibodies (VHHs), produced
from an alpaca immunized with the human interleukin-6 (IL-6) protein, as antigens.
By leveraging the simple structure of VHHs, which facilitates identification of fulllength amino acid sequences by DNA sequencing technology, AVIDa-hIL6 contains
573,891 antigen-VHH pairs with amino acid sequences. All the antigen-VHH pairs
have reliable labels for binding or non-binding, as generated by a novel labeling
method. Furthermore, via introduction of artificial mutations, AVIDa-hIL6 contains
30 different mutants in addition to wild-type IL-6 protein. This characteristic
provides opportunities to develop machine learning models for predicting changes
in antibody binding by antigen mutations. We report experimental benchmark
results on AVIDa-hIL6 by using machine learning models. The results indicate that
the existing models have potential, but further research is needed to generalize them
to predict effective antibodies against unknown mutants. The dataset is available at
https://avida-hil6.cognanous.com.

1

Introduction

Antibodies are proteins that play an essential role in the immune system. When antigens such as
viruses and bacteria invade the body, the immune system protects the body by producing large
numbers of antibodies that bind to the antigens to inhibit their function or mark them for removal.
Antibodies have become an important class of therapeutic agents to treat human diseases because
of their high target specificity and binding affinity [2]. An essential step in therapeutic antibody
discovery is the identification of specific interactions between antibody candidates and target antigens,
which has traditionally relied heavily on expensive, time-consuming experiments [24]. Therefore,
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

