Face Reconstruction from Facial Templates by
Learning Latent Space of a Generator Network

Reconstructed

Original

Hatef Otroshi Shahreza1,2 and Sébastien Marcel1,3
1
Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland
2
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland
3
Université de Lausanne (UNIL), Lausanne, Switzerland
{hatef.otroshi,sebastien.marcel}@idiap.ch

0.815

0.629

0.618

0.728

0.602

0.742

Figure 1: Sample face images from the FFHQ dataset and their corresponding reconstructed images
using our template inversion method from ArcFace templates (used in a face recognition system).
The values below each image show the cosine similarity between the corresponding templates of
original and reconstructed face images.

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on the template inversion attack against face recognition
systems and propose a new method to reconstruct face images from facial templates.
Within a generative adversarial network (GAN)-based framework, we learn a
mapping from facial templates to the intermediate latent space of a pre-trained
face generation network, from which we can generate high-resolution realistic
reconstructed face images. We show that our proposed method can be applied in
whitebox and blackbox attacks against face recognition systems. Furthermore, we
evaluate the transferability of our attack when the adversary uses the reconstructed
face image to impersonate the underlying subject in an attack against another face
recognition system. Considering the adversary’s knowledge and the target face
recognition system, we define five different attacks and evaluate the vulnerability of
state-of-the-art face recognition systems. Our experiments show that our proposed
method achieves high success attack rates in whitebox and blackbox scenarios.
Furthermore, the reconstructed face images are transferable and can be used to
enter target face recognition systems with a different feature extractor model. We
also explore important areas in the reconstructed face images that can fool the
target face recognition system.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

