Video Prediction Models as Rewards
for Reinforcement Learning
Alejandro Escontrela†∗
Ajay Jain

Ademi Adeniji†

Xue Bin Peng

Youngwoon Lee

Wilson Yan†

Ken Goldberg

Danijar Hafner

Pieter Abbeel

University of California, Berkeley
†

Equal contribution

Abstract
Specifying reward signals that allow agents to learn complex behaviors is a longstanding challenge in reinforcement learning. A promising approach is to extract
preferences for behaviors from unlabeled videos, which are widely available on
the internet. We present Video Prediction Rewards (VIPER), an algorithm that
leverages pretrained video prediction models as action-free reward signals for
reinforcement learning. Specifically, we first train an autoregressive transformer
on expert videos and then use the video prediction likelihoods as reward signals
for a reinforcement learning agent. VIPER enables expert-level control without
programmatic task rewards across a wide range of DMC, Atari, and RLBench tasks.
Moreover, generalization of the video prediction model allows us to derive rewards
for an out-of-distribution environment where no expert data is available, enabling
cross-embodiment generalization for tabletop manipulation. We see our work as
starting point for scalable reward specification from unlabeled videos that will
benefit from the rapid advances in generative modeling. Source code and datasets
are available on the project website: https://escontrela.me/viper

1

Introduction

Manually designing a reward function is laborious
and often leads to undesirable outcomes [32]. This
is a major bottleneck for developing general decision
making agents with reinforcement learning (RL). A
more scalable approach is to learn complex behaviors
from videos, which can be easily acquired at scale for
many applications (e.g., Youtube videos).

r3= ln p𝜃( x4 | x1:3 )

Frozen Video Prediction Model

Previous approaches that learn behaviors from videos
reward the similarity between the agent’s current observation and the expert data distribution [37, 38, 30,
43]. Since their rewards only condition on the current
x1
x2
x3
x4
observation, they cannot capture temporally meaningful behaviors. Moreover, the approaches with Figure 1: VIPER uses the next-token likeliadversarial training schemes [30, 43] often result in hoods of a frozen video prediction model as a
general reward function for various tasks.
mode collapse, which hinders generalization.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
∗

Corresponding author: escontrela@berkeley.edu

