Autonomous Capability Assessment of Sequential
Decision-Making Systems in Stochastic Settings

Pulkit Verma, Rushang Karia, and Siddharth Srivastava
Autonomous Agents and Intelligent Robots Lab,
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence,
Arizona State University, AZ, USA
{verma.pulkit, rushang.karia, siddharths}@asu.edu

Abstract
It is essential for users to understand what their AI systems can and can’t do in order
to use them safely. However, the problem of enabling users to assess AI systems
with sequential decision-making (SDM) capabilities is relatively understudied.
This paper presents a new approach for modeling the capabilities of black-box AI
systems that can plan and act, along with the possible effects and requirements for
executing those capabilities in stochastic settings. We present an active-learning
approach that can effectively interact with a black-box SDM system and learn an
interpretable probabilistic model describing its capabilities. Theoretical analysis
of the approach identifies the conditions under which the learning process is
guaranteed to converge to the correct model of the agent; empirical evaluations
on different agents and simulated scenarios show that this approach is few-shot
generalizable and can effectively describe the capabilities of arbitrary black-box
SDM agents in a sample-efficient manner.

1

Introduction

AI systems are becoming increasingly complex, and it is becoming difficult even for AI experts to
ascertain the limits and capabilities of such systems, as they often use black-box policies for their
decision-making process [Popov et al., 2017, Greydanus et al., 2018]. E.g., consider an elderly
couple with a household robot that learns and adapts to their specific household. How would they
determine what it can do, what effects their commands would have, and under what conditions?
Although we are making steady progress on learning for sequential decision-making (SDM), the
problem of enabling users to understand the limits and capabilities of their SDM systems is largely
unaddressed. Moreover, as the example above illustrates, the absence of reliable approaches for
user-driven capability assessment of AI systems limits their inclusivity and real-world deployability.
This paper presents a new approach for Query-based Autonomous Capability Estimation (QACE) of
black-box SDM systems in stochastic settings. Our approach uses a restricted form of interaction
with the input SDM agent (referred to as SDMA) to learn a probabilistic model of its capabilities.
The learned model captures high-level user-interpretable capabilities, such as the conditions under
which an autonomous vehicle could back out of a garage, or reach a certain target location, along
with the probabilities of possible outcomes of executing each such capability. The resulting learned
models directly provide interpretable representations of the scope of SDMA’s capabilities. They
can also be used to enable and support approaches for explaining SDMA’s behavior that require
closed-form models (e.g., Sreedharan et al. [2018]). We assume that the input SDMA provides
a minimal query-response interface that is already commonly supported by contemporary SDM
systems. In particular, SDMA should reveal capability names defining how each of its capabilities
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

