Parameter-efficient Tuning of Large-scale
Multimodal Foundation Model
Haixin Wang1,∗, Xinlong Yang1,∗ , Jianlong Chang2,† , Dian Jin3 , Jinan Sun1,† ,
Shikun Zhang1 , Xiao Luo1 , Qi Tian2
1
Peking University, 2 Huawei Cloud & AI, 3 University of Wisconsin-Madison
{wang.hx, xinlong.yang}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {jianlong.chang, tian.qi1}@huawei.com,
djin38@wisc.edu, {sjn, zhangsk, xiaoluo}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Driven by the progress of large-scale pre-training, parameter-efficient transfer
learning has gained immense popularity across different subfields of Artificial
Intelligence. The core is to adapt the model to downstream tasks with only a small
set of parameters. Recently, researchers have leveraged such proven techniques
in multimodal tasks and achieve promising results. However, two critical issues
remain unresolved: how to further reduce the complexity with lightweight design
and how to boost alignment between modalities under extremely low parameters.
In this paper, we propose A graceful prompt framework for cross-modal transfer
(Aurora) to overcome these challenges. Considering the redundancy in existing
architectures, we first utilize the mode approximation to generate 0.1M trainable
parameters to implement the multimodal parameter-efficient tuning, which explores
the low intrinsic dimension with only 0.04% parameters of the pre-trained model.
Then, for better modality alignment, we propose the Informative Context Enhancement and Gated Query Transformation module under extremely few parameters
scenes. A thorough evaluation on six cross-modal benchmarks shows that it not
only outperforms the state-of-the-art but even outperforms the full fine-tuning approach. Our code is available at: https://github.com/WillDreamer/Aurora.

1

Introduction

The era of large models in deep learning has arrived, with increasingly more large-scale pre-trained
models exhibiting remarkable generation and inference capabilities in the fields of text [38, 9, 63],
vision [57, 53], and multi-modality [56, 41, 3, 76]. Nowadays, the mainstream strategy in the
community involves pre-training models on large-scale data, and then fine-tuning them for each
downstream task. This approach has been demonstrated to be effective in various cross-modal tasks,
as evidenced by [40, 50, 67].
However, this high-performing strategy is not always advantageous, as several practical factors limit
its further development. The primary concern is excessive parameter dependency. For example, GPT3 [9] (175B params) obtains striking performances while coming at the cost of a massive parameter
count. The enormous parameter size has two obvious drawbacks. Firstly, it incurs significant
computations and physical storage costs, making pre-training and transfer very expensive. Besides,
fine-tuning limits pre-trained knowledge’s effectiveness in small-scale downstream tasks. Both of
them hinder the further extension of large models from specific datasets to more general scenarios.
To relieve the high cost of large pre-trained models, a series of parameter-efficient transfer learning
(PETL) methods [17, 74] have been proposed. The common paradigm is to freeze the backbone
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

