Tight Risk Bounds for
Gradient Descent on Separable Data

Matan Schliserman1∗

Tomer Koren12

1 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
2 Google Research, Tel Aviv

Abstract
We study the generalization properties of unregularized gradient methods applied
to separable linear classification—a setting that has received considerable attention
since the pioneering work of Soudry et al. [14]. We establish tight upper and
lower (population) risk bounds for gradient descent in this setting, for any smooth
loss function, expressed in terms of its tail decay rate. Our bounds take the form
2 /𝛾 2𝑇 + 𝑟 2 /𝛾 2 𝑛), where 𝑇 is the number of gradient steps, 𝑛 is size of
Θ(𝑟 ℓ,𝑇
ℓ,𝑇
the training set, 𝛾 is the data margin, and 𝑟 ℓ,𝑇 is a complexity term that depends
on the tail decay rate of the loss function (and on 𝑇). Our upper bound greatly
improves the existing risk bounds due to Shamir [13] and Schliserman and Koren
[12], that either applied to specific loss functions or imposed extraneous technical
assumptions, and applies to virtually any convex and smooth loss function. Our
risk lower bound is the first in this context and establish the tightness of our general
upper bound for any given tail decay rate and in all parameter regimes. The proof
technique used to show these results is also markedly simpler compared to previous
work, and is straightforward to extend to other gradient methods; we illustrate this
by providing analogous results for Stochastic Gradient Descent.

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been a marked increase in interest regarding the generalization capabilities of
unregularized gradient-based learning methods. One specific area of attention in this context has
been the setting of linear classification with separable data, where a pioneering work by Soudry et al.
[14] showed that, when using plain gradient descent to minimize the empirical risk on a linearly
separable training set with an exponentially-tailed classification loss (such as the logistic loss), the
trained predictor will asymptotically converge in direction to the max-margin solution. As a result,
standard margin-based generalization bounds for linear predictors suggest that, provided the number
of gradient steps (𝑇) is sufficiently large, the produced solution will not overfit, despite the lack of
explicit regularization and the fact that its magnitude (i.e., Euclidean norm) increases indefinitely
with 𝑇. This result has since been extended to incorporate other optimization algorithms and loss
functions [3, 4, 8, 9, 5].
Despite the high interest in this problem, the tight finite-time (population) risk performance of
unregularized gradient methods, and even just of gradient descent, have not yet been fully understood.
The convergence to a high margin solution exhibited by Soudry et al. [14] (for the logistic loss) occurs
at a slow logarithmic rate, thus, the risk bounds for the trained predictors only become effective when 𝑇
is at least exponentially large in comparison to the size of the training set 𝑛 and the margin 𝛾. In a more
e(1/𝛾 2𝑇 + 1/𝛾 2 𝑛) for several gradient
recent work, Shamir [13] established risk bounds of the form 𝑂
methods in this setting (still with the logistic loss), that apply for smaller and more realistic values of 𝑇.
∗ Corresponding author; schliserman@mail.tau.ac.il.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

