The Best of Both Worlds in Network Population
Games: Reaching Consensus & Convergence to
Equilibrium

Shuyue Hu
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
hushuyue@pjlab.org.cn

Harold Soh
National University of Singapore
harold@comp.nus.edu.sg

Georgios Piliouras
Singapore University of Technology and Design
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Reaching consensus and convergence to equilibrium are two major challenges of
multi-agent systems. Although each has attracted significant attention, relatively
few studies address both challenges at the same time. This paper examines the
connection between the notions of consensus and equilibrium in a multi-agent system where multiple interacting sub-populations coexist. We argue that consensus
can be seen as an intricate component of intra-population stability, whereas equilibrium can be seen as encoding inter-population stability. We show that smooth
fictitious play, a well-known learning model in game theory, can achieve both consensus and convergence to equilibrium in diverse multi-agent settings. Moreover,
we show that the consensus formation process plays a crucial role in the seminal
thorny problem of equilibrium selection in multi-agent learning.

1

Introduction

Two fundamental problems of multi-agent systems are consensus formation [26, 3, 12, 30, 5, 28,
86, 68] and learning in games [48, 33, 66, 58, 57, 70, 71, 13, 55]. The former (sometimes also
referred to as cooperative control, flocking, synchronization, and social norms) aims to understand
how a decentralized system of agents, which starts off in an initially disordered state, is able to
develop shared coordinated beliefs, opinions, or behaviors [7]. The latter (also known as multi-agent
learning) examines whether, how and what type of equilibrium arises as the result of the long-run
learning processes of individual agents [33]. Each problem has attracted significant interest, yet,
these two problems are largely studied in isolation.
Is there a unified way to think about consensus formation and learning in games? We argue that consensus and equilibrium, the fundamental notions of these two fields, can be both understood as stability concepts in a multi-agent system where there co-exist multiple interacting sub-populations (or
populations hereafter). Consensus can be seen as an intricate component of intra-population stability
that reflects whether each population is internally cohesive, i.e., a population is stable if all the agents
belonging to this population achieve consensus and develop the same belief, opinion, or behavior.
In contrast, game-theoretic (e.g., Nash) equilibrium can be seen at a more macro level as encoding
inter-population stability, i.e., the stability between different populations is achieved by alignment
to their population-wise incentives. Namely, a stable system of populations is characterized by the
internal cohesion of each population as well as the game-theoretic equilibration between different
populations. The merits of this way of thinking are twofold. It presents a non-trivial connection
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

