LinkerNet: Fragment Poses and Linker Co-Design
with 3D Equivariant Diffusion

Jiaqi Guan
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
jiaqi@illinois.edu
Peiqi Jiang
Tsinghua University
jpq20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Jian Peng
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
jianpeng@illinois.edu

Xingang Peng
Peking University
xingang.peng@gmail.com
Yunan Luo
Georgia Institute of Technology
yunan@gatech.edu
Jianzhu Ma
Tsinghua University
majianzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Targeted protein degradation techniques, such as PROteolysis TArgeting Chimeras
(PROTACs), have emerged as powerful tools for selectively removing diseasecausing proteins. One challenging problem in this field is designing a linker to
connect different molecular fragments to form a stable drug-candidate molecule.
Existing models for linker design assume that the relative positions of the fragments
are known, which may not be the case in real scenarios. In this work, we address a
more general problem where the poses of the fragments are unknown in 3D space.
We develop a 3D equivariant diffusion model that jointly learns the generative
process of both fragment poses and the 3D structure of the linker. By viewing
fragments as rigid bodies, we design a fragment pose prediction module inspired by
the Newton-Euler equations in rigid body mechanics. Empirical studies on ZINC
and PROTAC-DB datasets demonstrate that our model can generate chemically
valid, synthetically-accessible, and low-energy molecules under both unconstrained
and constrained generation settings.

1

Introduction

Targeted Protein Degradation (TPD) techniques [27, 7], including PROteolysis TArgeting Chimeras
(PROTACs) [35], molecular glues [40], etc., are emerging powerful tools for selectively removing
disease-causing proteins. These techniques typically involve multiple molecular fragments connected
by a linker, with each fragment binding to a specific protein. For instance, a PROTAC consists of three
components: a ligand (warhead) that targets the protein of interest, another ligand that recruits an E3
ubiquitin ligase, and a linker that connects two ligands [38, 9]. PROTACs induce the ubiquitination
of target proteins, which is a fundamental biological process where small proteins called ubiquitins
are attached to target proteins, marking them for degradation by the proteasome. Unlike traditional
small molecule inhibitors that temporarily inhibit protein function by binding to their active sites,
PROTAC techniques result in complete protein elimination and offer several advantages, including
increased selectivity, reduced off-target effects, and the potential to target previously undruggable
proteins [27]. However, designing effective PROTACs remains a significant challenge, particularly in
optimizing the linker, which is crucial in maintaining the conformational stability and other important
biological properties of the entire molecule.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

