PAC Learning Linear Thresholds
from Label Proportions

Anand Brahmbhatt∗
Google Research India
anandpareshb@google.com

Rishi Saket∗
Google Research India
rishisaket@google.com

Aravindan Raghuveer
Google Research India
araghuveer@google.com

Abstract
Learning from label proportions (LLP) is a generalization of supervised learning in
which the training data is available as sets or bags of feature-vectors (instances)
along with the average instance-label of each bag. The goal is to train a good
instance classifier. While most previous works on LLP have focused on training
models on such training data, computational learnability of LLP was only recently
explored by [25, 26] who showed worst case intractability of properly learning
linear threshold functions (LTFs) from label proportions. However, their work did
not rule out efficient algorithms for this problem on natural distributions.
In this work we show that it is indeed possible to efficiently learn LTFs using
LTFs when given access to random bags of some label proportion in which featurevectors are, conditioned on their labels, independently sampled from a Gaussian
distribution N (µ, Σ). Our work shows that a certain matrix – formed using covariances of the differences of feature-vectors sampled from the bags with and
without replacement – necessarily has its principal component, after a transformation, in the direction of the normal vector of the LTF. Our algorithm estimates
the means and covariance matrices using subgaussian concentration bounds which
we show can be applied to efficiently sample bags for approximating the normal
direction. Using this in conjunction with novel generalization error bounds in the
bag setting, we show that a low error hypothesis LTF can be identified. For some
special cases of the N (0, I) distribution we provide a simpler mean estimation
based algorithm. We include an experimental evaluation of our learning algorithms
along with a comparison with those of [25, 26] and random LTFs, demonstrating
the effectiveness of our techniques.

1

Introduction

In learning from label proportions (LLP), the training data is aggregated into sets or bags of featurevectors (instances). For each bag we are given its constituent feature-vectors along with only the sum
or average of their labels The goal is a to obtain a good instance-level classifier – one that minimizes
the classification error on a test set of instances or bags. In this work we study the LLP learnability
over Gaussian distributions of linear threshold
functions (LTFs), also called linear classifiers or

halfspaces, given by f (x) = pos rT x + c where pos(a) := 1 if a > 0 and 0 otherwise.
The probably approximately correct (PAC) model of [29] states that a concept class C of {0, 1}valued functions can be learnt by a hypothesis class H if there is an algorithm to efficiently obtain,
using iid samples from a distribution on (x, f (x)), a hypothesis h ∈ H of arbitrarily high accuracy
on that distribution, for any unknown f ∈ C. If H = C we say that C is properly learnable, for
∗ – equal contribution
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

