Flexible Attention-Based Multi-Policy Fusion for
Efficient Deep Reinforcement Learning

Zih-Yun Chiu1∗ Yi-Lin Tuan2∗ William Yang Wang2 Michael C. Yip1
1
University of California, San Diego 2 University of California, Santa Barbara

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) agents have long sought to approach the efficiency
of human learning. Humans are great observers who can learn by aggregating
external knowledge from various sources, including observations from others’
policies of attempting a task. Prior studies in RL have incorporated external
knowledge policies to help agents improve sample efficiency. However, it remains
non-trivial to perform arbitrary combinations and replacements of those policies,
an essential feature for generalization and transferability. In this work, we present
Knowledge-Grounded RL (KGRL), an RL paradigm fusing multiple knowledge
policies and aiming for human-like efficiency and flexibility. We propose a new
actor architecture for KGRL, Knowledge-Inclusive Attention Network (KIAN),
which allows free knowledge rearrangement due to embedding-based attentive
action prediction. KIAN also addresses entropy imbalance, a problem arising
in maximum entropy KGRL that hinders an agent from efficiently exploring the
environment, through a new design of policy distributions. The experimental
results demonstrate that KIAN outperforms alternative methods incorporating
external knowledge policies and achieves efficient and flexible learning. Our
implementation is available at https://github.com/Pascalson/KGRL.git.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has been effectively used in a variety of fields, including physics [7, 35]
and robotics [15, 30]. This success can be attributed to RL’s iterative process of interacting with the
environment and learning a policy to get positive feedback. Despite being influenced by the learning
process of infants [32], the RL process can require a large number of samples to solve a task [1],
indicating that the learning efficiency of RL agents is still far behind that of humans.
What learning capabilities do humans possess, yet RL agents still missing? Studies in social
learning [4] have demonstrated that humans often observe the behavior of others in diverse situations
and utilize those strategies as external knowledge to accelerate their own exploration of solutionspace. This type of learning is very flexible for humans since they can freely reuse and update the
knowledge they already possess. The followings are the five properties (the last four have been
mentioned in [14]) that summarize the efficiency and flexibility of human learning. [KnowledgeAcquirable]: Humans can develop their strategies by observing others. [Sample-Efficient]: Humans
require fewer interactions with the environment to solve a task by learning from external knowledge.
[Generalizable]: Humans can apply previously observed strategies, whether developed internally or
provided externally, to unseen tasks. [Compositional]: Humans can combine strategies from multiple
sources to form their knowledge set. [Incremental]: Humans do not need to relearn how to navigate
the entire knowledge set from scratch when they remove outdated strategies or add new ones.
∗

indicates equal contribution. The corresponding emails are zchiu@ucsd.edu and ytuan@cs.ucsb.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

