Tailoring Self-Attention for Graph via Rooted Subtrees

Siyuan Huang

Yunchong Song Jiayue Zhou
Shanghai Jiaotong University
siyuan_huang_sjtu@outlook.com ycsong@sjtu.edu.cn

Zhouhan Lin∗
lin.zhouhan@gmail.com

Abstract
Attention mechanisms have made significant strides in graph learning, yet they still
exhibit notable limitations: local attention faces challenges in capturing long-range
information due to the inherent problems of the message-passing scheme, while
global attention cannot reflect the hierarchical neighborhood structure and fails to
capture fine-grained local information. In this paper, we propose a novel multihop graph attention mechanism, named Subtree Attention (STA), to address the
aforementioned issues. STA seamlessly bridges the fully-attentional structure and
the rooted subtree, with theoretical proof that STA approximates the global attention under extreme settings. By allowing direct computation of attention weights
among multi-hop neighbors, STA mitigates the inherent problems in existing graph
attention mechanisms. Further we devise an efficient form for STA by employing
kernelized softmax, which yields a linear time complexity. Our resulting GNN
architecture, the STAGNN, presents a simple yet performant STA-based graph neural network leveraging a hop-aware attention strategy. Comprehensive evaluations
on ten node classification datasets demonstrate that STA-based models outperform existing graph transformers and mainstream GNNs. The code is available at
https://github.com/LUMIA-Group/SubTree-Attention.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable performance in various tasks, such as
drug discovery [35, 15], social networks [29, 31], traffic flow [11], and recommendation systems [44].
Most GNNs are based on the message-passing scheme [16], hierarchically aggregating information
from multi-hop neighbors by stacking multiple layers. During this procedure, a rooted subtree can
be generated for each node, representing the node’s neighborhood structure. Nodes with similar
neighborhood structures possess similar subtrees, which leads to similar node representations [13].
Local attention in graph learning can be seen as a natural combination of the message-passing scheme
and the self-attention mechanism. By adaptively assigning weights among one-hop neighbors in a
single layer, the local attention mechanism allows each node to focus on the most task-relevant neighbors [39, 36, 40, 3]. However, local attention limits the receptive field to one-hop neighbors. While
stacking multiple local-attention layers to build a deep model can increase the receptive field, such
message-passing-based deep architectures face challenges in capturing long-range dependencies [10]
due to issues such as over-smoothing [5] and over-squashing [2].
On the other hand, the global attention mechanism originated from vanilla Transformer [38] has
been widely adopted in graph learning domain [23, 12, 48, 28, 30], leveraging the fully-attentional
architecture to address the aforementioned issues. However, the global attention employed by graph
transformers cannot reflect the hierarchical neighborhood structure and fails to capture fine-grained
local information, which is crucial in many real-world scenarios [25, 17, 46, 49]. To mitigate
this deficiency, recent studies try to directly assemble global attention and message-passing-based
∗

Zhouhan Lin is the corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

