RIO: A Benchmark for Reasoning Intention-Oriented
Objects in Open Environments

Mengxue Qu1,3∗ Yu Wu 4 Wu Liu 5 Xiaodan Liang 6,7
Jingkuan Song 8 Yao Zhao1,2,3† Yunchao Wei1,2,3†
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
4
Wuhan University 5 JD Explore Academy 6 Sun Yat-sen University 7 MBZUAI
8
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
qumengxue@bjtu.edu.cn, wuyucs@whu.edu.cn, yunchao.wei@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Intention-oriented object detection aims to detect desired objects based on specific
intentions or requirements. For instance, when we desire to "lie down and rest",
we instinctively seek out a suitable option such as a "bed" or a "sofa" that can
fulfill our needs. Previous work in this area is limited either by the number of intention descriptions or by the affordance vocabulary available for intention objects.
These limitations make it challenging to handle intentions in open environments
effectively. To facilitate this research, we construct a comprehensive dataset called
Reasoning Intention-Oriented Objects (RIO). In particular, RIO is specifically
designed to incorporate diverse real-world scenarios and a wide range of object
categories. It offers the following key features: 1) intention descriptions in RIO are
represented as natural sentences rather than a mere word or verb phrase, making
them more practical and meaningful; 2) the intention descriptions are contextually
relevant to the scene, enabling a broader range of potential functionalities associated with the objects; 3) the dataset comprises a total of 40,214 images and 130,585
intention-object pairs. With the proposed RIO, we evaluate the ability of some
existing models to reason intention-oriented objects in open environments.

1

Introduction

Category-based object detection has been extensively investigated in recent years [1, 35, 5, 44], where
common object categories are typically defined based on object names, such as "cat", "dog", "car",
and so forth. These name-based categories facilitate the recognition and classification of objects
with similar visual characteristics by computer systems. However, variations in category definitions
among individuals pose challenges in predefining categories for all objects worldwide. In reality,
individuals tend to search for objects based on their immediate needs rather than predefined category
names. This challenges the traditional approach of category-based object detection, as the focus shifts
towards objects that fulfill specific functional requirements.
Previous research [6, 32, 30, 47, 28] has explored the concept of "Affordance" to establish a
connection between functional requirements and objects. "Affordance" refers to the function or
potential action that an object offers for utilization. For instance, when seeking to rest, one may look
for objects that afford the action of "lying down", such as a "bed", "sofa", or "bench". However, this
approach can lead to ambiguity as the same verb may apply to multiple objects. For example, the
verb "play" could refer to playing frisbee or playing the piano. Previous works use a limited number
∗
†

Work done during an internship at JD Explore Academy.
Co-corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

