Fine-grained Expressivity of Graph Neural Networks

Jan Böker
RWTH Aachen University
Ningyuan Huang
Johns Hopkins University

Ron Levie
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

Soledad Villar
Johns Hopkins University

Christopher Morris
RWTH Aachen University

Abstract
Numerous recent works have analyzed the expressive power of message-passing graph
neural networks (MPNNs), primarily utilizing combinatorial techniques such as the
1-dimensional Weisfeiler–Leman test (1-WL) for the graph isomorphism problem.
However, the graph isomorphism objective is inherently binary, not giving insights
into the degree of similarity between two given graphs. This work resolves this
issue by considering continuous extensions of both 1-WL and MPNNs to graphons.
Concretely, we show that the continuous variant of 1-WL delivers an accurate
topological characterization of the expressive power of MPNNs on graphons, revealing
which graphs these networks can distinguish and the level of difficulty in separating
them. We identify the finest topology where MPNNs separate points and prove a
universal approximation theorem. Consequently, we provide a theoretical framework
for graph and graphon similarity combining various topological variants of classical
characterizations of the 1-WL. In particular, we characterize the expressive power of
MPNNs in terms of the tree distance, which is a graph distance based on the concept of
fractional isomorphisms, and substructure counts via tree homomorphisms, showing
that these concepts have the same expressive power as the 1-WL and MPNNs on
graphons. Empirically, we validate our theoretical findings by showing that randomly
initialized MPNNs, without training, exhibit competitive performance compared to
their trained counterparts. Moreover, we evaluate different MPNN architectures
based on their ability to preserve graph distances, highlighting the significance of our
continuous 1-WL test in understanding MPNNs’ expressivity.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data is widespread across several application domains, including chemo- and
bioinformatics [11, 101], image analysis [107], and social-network analysis [38], explaining the recent
growth in developing and analyzing machine learning methods tailored to graphs. In recent years,
message-passing graph neural networks (MPNNs) [25, 50, 92] emerged as the dominant paradigm, and
alongside the growing prominence of MPNNs, numerous works [89, 115] analyzed MPNNs’ expressivity.
The analysis, typically based on combinatorial techniques such as the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler–Leman test
(1-WL) for the graph isomorphism problem [113, 114], provides explanations of MPNNs’ limitations
(see [92] for a thorough survey). However, since the graph isomorphism problem only concerns whether
the graphs are exactly the same, it only gives insights into MPNNs’ ability to distinguish graphs. Hence,
such approaches cannot quantify the graphs’ degree of similarity. Nonetheless, understanding the
similarities induced by MPNNs is crucial for precisely quantifying their generalization abilities [82, 94],
stability [44], or robustness properties [60].
Present work. To address these shortcomings, we show how to integrate MPNNs into the theory of
iterated degree measures first developed by Grebík and Rocha [52], which generalizes the 1-WL and its
characterizations to graphons [78]. Integrating MPNNs into this theory allows us to identify the finest
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

