Reference-Based POMDPs
Edward Kim
School of Computing
Australian National University
Canberra, Australia
edward.kim@anu.edu.au

Yohan Karunanayake
School of Computing
Australian National University
Canberra, Australia
yohan.karunanayake@anu.edu.au

Hanna Kurniawati
School of Computing
Australian National University
Canberra, Australia
hanna.kurniawati@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Making good decisions in partially observable and non-deterministic scenarios is
a crucial capability for robots. A Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP) is a general framework for the above problem. Despite advances in
POMDP solving, problems with long planning horizons and evolving environments
remain difficult to solve even by the best approximate solvers today. To alleviate
this difficulty, we propose a slightly modified POMDP problem, called a ReferenceBased POMDP, where the objective is to balance between maximizing the expected
total reward and being close to a given reference (stochastic) policy. The optimal
policy of a Reference-Based POMDP can be computed via iterative expectations
using the given reference policy, thereby avoiding exhaustive enumeration of
actions at each belief node of the search tree. We demonstrate theoretically that
the standard POMDP under stochastic policies is related to the Reference-Based
POMDP. To demonstrate the feasibility of exploiting the formulation, we present a
basic algorithm R EF S OLVER. Results from experiments on long-horizon navigation
problems indicate that this basic algorithm substantially outperforms POMCP.

1

Introduction

Computing motion strategies that are robust to uncertainty is a fundamental problem in robotics.
A robot often needs to strategically plan in an environment where it only has partial knowledge
about itself and the state of the world due to actuator disturbances, limited knowledge about the
environment, and imperfect sensory information. Such planning problems can generally be framed as
a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) [7, 22], which is a general mathematical
framework for planning in partially observable and non-deterministic scenarios. POMDPs explicitly
model partial observability using a probability distribution over the state space, called a belief, and
compute the best strategy with respect to beliefs. Finding the exact solution to a POMDP problem
is computationally intractable in the worst case [15, 17] for two main reasons. Firstly, the size
of the belief space grows exponentially with respect to the size of the state space. Secondly, the
number of action-observation histories grows exponentially with respect to the planning horizon.
These challenges are known as the curse of dimensionality and the curse of history respectively.
To deal with these challenges, many practical solvers have been proposed in the past few decades
[9]. Sampling-based approximate solvers [12, 21, 29] have made good progress on both curses
by employing particle filters to maintain a belief search tree and judiciously exploring a subset of
histories in this search tree.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

