Parallel Spiking Neurons with High Efficiency and
Ability to Learn Long-term Dependencies

Wei Fang1,2 , Zhaofei Yu4 , Zhaokun Zhou3,2 , Ding Chen5,2 , Yanqi Chen1,2 ,
Zhengyu Ma2∗ , Timothée Masquelier6 , Yonghong Tian1,2,3∗
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, China
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
6
Centre de Recherche Cerveau et Cognition (CERCO), UMR5549 CNRS - Univ. Toulouse 3, France

Abstract
Vanilla spiking neurons in Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) use charge-fire-reset
neuronal dynamics, which can only be simulated serially and can hardly learn
long-time dependencies. We find that when removing reset, the neuronal dynamics
can be reformulated in a non-iterative form and parallelized. By rewriting neuronal
dynamics without reset to a general formulation, we propose the Parallel Spiking
Neuron (PSN), which generates hidden states that are independent of their predecessors, resulting in parallelizable neuronal dynamics and extremely high simulation
speed. The weights of inputs in the PSN are fully connected, which maximizes the
utilization of temporal information. To avoid the use of future inputs for step-bystep inference, the weights of the PSN can be masked, resulting in the masked PSN.
By sharing weights across time-steps based on the masked PSN, the sliding PSN is
proposed to handle sequences of varying lengths. We evaluate the PSN family on
simulation speed and temporal/static data classification, and the results show the
overwhelming advantage of the PSN family in efficiency and accuracy. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first study about parallelizing spiking neurons and can
be a cornerstone for the spiking deep learning research. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/fangwei123456/Parallel-Spiking-Neuron.

1

Introduction

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are the next generation [1] of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs)
using a lower abstraction of the biological neural system. The spiking neurons are the key components
of SNNs, which process input currents with complex neuronal dynamics and fire spikes as outputs
when their membrane potential reaches the threshold. The SNNs use discrete spikes to communicate
between layers, which enable the event-driven computational paradigm and have extremely high
power efficiency in neuromorphic chips such as True North[2], Loihi [3] and Tianjic [4]. Due to their
high biological plausibility, SNNs have been regarded by neuroscientists as useful tools for analyzing,
simulating, and learning the biological system [5, 6]. With the introduction of deep learning methods
[7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12], the performance of SNNs on real-world tasks has been greatly improved and the
applications of SNNs are expanded [13, 14]. As the bridge between neuroscience and computational
science, SNNs have attracted more and more research interest in recent years.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

