Topology-Aware Uncertainty for Image Segmentation

Saumya Gupta1∗ Yikai Zhang2 Xiaoling Hu1,3 Prateek Prasanna1 Chao Chen1
1
Stony Brook University, NY, USA 2 Morgan Stanley, NY, USA
3
Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, MA, USA

Abstract
Segmentation of curvilinear structures such as vasculature and road networks is
challenging due to relatively weak signals and complex geometry/topology. To
facilitate and accelerate large scale annotation, one has to adopt semi-automatic
approaches such as proofreading by experts. In this work, we focus on uncertainty
estimation for such tasks, so that highly uncertain, and thus error-prone structures
can be identified for human annotators to verify. Unlike most existing works,
which provide pixel-wise uncertainty maps, we stipulate it is crucial to estimate
uncertainty in the units of topological structures, e.g., small pieces of connections
and branches. To achieve this, we leverage tools from topological data analysis,
specifically discrete Morse theory (DMT), to first capture the structures, and then
reason about their uncertainties. To model the uncertainty, we (1) propose a
joint prediction model that estimates the uncertainty of a structure while taking
the neighboring structures into consideration (inter-structural uncertainty); (2)
propose a novel Probabilistic DMT to model the inherent uncertainty within each
structure (intra-structural uncertainty) by sampling its representations via a perturband-walk scheme. On various 2D and 3D datasets, our method produces better
structure-wise uncertainty maps compared to existing works. Code available at
https://github.com/Saumya-Gupta-26/struct-uncertainty

1

Introduction

Curvilinear segmentation is an essential initial step in various medical and non-medical applications,
involving the precise extraction of fine-scale structures, such as blood vessels, nerves, and other
elongated objects [21, 33]. For example, extraction of retinal vasculature is an essential precursor
to understanding disease progression and assessing therapeutic effects [15]. In civil engineering,
road network and railway track segmentation can support urban planning and transportation system
optimization [45]. Despite the success of deep learning [5, 6, 25, 37], automatic segmentation of thin
structures remains challenging due to their relatively low visibility and complex topology. Existing
segmentation methods often make topological errors such as broken connections or missing branches.
As a cost-efficient alternative, in many applications, one employs semi-automatic techniques, e.g.,
iterative proofreading by human annotators [23]. On the other hand, proofreading of complex finescale structures can be extremely time-consuming [53]. This necessitates a better strategy to direct
the annotators’ attention towards locations that are more error-prone. Following the classic active
learning principle [18, 55, 61], we may estimate the uncertainty [19] and concentrate on the locations
where a neural network is the least certain.
Despite many existing studies on segmentation uncertainty [12, 51, 60], most existing uncertainty
estimation methods do not apply to curvilinear structure segmentation. Existing methods typically
generate pixel-wise uncertainty maps. Such maps highlight pixels along the boundary of all structures,
∗

Email: saumgupta@cs.stonybrook.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

