When Can We Track Significant Preference Shifts in
Dueling Bandits?

Joe Suk
Columbia University
joe.suk@columbia.edu

Arpit Agarwal
Columbia University
aa4931@columbia.edu

Abstract
The K-armed dueling bandits problem, where the feedback is in the form of noisy
pairwise preferences, has been widely studied due its applications in information
retrieval, recommendation systems, etc. Motivated by concerns that user preferences/tastes can evolve over time, we consider the problem of dueling bandits with
distribution shifts. Specifically, we study the recent notion of significant shifts [Suk
and Kpotufe, 2022], and askp
whether one can design an adaptive algorithm for
the dueling problem with O( K L̃T ) dynamic regret, where L̃ is the (unknown)
number of significant shifts in preferences. We show that the answer to this question depends on the properties of underlying preference distributions.
Firstly, we
p
give an impossibility result that rules out any algorithm with O( K L̃T ) dynamic
regret under the well-studied Condorcet and SST classes of preference distributions. Secondly, we show that SST∩STI is the largest amongst popular classes of
preference distributions where it is possible to design such an algorithm. Overall,
our results provides an almost complete resolution of the above question for the
hierarchy of distribution classes.

1

Introduction

The K-armed dueling bandits problem has been well-studied in the multi-armed bandits literature
[Yue and Joachims, 2011, Yue et al., 2012b, Urvoy et al., 2013, Ailon et al., 2014, Zoghi et al., 2014,
2015a,b, Dudik et al., 2015, Jamieson et al., 2015, Komiyama et al., 2015, 2016, Ramamohan et al.,
2016, Chen and Frazier, 2017, Saha and Gaillard, 2022, Agarwal et al., 2022]. In this problem, on
each trial t ∈ [T ], the learner pulls a pair of arms and observes relative feedback between these
arms indicating which arm was preferred. The feedback is typically stochastic, drawn according to a
pairwise preference matrix P ∈ [0, 1]K×K , and the regret measures the ‘sub-optimality’ of arms with
respect to a ‘best’ arm.
This problem has many applications, e.g. information retrieval, recommendation systems, etc, where
relative feedback between arms is easy to elicit, while real-valued feedback is difficult to obtain or
interpret. For example, a central task for information retrieval algorithms is to output a ranked list
of documents in response to a query. The framework of online learning has been very useful for
automatic parameter tuning, i.e. finding the best parameter(s), for such retrieval algorithms based on
user feedback [Liu, 2009]. However, it is often difficult to get numerical feedback for an individual
list of documents. Instead, one can (implicitly) compare two lists of documents by interleaving
them and observing the relative number of clicks [Radlinski et al., 2008]. The availability of these
pairwise comparisons allows one to tune the parameters of retrieval algorithms in real-time using the
framework of dueling bandits.
However, in many such applications that rely on user generated preference feedback, there are
practical concerns that the tastes/beliefs of users can change over time, resulting in a dynamically
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

