Learning Multi-agent Behaviors from Distributed and
Streaming Demonstrations

Shicheng Liu & Minghui Zhu
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802, USA
{sfl5539,muz16}@psu.edu

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of inferring the behaviors of multiple interacting
experts by estimating their reward functions and constraints where the distributed
demonstrated trajectories are sequentially revealed to a group of learners. We
formulate the problem as a distributed online bi-level optimization problem where
the outer-level problem is to estimate the reward functions and the inner-level
problem is to learn the constraints and corresponding policies. We propose a novel
“multi-agent behavior inference from distributed and streaming demonstrations"
(MA-BIRDS) algorithm that allows the learners to solve the outer-level and innerlevel problems in a single loop through intermittent communications. We formally
guarantee that the distributed learners achieve consensus on reward functions, constraints, and policies, the average local regret (over N online iterations) decreases at
the rate of O(1/N 1−η1 +1/N 1−η2 +1/N ), and the cumulative constraint violation
increases sub-linearly at the rate of O(N η2 + 1) where η1 , η2 ∈ (1/2, 1).

1

Introduction

Multi-agent systems (MASs) are an effective tool to model networked systems where multiple entities
interact with each other to reach certain goals. Due to the lack of a centralized authority, the data
in MASs is usually distributed [1, 2]. Therefore, distributed learning is desired for MASs where
machine learning models are trained over distributed data sets. Current works on distributed learning
include distributed supervised learning [3, 4], distributed unsupervised learning [5, 6], distributed
reinforcement learning [7, 8], etc. Recently, distributed learning is applied to learn the behaviors in
MASs from distributed experts’ demonstrations via inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) [9].
In IRL [10, 11, 12, 13, 14], a learner aims to learn a policy that imitates the expert behaviors in the
demonstrations by first learning a reward function. Multi-agent IRL [15, 16, 17] extends IRL to
MASs where the reward functions and policies of a group of experts are learned. However, current
works on multi-agent IRL have the following two limitations: (i) As mentioned, the demonstration
data in MASs is usually distributed while these works assume that there is a centralized learner which
can obtain all the demonstrations. (ii) There are usually many underlying constraints in MASs, e.g.,
avoiding collision with each other and obstacles, and thus learning a reward function combined with
a set of constraints is better than learning a single reward function in terms of explaining the experts’
behaviors [18, 19]. Therefore, distributed inverse constrained reinforcement learning (D-ICRL) [9] is
proposed where a group of learners cooperatively learn the behaviors in an MAS by estimating the
experts’ reward functions and constraints and each learner can only access a local demonstration set.
While D-ICRL performs over pre-collected distributed data, recent applications [20, 21] of IRL
motivate the need for algorithms that can learn from sequentially revealed demonstrations and
continuously improve the learned models. For example, inferring a person’s intent by observing her
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

