ChimpACT: A Longitudinal Dataset for
Understanding Chimpanzee Behaviors
Xiaoxuan Ma 1,‹
maxiaoxuan@pku.edu.cn

Stephan P. Kaufhold 2,‹
spkaufho@ucsd.edu

Jiajun Su 1,‹
sujiajun@pku.edu.cn

Wentao Zhu 1
wtzhu@pku.edu.cn

Jack Terwilliger 2
jterwilliger@ucsd.edu

Andres Meza 2
anmeza@ucsd.edu

Yixin Zhu 3,5,
yixin.zhu@pku.edu.cn

Federico Rossano 2,
frossano@ucsd.edu

Yizhou Wang 1, 3, 4
yizhou.wang@pku.edu.cn

‹

X. Ma, S. Kaufhold, and J. Su contributed equally.
Corresponding authors
1
CFCS, School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
2
Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego, USA
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, China
4
Nat’l Eng. Research Center of Visual Technology, China
5
PKU-WUHAN Institute for Artificial Intelligence, China
https://shirleymaxx.github.io/ChimpACT/
Azibo | being carried

Swela | resting

Azibo | moving

Azibo | moving

Swela | carrying, moving

Azibo | being carried
Swela | carrying, moving

Corrie | resting

Figure 1: Sample frames and annotations from a ChimpACT clip. While we also annotate visibility for both
the bounding box and the keypoint, these are omitted here for clarity.

Abstract
Understanding the behavior of non-human primates is crucial for improving animal
welfare, modeling social behavior, and gaining insights into distinctively human
and phylogenetically shared behaviors. However, the lack of datasets on non-human
primate behavior hinders in-depth exploration of primate social interactions, posing
challenges to research on our closest living relatives. To address these limitations,
we present ChimpACT, a comprehensive dataset for quantifying the longitudinal
behavior and social relations of chimpanzees within a social group. Spanning from
2015 to 2018, ChimpACT features videos of a group of over 20 chimpanzees
residing at the Leipzig Zoo, Germany, with a particular focus on documenting
the developmental trajectory of one young male, Azibo. ChimpACT is both comprehensive and challenging, consisting of 163 videos with a cumulative 160,500
frames, each richly annotated with detection, identification, pose estimation, and
fine-grained spatiotemporal behavior labels. We benchmark representative methods
of three tracks on ChimpACT: (i) tracking and identification, (ii) pose estimation,
and (iii) spatiotemporal action detection of the chimpanzees. Our experiments
reveal that ChimpACT offers ample opportunities for both devising new methods
and adapting existing ones to solve fundamental computer vision tasks applied
to chimpanzee groups, such as detection, pose estimation, and behavior analy37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

