Multi-body SE(3) Equivariance for Unsupervised
Rigid Segmentation and Motion Estimation

Jia-Xing Zhong, Ta-Ying Cheng, Yuhang He, Kai Lu, Kaichen Zhou ,
Andrew Markham, Niki Trigoni
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
{jiaxing.zhong, ta-ying.cheng, yuhang.he, kai.lu, rui.zhou}@cs.ox.ac.uk
{andrew.markham, niki.trigoni}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
A truly generalizable approach to rigid segmentation and motion estimation is
fundamental to 3D understanding of articulated objects and moving scenes. In
view of the closely intertwined relationship between segmentation and motion
estimates, we present an SE(3) equivariant architecture and a training strategy to
tackle this task in an unsupervised manner. Our architecture is composed of two
interconnected, lightweight heads. These heads predict segmentation masks using
point-level invariant features and estimate motion from SE(3) equivariant features,
all without the need for category information. Our training strategy is unified and
can be implemented online, which jointly optimizes the predicted segmentation and
motion by leveraging the interrelationships among scene flow, segmentation mask,
and rigid transformations. We conduct experiments on four datasets to demonstrate
the superiority of our method. The results show that our method excels in both
model performance and computational efficiency, with only 0.25M parameters and
0.92G FLOPs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work designed for
category-agnostic part-level SE(3) equivariance in dynamic point clouds.

1

Introduction

AP

Comprehending point cloud motion is critical for vari%
Ours-sup
ous 3D vision tasks in dynamic scenarios, e.g., tracking,
OGC-sup
70
0.25M
animation, simulation, and manipulation. Many types
0.5M
10M
of 3D motion can be described as a composition of
#PARAMS: M
multi-body rigid movements, such as articulated obOGC-unsup
60
Ours-unsup
jects [68], and vehicular traffic scenes [25]. Specifically,
the setting of multi-body rigid motion requires all moving parts (i.e., bodies) to undergo only translation and
50
rotation, without any type of deformation. The process
G
MBS
of modeling these multi-body rigid movements typically
……
40
involves two primary portions [32]: 1) the identifica1.0
4.0
600.0
FLOPs
tion of distinct moving bodies (i.e., rigid segmentation),
and 2) the calculation of individual movements for each Figure 1: Comparison of FLOPs, parameidentified body (i.e., motion estimation).
ter number, and AP on SAPIEN. Supervised
Being the first modeling portion, rigid segmentation methods are marked in #.

significantly differs from traditional semantic segmentation tasks that concentrate on category information [16, 3, 30, 31, 70]. Based on multi-body motion instead of category-dependent semantics,
rigid segmentation becomes category-agnostic about moving parts as rigid bodies are not limited to a
specific set of shapes and naturally cannot be assigned certain category labels. As regards motion
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

