Two-Stage Predict+Optimize for Mixed Integer Linear
Programs with Unknown Parameters in Constraints

Xinyi Hu1 , Jasper C.H. Lee2 , Jimmy H.M. Lee1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
2
Department of Computer Sciences & Institute for Foundations of Data Science
University of Wisconsin–Madison, WI, USA
{xyhu,jlee}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, jasper.lee@wisc.edu
1

Abstract
Consider the setting of constrained optimization, with some parameters unknown
at solving time and requiring prediction from relevant features. Predict+Optimize
is a recent framework for end-to-end training supervised learning models for
such predictions, incorporating information about the optimization problem in the
training process in order to yield better predictions in terms of the quality of the
predicted solution under the true parameters. Almost all prior works have focused
on the special case where the unknowns appear only in the optimization objective
and not the constraints. Hu et al. proposed the first adaptation of Predict+Optimize
to handle unknowns appearing in constraints, but the framework has somewhat
ad-hoc elements, and they provided a training algorithm only for covering and
packing linear programs. In this work, we give a new simpler and more powerful
framework called Two-Stage Predict+Optimize, which we believe should be the
canonical framework for the Predict+Optimize setting. We also give a training
algorithm usable for all mixed integer linear programs, vastly generalizing the
applicability of the framework. Experimental results demonstrate the superior
prediction performance of our training framework over all classical and state-ofthe-art methods.

1

Introduction

Optimization problems are prevalent in modern society, and yet the problem parameters are not
always available at the time of solving. For example, consider the real-world application scenario
of stocking a store: as store managers, we need to place monthly orders for products to stock in the
store. We want to stock products that sell fast and yield high profits, as much of them as possible,
subject to the hard constraint of limited storage space. However, orders need to be placed two weeks
in advance of the monthly delivery, and the customer demand next month cannot be known exactly
at the time of order placement. In this paper, we consider the supervised learning setting, where
the unknown parameters can be predicted from relevant features, and there are sufficient historical
(features, parameters) pairs as training data for a prediction model. The goal, then, is to learn a
prediction model from the training data such that, if we plug in the estimated parameters into the
optimization problem and solve for an estimated solution, the estimated solution remains a good
solution even after the true parameters are revealed.
The classic approach to the problem would be to train a simple regression model, based on standard
losses such as (regularized) ℓ2 loss, to predict parameters from the features. It is shown, however, that
having a small prediction error in the parameter space does not necessarily mean that the estimated
solution performs well under the true parameters. The recent framework of Predict+Optimize, by
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

