Time-Reversed Dissipation Induces Duality Between
Minimizing Gradient Norm and Function Value

Jaeyeon Kim
Seoul National University
kjy011102@snu.ac.kr

Asuman Ozdaglar
MIT EECS
asuman@mit.edu

Chanwoo Park
MIT EECS
cpark97@mit.edu

Ernest K. Ryu
Seoul National University
ernestryu@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In convex optimization, first-order optimization methods efficiently minimizing
function values have been a central subject study since Nesterov’s seminal work
of 1983. Recently, however, Kim and Fessler’s OGM-G and Lee et al.’s FISTA-G
have been presented as alternatives that efficiently minimize the gradient magnitude instead. In this paper, we present H-duality, which represents a surprising
one-to-one correspondence between methods efficiently minimizing function values and methods efficiently minimizing gradient magnitude. In continuous-time
formulations, H-duality corresponds to reversing the time dependence of the dissipation/friction term. To the best of our knowledge, H-duality is different from
Lagrange/Fenchel duality and is distinct from any previously known duality or
symmetry relations. Using H-duality, we obtain a clearer understanding of the
symmetry between Nesterov’s method and OGM-G, derive a new class of methods
efficiently reducing gradient magnitudes of smooth convex functions, and find a
new composite minimization method that is simpler and faster than FISTA-G.

1

Introduction

Since Nesterov’s seminal work of 1983 [37], accelerated first-order optimization methods that efficiently reduce function values have been central to the theory and practice of large-scale optimization
and machine learning. In 2012, however, Nesterov initiated the study of first-order methods that
efficiently reduce gradient magnitudes of convex functions [41]. In convex optimization, making the
function value exactly optimal is equivalent to making the gradient exactly zero, but reducing the
function-value suboptimality below a threshold is not equivalent to reducing the gradient magnitude
below a threshold. This line of research showed that accelerated methods for reducing function
values, such as Nesterov’s FGM [37], the more modern OGM [26], and the accelerated composite
optimization method FISTA [11] are not optimal for reducing gradient magnitude, and new optimal
alternatives, such as OGM-G [29] and FISTA-G [31], were presented.
These new accelerated methods for reducing gradient magnitudes are understood far less than those for
minimizing function values. However, an interesting observation of symmetry, described in Section 2,
was made between these two types of methods, and it was conjectured that this symmetry might be a
key to understanding the acceleration mechanism for efficiently reducing gradient magnitude.
Contribution. We present a surprising one-to-one correspondence between methods efficiently
minimizing function values and methods efficiently minimizing gradient magnitude. We call this
correspondence H-duality and formally establish a duality theory in both discrete- and continuoustime dynamics. Using H-duality, we obtain a clearer understanding of the symmetry between
FGM/OGM and OGM-G, derive a new class of methods efficiently reducing gradient magnitudes,
and find a new composite minimization method that is simpler and faster than FISTA-G, the prior
state-of-the-art in efficiently reducing gradient magnitude in the composite minimization setup.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

