Benchmarking Distribution Shift in Tabular Data
with TableShift
Josh Gardner♮

Zoran Popović♮

Ludwig Schmidt♮,♭

♮

University of Washington ♭ Allen Institute for AI
{jpgard, zoran, schmidt}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Robustness to distribution shift has become a growing concern for text and image models as they transition from research subjects to deployment in the real
world. However, high-quality benchmarks for distribution shift in tabular machine
learning tasks are still lacking despite the widespread real-world use of tabular
data and differences in the models used for tabular data in comparison to text and
images. As a consequence, the robustness of tabular models to distribution shift is
poorly understood. To address this issue, we introduce TABLE S HIFT, a distribution
shift benchmark for tabular data. TABLE S HIFT contains 15 binary classification
tasks in total, each with an associated shift, and includes a diverse set of data
sources, prediction targets, and distribution shifts. The benchmark covers domains
including finance, education, public policy, healthcare, and civic participation, and
is accessible using only a few lines of Python code via the TABLE S HIFT API. We
conduct a large-scale study comparing several state-of-the-art tabular data models
alongside robust learning and domain generalization methods on the benchmark
tasks. Our study demonstrates (1) a linear trend between in-distribution (ID) and
out-of-distribution (OOD) accuracy; (2) domain robustness methods can reduce
shift gaps but at the cost of reduced ID accuracy; (3) a strong relationship between
shift gap (difference between ID and OOD performance) and shifts in the label
distribution.1

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning models have achieved near- or even super-human performance on many
tasks. This has contributed to deployments of models across critical domains, including finance,
public policy, and healthcare. However, in tandem with the growing deployment of machine learning
models, researchers have also demonstrated concerning model performance drops under distribution
shift – when the test/deployment data are not drawn from the same distribution as the training data.
Analyses of these performance drops have primarily been confined to the domains of vision and
language modeling (e.g. [38, 50], where effective benchmarks for distribution shift exist. Despite
the widespread use of tabular data, the impact of distribution shift on tabular data has not been
thoroughly investigated. While there are existing benchmarks for IID tabular classification, none of
these focus on distribution shifts [36, 33].
This is particularly concerning in light of the known differences between tabular data and the
modalities mentioned above (images, text, audio). First, in contrast to these modalities, where large
neural models are the undisputed state-of-the-art, there is considerable debate about whether deep
1
The benchmark data, Python package, model implementations, and more information about TABLE S HIFT
are available at https://github.com/mlfoundations/tableshift and https://tableshift.org.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

