Auxiliary Losses for Learning Generalizable
Concept-based Models

Ivaxi Sheth∗
CISPA-Helmholtz Center for Information Security
ivaxi.sheth@cispa.de
Samira Ebrahimi Kahou
École de technologie supérieure, Mila, CIFAR AI Chair
samira.ebrahimi-kahou@etsmtl.ca

Abstract
The increasing use of neural networks in various applications has lead to increasing
apprehensions, underscoring the necessity to understand their operations beyond
mere final predictions. As a solution to enhance model transparency, Concept
Bottleneck Models (CBMs) have gained popularity since their introduction. CBMs
essentially limit the latent space of a model to human-understandable high-level
concepts. While beneficial, CBMs have been reported to often learn irrelevant concept representations that consecutively damage model performance. To overcome
the performance trade-off, we propose cooperative-Concept Bottleneck Model
(coop-CBM). The concept representation of our model is particularly meaningful
when fine-grained concept labels are absent. Furthermore, we introduce the concept
orthogonal loss (COL) to encourage the separation between the concept representations and to reduce the intra-concept distance. This paper presents extensive
experiments on real-world datasets for image classification tasks, namely CUB,
AwA2, CelebA and TIL. We also study the performance of coop-CBM models
under various distributional shift settings. We show that our proposed method
achieves higher accuracy in all distributional shift settings even compared to the
black-box models with the highest concept accuracy.

1

Introduction

The recent advances in deep learning have impacted various domains such as computer vision [21],
natural language processing [53], and speech recognition [6]. Recently, the deployment of large
models [8, 51] has led to various concerns regarding privacy and safety since machine learning
models are often considered black boxes. With the increasing use of such deep learning models in
daily human life and their wide deployment, it is essential to understand model behaviors beyond
final prediction. Since neural networks are considered opaque decision-makers, inaccurate decisions
by models in applications such as medicine [18] or autonomous driving [59] lead to catastrophe for
humans. To understand the inner workings of such black-box neural networks, the field of XAI [32]
has emerged in recent times. Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) [27] are a family of neural networks
that enable human interpretable explanations.
Concept-based models introduce a bottleneck layer before the final prediction. This bottleneck layer
consists of human-interpretable concept predictions. For example, in the context of images of animals,
these concepts could be “mane” in the case of a lion or “black and white stripes” in the case of a zebra.
∗

Work done when the author was at Mila, École de technologie supérieure.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

