FGPrompt: Fine-grained Goal Prompting
for Image-goal Navigation
Xinyu Sun1,3

Peihao Chen1 Jugang Fan1 Thomas H. Li4
Jian Chen1∗ Mingkui Tan1,2,5∗
1
South China University of Technology, 2 Pazhou Laboratory,
3
Information Technology R&D Innovation Center of Peking University,
4
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School,
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education,
csxinyusu@gmail.com, mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn
Project Page & Videos: https://xinyusun.github.io/fgprompt-pages

Abstract
Learning to navigate to an image-specified goal is an important but challenging
task for autonomous systems. The agent is required to reason the goal location
from where a picture is shot. Existing methods try to solve this problem by
learning a navigation policy, which captures semantic features of the goal image and
observation image independently and lastly fuses them for predicting a sequence
of navigation actions. However, these methods suffer from two major limitations.
1) They may miss detailed information in the goal image, and thus fail to reason
the goal location. 2) More critically, it is hard to focus on the goal-relevant regions
in the observation image, because they attempt to understand observation without
goal conditioning. In this paper, we aim to overcome these limitations by designing
a Fine-grained Goal Prompting (FGPrompt) method for image-goal navigation. In
particular, we leverage fine-grained and high-resolution feature maps in the goal
image as prompts to perform conditioned embedding, which preserves detailed
information in the goal image and guides the observation encoder to pay attention
to goal-relevant regions. Compared with existing methods on the image-goal
navigation benchmark, our method brings significant performance improvement on
3 benchmark datasets (i.e., Gibson, MP3D, and HM3D). Especially on Gibson, we
surpass the state-of-the-art success rate by 8% with only 1/50 model size.

1

Introduction

We focus on the image-goal navigation (ImageNav) task [51] that requires an agent to navigate to an
image-specified goal position and face the same orientation as where the photo is taken. In this task,
the agent needs to explore the environment and try to find the objects with their surroundings that
best match the ones specified in the goal image. Though humans prefer to share information using
language, an image is a much clearer and more detailed description to specify a goal location or an
intermediate landmark for some household robots [23] or self-driving vehicles.
Despite its wide applications, this task is still very challenging for the embodied agent due to the
following two aspects. First, compared to object-goal navigation which assigns goal descriptions with
specific semantic categories, it requires the agent to perceive the visual observation as well as the goal
image and make a comprehensive understanding of the scene in order to identify goal-relevant objects.
Second, objects share similar semantic meanings within one environment, making it challenging to
accurately find out the desired object instance.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

