Inverse Dynamics Pretraining Learns Good
Representations for Multitask Imitation

David Brandfonbrener∗
New York University

Ofir Nachum
Google

Joan Bruna
New York University

Abstract
In recent years, domains such as natural language processing and image recognition
have popularized the paradigm of using large datasets to pretrain representations
that can be effectively transferred to downstream tasks. In this work we evaluate
how such a paradigm should be done in imitation learning, where both pretraining
and finetuning data are trajectories collected by experts interacting with an unknown
environment. Namely, we consider a setting where the pretraining corpus consists
of multitask demonstrations and the task for each demonstration is set by an
unobserved latent context variable. The goal is to use the pretraining corpus
to learn a low dimensional representation of the high dimensional (e.g., visual)
observation space which can be transferred to a novel context for finetuning on
a limited dataset of demonstrations. Among a variety of possible pretraining
objectives, we argue that inverse dynamics modeling – i.e., predicting an action
given the observations appearing before and after it in the demonstration – is
well-suited to this setting. We provide empirical evidence of this claim through
evaluations on a variety of simulated visuomotor manipulation problems. While
previous work has attempted various theoretical explanations regarding the benefit
of inverse dynamics modeling, we find that these arguments are insufficient to
explain the empirical advantages often observed in our settings, and so we derive a
novel analysis using a simple but general environment model.

1

Introduction

Pipelines in image recognition and natural language processing commonly use large datasets to
pretrain representations that are then transferred to downstream tasks where data is limited [Devlin
et al., 2018, Chen et al., 2020, Radford et al., 2021]. In this paper, we consider how this paradigm
can be applied to imitation learning [Pomerleau, 1991, Ho and Ermon, 2016, Kostrikov et al., 2019].
In contrast to supervised learning domains where datasets consist of input-output pairs, imitation
learning datasets consist of trajectories with both the input-output mapping to be learned (namely,
observation-action pairs) as well as information about the dynamics of the environment. Given
this additional structure, it is worthwhile to study pretraining approaches that can incorporate this
structure to improve beyond methods from traditional supervised learning domains.
To formalize the precise notion of transfer between pretraining and finetuning phases, we consider
a multitask imitation setting where the environment (i.e., the transition dynamics) is fixed and data
is comprised of trajectories of task experts acting in this environment. A task is defined by a latent
context variable that is observed by an expert demonstrator, but is not contained in the dataset, as
shown in Figure 1. During pretraining, we have access to a large number of trajectories from various
tasks, while during finetuning we have access to a small number of trajectories from a single task.
The goal is thus to use the pretraining dataset to learn representations that contain information about
the environment that facilitates efficient learning of the finetuning task.
∗

david.brandfonbrener@nyu.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

