Learning Space-Time Continuous Neural PDEs from
Partially Observed States

Valerii Iakovlev Markus Heinonen Harri Lähdesmäki
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
{valerii.iakovlev, markus.o.heinonen, harri.lahdesmaki}@aalto.fi

Abstract
We introduce a novel grid-independent model for learning partial differential
equations (PDEs) from noisy and partial observations on irregular spatiotemporal
grids. We propose a space-time continuous latent neural PDE model with an
efficient probabilistic framework and a novel encoder design for improved data
efficiency and grid independence. The latent state dynamics are governed by a
PDE model that combines the collocation method and the method of lines. We
employ amortized variational inference for approximate posterior estimation and
utilize a multiple shooting technique for enhanced training speed and stability.
Our model demonstrates state-of-the-art performance on complex synthetic and
real-world datasets, overcoming limitations of previous approaches and effectively
handling partially-observed data. The proposed model outperforms recent methods,
showing its potential to advance data-driven PDE modeling and enabling robust,
grid-independent modeling of complex partially-observed dynamic processes.

1

Introduction

Modeling spatiotemporal processes allows to understand and predict the behavior of complex systems
that evolve over time and space (Cressie and Wikle, 2011). Partial differential equations (PDEs)
are a popular tool for this task as they have a solid mathematical foundation (Evans, 2010) and can
describe the dynamics of a wide range of physical, biological, and social phenomena (Murray, 2002;
Hirsch, 2007). However, deriving PDEs can be challenging, especially when the system’s underlying
mechanisms are complex and not well understood. Data-driven methods can bypass these challenges
(Brunton and Kutz, 2019). By learning the underlying system dynamics directly from data, we
can develop accurate PDE models that capture the essential features of the system. This approach
has changed our ability to model complex systems and make predictions about their behavior in a
data-driven manner.
While current data-driven PDE models have been successful at modeling complex spatiotemporal
phenomena, they often operate under various simplifying assumptions such as regularity of the spatial
or temporal grids (Long et al., 2018; Kochkov et al., 2021; Pfaff et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Han et al.,
2022; Poli et al., 2022), discreteness in space or time (Seo et al., 2020; Pfaff et al., 2021; Lienen and
Günnemann, 2022; Brandstetter et al., 2022), and availability of complete and noiseless observations
(Long et al., 2018; Pfaff et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022). Such assumptions become increasingly limiting
in more realistic scenarios with scarce data and irregularly spaced, noisy and partial observations.
We address the limitations of existing methods and propose a space-time continuous and gridindependent model that can learn PDE dynamics from noisy and partial observations made on
irregular spatiotemporal grids. Our main contributions include:
Source code and datasets can be found in our github repository.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

