Robust Mean Estimation Without Moments for
Symmetric Distributions

Gleb Novikov
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich

David Steurer
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich

Stefan Tiegel
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich

Abstract
We study the problem of robustly estimating the mean or location parameter
without moment assumptions. Known computationally efficient algorithms rely on
strong distributional assumptions, such as sub-Gaussianity, or (certifiably) bounded
moments. Moreover, the guarantees that they achieve in the heavy-tailed setting
are weaker than those for sub-Gaussian distributions with known covariance. In
this work, we show that such a tradeoff, between error guarantees and heavy-tails,
is not necessary for symmetric distributions. We show that for a large class of
symmetric distributions, the same error as in the Gaussian setting can be achieved
efficiently. The distributions we study include products of arbitrary symmetric
one-dimensional distributions, such as product Cauchy distributions, as well as
elliptical distributions, a vast generalization of the Gaussian distribution.
For product distributions and elliptical distributions with known scatter (covariance)
matrix, we show that given an ε-corruptedp
sample, we can with probability at least
1 − δ estimate its location up to error O(ε log(1/ε)) using d log(d)+log(1/δ)
samε2 log(1/ε)
ples. This result matches the best-known guarantees for the Gaussian distribution
and known SQ lower bounds (up to the log(d) factor). For elliptical distributions
with unknown scatter (covariance) matrix, we propose a sequence of efficient
algorithms that approaches this optimal error. Specifically, for every k ∈ N, we
1
design an estimator using time and samples Õ(dk ) achieving error O(ε1− 2k ). This
matches the error and running time guarantees when assuming certifiably bounded
√
moments of order up to k. For unknown covariance, such error bounds of o( ε)
are not even known for (general) sub-Gaussian distributions.
Our algorithms are based on a generalization of the well-known filtering technique
[DK22]. More specifically, we show how this machinery can be combined with
Huber-loss-based techniques to work with projections of the noise that behave more
nicely than the initial noise. Moreover, we show how sum-of-squares proofs can be
used to obtain algorithmic guarantees even for distributions without a first moment.
We believe that this approach may find other applications in future works.

1

Introduction

Robust statistics [Hub11, RHRS11] is a central field in statistics with the goal of designing algorithms
for statistical problems that are robust to a small amount of outliers, for example caused by measurement errors or corrupted data. We model this as follows: Samples are generated from an unknown
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

