Regularization properties of
adversarially-trained linear regression

Antônio H. Ribeiro
Uppsala University
antonio.horta.ribeiro@it.uu.se

Dave Zachariah
Uppsala University
dave.zachariah@it.uu.se

Francis Bach
PSL Research University, INRIA
francis.bach@inria.fr

Thomas B. Schön
Uppsala University
thomas.schon@it.uu.se

Abstract
State-of-the-art machine learning models can be vulnerable to very small input
perturbations that are adversarially constructed. Adversarial training is an effective
approach to defend against it. Formulated as a min-max problem, it searches for
the best solution when the training data were corrupted by the worst-case attacks.
Linear models are among the simple models where vulnerabilities can be observed
and are the focus of our study. In this case, adversarial training leads to a convex
optimization problem which can be formulated as the minimization of a finite sum.
We provide a comparative analysis between the solution of adversarial training
in linear regression and other regularization methods. Our main findings are that:
(A) Adversarial training yields the minimum-norm interpolating solution in the
overparameterized regime (more parameters than data), as long as the maximum
disturbance radius is smaller than a threshold. And, conversely, the minimumnorm interpolator is the solution to adversarial training with a given radius. (B)
Adversarial training can be equivalent to parameter shrinking methods (ridge
regression and Lasso). This happens in the underparametrized region, for an
appropriate choice of adversarial radius and zero-mean symmetrically distributed
covariates. (C) For ℓ∞ -adversarial training—as in square-root Lasso—the choice
of adversarial radius for optimal bounds does not depend on the additive noise
variance. We confirm our theoretical findings with numerical examples.

1

Introduction

Adversarial attacks generated striking examples of the brittleness of modern machine learning. The
framework considers inputs contaminated with disturbances deliberately chosen to maximize the
model error and, even for small disturbances, can cause a substantial performance drop in otherwise
state-of-the-art models [1]–[6]. Adversarial training [7] is one of the most effective approaches for
deep learning models to defend against adversarial attacks [7]–[9]. It considers training models on
samples that have been modified by an adversary, with the goal of obtaining a model that will be more
robust when faced with new adversarially perturbed samples. The training procedure is formulated as
a min-max problem, searching for the best solution to the worst-case attacks.
Despite its success in producing state-of-the-art results in adversarial defense benchmarks [10], there
are still major challenges in using adversarial training. The min-max problem is a hard optimization
problem to solve and it is still an open question how to solve it efficiently. Moreover, these methods
still produce large errors in new adversarially disturbed test points, often much larger than the
adversarial error obtained during training.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

