NAS-χ: Neural Adaptive Smoothing via Twisting

Dieterich Lawson*,†
Google Research
dieterichl@google.com

Michael Y. Li*
Stanford University
michaelyli@stanford.edu

Scott W. Linderman
Stanford University
scott.linderman@stanford.edu

Abstract
Sequential latent variable models (SLVMs) are essential tools in statistics and
machine learning, with applications ranging from healthcare to neuroscience. As
their flexibility increases, analytic inference and model learning can become challenging, necessitating approximate methods. Here we introduce neural adaptive
smoothing via twisting (NAS-X), a method that extends reweighted wake-sleep
(RWS) to the sequential setting by using smoothing sequential Monte Carlo (SMC)
to estimate intractable posterior expectations. Combining RWS and smoothing
SMC allows NAS-X to provide low-bias and low-variance gradient estimates, and
fit both discrete and continuous latent variable models. We illustrate the theoretical
advantages of NAS-X over previous methods and explore these advantages empirically in a variety of tasks, including a challenging application to mechanistic
models of neuronal dynamics. These experiments show that NAS-X substantially
outperforms previous VI- and RWS-based methods in inference and model learning,
achieving lower parameter error and tighter likelihood bounds.

1

Introduction

Sequential latent variable models (SLVMs) are a foundational model class in statistics and machine
learning, propelled by the success of hidden Markov models [1] and linear dynamical systems [2]. To
model more complex data, SLVMs have incorporated nonlinear conditional dependencies, resulting
in models such as sequential variational autoencoders [3–7], financial volatility models [8], and
biophysical models of neural activity [9]. While these nonlinear dependencies make SLVMs more
flexible, they also frustrate inference and model learning, motivating the search for approximate
methods.
One popular method for inference in nonlinear SLVMs is sequential Monte Carlo (SMC), which
provides a weighted particle approximation to the true posterior and an unbiased estimator of the
marginal likelihood. For most SLVMs, SMC is a significant improvement over standard importance
sampling, providing an estimator of the marginal likelihood with variance that grows linearly in
the length of the sequence rather than exponentially [10]. SMC’s performance, however, depends
on having a suitable proposal. The optimal proposal is often intractable, so in practice, proposal
parameters are learned from data. Broadly, there are two approaches to proposal learning: variational
inference [11, 12] and reweighted wake-sleep [13, 14].
*

Equal contribution. † Work performed while at Stanford University.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

