FOCAL: Contrastive Learning for Multimodal
Time-Series Sensing Signals in
Factorized Orthogonal Latent Space

Shengzhong Liu∗ , Tomoyoshi Kimura† , Dongxin Liu‡ , Ruijie Wang† , Jinyang Li† ,
Suhas Diggavi§ , Mani Srivastava§ , Tarek Abdelzaher†
∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, † University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
‡
Meta, § Univeristy of California, Los Angeles
shengzhong@sjtu.edu.cn, {tkimura4, ruijiew2, jinyang7, zaher}@illinois.edu
dxliu@meta.com, {suhas, mbs}@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel contrastive learning framework, called FOCAL, for
extracting comprehensive features from multimodal time-series sensing signals
through self-supervised training. Existing multimodal contrastive frameworks
mostly rely on the shared information between sensory modalities, but do not
explicitly consider the exclusive modality information that could be critical to
understanding the underlying sensing physics. Besides, contrastive frameworks
for time series have not handled the temporal information locality appropriately.
FOCAL solves these challenges by making the following contributions: First,
given multimodal time series, it encodes each modality into a factorized latent
space consisting of shared features and private features that are orthogonal to each
other. The shared space emphasizes feature patterns consistent across sensory
modalities through a modal-matching objective. In contrast, the private space extracts modality-exclusive information through a transformation-invariant objective.
Second, we propose a temporal structural constraint for modality features, such
that the average distance between temporally neighboring samples is no larger
than that of temporally distant samples. Extensive evaluations are performed on
four multimodal sensing datasets with two backbone encoders and two classifiers to demonstrate the superiority of FOCAL. It consistently outperforms the
state-of-the-art baselines in downstream tasks with a clear margin, under different
ratios of available labels. The code and self-collected dataset are available at
https://github.com/tomoyoshki/focal.

1

Introduction

As a representative self-supervised learning (SSL) paradigm, contrastive learning (CL) has achieved
unprecedented success in vision tasks [3, 14, 4, 12, 55] and are increasingly leveraged in learning
from time series [10, 7, 63, 65, 36, 58]. However, many IoT applications [39, 56, 33] rely on
heterogeneous sensory modalities to collaboratively perceive the physical surroundings and lead to
a more complicated learning space. This paper aims to build a contrastive learning framework that
maximally extracts complementary information from multimodal time-series sensing signals [23, 60],.
The key challenge is to define appropriate similarity/distance measures (i.e., who should be close to
whom) in the joint multimodal embedding space that facilitates the downstream tasks [53, 57].
Existing contrastive frameworks for time series either ignore the heterogeneity among sensory
modalities and are limited to instance-level discrimination [22, 17], or are designed to extract only
shared information across sensory modalities [48, 6, 35]. For instance, as a representative framework,
CMC [48] builds on the hypothesis that only information shared across views corresponds to the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

