AI for Interpretable Chemistry: Predicting Radical
Mechanistic Pathways via Contrastive Learning

Mohammadamin Tavakoli
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
mohamadt@uci.edu

Yin Ting T.Chiu
Department of Chemistry
University of California, Irvine
yintc@uci.edu

Alexander Shmakov
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
ashmakov@uci.edu

Ann Marie Carlton
Department of Chemistry
University of California, Irvine
agcarlto@uci.edu

David Van Vranken
Department of Chemistry
University of California, Irvine
david.vv@uci.edu

Pierre Baldi
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
pfbaldi@uci.edu

Abstract
Deep learning-based reaction predictors have undergone significant architectural
evolution. However, their reliance on reactions from the US Patent Office results in
a lack of interpretable predictions and limited generalizability to other chemistry
domains, such as radical and atmospheric chemistry. To address these challenges,
we introduce a new reaction predictor system, RMechRP, that leverages contrastive
learning in conjunction with mechanistic pathways, the most interpretable representation of chemical reactions. Specifically designed for radical reactions, RMechRP
provides different levels of interpretation of chemical reactions. We develop and
train multiple deep-learning models using RMechDB, a public database of radical
reactions, to establish the first benchmark for predicting radical reactions. Our
results demonstrate the effectiveness of RMechRP in providing accurate and interpretable predictions of radical reactions, and its potential for various applications
in atmospheric chemistry.

1

Introduction

Three primary approaches have been employed for the systematic prediction of chemical reactions:
Quantum Mechanics simulations [1; 2], Template-based methods [3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 8], and machine
learning methods [9; 10; 11; 12; 13; 14; 15]. Notably, among these methods, machine learning
techniques have demonstrated superior generalization capabilities and have enabled high-throughput
predictions.
However, the majority of recently developed data-driven predictive models are primarily designed
to operate at the level of overall transformations. These predictors are trained using the chemical
transformation dataset sourced from the US Patent Office (USPTO) [16], along with a few additional,
though relatively small, datasets introduced scatteredly in various studies [17; 18; 19]. It is important
to note that all these datasets have notable limitations, which include: limited coverage of chemical
reactions, lack of information about the byproducts, an imbalance between reactants and products,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

