MosaicBERT: A Bidirectional Encoder Optimized for
Fast Pretraining

Jacob Portes1∗
jacob.portes@
Moin Nadeem2†
moinnadeem@

Alex Trott1∗
alex.trott@

Sam Havens1
sam.havens@

Nikhil Sardana1
nikhil.sardana@

Daniel King1
daniel.king@

Daya Khudia1
daya.khudia@

Abhinav Venigalla1
abhi@
Jonathan Frankle1
jfrankle@

1

1

MosaicML × Databricks
@databricks.com 2 @moinnadeem.com

Abstract
Although BERT-style encoder models are heavily used in NLP research, many
researchers do not pretrain their own BERTs from scratch due to the high cost
of training. In the past half-decade since BERT first rose to prominence, many
advances have been made with other transformer architectures and training configurations that have yet to be systematically incorporated into BERT. Here, we
introduce MosaicBERT, a BERT-style encoder architecture and training recipe that
is empirically optimized for fast pretraining. This efficient architecture incorporates
FlashAttention, Attention with Linear Biases (ALiBi), Gated Linear Units (GLU),
a module to dynamically remove padded tokens, and low precision LayerNorm into
the classic transformer encoder block. The training recipe includes a 30% masking
ratio for the Masked Language Modeling (MLM) objective, bfloat16 precision, and
vocabulary size optimized for GPU throughput, in addition to best-practices from
RoBERTa and other encoder models. When pretrained from scratch on the C4
dataset, this base model achieves a downstream average GLUE (dev) score of 79.6
in 1.13 hours on 8 A100 80 GB GPUs at a cost of roughly $20. We plot extensive
accuracy vs. pretraining speed Pareto curves and show that MosaicBERT base and
large are consistently Pareto optimal when compared to a competitive BERT base
and large. This empirical speed up in pretraining enables researchers and engineers
to pretrain custom BERT-style models at low cost instead of finetune on existing
generic models. We open source our model weights and code.

1

Introduction

BERT has been the workhorse of modern natural language processing (NLP) since its introduction in
2018 [14]. Even in the era of large language models (LLMs), BERT-style encoder models are still
quite relevant; for example, encoder models are used for vector database embeddings and retrieval
augmented generation in tandem with LLMs [30, 35, 27, 61, 52]. In the past half-decade since
BERT first rose to prominence, however, many advances have been made with other transformer
architectures and training configurations that have yet to be systematically incorporated into BERT
[12, 44, 11]. In this study we empirically show that these speed optimizations can successfully be
incorporated into the classic BERT architecture and training recipe.
∗
equal contribution. Corresponding author jacob.portes@databricks.com. Code can be found at
mosaicbert.github.io
†
work done while at MosaicML.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

