Differentially Private Statistical Inference
through β-Divergence One Posterior Sampling

Jack Jewson∗
Department of Economics and Business
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
jack.jewson@upf.edu

Sahra Ghalebikesabi∗
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
sahra.ghalebikesabi@univ.ox.ac.uk

Chris Holmes
The Alan Turing Institute
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
chris.holmes@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Differential privacy guarantees allow the results of a statistical analysis involving
sensitive data to be released without compromising the privacy of any individual
taking part. Achieving such guarantees generally requires the injection of noise,
either directly into parameter estimates or into the estimation process. Instead
of artificially introducing perturbations, sampling from Bayesian posterior distributions has been shown to be a special case of the exponential mechanism,
producing consistent, and efficient private estimates without altering the data generative process. The application of current approaches has, however, been limited
by their strong bounding assumptions which do not hold for basic models, such
as simple linear regressors. To ameliorate this, we propose βD-Bayes, a posterior
sampling scheme from a generalised posterior targeting the minimisation of the
β-divergence between the model and the data generating process. This provides
private estimation that is generally applicable without requiring changes to the
underlying model and consistently learns the data generating parameter. We show
that βD-Bayes produces more precise inference estimation for the same privacy
guarantees, and further facilitates differentially private estimation via posterior
sampling for complex classifiers and continuous regression models such as neural
networks for the first time.

1

Introduction

Statistical and machine learning analyses are increasingly being done with sensitive information, such
as personal user preferences [49], electronic health care records [72], or defence and national security
data [27]. It thus becomes more and more important to ensure that data-centric algorithms do not leak
information about their training data. Let D = {Di }ni=1 = {yi , Xi }ni=1 ∈ D denote a sensitive data
set with d dimensional features Xi ∈ X ⊂ Rd , and labels yi ⊂ Y ⊂ R. Here, we are considering
inference problems where a trusted data holder releases model parameters θ̃(D) ∈ Θ, that describe
the relationship between X and y, based on an arbitrary likelihood model f (·; θ). Differential privacy
∗

Joint first authorship. Order decided based on coin flip.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

