Extracting Reward Functions from Diffusion Models

Felipe Nuti∗ Tim Franzmeyer∗ João F. Henriques
{nuti, frtim, joao}@robots.ox.ac.uk
University of Oxford

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable results in image generation, and have
similarly been used to learn high-performing policies in sequential decision-making
tasks. Decision-making diffusion models can be trained on lower-quality data, and
then be steered with a reward function to generate near-optimal trajectories. We
consider the problem of extracting a reward function by comparing a decisionmaking diffusion model that models low-reward behavior and one that models
high-reward behavior; a setting related to inverse reinforcement learning. We
first define the notion of a relative reward function of two diffusion models and
show conditions under which it exists and is unique. We then devise a practical
learning algorithm for extracting it by aligning the gradients of a reward function –
parametrized by a neural network – to the difference in outputs of both diffusion
models. Our method finds correct reward functions in navigation environments,
and we demonstrate that steering the base model with the learned reward functions
results in significantly increased performance in standard locomotion benchmarks.
Finally, we demonstrate that our approach generalizes beyond sequential decisionmaking by learning a reward-like function from two large-scale image generation
diffusion models. The extracted reward function successfully assigns lower rewards
to harmful images.1

1

Introduction

Recent work [25, 2] demonstrates that diffusion models – which display remarkable performance
in image generation – are similarly applicable to sequential decision-making. Leveraging a wellestablished framing of reinforcement learning as conditional sampling [37], Janner et al. [25] show
that diffusion models can be used to parameterize a reward-agnostic prior distribution over trajectories,
learned from offline demonstrations alone. Using classifier guidance [61], the diffusion model can
then be steered with a (cumulative) reward function, parametrized by a neural network, to generate
near-optimal behaviors in various sequential decision-making tasks. Hence, it is possible to learn
successful policies both through (a) training an expert diffusion model on a distribution of optimal
trajectories, and (b) by training a base diffusion model on lower-quality or reward-agnostic trajectories
and then steering it with the given reward function. This suggests that the reward function can be
extracted by comparing the distributions produced by such base and expert diffusion models.
The problem of learning the preferences of an agent from observed behavior, often expressed as a
reward function, is considered in the Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) literature [56, 43]. In
contrast to merely imitating the observed behavior, learning the reward function behind it allows for
better robustness, better generalization to distinct environments, and for combining rewards extracted
from multiple behaviors.
∗
1

Equal Contribution.
Video and Code at https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/reward-diffusion/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

