Sounding Bodies: Modeling 3D Spatial Sound of
Humans Using Body Pose and Audio
Xudong Xu⇤
Shanghai AI Laboratory
xudongxu9710@gmail.com
Jacob Sandakly
Meta Reality Labs Research
jasandakly@meta.com

Dejan Marković
Meta Reality Labs Research
dejanmarkovic@meta.com

Todd Keebler
Meta Reality Labs Research
toddkeebler@meta.com

Steven Krenn
Meta Reality Labs Research
stevenkrenn@meta.com

Alexander Richard
Meta Reality Labs Research
richardalex@meta.com

Abstract
While 3D human body modeling has received much attention in computer vision,
modeling the acoustic equivalent, i.e. modeling 3D spatial audio produced by body
motion and speech, has fallen short in the community. To close this gap, we present
a model that can generate accurate 3D spatial audio for full human bodies. The
system consumes, as input, audio signals from headset microphones and body
pose, and produces, as output, a 3D sound field surrounding the transmitter’s
body, from which spatial audio can be rendered at any arbitrary position in the 3D
space. We collect a first-of-its-kind multimodal dataset of human bodies, recorded
with multiple cameras and a spherical array of 345 microphones. In an empirical
evaluation, we demonstrate that our model can produce accurate body-induced
sound fields when trained with a suitable loss. Dataset and code are available
online.1

1

Introduction

Throughout all of our history, humans have been at the center of the stories we tell: starting from early
cave paintings, over ancient tales and books, to modern media such as movies, TV series, computer
games, or, more recently, virtual and augmented realities. Not surprisingly, digital representations
of the human body have therefore long been a research topic in our community Guan et al. [2009],
Loper et al. [2015], Kanazawa et al. [2018]. With the rise of computer-generated imagery in the film
industry and the availability of powerful computing on consumer devices, visual representations of
3D human bodies have seen great advances recently, leading to extremely lifelike and photorealistic
body models Bagautdinov et al. [2021], Zheng et al. [2023].
However, while the visual representation of human bodies has made steady progress, its acoustic
counterpart has been largely neglected. Yet, human sensing is intrinsically multi-modal, and visual
and acoustic components are intertwined in our perception of the world around us. Correctly modeling
3D sound that matches the visual scene is essential to the feeling of presence and immersion in a
⇤

1

Work done during internship at Meta Reality Labs Research, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
https://github.com/facebookresearch/SoundingBodies

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

