On Separate Normalization in Self-supervised
Transformers
Xiaohui Chen
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
xiaohui.chen@tufts.edu

Yinkai Wang
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
yinkai.wang@tufts.edu

Yuanqi Du
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
yd392@cornell.edu

Soha Hassoun
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
soha.hassoun@tufts.edu

Li-Ping Liu
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
liping.liu@tufts.edu

Abstract
Self-supervised training methods for transformers have demonstrated remarkable
performance across various domains. Previous transformer-based models, such as
masked autoencoders (MAE), typically utilize a single normalization layer for both
the class token [CLS] and the tokens. We propose in this paper a new yet simple
normalization method that separately normalizes embedding vectors respectively
corresponding to normal tokens and the [CLS] token, in order to better capture their
distinct characteristics and enhance downstream task performance. Our empirical
study shows that the [CLS] embeddings learned with our separate normalization
layer better encode the global contextual information and are distributed more
uniformly in its anisotropic space. When the conventional normalization layer
is replaced with a separate normalization layer, we observe an average 2.7%
performance improvement in learning tasks from the image, natural language, and
graph domains.

1

Introduction

Transformer models [Vaswani et al., 2017] have revolutionized natural language processing
(NLP) [Devlin et al., 2018, Liu et al., 2019] and demonstrated remarkable performances across
a wide range of NLP tasks. The significance of transformer models lies in their ability to model
context and capture complex linguistic patterns without being constrained by the sequential nature
of data. Beyond NLP transformers have further found their successes in areas such as computer
vision (CV) [Han et al., 2022], speech recognition [Karmakar et al., 2021], and recommendation
systems [Sun et al., 2019, Gu et al., 2020, Wu et al., 2020]. Their flexible architecture and ability to
capture dependencies have made them adaptable to diverse data modalities in these domains.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

