The Impact of Positional Encoding on Length
Generalization in Transformers
Amirhossein Kazemnejad1 , Inkit Padhi2
Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy2 , Payel Das2 , Siva Reddy1,3,4
1
Mila, McGill University; 2 IBM Research;
3
Facebook CIFAR AI Chair; 4 ServiceNow Research
{amirhossein.kazemnejad,siva.reddy}@mila.quebec
inkpad@ibm.com, {knatesa,daspa}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Length generalization, the ability to generalize from small training context sizes
to larger ones, is a critical challenge in the development of Transformer-based
language models. Positional encoding (PE) has been identified as a major factor
influencing length generalization, but the exact impact of different PE schemes
on extrapolation in downstream tasks remains unclear. In this paper, we conduct
a systematic empirical study comparing the length generalization performance
of decoder-only Transformers with five different position encoding approaches
including Absolute Position Embedding (APE), T5’s Relative PE, ALiBi, and
Rotary, in addition to Transformers without positional encoding (NoPE). Our
evaluation encompasses a battery of reasoning and mathematical tasks. Our findings
reveal that the most commonly used positional encoding methods, such as ALiBi,
Rotary, and APE, are not well suited for length generalization in downstream
tasks. More importantly, NoPE outperforms other explicit positional encoding
methods while requiring no additional computation. We theoretically demonstrate
that NoPE can represent both absolute and relative PEs, but when trained with
SGD, it mostly resembles T5’s Relative PE attention patterns. Finally, we find
that scratchpad is not always helpful to solve length generalization and its format
highly impacts the model’s performance. Overall, our work suggests that explicit
position encodings are not essential for decoder-only Transformers to generalize
well to longer sequences.

1

Introduction

The ability to generalize from smaller training context sizes to larger ones, commonly known as
length generalization, is a major challenge for Transformer-based language models (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Deletang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). Even with larger Transformers, this issue persists
(Brown et al., 2020; Furrer et al., 2020). With larger context sizes, a model can benefit from more
in-context-learning examples, higher numbers of reasoning steps, or longer text generation. However,
training a Transformer with a larger context size can be excessively slow and memory-intensive. This
is even more pronounced in the recent paradigm of model finetuning on instruction-following datasets
(Wei et al., 2022a; Chung et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022). It is not only infeasible to train the model
on all possible context lengths, but also the number of training examples drops dramatically as the
sequence length increases requiring the model to generalize from finite and shorter-length training
examples. In this work, we focus on the effect of positional encoding on length generalization in the
“decoder-only" Transformers on various tasks trained from scratch. Figure 1 summarizes our finding
that using no positional encoding is better than using explicit positional encodings.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

