MIMONets: Multiple-Input-Multiple-Output Neural
Networks Exploiting Computation in Superposition

Nicolas Menet1,2∗
menetn@ethz.ch

Michael Hersche1,2

Geethan Karunaratne1

her@zurich.ibm.com

kar@zurich.ibm.com

Luca Benini2

Abu Sebastian1

Abbas Rahimi1

lbenini@iis.ee.ethz.com

ase@zurich.ibm.com

abr@zurich.ibm.com

1

IBM Research – Zurich, 2 ETH Zurich

Abstract
With the advent of deep learning, progressively larger neural networks have been
designed to solve complex tasks. We take advantage of these capacity-rich models
to lower the cost of inference by exploiting computation in superposition. To
reduce the computational burden per input, we propose Multiple-Input-MultipleOutput Neural Networks (MIMONets) capable of handling many inputs at once.
MIMONets augment various deep neural network architectures with variable binding mechanisms to represent an arbitrary number of inputs in a compositional data
structure via fixed-width distributed representations. Accordingly, MIMONets
adapt nonlinear neural transformations to process the data structure holistically,
leading to a speedup nearly proportional to the number of superposed input items
in the data structure. After processing in superposition, an unbinding mechanism
recovers each transformed input of interest. MIMONets also provide a dynamic
trade-off between accuracy and throughput by an instantaneous on-demand switching between a set of accuracy-throughput operating points, yet within a single
set of fixed parameters. We apply the concept of MIMONets to both CNN and
Transformer architectures resulting in MIMOConv and MIMOFormer, respectively.
Empirical evaluations show that MIMOConv achieves ≈ 2 – 4× speedup at an
accuracy delta within [+0.68, −3.18]% compared to WideResNet CNNs on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. Similarly, MIMOFormer can handle 2–4 inputs at once
while maintaining a high average accuracy within a [−1.07, −3.43]% delta on the
long range arena benchmark. Finally, we provide mathematical bounds on the interference between superposition channels in MIMOFormer. Our code is available
at https://github.com/IBM/multiple-input-multiple-output-nets.

1

Introduction

Driven by the successes of deep learning in image and natural language processing tasks, increasingly
large neural network models have been developed to reach state-of-the-art performance [1–4]. These
large models, however, increase computational complexity in terms of operation count for every event
of input processing. One viable option to reduce the computational cost of processing per input is
to create a compositional data structure where a variable number of input items (i.e., values) can be
bound to corresponding protection keys, creating key-value pairs that can coexist and be processed
∗

Research conducted at IBM Research – Zurich.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

