A Regularized Conditional GAN for Posterior
Sampling in Image Recovery Problems
Matthew C. Bendel
Dept. ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
bendel.8@osu.edu

Rizwan Ahmad
Dept. BME
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
ahmad.46@osu.edu

Philip Schniter
Dept. ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43201
schniter.1@osu.edu

Abstract
In image recovery problems, one seeks to infer an image from distorted, incomplete,
and/or noise-corrupted measurements. Such problems arise in magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), computed tomography, deblurring, super-resolution, inpainting,
phase retrieval, image-to-image translation, and other applications. Given a training
set of signal/measurement pairs, we seek to do more than just produce one good
image estimate. Rather, we aim to rapidly and accurately sample from the posterior
distribution. To do this, we propose a regularized conditional Wasserstein GAN that
generates dozens of high-quality posterior samples per second. Our regularization
comprises an `1 penalty and an adaptively weighted standard-deviation reward.
Using quantitative evaluation metrics like conditional Fréchet inception distance,
we demonstrate that our method produces state-of-the-art posterior samples in both
multicoil MRI and large-scale inpainting applications. The code for our model can
be found here: https://github.com/matt-bendel/rcGAN.

1

Introduction

We consider image recovery, where one observes measurements y = M(x) of the true image x that
may be masked, distorted, and/or corrupted x with noise, and the goal is to infer x from y. This
includes linear inverse problems arising in, e.g., deblurring, super-resolution, inpainting, colorization,
computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), where y = Ax + w with
known linear operator A and noise w. But it also includes non-linear inverse problems like those
arising in phase-retrieval and dequantization, as well as image-to-image translation problems. In all
cases, it is impossible to perfectly infer x from y.
Image recovery is often posed as finding the single “best” recovery b
x, which is known as a point
estimate of x [1]. But point estimation is problematic due to the perception-distortion tradeoff [2],
which establishes a fundamental tradeoff between distortion (defined as some distance between b
x
and x) and perceptual quality (defined as some distance between b
x and the set of clean images).
For example, the minimum mean-squared error (MMSE) recovery b
xmmse is optimal in terms of `2
distortion, but can be unrealistically smooth. Although one could instead compute an approximation
of the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate [3] or minimize some combination of perceptual and
distortion losses, it’s unclear which combination would be most appropriate.
Another major limitation with point estimation is that it’s unclear how certain one can be about
the recovered b
x. For example, with deep-learning-based recovery, it’s possible to hallucinate a
nice-looking b
x, but is it correct? Quantifying the uncertainty in b
x is especially important in medical
applications such as MRI, where a diagnosis must be made based on the measurements y. Rather
than simply reporting our best guess of whether a pathology is present or absent based on b
x, we
might want to report the probability that the pathology is present (given all available data).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

