Demo2Code: From Summarizing Demonstrations
to Synthesizing Code via Extended Chain-of-Thought

Huaxiaoyue Wang
Cornell University
yukiwang@cs.cornell.edu

Gonzalo Gonzalez-Pumariega
Cornell University
gg387@cornell.edu

Yash Sharma
Cornell University
ys749@cornell.edu

Sanjiban Choudhury
Cornell University
sanjibanc@cornell.edu

Abstract
Language instructions and demonstrations are two natural ways for users to teach
robots personalized tasks. Recent progress in Large Language Models (LLMs)
has shown impressive performance in translating language instructions into code
for robotic tasks. However, translating demonstrations into task code continues to
be a challenge due to the length and complexity of both demonstrations and code,
making learning a direct mapping intractable. This paper presents Demo2Code,
a novel framework that generates robot task code from demonstrations via an
extended chain-of-thought and defines a common latent specification to connect
the two. Our framework employs a robust two-stage process: (1) a recursive
summarization technique that condenses demonstrations into concise specifications,
and (2) a code synthesis approach that expands each function recursively from
the generated specifications. We conduct extensive evaluation on various robot
task benchmarks, including a novel game benchmark Robotouille, designed to
simulate diverse cooking tasks in a kitchen environment. The project’s website is
at https://portal-cornell.github.io/demo2code/

1

Introduction

How do we program home robots to perform a wide variety of personalized everyday tasks? Robots
must learn such tasks online, through natural interactions with the end user. A user typically
communicates a task through a combination of language instructions and demonstrations. This paper
addresses the problem of learning robot task code from those two inputs. For instance, in Fig. 1, the
user teaches the robot how they prefer to make a burger through both language instructions, such as
“make a burger”, and demonstrations, which shows the order in which the ingredients are used.
Recent works [24, 23, 33, 80, 61, 35] have shown that Large Language Models (LLMs) are highly
effective in using language instructions as prompts to plan robot tasks. However, extending LLMs to
take demonstrations as input presents two fundamental challenges. The first challenge comes from
demonstrations for long-horizon tasks. Naively concatenating and including all demonstrations in
the LLM’s prompt would easily exhaust the model’s context length. The second challenge is that
code for long-horizon robot tasks can be complex and require control flow. It also needs to check for
physics constraints that a robot may have and be able to call custom perception and action libraries.
Directly generating such code in a single step is error-prone.
Our key insight is that while demonstrations are long and code is complex, they both share a
latent task specification that the user had in mind. This task specification is a detailed language
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

