Katakomba:
Tools and Benchmarks for Data-Driven NetHack
Vladislav Kurenkov∗
Tinkoff
v.kurenkov@tinkoff.ai

Alexander Nikulin*
Tinkoff
a.p.nikulin@tinkoff.ai

Denis Tarasov
Tinkoff
den.tarasov@tinkoff.ai

Sergey Kolesnikov
Tinkoff
s.s.kolesnikov@tinkoff.ai

Abstract
NetHack is known as the frontier of reinforcement learning research where learningbased methods still need to catch up to rule-based solutions. One of the promising
directions for a breakthrough is using pre-collected datasets similar to recent
developments in robotics, recommender systems, and more under the umbrella of
offline reinforcement learning (ORL). Recently, a large-scale NetHack dataset was
released; while it was a necessary step forward, it has yet to gain wide adoption in
the ORL community. In this work, we argue that there are three major obstacles for
adoption: resource-wise, implementation-wise, and benchmark-wise. To address
them, we develop an open-source library2 that provides workflow fundamentals
familiar to the ORL community: pre-defined D4RL-style tasks, uncluttered baseline
implementations, and reliable evaluation tools with accompanying configs and logs
synced to the cloud.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (Arulkumaran et al., 2017; Levine et al., 2020) led to remarkable progress
in the decision-making problems in recent years: robotics (Smith et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2021),
recommender systems (Chen et al., 2022a), traffic control (Chen et al., 2020), energy management
(Yu et al., 2019), combinatorial optimization (Mazyavkina et al., 2021), and videogames (Baker et al.,
2022; Hafner et al., 2023). Many of those are considered solved or close to solved problems, and the
arguably next untapped frontier for RL algorithms is the NetHack (Küttler et al., 2020).
NetHack3 is considered one of the most challenging games for humans, even more to learning agents.
This game requires strong generalization capabilities, as the levels are procedurally generated with
each reset, and extraordinary memory capacity, as the episodes may last for 100k steps requiring
to remember what happened a thousand steps before to act optimally. Moreover, the high level of
uncertainty and its dependence on the initial character configuration further hardens the problem.
Indeed, at the moment, the best agent, AutoAscend (Hambro et al., 2022a), is essentially rule-based,
and yet reinforcement learning agents cannot even come close in terms of the game score or levels
reached. While there were various attempts to advance online reinforcement learning agents, this task
seems out of reach for them.
∗

Contributed equally.
Source code: https://github.com/corl-team/katakomba
3
For a brief introduction to the game, we recommend excellent game wiki, as well as the original publication
by Küttler et al. (2020), which introduced the NetHack environment.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

