Efficient Coding of Natural Images using
Maximum Manifold Capacity Representations

Thomas Yerxa 1

Yilun Kuang 2,3 Eero Simoncelli 1,2,3 SueYeon Chung1,2
Center for Neural Science, New York University
2
Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute
3
Courant Inst. of Mathematical Sciences,
tey214@nyu.edu
1

Abstract
The efficient coding hypothesis posits that sensory systems are adapted to the statistics of their inputs, maximizing mutual information between environmental signals
and their representations, subject to biological constraints. While elegant, information theoretic quantities are notoriously difficult to measure or optimize, and most
research on the hypothesis employs approximations, bounds, or substitutes (e.g.,
reconstruction error). A recently developed measure of coding efficiency, the “manifold capacity”, quantifies the number of object categories that may be represented
in a linearly separable fashion, but its calculation relies on a computationally intensive iterative procedure that precludes its use as an objective. Here, we simplify
this measure to a form that facilitates direct optimization, use it to learn Maximum
Manifold Capacity Representations (MMCRs), and demonstrate that these are
competitive with state-of-the-art results on current self-supervised learning (SSL)
recognition benchmarks. Empirical analyses reveal important differences between
MMCRs and the representations learned by other SSL frameworks, and suggest a
mechanism by which manifold compression gives rise to class separability. Finally,
we evaluate a set of SSL methods on a suite of neural predictivity benchmarks, and
find MMCRs are highly competitive as models of the primate ventral stream.

1

Introduction

Biological visual systems learn complex representations of the world that support a wide range of
cognitive behaviors, without relying on a large number of labelled examples. The efficient coding
hypothesis (8; 65) suggests that this is accomplished by adapting the sensory representation to the
statistics of the input signal, so as to reduce redundancy or dimensionality. Visual signals have several
clear sources of redundancy. They evolve slowly in time, since temporally adjacent inputs typically
correspond to different views of the same scene, which in turn are usually more similar than views
of distinct scenes. Moreover, the variations within individual scenes often correspond to variations
in a small number of parameters, such as those controlling viewing and lighting conditions, and are
thus inherently low dimensional. Many previous results have demonstrated how the computations of
neural circuits can be seen as matched to such structures in naturalistic environments (48; 29; 65; 17)
Studies in various modalities have identified geometric structures in neural data that are associated
with behavioral tasks (10; 25; 43; 33; 56), and explored metrics for quantifying these structures.
The recent development of “manifold capacity theory” provides a more explicit connection between
the geometry (size and dimensionality) of neural representations and their coding capacity (18).
This theory has been used to evaluate efficiency of biological and artificial neural networks across
modalities (17; 24; 66; 52). However, usage as a design principle for building model representations
has not been explored.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

