Rewiring Neurons in Non-Stationary Environments

Zhicheng Sun, Yadong Mu∗
Peking University, Beijing, China
{sunzc,myd}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The human brain rewires itself for neuroplasticity in the presence of new tasks.
We are inspired to harness this key process in continual reinforcement learning,
prioritizing adaptation to non-stationary environments. In distinction to existing
rewiring approaches that rely on pruning or dynamic routing, which may limit
network capacity and plasticity, this work presents a novel rewiring scheme by
permuting hidden neurons. Specifically, the neuron permutation is parameterized
to be end-to-end learnable and can rearrange all available synapses to explore a
large span of weight space, thereby promoting adaptivity. In addition, we introduce
two main designs to steer the rewiring process in continual reinforcement learning:
first, a multi-mode rewiring strategy is proposed which diversifies the policy and
encourages exploration when encountering new environments. Secondly, to ensure
stability on history tasks, the network is devised to cache each learned wiring while
subtly updating its weights, allowing for retrospective recovery of any previous state
appropriate for the task. Meanwhile, an alignment mechanism is curated to achieve
better plasticity-stability tradeoff by jointly optimizing cached wirings and weights.
Our proposed method is comprehensively evaluated on 18 continual reinforcement
learning scenarios ranging from locomotion to manipulation, demonstrating its
advantages over state-of-the-art competitors in performance-efficiency tradeoffs.
Code is available at https://github.com/feifeiobama/RewireNeuron.

1

Introduction

Despite remarkable advances in artificial neural networks, they have yet to emulate the adaptivity of
the human brain in realistic, non-stationary environments. A plausible explanation for this disparity
from neuroscience is that the brain gains additional structural plasticity by constantly rewiring itself
throughout one’s lifetime [9, 35, 67]. In fact, with extensive rewiring, the brain could even confront
more adverse scenarios such as stroke [11, 68]. By contrast, the wiring of artificial neural networks
is usually optimized for a single domain [79, 72, 70] and remains fixed thereafter, thus exhibiting
limited adaptivity in the real world. This comparison highlights the potential of rewiring neurons
in enabling neural networks to continually engage and learn in dynamically evolving environments,
which is referred to as the problem of continual reinforcement learning [53, 64].
A few preliminary studies have exploited this rewiring process in deep learning with other research
scopes. They rewired neural networks through pruning [37, 28, 5] or dynamic routing [43, 55, 74] to
allow more efficient or input-dependent inference at test time. Following this line of work, a mainstay
of continual learning methods [41, 32, 23] learned task-specific masks on neuron wiring to alleviate
catastrophic interference [42] between different tasks. Unfortunately, existing rewiring approaches
that rely on selecting a subnetwork are typically prone to capacity shrinkage over time and therefore
may not be competent for continual adaptation to new reinforcement environments.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

