TOA: Task-oriented Active VQA

Xiaoying Xing Mingfu Liang Ying Wu
Northwestern University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
{xiaoyingxing2026, mingfuliang2020}@u.northwestern.edu
yingwu@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Knowledge-based visual question answering (VQA) requires external knowledge to
answer the question about an image. Early methods explicitly retrieve knowledge
from external knowledge bases, which often introduce noisy information. Recently
large language models like GPT-3 have shown encouraging performance as implicit
knowledge source and revealed planning abilities. However, current large language
models can not effectively understand image inputs, thus it remains an open
problem to extract the image information and input to large language models. Prior
works have used image captioning and object descriptions to represent the image.
However, they may either drop the essential visual information to answer the
question correctly or involve irrelevant objects to the task-of-interest. To address
this problem, we propose to let large language models make an initial hypothesis
according to their knowledge, then actively collect the visual evidence required
to verify the hypothesis. In this way, the model can attend to the essential visual
information in a task-oriented manner. We leverage several vision modules from
the perspectives of spatial attention (i.e., Where to look) and attribute attention (i.e.,
What to look), which is similar to human cognition. The experiments show that
our proposed method outperforms the baselines on open-ended knowledge-based
VQA datasets and presents clear reasoning procedure with better interpretability.

1

Introduction

The problem of knowledge-based visual question answer (VQA) [1, 2] requires open-world knowledge
to answer the question about an image, which is more challenging than traditional VQA tasks [3]
since the model needs to extract relevant external knowledge and then perform joint reasoning on the
question, image, and the knowledge. To this end, most existing solutions explicitly retrieve external
knowledge from various sources like Wikipedia [4, 5, 6, 7] and ConceptNet [8, 9, 4]. However,
their performances are mainly limited by the explicit knowledge-retrieval stage [10]. First, the
required knowledge may not be successfully retrieved, leading to insufficient information to answer
the question. Second, the retrieved knowledge may be noisy and introduce irrelevant information,
hence degrading the performance of the joint reasoning stage.
Recent works [11, 10, 12, 13] explore to use the large language models (LLMs) like GPT-3 [14]
as implicit knowledge base, since they have shown powerful abilities in knowledge retrieval [15]
and reasoning [16]. However, it remains a challenge to enable a pretrained LLM to further exploit
the visual information, as this requires large computation resources to fine-tune the LLM on visionlanguage tasks [17, 18]. To sidestep this challenge, captioning-based methods translate the image
into a caption such that the LLM can understand image information like a textual prompt. Despite
the significant improvement compared to the explicit retrieval-based methods, their performances are
still limited because the caption may usually drop essential visual information required to answer
the question. On the other hand, the detection-based method leverages object detectors to extract all
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

