A*Net: A Scalable Path-based Reasoning Approach
for Knowledge Graphs

Zhaocheng Zhu1,2,∗, Xinyu Yuan1,2,∗, Mikhail Galkin3,† , Sophie Xhonneux1,2
Ming Zhang4 , Maxime Gazeau5 , Jian Tang1,6,7
1
Mila - Québec AI Institute, 2 University of Montréal
3
Intel AI Lab, 4 Peking University, 5 LG Electronics AI Lab
6
HEC Montréal, 7 CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Reasoning on large-scale knowledge graphs has been long dominated by embedding
methods. While path-based methods possess the inductive capacity that embeddings lack, their scalability is limited by the exponential number of paths. Here
we present A*Net, a scalable path-based method for knowledge graph reasoning.
Inspired by the A* algorithm for shortest path problems, our A*Net learns a priority
function to select important nodes and edges at each iteration, to reduce time and
memory footprint for both training and inference. The ratio of selected nodes and
edges can be specified to trade off between performance and efficiency. Experiments on both transductive and inductive knowledge graph reasoning benchmarks
show that A*Net achieves competitive performance with existing state-of-the-art
path-based methods, while merely visiting 10% nodes and 10% edges at each
iteration. On a million-scale dataset ogbl-wikikg2, A*Net not only achieves a new
state-of-the-art result, but also converges faster than embedding methods. A*Net is
the first path-based method for knowledge graph reasoning at such scale.

1

Introduction

Reasoning, the ability to apply logic to draw new conclusions from existing facts, has been long pursued as a
goal of artificial intelligence [32, 20]. Knowledge graphs
encapsulate facts in relational edges between entities,
and serve as a foundation for reasoning. Reasoning over
knowledge graphs is usually studied in the form of knowledge graph completion, where a model is asked to predict
missing triplets based on observed triplets in the knowledge graph. Such a task can be used to not only populate
existing knowledge graphs, but also improve downstream
applications like multi-hop logical reasoning [34], quesFigure 1: Validation MRR w.r.t. traintion answering [5] and recommender systems [53].
ing time on ogbl-wikikg2 (1 A100 GPU).
One challenge central to knowledge graph reasoning is A*Net achieves state-of-the-art perforthe scalability of reasoning methods, as many real-world mance and the fastest convergence.
knowledge graphs [2, 44] contain millions of entities and
triplets. Typically, large-scale knowledge graph reasoning is solved by embedding methods [6, 42, 38],
which learn an embedding for each entity and relation to reconstruct the structure of the knowledge
∗
†

Equal contribution. Code is available at https://github.com/DeepGraphLearning/AStarNet
Work done while at Mila - Québec AI Institute.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

