Unlimiformer: Long-Range Transformers with
Unlimited Length Input

Uri Alon∗
Graham Neubig
Matthew R. Gormley
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
{abertsch,ualon,gneubig,mgormley}@cs.cmu.edu
Amanda Bertsch

Abstract
Since the proposal of transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), these models have
been limited to bounded input lengths, because of their need to attend to every
token in the input. In this work, we propose Unlimiformer: a general approach
that wraps any existing pretrained encoder-decoder transformer, and offloads the
cross-attention computation to a single k-nearest-neighbor (kNN) index, while the
returned kNN distances are the attention dot-product scores. This kNN index can
be kept on either the GPU or CPU memory and queried in sub-linear time; this
way, we can index practically unlimited input sequences, while every attention
head in every decoder layer retrieves its top-k keys, instead of attending to every
key. We evaluate Unlimiformer on several long-document and book-summarization
benchmarks, showing that it can process even 500k token-long inputs from the
BookSum dataset, without any input truncation at test time. We demonstrate that
Unlimiformer improves pretrained models such as BART (Lewis et al., 2020a) and
Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020) by extending them to unlimited inputs without
additional learned weights and without modifying their code. Our code and models
are publicly available, and support LLaMA-2 as well2 .

1

Introduction

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have risen as the dominant sequence-to-sequence architecture.
Pretrained transformers generally have a context window of 512 (e.g. BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), T5
(Raffel et al., 2020)) or 1024 tokens (e.g. BART (Lewis et al., 2020b)), which are sufficient lengths
for many current conditional generation datasets (XSum; Narayan et al., 2018) (CNN/DM; Nallapati
et al., 2016). To address inputs between 1024 and 16,384 tokens, specialized long-context models
sparsify or approximate attention (e.g. Longformer (Beltagy et al., 2020), Performers (Choromanski
et al., 2020)), allowing the maximum input length to quadruple while remaining computationally
feasible. Most long-document summarization and question-answering datasets, such as SCROLLS
(Shaham et al., 2022), are included in this range.
Yet tasks that involve long narratives, such as book summarization (Kryściński et al., 2021), can contain inputs exceeding 500k tokens. Figure 1 shows the input lengths of several popular summarization
and question-answering datasets, plotted against common context window lengths; the longest inputs
are more than 34 times longer than Longformer’s context window.
In these extremely-long-input cases, vanilla transformers cannot be simply scaled, as naïve selfattention has quadratic complexity. Long-input transformers usually modify the base architecture,
and thus necessitate re-pre-training the model from scratch, which requires significant computational
∗
2

Now at Google DeepMind
https://github.com/abertsch72/unlimiformer

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

