Universal Prompt Tuning for Graph Neural Networks

Taoran Fang1 , Yunchao Zhang1 , Yang Yang1∗, Chunping Wang2 , Lei Chen2
1
Zhejiang University, 2 FinVolution Group
{fangtr,3190105622,yangya}@zju.edu.cn,
{wangchunping02,chenlei04}@xinye.com

Abstract
In recent years, prompt tuning has sparked a research surge in adapting pre-trained
models. Unlike the unified pre-training strategy employed in the language field, the
graph field exhibits diverse pre-training strategies, posing challenges in designing
appropriate prompt-based tuning methods for graph neural networks. While some
pioneering work has devised specialized prompting functions for models that
employ edge prediction as their pre-training tasks, these methods are limited to
specific pre-trained GNN models and lack broader applicability. In this paper, we
introduce a universal prompt-based tuning method called Graph Prompt Feature
(GPF) for pre-trained GNN models under any pre-training strategy. GPF operates
on the input graph’s feature space and can theoretically achieve an equivalent effect
to any form of prompting function. Consequently, we no longer need to illustrate the
prompting function corresponding to each pre-training strategy explicitly. Instead,
we employ GPF to obtain the prompted graph for the downstream task in an
adaptive manner. We provide rigorous derivations to demonstrate the universality
of GPF and make guarantee of its effectiveness. The experimental results under
various pre-training strategies indicate that our method performs better than finetuning, with an average improvement of about 1.4% in full-shot scenarios and
about 3.2% in few-shot scenarios. Moreover, our method significantly outperforms
existing specialized prompt-based tuning methods when applied to models utilizing
the pre-training strategy they specialize in. These numerous advantages position
our method as a compelling alternative to fine-tuning for downstream adaptations.
Our code is available at: https://github.com/zjunet/GPF.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have garnered significant attention from researchers due to their
remarkable success in graph representation learning [Kipf and Welling, 2017, Hamilton et al., 2017,
Xu et al., 2019]. However, two fundamental challenges hinder the large-scale practical applications
of GNNs. One is the scarcity of labeled data in the real world [Zitnik et al., 2018], and the other is
the low out-of-distribution generalization ability of the trained models [Hu et al., 2020a, Knyazev
et al., 2019, Yehudai et al., 2021, Morris et al., 2019]. To overcome these challenges, researchers
have made substantial efforts in designing pre-trained GNN models [Xia et al., 2022b, Hu et al.,
2020a,b, Lu et al., 2021] in recent years. Similar to the pre-trained models in the language field,
pre-trained GNN models undergo training on extensive pre-training datasets and are subsequently
adapted to downstream tasks. Most existing pre-trained GNN models obey the “pre-train, fine-tune”
learning strategy [Xu et al., 2021a]. Specifically, we train a GNN model with a massive corpus of
pre-training graphs, then we utilize the pre-trained GNN model as initialization and fine-tune the
model parameters based on the specific downstream task.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

