Explainable and Efficient Randomized Voting Rules
Soroush Ebadian
University of Toronto
soroush@cs.toronto.edu

Aris Filos-Ratsikas
University of Edinburgh
Aris.Filos-Ratsikas@ed.ac.uk

Mohamad Latifian
University of Toronto
latifian@cs.toronto.edu

Nisarg Shah
University of Toronto
nisarg@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
With a rapid growth in the deployment of AI tools for making critical decisions
(or aiding humans in doing so), there is a growing demand to be able to explain
to the stakeholders how these tools arrive at a decision. Consequently, voting is
frequently used to make such decisions due to its inherent explainability. Recent
work suggests that using randomized (as opposed to deterministic) voting rules
can lead to significant efficiency gains measured via the distortion framework.
However, rules that use intricate randomization can often become too complex to
explain to the stakeholders; losing explainability can eliminate the key advantage
of voting over black-box AI tools, which may outweigh the efficiency gains.
We study the efficiency gains which can be unlocked by using voting rules that add
a simple randomization step to a deterministic rule, thereby retaining explainability.
We focus on two such families of rules, randomized positional scoring rules and
random committee member rules, and show, theoretically and empirically, that they
indeed achieve explainability and efficiency simultaneously to some extent.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, AI and machine learning solutions have been deployed ubiquitously to make
increasingly critical decisions that affect human lives. Consequently, there is a growing demand
for these models and their decisions to be explainable [1, 2]. The literature makes a distinction
between two types of explanations: outcome explanations, which explain to the stakeholders why the
chosen outcome was selected in a given instance, and procedural explanations, which explain to the
stakeholders the procedure of choosing outcomes across all possible instances.Much of the explainable
AI (XAI) literature focuses on outcome explanations because many black-box AI solutions used in
practice are too complex to admit simple procedural explanations [3].
However, there are several drawbacks of outcome explanations. First, it opens up the possibility
of post-hoc explanations for why an outcome was selected. These are susceptible to adversarial
reasoning that hides biases [4]. Also, psychological research suggests that people’s perception of
fairness of an outcome depends not only on the outcome itself, but also on the process by which the
outcome is selected [5, 6], and the same outcome may be perceived as fair or unfair depending on
the process used [6]. This motivates the need for procedural explanations. Note that an intuitive
explanation of the procedure to select outcomes already serves as a rudimentary justification for why
a given outcome was selected.
To that end, we turn our attention to voting. While explainability is a nascent demand in the AI
ecosystem, voting rules, historically deployed for political decision-making, have always battled
with the need to be able to explain to the voters how the winner of an election is chosen. Thus,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

