RL-based Stateful Neural Adaptive Sampling and
Denoising for Real-Time Path Tracing

Antoine Scardigli, Lukas Cavigelli, Lorenz K. Müller
Computing Systems Lab, Huawei Zurich Research Center, Switzerland
scardigliantoine@gmail.com, {lukas.cavigelli, lorenz.mueller}@huawei.com

Abstract
Monte-Carlo path tracing is a powerful technique for realistic image synthesis but
suffers from high levels of noise at low sample counts, limiting its use in real-time
applications. To address this, we propose a framework with end-to-end training of
a sampling importance network, a latent space encoder network, and a denoiser
network. Our approach uses reinforcement learning to optimize the sampling
importance network, thus avoiding explicit numerically approximated gradients.
Our method does not aggregate the sampled values per pixel by averaging but
keeps all sampled values which are then fed into the latent space encoder. The
encoder replaces handcrafted spatiotemporal heuristics by learned representations
in a latent space. Finally, a neural denoiser is trained to refine the output image.
Our approach increases visual quality on several challenging datasets and reduces
rendering times for equal quality by a factor of 1.6x compared to the previous
state-of-the-art, making it a promising solution for real-time applications.

1

Introduction

Monte-Carlo path tracing relies on repeatedly sending discrete rays that bounce in random directions
to approximate the real-life (continuous) light scattering. The number of rays sent per pixel is called
the Sample Per Pixel (spp) count. The Monte-Carlo method guarantees that the estimated pixel value
is unbiased and that the standard error decreases at a rate proportional to √1n where n is the spp
count [1, 2, 3, 4].
Denoising Offline rendering can afford high spp counts. Nevertheless, it is very common to use
spatial denoising as postprocessing to reduce the computational budget by several orders of magnitude
for equivalent quality outputs [5]. First, denoising approaches were heuristic-based [6], but learned
methods recently imposed themselves [7]. In particular, encoder-decoder neural networks like
UNETs [8] are the current state of the art in terms of denoising [9]. Training the denoiser specifically
for low sample counts (4 spp) allows still reaching high-quality results [10].
Adaptive Sampling Following the intuition that low spp counts are likely sufficient for some parts
of the frames like large uniform areas, and that some areas with bigger variance like edges or highly
reflective surfaces might require a higher sample count, heuristic-based methods for sampling a
non-uniform sample count within a frame have first been proposed. Some approaches use specific
metrics like variance [11], contrast [12], frequency content [13], or mean absolute deviation [14]
to assign more samples in challenging areas. Further work noticed that the denoiser should use
information from the sampling heatmap or vice versa. They perform joint adaptive sampling and
denoising by estimating the most problematic regions for the denoiser using Gaussians [15], linear
regression [16], or polynomials [17]. As these metrics have to be estimated to sufficient precision,
a high spp count (4 or more) is required, making them unsuitable for real-time applications: It is
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

