Generalized Bayesian Inference for Scientific
Simulators via Amortized Cost Estimation
Richard Gao*1,2
r.dg.gao@gmail.com

Michael Deistler*1,2
michael.deistler@uni-tuebingen.de

Jakob H. Macke1,2,3
jakob.macke@uni-tuebingen.de
1

Machine Learning in Science, Excellence Cluster Machine Learning, University of Tübingen
2
Tübingen AI Center
3
Department Empirical Inference, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
*
Equal contributions.

Abstract
Simulation-based inference (SBI) enables amortized Bayesian inference for simulators with implicit likelihoods. But when we are primarily interested in the
quality of predictive simulations, or when the model cannot exactly reproduce
the observed data (i.e., is misspecified), targeting the Bayesian posterior may be
overly restrictive. Generalized Bayesian Inference (GBI) aims to robustify inference for (misspecified) simulator models, replacing the likelihood-function with a
cost function that evaluates the goodness of parameters relative to data. However,
GBI methods generally require running multiple simulations to estimate the cost
function at each parameter value during inference, making the approach computationally infeasible for even moderately complex simulators. Here, we propose
amortized cost estimation (ACE) for GBI to address this challenge: We train a
neural network to approximate the cost function, which we define as the expected
distance between simulations produced by a parameter and observed data. The
trained network can then be used with MCMC to infer GBI posteriors for any observation without running additional simulations. We show that, on several benchmark
tasks, ACE accurately predicts cost and provides predictive simulations that are
closer to synthetic observations than other SBI methods, especially for misspecified
simulators. Finally, we apply ACE to infer parameters of the Hodgkin-Huxley
model given real intracellular recordings from the Allen Cell Types Database. ACE
identifies better data-matching parameters while being an order of magnitude more
simulation-efficient than a standard SBI method. In summary, ACE combines the
strengths of SBI methods and GBI to perform robust and simulation-amortized
inference for scientific simulators.

1

Introduction

Mechanistic models expressed as computer simulators are used in a wide range of scientific domains,
from astronomy, geophysics, to neurobiology. The parameters of the simulator, θ, encode mechanisms
of interest, and simulating different parameter values produces different outputs, i.e., sim(θ i ) → xi ,
where each model-simulation xi can be compared to experimentally observed data, xo . Using such
simulators, we can quantitatively reason about the contribution of mechanisms behind experimental
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

