Score-based Generative Modeling through
Stochastic Evolution Equations in Hilbert Spaces
Sungbin Lim1, 6, 7⇤, Eunbi Yoon1†, Taehyun Byun2 , Taewon Kang3 ,
Seungwoo Kim4 , Kyungjae Lee5 , Sungjoon Choi2⇤
1
Department of Statistics, Korea University
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
4
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST
5
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Chung-Ang University
6
LG AI Research
7
SNU-LG AI Research Center

Abstract
Continuous-time score-based generative models consist of a pair of stochastic
differential equations (SDEs)—a forward SDE that smoothly transitions data into a
noise space and a reverse SDE that incrementally eliminates noise from a Gaussian
prior distribution to generate data distribution samples—are intrinsically connected
by the time-reversal theory on diffusion processes. In this paper, we investigate
the use of stochastic evolution equations in Hilbert spaces, which expand the
applicability of SDEs in two aspects: sample space and evolution operator, so they
enable encompassing recent variations of diffusion models, such as generating
functional data or replacing drift coefficients with image transformation. To this
end, we derive a generalized time-reversal formula to build a bridge between
probabilistic diffusion models and stochastic evolution equations and propose a
score-based generative model called Hilbert Diffusion Model (HDM). Combining
with Fourier neural operator, we verify the superiority of HDM for sampling
functions from functional datasets with a power of kernel two-sample test of 4.2 on
Quadratic, 0.2 on Melbourne, and 3.6 on Gridwatch, which outperforms existing
diffusion models formulated in function spaces. Furthermore, the proposed method
shows its strength in motion synthesis tasks by utilizing the Wiener process with
values in Hilbert space. Finally, our empirical results on image datasets also
validate a connection between HDM and diffusion models using heat dissipation,
revealing the potential for exploring evolution operators and sample spaces.

1

Introduction

Score-based generative models [52] have shown success in various domains, including the generation
of images [25], texts [30], videos [26], motions [31]. [52] proposes a framework for continuous-time
score-based generative models that use a pair of stochastic differential equations (SDEs); a forward
SDE smoothly transitions data into noise space, and a reverse SDE incrementally eliminates noise
from a Gaussian prior distribution to generate samples from the data distribution. Both SDEs have
the same marginal distribution when their coefficients satisfy the time-reversal formula [1, 24], which
is an ingenious application of the Kolmogorov-Fokker-Planck equation for diffusion processes.
⇤
†

Corresponding Author. e-mail: sungbin@korea.ac.kr.
This work is done at UNIST.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

