False Discovery Proportion control for aggregated
Knockoffs
Bertrand Thirion
INRIA
CEA
bertrand.thirion@inria.fr

Alexandre Blain
INRIA
Université Paris-Saclay
alexandre.blain@inria.fr
Olivier Grisel
INRIA
olivier.grisel@inria.fr

Pierre Neuvial
Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse
Université de Toulouse
pierre.neuvial@math.univ-toulouse.fr

Abstract
Controlled variable selection is an important analytical step in various scientific
fields, such as brain imaging or genomics. In these high-dimensional data settings,
considering too many variables leads to poor models and high costs, hence the
need for statistical guarantees on false positives. Knockoffs are a popular statistical
tool for conditional variable selection in high dimension. However, they control for
the expected proportion of false discoveries (FDR) and not their actual proportion
(FDP). We present a new method, KOPI, that controls the proportion of false
discoveries for Knockoff-based inference. The proposed method also relies on a
new type of aggregation to address the undesirable randomness associated with
classical Knockoff inference. We demonstrate FDP control and substantial power
gains over existing Knockoff-based methods in various simulation settings and
achieve good sensitivity/specificity tradeoffs on brain imaging and genomic data.

1

Introduction

Statistically controlled variable selection arises in many different application fields, when the aim
is to identify variables that are important for predicting an outcome of interest. For instance, in the
context of brain imaging, practitioners are interested in finding which brain areas are relevant for
predicting behavior or brain diseases. Such problems also appear in genomics, where practitioners
wish to select genes associated with disease outcomes.
More precisely, we consider here conditional variable selection, meaning that we wish to select
variables that are relevant to predict an outcome given the other variables. This type of inference
is substantially more challenging than marginal inference, especially in high-dimensional settings,
where the number of variables exceeds the number of samples. This is typically the case for brain
mapping studies that comprise at most a few hundred subjects (hence, samples), while modern
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans consist of more than 100k voxels. In the
context of conditional inference, those are typically reduced to a few hundreds of brain regions, still
possibly more than the number of samples.
Importantly, statistical guarantees are needed to ensure that the inference is reliable - i.e. that the
proportion of false discoveries made by the variable selection procedure is controlled.
In the Knockoffs framework [1, 6], this problem is tackled by building noisy copies of the original
variables. These copies are then compared to their original counterpart to perform variable selection.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

