S OUND C AM: A Dataset for Finding Humans Using
Room Acoustics
Mason Wang∗ 1 Samuel Clarke∗1
Jui-Hsien Wang2 Ruohan Gao1 Jiajun Wu1
1

Stanford University

2

Adobe Research

Abstract
A room’s acoustic properties are a product of the room’s geometry, the objects
within the room, and their specific positions. A room’s acoustic properties can
be characterized by its impulse response (RIR) between a source and listener
location, or roughly inferred from recordings of natural signals present in the room.
Variations in the positions of objects in a room can effect measurable changes in
the room’s acoustic properties, as characterized by the RIR. Existing datasets of
RIRs either do not systematically vary positions of objects in an environment, or
they consist of only simulated RIRs. We present S OUND C AM, the largest dataset
of unique RIRs from in-the-wild rooms publicly released to date.1 It includes
5,000 10-channel real-world measurements of room impulse responses and 2,000
10-channel recordings of music in three different rooms, including a controlled
acoustic lab, an in-the-wild living room, and a conference room, with different
humans in positions throughout each room. We show that these measurements
can be used for interesting tasks, such as detecting and identifying humans, and
tracking their positions.

1

Introduction

The physical sound field of a room, or the transmission and reflection of sound between any two
points within the room, is influenced by many factors, including the geometry of the room as well as
the shape, position, and surface material of each object within the room [Kuster et al., 2004, Bistafa
and Bradley, 2000, Cucharero et al., 2019]. For this reason, each room has a distinct sound field,
and a change in a position of a particular object in the room will generally change this sound field in
distinct ways [Mei and Mertins, 2010, Götz et al., 2021]. We present S OUND C AM, a novel dataset
to investigate whether this principle can be used for three distinct tasks for identifying humans and
tracking their positions in diverse conditions, including in both controlled and in-the-wild rooms.
A room’s sound field between a given source and listener location pair can be characterized by a room
impulse response (RIR) between that pair. While there are many datasets of RIRs recorded in diverse
environments, existing datasets mainly focus on densely characterizing the sound field of rooms by
varying the locations of the sources and/or listeners in the environment. There are datasets which
focus on isolating the effects of changing objects or their positions in the room, but they provide
RIRs generated purely in simulated environments. Our S OUND C AM dataset is the largest dataset
of unique, real RIRs from in-the-wild rooms publicly released to date and specifically focuses on
isolating the acoustic effects of changing the positions and identities of humans.
The ability to identify and/or track the position of a human in an indoor environment has many
applications to ensure safe and high-quality user experiences for interactive applications such as
∗

indicates equal contribution
The project page and dataset are available at https://masonlwang.com/soundcam/, with data
released to the public under the MIT license.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

