DropCompute: simple and more robust distributed
synchronous training via compute variance reduction

Niv Giladi1,2∗ Shahar Gottlieb1,2∗ Moran Shkolnik1,2
Ron Banner2

Elad Hoffer2
1

Kfir Yehuda Levy1

Asaf Karnieli2

Daniel Soudry1

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
2
Habana-Labs

{giladiniv, moranshkolnik, elad.hoffer, kfiryehud, daniel.soudry}@gmail.com
{sgottlieb, akarnieli, rbanner}@habana.ai

Abstract
Background. Distributed training is essential for large scale training of deep
neural networks (DNNs). The dominant methods for large scale DNN training are
synchronous (e.g. All-Reduce), but these require waiting for all workers in each
step. Thus, these methods are limited by the delays caused by straggling workers.
Results. We study a typical scenario in which workers are straggling due to
variability in compute time. We find an analytical relation between compute time
properties and scalability limitations, caused by such straggling workers. With
these findings, we propose a simple yet effective decentralized method to reduce the
variation among workers and thus improve the robustness of synchronous training.
This method can be integrated with the widely used All-Reduce. Our findings are
validated on large-scale training tasks using 200 Gaudi Accelerators. A reference
implementation2 is provided.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) training continues to scale over size and computational footprint, as
a result of a higher number of trainable parameters, wider and deeper models, and growing amounts
of training data. As improvements in model quality (measured by test loss, for example) (Kaplan
et al., 2020) lead over hardware capabilities (Hooker, 2020), this scale-up translates into a need for a
growing number of training devices working in tandem (Chowdhery et al., 2022), turning distributed
training to the standard approach for training DNNs on a large scale.
Distributed training typically refers to three parallelism paradigms — data parallel, model parallel and
layer pipelining (Ben-Nun & Hoefler, 2019). Several variants and hybrid solutions exist in modern
implementations such as tensor parallel (Narayanan et al., 2021) and parameter sharding (Rajbhandari
et al., 2020; Rasley et al., 2020). These can be used separately or combined as they are orthogonal to
each other. Mainly, data parallelism is straightforward, where the data is sharded among workers,
and all workers share the same global model state. At each step, workers compute gradients locally
and then aggregate them before taking an optimization step. When training synchronously, workers
update their parameters in lockstep. This ensures that all workers hold a consensus on the same model
and that gradients are averaged over all workers before being applied to the model. This approach is
easy to implement and allows for good convergence properties, and correspondingly is the prevalent
optimization method.
∗
2

Equal contribution
https://github.com/paper-submissions/dropcompute

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

