Estimating Noise Correlations Across Continuous
Conditions With Wishart Processes
Amin Nejatbakhsh
Isabel Garon
Alex H Williams
Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, NY
Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute, New York, NY
{anejatbakhsh,igaron,awilliams}@flatironinstitute.org

Abstract
The signaling capacity of a neural population depends on the scale and orientation
of its covariance across trials. Estimating this “noise” covariance is challenging
and is thought to require a large number of stereotyped trials. New approaches are
therefore needed to interrogate the structure of neural noise across rich, naturalistic
behaviors and sensory experiences, with few trials per condition. Here, we exploit
the fact that conditions are smoothly parameterized in many experiments and
leverage Wishart process models to pool statistical power from trials in neighboring
conditions. We demonstrate that these models perform favorably on experimental
data from the mouse visual cortex and monkey motor cortex relative to standard
covariance estimators. Moreover, they produce smooth estimates of covariance
as a function of stimulus parameters, enabling estimates of noise correlations in
entirely unseen conditions as well as continuous estimates of Fisher information—
a commonly used measure of signal fidelity. Together, our results suggest that
Wishart processes are broadly applicable tools for quantification and uncertainty
estimation of noise correlations in trial-limited regimes, paving the way toward
understanding the role of noise in complex neural computations and behavior.

1

Introduction

Nominally identical repetitions of a sensory stimulus or a behavioral action often elicit variable
responses in neurons. Intuitively, this “noise” degrades the information capacity of neural representations. However, the precise nature of this effect is complex since neural responses are not independent
random events. Indeed, pairs of co-recorded neurons exhibit significant “noise correlations” from
trial-to-trial, with well-studied and intriguing consequences [1–5]. In particular, introducing noise
correlations into a circuit can theoretically degrade or enhance its signaling capacity depending on
the geometric configuration of neural representations in firing rate space (Fig. 1A; [6, 7]).
Estimating noise covariance is therefore an important problem that arises frequently in neural data
analysis.1 However, this problem is widely regarded as challenging [8–10] because the number of
estimated parameters (i.e., number of unique neuron pairs) grows quadratically with the number
of co-recorded neurons, while the number of measurements per trial (i.e., number of neurons with
a response) grows only linearly (for more discussion see, e.g., [11]). As a result, experimental
investigations into noise correlation have been limited to extremely simple tasks where a very large
number of trials can be collected over a small number of conditions. For example, Rumyantsev et al.
[10] recorded neural responses over just two stimulus conditions (oriented visual gratings), repeated
across hundreds of trials. We therefore have a rudimentary characterization of how noise correlations
1

Throughout, we focus on the problem of estimating noise covariance instead of noise correlation. By
accurately estimating the former, we can also estimate the latter since the correlation between two neurons is
given by their covariance normalized by each neuron’s marginal variance.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

