Tester-Learners for Halfspaces: Universal Algorithms

Aravind Gollakota
Apple
aravindg@cs.utexas.edu

Adam R. Klivans
UT Austin
klivans@cs.utexas.edu

Konstantinos Stavropoulos
UT Austin
kstavrop@cs.utexas.edu

Arsen Vasilyan
MIT
vasilyan@mit.edu

Abstract
We give the first tester-learner for halfspaces that succeeds universally over a wide
class of structured distributions. Our universal tester-learner runs in fully polynomial time and has the following guarantee: the learner achieves error O(opt) + ϵ
on any labeled distribution that the tester accepts, and moreover, the tester accepts
whenever the marginal is any distribution that satisfies a Poincaré inequality. In
contrast to prior work on testable learning, our tester is not tailored to any single
target distribution but rather succeeds for an entire target class of distributions.
The class of Poincaré distributions includes all strongly log-concave distributions,
and, assuming the Kannan–Lóvasz–Simonovits (KLS) conjecture, includes all
log-concave distributions. In the special case where the label noise is known to be
Massart, our tester-learner achieves error opt + ϵ while accepting all log-concave
distributions unconditionally (without assuming KLS). Our tests rely on checking
hypercontractivity of the unknown distribution using a sum-of-squares (SOS) program, and crucially make use of the fact that Poincaré distributions are certifiably
hypercontractive in the SOS framework.

1

Introduction

In this paper we study the recent model of testable learning, due to Rubinfeld and Vasilyan [RV23].
Testable learning addresses a key issue with essentially all known algorithms for the basic problem
of agnostic learning, in which a learner is required to produce a hypothesis competitive with the
best-fitting hypothesis in a concept class C. The issue is that these algorithms make distributional
assumptions (such as Gaussianity or log-concavity) that are in general hard to verify. This means that
in the absence of any prior information about the distribution or the optimal achievable error, it can
be hard to check that the learner has even succeeded at meeting its guarantee.
In the testable learning model, the learning algorithm, or tester-learner, is given access to labeled
examples from an unknown distribution and may either reject or accept the unknown distribution.
If it accepts, it must successfully produce a near-optimal hypothesis. Moreover, it is also required
to accept whenever the unknown distribution truly has a certain target marginal D∗ . Work of
[RV23, GKK23, GKSV23, DKK+ 23] provided tester-learners for a range of basic classes (including
halfspaces, intersections of halfspaces, and more) with respect to particular target marginals D∗
(such as the standard Gaussian). All of these algorithms, however, have the shortcoming that they are
closely tailored to the particular target marginal D∗ that is chosen. Indeed, their tests would reject
many well-behaved distributions that are appreciably far from D∗ . A highly natural question from
both a theoretical and a practical perspective is: can we design tester-learners that accept a wide class
of distributions simultaneously, without being tailored to any particular one?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

