P-Flow: A Fast and Data-Efficient Zero-Shot TTS
through Speech Prompting

Sungwon Kim1,2∗ †, Kevin J Shih1 , Rohan Badlani1 , João Felipe Santos1 , Evelina Bhakturina1 ,
Mikyas Desta1 , Rafael Valle1†, Sungroh Yoon2,3†, Bryan Catanzaro1
NVIDIA1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University2
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University3

Abstract
While recent large-scale neural codec language models have shown significant
improvement in zero-shot TTS by training on thousands of hours of data, they
suffer from drawbacks such as a lack of robustness, slow sampling speed similar
to previous autoregressive TTS methods, and reliance on pre-trained neural codec
representations. Our work proposes P-Flow, a fast and data-efficient zero-shot TTS
model that uses speech prompts for speaker adaptation. P-Flow comprises a speechprompted text encoder for speaker adaptation and a flow matching generative
decoder for high-quality and fast speech synthesis. Our speech-prompted text
encoder uses speech prompts and text input to generate speaker-conditional text
representation. The flow matching generative decoder uses the speaker-conditional
output to synthesize high-quality personalized speech significantly faster than in
real-time. Unlike the neural codec language models, we specifically train P-Flow
on LibriTTS dataset using a continuous mel-representation. Through our training
method using continuous speech prompts, P-Flow matches the speaker similarity
performance of the large-scale zero-shot TTS models with two orders of magnitude
less training data and has more than 20× faster sampling speed. Our results show
that P-Flow has better pronunciation and is preferred in human likeness and speaker
similarity to its recent state-of-the-art counterparts, thus defining P-Flow as an
attractive and desirable alternative. We provide audio samples on our demo page.

1

Introduction

Zero-shot TTS (Text-to-Speech) refers to the goal of generating text-conditioned speech with novel
speaker characteristics at inference without the need for additional training. The speaker characteristics are provided by a short reference audio segment, which in recent works can be as short
as 3 seconds long [37, 19, 6]. Many recent advances have come at a cost: larger datasets, more
complicated training setups, additional quantization steps, additional pretraining tasks, and computationally expensive autoregressive formulations. Our work explores whether a more efficient solution
exists. By staying within the general framework of prompt continuation, as often seen in recent large
language model works, we demonstrate that similar results can be achieved with simpler training
pipelines, significantly less data, and faster inference.
Following recent successes in the zero-shot and few-shot capabilities of large scale language models
such as GPT [2], it has been generally accepted that an analogous approach will yield similar results
∗

Work done as a research intern at NVIDIA.
Corresponding authors: Sungwon Kim: ksw0306@snu.ac.kr, Rafael Valle: rafaelvalle@nvidia.com,
Sungroh Yoon: sryoon@snu.ac.kr
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

