INSPECT: A Multimodal Dataset for Pulmonary
Embolism Diagnosis and Prognosis

Shih-Cheng Huang∗
Stanford University
mschuang@stanford.edu
Chia-Chun Chiang
Mayo Clinic
chiang.chia-chun@mayo.edu
Serena Yeung
Stanford University
syyeung@stanford.edu

Zepeng Huo∗
Stanford University
zphuo@stanford.edu

Ethan Steinberg∗
Stanford University
ethanid@stanford.edu

Matthew P. Lungren
Microsoft
mlungren@microsoft.com

Curtis P. Langlotz
Stanford University
langlotz@stanford.edu

Nigam H. Shah
Clinical Excellence Research Center
Stanford University
Technology and Digital Solutions
Stanford Healthcare
nigam@stanford.edu

Jason A. Fries
Stanford University
jfries@stanford.edu

Abstract
Synthesizing information from multiple data sources plays a crucial role in the practice of modern medicine. Current applications of artificial intelligence in medicine
often focus on single-modality data due to a lack of publicly available, multimodal
medical datasets. To address this limitation, we introduce INSPECT, which contains de-identified longitudinal records from a large cohort of patients at risk for
pulmonary embolism (PE), along with ground truth labels for multiple outcomes.
INSPECT contains data from 19,402 patients, including CT images, radiology
report impression sections, and structured electronic health record (EHR) data (i.e.
demographics, diagnoses, procedures, vitals, and medications). Using INSPECT,
we develop and release a benchmark for evaluating several baseline modeling
approaches on a variety of important PE related tasks. We evaluate image-only,
EHR-only, and multimodal fusion models. Trained models and the de-identified
dataset are made available for non-commercial use under a data use agreement. To
the best of our knowledge, INSPECT is the largest multimodal dataset integrating
3D medical imaging and EHR for reproducible methods evaluation and research1 .

1

Introduction

The practice of modern medicine is inherently multimodal, where synthesizing information from
multiple data sources is essential for diagnosis (identifying which condition a patient currently
has) and prognosis (predicting the likely course or outcome of a disease). Physicians routinely
analyze patients’ current symptoms and past medical history by examining imaging modalities
such as X-rays and reviewing electronic health record (EHR) data to diagnose conditions, monitor
disease progression, and tailor treatment plans [40, 10]. Artificial intelligence (AI) models capable of
emulating the multimodal approach of contemporary medicine hold significant promise for enhancing
the efficiency and accuracy of medical diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment planning.
1

https://inspect.stanford.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

