Voicebox: Text-Guided Multilingual
Universal Speech Generation at Scale

Matthew Le∗ Apoorv Vyas∗
Mary Williamson

Bowen Shi∗

Vimal Manohar

Brian Karrer∗

Leda Sari

†

Yossi Adi Jay Mahadeokar

Rashel Moritz

Wei-Ning Hsu∗

Fundamental AI Research (FAIR), Meta

Abstract
Large-scale generative models such as GPT and DALL-E have revolutionized the
research community. These models not only generate high fidelity outputs, but are
also generalists which can solve tasks not explicitly taught. In contrast, speech
generative models are still primitive in terms of scale and task generalization. In
this paper, we present Voicebox, the most versatile text-guided generative model for
speech at scale. Voicebox is a non-autoregressive flow-matching model trained to
infill speech, given audio context and text, trained on over 50K hours of speech that
are not filtered or enhanced. Similar to GPT, Voicebox can perform many different
tasks through in-context learning, but is more flexible as it can also condition on
future context. Voicebox can be used for mono or cross-lingual zero-shot textto-speech synthesis, noise removal, content editing, style conversion, and diverse
sample generation. In particular, Voicebox outperforms the state-of-the-art zeroshot TTS model VALL-E on both intelligibility (5.9% vs 1.9% word error rates)
and audio similarity (0.580 vs 0.681) while being up to 20 times faster. Audio
samples can be found in https://voicebox.metademolab.com.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large-scale generative models [6, 42, 50] have led to a major paradigm shift
towards building general-purpose models, which can perform many new tasks not explicitly trained
on. These generative models learn to predict the missing data given the context. Post training, we
can directly input a question, optionally with a few contextual question-answer examples, instead of
fine-tuning with labeled data. While the training objective appears simple, it subsumes many tasks
as one can convert them into some form of context. For the model to perform well at every task, it
implies that the estimation of p(missing data | context) needs to be accurate for every context. Hence,
scale and diversity are the most crucial factors for building general-purpose models [20, 1].
Despite the success of large-scale generative models in other areas, most speech models are still
trained on datasets at the scale of tens to hundreds of hours [51, 31, 32, 46, 24, 58, 7]. Previous works
consider highly curated datasets such as VCTK [64], which contains only clean audio recorded in
studio from about 100 speakers with little speaking style and text variation. Such models struggle to
synthesize speech with rich variation in emotion, voice, background noise, acoustic condition, and
have not been tested on the abilities to generalize to tasks not explicitly trained on.
This paper presents Voicebox, the most versatile text-conditioned speech generative model at scale.
Voicebox is trained on a text-guided speech infilling task, where the goal is to generate masked speech
∗
†

Equal contribution. Corresponding authors: {mattle,wnhsu}@meta.com
FAIR & Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

