Decentralized Matrix Sensing:
Statistical Guarantees and Fast Convergence
Marie Maros
School of Industrial Engineering
Purdue University
mmaros@purdue.edu

Gesualdo Scutari
School of Industrial Engineering
Purdue University
gscutari@purdue.edu

Abstract
We explore the matrix sensing problem from near-isotropic linear measurements,
distributed across a network of agents modeled as an undirected graph, with no
server. We provide the first study of statistical, computational/communication
guarantees for a decentralized gradient algorithm that solves the (nonconvex)
Burer-Monteiro type decomposition associated to the low-rank matrix estimation.
With small random initialization, the algorithm displays an approximate two-phase
convergence: (i) a spectral phase that aligns the iterates’ column space with
the underlying low-rank matrix, mimicking centralized spectral initialization (not
directly implementable over networks); and (ii) a local refinement phase that diverts
the iterates from certain degenerate saddle points, while ensuring swift convergence
to the underlying low-rank matrix. Central to our analysis is a novel “in-network”
Restricted Isometry Property which accommodates for the decentralized nature
of the optimization, revealing an intriguing interplay between sample complexity,
network connectivity & topology, and communication complexity.

1

Introduction

Matrix sensing–the estimation of a low-rank matrix from a set of linear measurements–finds applications in diverse fields such as image reconstruction (e.g., [48, 29]), object detection (e.g., [33, 52])
and array processing (e.g., [21]), to name a few. It also serves as a benchmark for determining the
statistical and computational guarantees achievable in deep learning theory, since it retains many of
the key phenomena in deep learning while being simpler to analyze. Despite significant progress in
understanding the convergence and generalization properties of various solution methods for training
such learning models, a majority of these advances focus on a centralized paradigm, aggregating
data at a central location with vast computing resources–good tutorials on the topic include [7, 4].
This centralized approach, however, is increasingly unsuitable for modern applications due to server
bottlenecks, inefficient communication, and power usage. Therefore, the development of statistical
learning methods for massively decentralized networks without servers is timely and crucial.
This paper tackles the matrix sensing problem from data distributed over networks. We contemplate a
network of m agents modeled as an undirected graph with no servers, where agents can communicate
with their immediate neighbors–these architectures are also known as mesh networks. The collective
objective is to estimate a ground-truth matrix Z̄ ? 2 Rd⇥d , based on N = m · n total observations
y1 , . . . , yN , equally split into n-sized, disjoint datasets D1 , D2 , . . . , Dm . Each agent’s signal model
is thus given by
⌦
↵
yj = Aj , Z̄ ? := trace(Aj Z̄ ? ), for j 2 Di .
(1)
Here, Aj 2 Rd⇥d , with j 2 Di , are the known symmetric measurement matrices to agent i; Z̄ ? is
assumed symmetric, positive semidefinite, and low-rank, i.e., r? := rank(Z̄ ? ) << d.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

