Balanced Training for Sparse GANs

Yite Wang1† , Jing Wu1† , Naira Hovakimyan1 , Ruoyu Sun2,3∗
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA
2
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
Shenzhen International Center for Industrial and Applied Mathematics,
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
{yitew2,jingwu6,nhovakim}@illinois.edu, sunruoyu@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Over the past few years, there has been growing interest in developing larger and
deeper neural networks, including deep generative models like generative adversarial networks (GANs). However, GANs typically come with high computational
complexity, leading researchers to explore methods for reducing the training and
inference costs. One such approach gaining popularity in supervised learning is
dynamic sparse training (DST), which maintains good performance while enjoying excellent training efficiency. Despite its potential benefits, applying DST to
GANs presents challenges due to the adversarial nature of the training process.
In this paper, we propose a novel metric called the balance ratio (BR) to study
the balance between the sparse generator and discriminator. We also introduce a
new method called balanced dynamic sparse training (ADAPT), which seeks to
control the BR during GAN training to achieve a good trade-off between performance and computational cost. Our proposed method shows promising results
on multiple datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness. Our code is available at
https://github.com/YiteWang/ADAPT.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [20, 7, 70, 44] are a type of generative model that has gained
significant attention in recent years due to their impressive performance in image-generation tasks.
However, the mainstream models in GANs are known to be computationally intensive, making them
challenging to train in resource-constrained settings. Therefore, it is crucial to develop methods that
can effectively reduce the computational cost of training GANs while maintaining their performance,
making GANs more practical and applicable in real-world scenarios.
Neural network pruning has recently emerged as a powerful tool to reduce the training and inference
costs of DNNs for supervised learning. There are mainly three genres of pruning methods, namely
pruning-at-initialization, pruning-during-training, and post-hoc pruning methods. Post-hoc pruning
[32, 42, 25] can date back to the 1980s, which was first introduced for reducing inference time and
memory requirements for efficient deployment; hence does not align with our purpose of efficient
training. Later, pruning-at-initialization [46, 78, 75] and pruning-during-training methods [84] were
introduced to circumvent the need to fully train the dense networks. However, early pruning-duringtraining algorithms [58] do not bring much training efficiency compared to post-hoc pruning, while
pruning-at-initialization methods usually suffer from significant performance drop [18]. Recently,
advances in dynamic sparse training (DST) [62, 16, 51, 52, 54] for the first time show that pruningduring-training methods can have comparable training FLOPs as pruning-at-initialization methods
∗
†

Corresponding author.
Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

