LAMM: Language-Assisted Multi-Modal
Instruction-Tuning Dataset, Framework, and
Benchmark
Zhenfei Yin1, 3∗, Jiong Wang1, 4∗, Jianjian Cao1, 4∗, Zhelun Shi1, 2∗, Dingning Liu1, 5 , Mukai Li1
Xiaoshui Huang1 , Zhiyong Wang3 , Lu Sheng2 , Lei Bai1†, Jing Shao1†, Wanli Ouyang1
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2
3
Beihang University The University of Sydney 4 Fudan University 5 Dalian University of Technology
{yinzhenfei,bailei,shaojing}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Large language models have emerged as a promising approach towards achieving
general-purpose AI agents. The thriving open-source LLM community has greatly
accelerated the development of agents that support human-machine dialogue interaction through natural language processing. However, human interaction with
the world extends beyond only text as a modality, and other modalities such as
vision are also crucial. Recent works on multi-modal large language models, such
as GPT-4V and Bard, have demonstrated their effectiveness in handling visual
modalities. However, the transparency of these works is limited and insufficient to
support academic research. To the best of our knowledge, we present one of the
very first open-source endeavors in the field, LAMM, encompassing a LanguageAssisted Multi-Modal instruction tuning dataset, framework, and benchmark. Our
aim is to establish LAMM as a growing ecosystem for training and evaluating
MLLMs, with a specific focus on facilitating AI agents capable of bridging the
gap between ideas and execution, thereby enabling seamless human-AI interaction. Our main contribution is three-fold: 1) We present a comprehensive dataset
and benchmark, which cover a wide range of vision tasks for 2D and 3D vision.
Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our dataset and benchmark.
2) We outline the detailed methodology of constructing multi-modal instruction
tuning datasets and benchmarks for MLLMs, enabling rapid scaling and extension
of MLLM research to diverse domains, tasks, and modalities. 3) We provide a
primary but potential MLLM training framework optimized for modality extension. We also provide baseline models, comprehensive experimental observations,
and analysis to accelerate future research. Our baseline model is trained within
24 A100 GPU hours, framework supports training with V100 and RTX3090 is
available thanks to the open-source society. Codes and data are now available at
https://openlamm.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Humans interact with the real world through multi-modal information, such as vision and language,
since each modality possesses unique capabilities to describe the world, thereby providing us with
richer information to construct our world model. Developing AI agents capable of processing such
multi-modal information, learning and memorizing world knowledge from it, and comprehending
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Authors: Jing Shao (shaojing@pjlab.org.cn) and Lei Bai (bailei@pjlab.org.cn)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

