CycleNet: Rethinking Cycle Consistency in
Text-Guided Diffusion for Image Manipulation

Sihan Xu1∗ Ziqiao Ma1∗ Yidong Huang1 Honglak Lee1,2 Joyce Chai1
1
University of Michigan, 2 LG AI Research
{sihanxu,marstin,owenhji,honglak,chaijy}@umich.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have enabled breakthroughs in image synthesis tasks but
lack an intuitive interface for consistent image-to-image (I2I) translation. Various
methods have been explored to address this issue, including mask-based methods, attention-based methods, and image-conditioning. However, it remains a
critical challenge to enable unpaired I2I translation with pre-trained DMs while
maintaining satisfying consistency. This paper introduces CycleNet, a novel but
simple method that incorporates cycle consistency into DMs to regularize image
manipulation. We validate CycleNet on unpaired I2I tasks of different granularities. Besides the scene and object level translation, we additionally contribute a
multi-domain I2I translation dataset to study the physical state changes of objects.
Our empirical studies show that CycleNet is superior in translation consistency and
quality, and can generate high-quality images for out-of-domain distributions with
a simple change of the textual prompt. CycleNet is a practical framework, which
is robust even with very limited training data (around 2k) and requires minimal
computational resources (1 GPU) to train.
CycleNet (Ours)

P2P + NullText

Cycle Diﬀusion

SDEdit

Summer → Winter

Input

Figure 1: A high-resolution example of CycleNet for diffusion-based image-to-image translation
compared to other diffusion-based methods. CycleNet produces high-quality translations with
satisfactory consistency. The areas in the boxes are enlarged for detailed comparisons.

1

Introduction

Recently, pre-trained diffusion models (DMs) [38, 37, 39] have enabled an unprecedented breakthrough in image synthesis tasks. Compared to GANs [9] and VAEs [22], DMs exhibit superior
stability and quality in image generation, as well as the capability to scale up to open-world multimodal data. As such, pre-trained DMs have been applied to image-to-image (I2I) translation, which
is to acquire a mapping between images from two distinct domains, e.g., different scenes, different
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

