Human-Guided Complexity-Controlled Abstractions

Andi Peng∗
MIT
Eoin M. Kenny
MIT

Mycal Tucker∗
MIT

Noga Zaslavsky
UC Irvine

Pulkit Agrawal
MIT

Julie A. Shah
MIT

Abstract
Neural networks often learn task-specific latent representations that fail to generalize to novel settings or tasks. Conversely, humans learn discrete representations
(i.e., concepts or words) at a variety of abstraction levels (e.g., “bird” vs. “sparrow”) and deploy the appropriate abstraction based on task. Inspired by this, we
train neural models to generate a spectrum of discrete representations and control
the complexity of the representations (roughly, how many bits are allocated for
encoding inputs) by tuning the entropy of the distribution over representations. In
finetuning experiments, using only a small number of labeled examples for a new
task, we show that (1) tuning the representation to a task-appropriate complexity
level supports the highest finetuning performance, and (2) in a human-participant
study, users were able to identify the appropriate complexity level for a downstream task using visualizations of discrete representations. Our results indicate a
promising direction for rapid model finetuning by leveraging human insight.

1

Introduction

Neural networks learn implicit representations tailored to specific training tasks, but such representations, or abstractions, often fail to generalize to distinct test tasks. One approach to mitigating
such generalization failures is based on the Information Bottleneck (IB) method [26, 1, 25, 24],
which provides a framework for controlling how much information is passed through the network,
effectively limiting its representational complexity. Unfortunately, it is difficult to know a-priori how
much information to retain for optimal task performance.
Humans, however, when given a task, are remarkably adept at understanding which abstraction to
deploy [35]. Consider an expert birdwatcher who has learned fine-grained classes of birds such as
“sparrows,” “goldfinches,” and “kiwis.” When accompanied by other experts, a birdwatcher knows
to deploy their “most complex” abstraction for classifying birds; meanwhile, when at home with a
6-year old child, a birdwatcher knows to deploy a far simpler representation to communicate about a
“red” vs. “yellow” bird. In other words, given a task, humans naturally adopt the right abstraction
level that meaningfully captures task-relevant information and enables rapid learning [11, 5]. Inspired
by humans, we seek to train neural nets along an axis of representational complexity and allow end
users to select the desired complexity level to support data-efficient finetuning.
In this paper, we introduce a human-in-the-loop framework, depicted in Figure 1, for pre-training
and finetuning complexity-regulated neural representations. Within this framework, we first generate
a spectrum of complexity-controlled representations by training discrete information bottleneck
methods [29] on a pre-training task. Second, we allow a human to specify a finetuning task, unknown
∗
1

Equal contribution.
Code available at github.com/mycal-tucker/human-guided-abstractions.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

