Self-Consistent Velocity Matching of Probability Flows

Lingxiao Li
MIT CSAIL
lingxiao@mit.edu

Samuel Hurault
Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, CNRS, IMB
samuel.hurault@math.u-bordeaux.fr

Justin Solomon
MIT CSAIL
jsolomon@mit.edu

Abstract
We present a discretization-free scalable framework for solving a large class
of mass-conserving partial differential equations (PDEs), including the timedependent Fokker-Planck equation and the Wasserstein gradient flow. The main
observation is that the time-varying velocity field of the PDE solution needs to
be self-consistent: it must satisfy a fixed-point equation involving the probability flow characterized by the same velocity field. Instead of directly minimizing
the residual of the fixed-point equation with neural parameterization, we use an
iterative formulation with a biased gradient estimator that bypasses significant
computational obstacles with strong empirical performance. Compared to existing
approaches, our method does not suffer from temporal or spatial discretization,
covers a wider range of PDEs, and scales to high dimensions. Experimentally,
our method recovers analytical solutions accurately when they are available and
achieves superior performance in high dimensions with less training time compared
to alternatives.

1

Introduction

Mass conservation is a ubiquitous phenomenon in dynamical systems arising from fluid dynamics,
electromagnetism, thermodynamics, and stochastic processes. Mathematically, mass conservation is
formulated as the continuity equation:
∂t pt (x) = −∇ · (vt pt ), ∀x, t ∈ [0, T ],
(1)
R
where pt : R → R is a scalar quantity such that the total mass pt (x) is conserved with respect to
t, vt R: Rd → Rd is a velocity field, and T > 0 is total time. We will assume, for all t ∈ [0, T ], pt ≥ 0
and pt (x) dx = 1, i.e., pt is a probability density function. We use µt to denote the probability
measure with density pt . Once a pair (pt , vt ) satisfies (1), the density pt is coupled with vt in the
sense that the evolution of pt in time is characterized by vt (Section 3.1).
d

We consider the subclass of mass-conserving PDEs that can be written succinctly as
∂t pt (x) = −∇ · (ft (x; µt )pt ), ∀x, t ∈ [0, T ],

(2)

where ft (·; µt ) : R → R is a given function depending on µt , with initial condition µ0 = µ∗0 for a
given initial probability measure µ∗0 with density p∗0 .
d

d

Different choices of ft lead to a large class of mass-conserving PDEs. For instance, given a functional
F : P2 (Rd ) → R on the space of probability distributions with finite second moments, if we take
d

ft (x; µt ) := −∇W2 F(µt )(x),

(3)

ft (x; µt ) := bt (x) − Dt (x)∇ log pt (x),

(4)

d

where ∇W2 F(µ) : R → R is the Wasserstein gradient of F, then the solution to (2) is the
Wasserstein gradient flow of F [Santambrogio, 2015, Chapter 8]. Thus, solving (2) efficiently allows
us to optimize in the probability measure space. If we take

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

