Preconditioning Matters: Fast Global Convergence of
Non-convex Matrix Factorization via Scaled Gradient
Descent
Xixi Jia1

Hailin Wang2 Jiangjun Peng2 Xiangchu Feng1∗ Deyu Meng2,3
1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xidian University
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Macao Institute of Systems Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology
{hsijiaxidian, andrew.pengjj}@gmail.com; wanghailin97@163.com
xcfeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn; dymeng@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Low-rank matrix factorization (LRMF) is a canonical problem in non-convex
optimization, the objective function to be minimized is non-convex and even
non-smooth, which makes the global convergence guarantee of gradient-based
algorithm quite challenging. Recent work made a breakthrough on proving that
2
dσd
standard gradient descent converges to the ε-global minima after O( dκ
τ 2 ln τ +
2
σd
dκ
τ 2 ln ε ) iterations from small initialization with a very small learning rate (both
are related to the small constant τ ). While the dependence of the convergence on
the condition number κ and small learning rate makes it not practical especially
for ill-conditioned LRMF problem.
In this paper, we show that precondition helps in accelerating the convergence and
prove that the scaled gradient descent (ScaledGD) and its variant, alternating scaled
gradient descent (AltScaledGD) converge to an ε-global minima after O(ln dδ +ln dε )
iterations from general random initialization. Meanwhile, for small initialization as
in gradient descent, both ScaledGD and AltScaledGD converge to ε-global minima
after only O(ln dε ) iterations. Furthermore, we prove that as a proximity to the
alternating minimization, AltScaledGD converges faster than ScaledGD, its global
convergence does not rely on small learning rate and small initialization, which
certificates the advantages of AltScaledGD in LRMF.

1

Introduction

Low-rank matrix factorization aims to approximate a given rank d matrix M ∈ Rm×n by the product
of two factor matrices U ∈ Rm×d , V ∈ Rn×d , which plays a fundamental and essential role in
low-rank matrix recovery such as matrix completion Jain et al. [2013], Ge et al. [2016], Sun and
Luo [2016], matrix sensing Chi et al. [2019], Zhao et al. [2015], Charisopoulos et al. [2021], robust
principal component analysis Candès et al. [2011], Cai et al. [2021], and the theoretical analysis
of deep neural network Du et al. [2018]. Meanwhile, low-rank matrix factorization is also viewed
as a canonical problem in non-convex optimization as the objective function to be minimized is
non-convex and even non-smooth. Mathematically, we are to solve
min

U ∈Rm×d ,V ∈Rn×d
∗

f (U , V ) :=

1
kU V > − M k2F ,
2

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

(1)

