Instructing Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning
Agents with Temporal Logic Objectives

Wenjie Qiu∗
Rutgers University
wq37@cs.rutgers.edu

Wensen Mao∗
Rutgers University
wm300@cs.rutgers.edu

He Zhu
Rutgers University
hz375@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful approach for learning
general-purpose skills by reaching diverse goals. However, it has limitations when
it comes to task-conditioned policies, where goals are specified by temporally
extended instructions written in the Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) formal language.
Existing approaches for finding LTL-satisfying policies rely on sampling a large
set of LTL instructions during training to adapt to unseen tasks at inference time.
However, these approaches do not guarantee generalization to out-of-distribution
LTL objectives, which may have increased complexity. In this paper, we propose a
novel approach to address this challenge. We show that simple goal-conditioned RL
agents can be instructed to follow arbitrary LTL specifications without additional
training over the LTL task space. Unlike existing approaches that focus on LTL
specifications expressible as regular expressions, our technique is unrestricted
and generalizes to ω-regular expressions. Experiment results demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach in adapting goal-conditioned RL agents to satisfy
complex temporal logic task specifications zero-shot.

1

Introduction

Goal-conditioned learning Liu et al. [2022] is a type of reinforcement learning (RL) task where an
agent learns to achieve a specific goal in a given environment. The goal can be defined in various
ways, such as a particular state of the environment or a desired outcome, and the agent learns to map
its current observations to actions that bring it closer to the goal. By providing a high-level goal, the
agent can effectively learn to generalize its behavior and adapt to changing conditions.
However, goal-conditioned RL agents struggle with generalizing to more complex, task-oriented
policies when the goals are specified by temporally extended instructions typically written in Linear
Temporal Logic (LTL) languages, which creates a much larger task space than simple goals. In such
cases, as the LTL task space is vast and difficult to exhaustively sample, it becomes more challenging
for the agent to identify the correct sequence of actions needed to accomplish a task, which results in
slow learning and poor generalization.
We propose a novel approach that enables simple goal-conditioned RL agents to follow arbitrary
LTL specifications without any additional training over the LTL task space. This is in sharp contrast
to existing approaches for finding LTL-satisfying policies, which require sampling a large set of
LTL instructions from the task space during training as “goals" Vaezipoor et al. [2021], Kuo et al.
[2020]. Such methods have no guarantee in generalizing to unseen tasks outside their training
distribution of LTL objectives. As an example, the capability of most existing learning algorithms for
LTL-satisfying policies is restricted to specifications over regular expressions that can be modeled by
reward machines Icarte et al. [2022, 2018]. Our technique can handle ω-regular LTL specifications
∗

Wenjie Qiu and Wensen Mao contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

