Principle-Driven Self-Alignment of Language Models
from Scratch with Minimal Human Supervision

Zhiqing Sun1∗

Yikang Shen2

Hongxin Zhang3

Qinhong Zhou3

Zhenfang Chen2

Yiming Yang1

David Cox2

Chuang Gan2,3

1
2

Language Technologies Institute, CMU
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
3
UMass Amherst

https://github.com/IBM/Dromedary

Abstract
Recent AI-assistant agents, such as ChatGPT, predominantly rely on supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) with human annotations and reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) to align the output of large language models (LLMs) with
human intentions, ensuring they are helpful, ethical, and reliable. However, this
dependence can significantly constrain the true potential of AI-assistant agents due
to the high cost of obtaining human supervision and the related issues on quality,
reliability, diversity, self-consistency, and undesirable biases. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel approach called S ELF -A LIGN, which combines
principle-driven reasoning and the generative power of LLMs for the self-alignment
of the AI agents with minimal human supervision.
Applying S ELF -A LIGN to the LLaMA-65b base language model, we develop an
AI assistant named Dromedary . With fewer than 300 lines of human annotations (including < 200 seed prompts, 16 generic principles, and 5 exemplars
for in-context learning), Dromedary significantly surpasses the performance of
several state-of-the-art AI systems, including Text-Davinci-003 and Alpaca,
on benchmark datasets with various settings. We have open-sourced the code,
LoRA weights of Dromedary, and our synthetic training data to encourage further
research into aligning LLM-based AI agents with enhanced supervision efficiency,
reduced biases, and improved controllability.

1

Introduction

The problem of aligning large language models (LLMs) to human values and intentions in terms
of being comprehensive, respectful, and compliant1 [10, 32, 30, 4, 5, 27] has gained significant
attention in research as recent AI systems (like ChatGPT or GPT-4) have rapidly advanced in their
capabilities [12, 33, 7, 9]. Presently, state-of-the-art AI systems predominantly depend on supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) with human instructions and annotations, as well as reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF) on their preferences [26, 28, 29, 2]. The success of these techniques heavily
∗
1

Correspondence: zhiqings@cs.cmu.edu.
This is the definition of AI alignment in this paper, distinct from following simple instructions [30, 48, 42].

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

