Demystifying Softmax Gating Function in
Gaussian Mixture of Experts

Huy Nguyen†

TrungTin Nguyen⋄

Nhat Ho†

Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin†
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK⋄
{huynm, minhnhat}@utexas.edu, trung-tin.nguyen@inria.fr

Abstract
Understanding the parameter estimation of softmax gating Gaussian mixture of
experts has remained a long-standing open problem in the literature. It is mainly
due to three fundamental theoretical challenges associated with the softmax gating
function: (i) the identifiability only up to the translation of parameters; (ii) the
intrinsic interaction via partial differential equations between the softmax gating
and the expert functions in the Gaussian density; (iii) the complex dependence
between the numerator and denominator of the conditional density of softmax
gating Gaussian mixture of experts. We resolve these challenges by proposing
novel Voronoi loss functions among parameters and establishing the convergence
rates of maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) for solving parameter estimation
in these models. When the true number of experts is unknown and over-specified,
our findings show a connection between the convergence rate of the MLE and a
solvability problem of a system of polynomial equations.

1

Introduction

Softmax gating Gaussian mixture of experts [32, 37], a class of statistical machine learning models
that combine multiple simpler models, known as expert functions of the covariates, via softmax
gating networks to form more complex and accurate models, has found widespread use in various
applications, including speech recognition [51, 64, 65], natural language processing [14, 20, 17, 54,
21], computer vision [52, 3, 15, 44], and other applications [26, 49, 7, 8, 48, 5, 6]. Regarding the
applications of the softmax gating Gaussian mixture of experts in medicine [43] and physical sciences
[39], the parameters of each expert function play an important role in capturing the heterogeneity of
data. Thus, the main objective of these works is to conduct statistical inference for those parameters,
which leads to a need for convergence rates of parameter estimation in the softmax gating Gaussian
mixture of experts. However, a comprehensive theoretical understanding of parameter estimation in
that model has still remained a long-standing open problem in the literature.
Parameter estimation has been studied quite extensively in standard mixture models. In his seminal
work, Chen et al. [9] established the convergence rate O(n−1/4 ) of parameter estimation in over-fitted
univariate mixture models, namely, the settings when the number of true components is unknown and
over-specified, and the family of distributions is strongly identifiable in the second order, e.g., location
Gaussian distributions. That slow and non-standard rate is due to the collapse of some parameters
into single pararameter or the convergence of weights to zero, which leads to the singularity of Fisher
information matrix around the true parameters. Then, Nguyen et al. [50] and Ho et al. [29] utilized
Wasserstein metrics to achieve this rate under the multivariate settings of second-order strongly
identifiable mixture models. Recently, Ho et al. [28] demonstrated that rates of the MLE can strictly
depend on the number of over-specified components when the mixture models are not strongly
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

