Truncating Trajectories in Monte Carlo Policy
Evaluation: an Adaptive Approach

Riccardo Poiani
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
riccardo.poiani@polimi.it

Nicole Nobili
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
nicole.nobili@mail.polimi.it

Alberto Maria Metelli
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it

Marcello Restelli
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
Policy evaluation via Monte Carlo (MC) simulation is at the core of many MC
Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms (e.g., policy gradient methods). In this
context, the designer of the learning system specifies an interaction budget that the
agent usually spends by collecting trajectories of fixed length within a simulator.
However, is this data collection strategy the best option? To answer this question,
in this paper, we consider as quality index the variance of an unbiased policy return
estimator that uses trajectories of different lengths, i.e., truncated. We first derive
a closed-form expression of this variance that clearly shows the sub-optimality
of the fixed-length trajectory schedule. Furthermore, it suggests that adaptive
data collection strategies that spend the available budget sequentially might be
able to allocate a larger portion of transitions in timesteps in which more accurate
sampling is required to reduce the variance of the final estimate. Building on
these findings, we present an adaptive algorithm called Robust and Iterative Data
collection strategy Optimization (RIDO). The main intuition behind RIDO is to
split the available interaction budget into mini-batches. At each round, the agent
determines the most convenient schedule of trajectories that minimizes an empirical
and robust estimate of the estimator’s variance. After discussing the theoretical
properties of our method, we conclude by assessing its performance across multiple
domains. Our results show that RIDO can adapt its trajectory schedule toward
timesteps where more sampling is required to increase the quality of the final
estimation.

1

Introduction

In Reinforcement Learning [RL, Sutton and Barto, 2018], an agent acts in an unknown, or partially
known, environment to maximize/estimate the infinite expected discounted sum of an external reward
signal, i.e., the expected return. Monte Carlo evaluation [MC, Owen, 2013] is at the core of many
successful RL algorithms. Whenever a simulator with reset possibility is available to the learning
systems designer, a large family of approaches [Williams, 1992, Baxter and Bartlett, 2001, Schulman
et al., 2015, 2017, Cobbe et al., 2021] that can be used to solve the RL problem relies on MC
simulations for estimating performance or gradient estimates on the task to be solved. In this scenario,
since the goal is to estimate the expected infinite sum of rewards, the designer usually specifies a
sufficiently large estimation horizon T , along with a transition budget Λ = QT , so that the agent

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

