Template-free Articulated Neural Point Clouds for
Reposable View Synthesis

Lukas Uzolas Elmar Eisemann Petr Kellnhofer
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
{l.uzolas, e.eisemann, p.kellnhofer}@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Dynamic Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) achieve remarkable visual quality when
synthesizing novel views of time-evolving 3D scenes. However, the common
reliance on backward deformation fields makes reanimation of the captured object
poses challenging. Moreover, the state of the art dynamic models are often limited
by low visual fidelity, long reconstruction time or specificity to narrow application
domains. In this paper, we present a novel method utilizing a point-based representation and Linear Blend Skinning (LBS) to jointly learn a Dynamic NeRF and an
associated skeletal model from even sparse multi-view video. Our forward-warping
approach achieves state-of-the-art visual fidelity when synthesizing novel views and
poses while significantly reducing the necessary learning time when compared to
existing work. We demonstrate the versatility of our representation on a variety of
articulated objects from common datasets and obtain reposable 3D reconstructions
without the need of object-specific skeletal templates. The project website can be
found at https://lukas.uzolas.com/Articulated-Point-NeRF/.

1

Introduction

Synthesizing novel photo-realistic views of captured 3D scenes is important for many domains including virtual/augmented reality, video games or movie productions. In recent years, Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRFs) [1] have proved their remarkable capacity to represent complex view-dependent
effects, captured in photographs and videos, sparsely sampled from natural light fields [2]. Follow-up
works have extended the scope to dynamic scenes [3–10], facilitating rendering of unseen views at
different timestamps. Despite progress in reconstruction quality and speed [11], manipulating learned
scenes remains a challenge, but would be a highly desirable feature, as it can enable downstream
applications, such as the creation of avatars for virtual presence or 3D assets for games and movies.
The key challenge of reposing a NeRF is inverting the backward-warping function that maps individual
observations to a shared canonical representation [3]. It is an inversion of traditional kinematic
animation, such as Linear Blend Skinning (LBS) [12], where a canonical shape is forward-warped to
a desired pose. Such inverse mapping often requires resolving ambiguous situations as it is difficult
to guarantee bijectivity (see Fig. 2). A common remedy are parametric templates, typically built
for narrow application domains, such as human heads and bodies [13–16], but they are difficult to
generalize. Alternatively, object shapes can be retrieved from videos as ensembles of geometric parts,
yet existing techniques provide limited image-synthesis fidelity [17–19]. Our work aims to combine
these different lines of work and enable joint learning of the NeRF representation and its pose
parameterization from sparse or dense multi-view videos. We aim for time-efficient class-agnostic
view synthesis of reposable models with high image-synthesis quality without access to a template or
pose annotation, which is a combination not currently covered by existing work (see Table 1).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

