The paper has been revised to address the identified inaccuracies in the references.

Distributional Pareto-Optimal Multi-Objective
Reinforcement Learning

Xin-Qiang Cai1∗ , Pushi Zhang2∗ , Li Zhao2 , Jiang Bian2 ,
Masashi Sugiyama3,1 Ashley J. Llorens2
1
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
2
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
3
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
Multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) has been proposed to learn control
policies over multiple competing objectives with each possible preference over
returns. However, current MORL algorithms fail to account for distributional
preferences over the multi-variate returns, which are particularly important in realworld scenarios such as autonomous driving. To address this issue, we extend the
concept of Pareto-optimality in MORL into distributional Pareto-optimality, which
captures the optimality of return distributions, rather than the expectations. Our
proposed method, called Distributional Pareto-Optimal Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning (DPMORL), is capable of learning distributional Pareto-optimal
policies that balance multiple objectives while considering the return uncertainty.
We evaluated our method on several benchmark problems and demonstrated its
effectiveness in discovering distributional Pareto-optimal policies and satisfying
diverse distributional preferences compared to existing MORL methods.

1

Introduction

Apart from most Reinforcement Learning (RL) works that consider the scalar reward of a task [1, 2,
3, 4], Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning (MORL) has recently received extensive attention
due to its adeptness at managing intricate decision-making issues with multiple conflicting objectives
[5, 6, 7, 8]. In many multi-objective tasks, the relative preferences of users over different objectives
are typically indeterminate a priori. Consequently, MORL’s primary aim is to learn a variety of
optimal policies under different preferences to approximate the Pareto frontier of optimal solutions.
It has been demonstrated that MORL can significantly reduce the reliance on scalar reward design for
objective combinations and dynamically adapt to the varying preferences of different users.
However, numerous real-world situations involve not only unknown relative preferences across multiple objectives, but also uncertain preferences in return distributions. These may include preference
in risk [9, 10], safety conditions [11], and non-linear user’s utility [12]. Consider, for instance,
autonomous driving scenarios where agents need to strike a balance between safety and efficiency objectives. Different users might possess varying levels of risk tolerance. Some may demand high safety
performance, tolerating lower expected efficiency, while others may seek a more balanced performance between safety and efficiency. Current MORL methods, by focusing exclusively on expected
values with linear preferences, may not adequately capture multi-objective risk-sensitive preferences,
hence being unable to deliver diverse policies catering to users with varied risk preferences.
In this work, we broaden the concept of Pareto-optimality in MORL to encompass distributional
Pareto-optimality, which prioritizes the optimality of return distributions over mere expectations, as
∗

Equal contribution. Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

