Managing Temporal Resolution in Continuous Value
Estimation: A Fundamental Trade-off
Zichen Zhang∗, Johannes Kirschner, Junxi Zhang, Francesco Zanini, Alex Ayoub,
Masood Dehghan, Dale Schuurmans
University of Alberta
{zichen2,jkirschn,junxi3,fzanini,aayoub,masood1,daes}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
A default assumption in reinforcement learning (RL) and optimal control is that
observations arrive at discrete time points on a fixed clock cycle. Yet, many applications involve continuous-time systems where the time discretization, in principle,
can be managed. The impact of time discretization on RL methods has not been
fully characterized in existing theory, but a more detailed analysis of its effect
could reveal opportunities for improving data-efficiency. We address this gap by
analyzing Monte-Carlo policy evaluation for LQR systems and uncover a fundamental trade-off between approximation and statistical error in value estimation.
Importantly, these two errors behave differently to time discretization, leading to
an optimal choice of temporal resolution for a given data budget. These findings
show that managing the temporal resolution can provably improve policy evaluation efficiency in LQR systems with finite data. Empirically, we demonstrate the
trade-off in numerical simulations of LQR instances and standard RL benchmarks
for non-linear continuous control.

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications of control and reinforcement learning, the underlying system evolves
continuously in time [Eliasmith and Furlong, 2022]. For instance, a physical system like a robot is
naturally modelled as a stochastic dynamical system. Nonetheless, sensor measurements are typically
captured at discrete time intervals, which entails choosing the sampling frequency or measurement
step-size. This step-size is usually treated as an immutable quantity based on prior measurement
design, but it has a significant impact on data efficiency [Burns et al., 2023]. We will see that, from a
data-cost perspective, learning can be far more data efficient if it operates at a temporal resolution
that is allowed to differ from a prior step-size choice.
In this work, we investigate episodic policy evaluation with a finite data budget to provide a key initial
step to addressing broader research questions on the impact of temporal resolution in reinforcement
learning. We show that data efficiency can be significantly improved by leveraging a precise
understanding of the trade-off between approximation error and statistical estimation error in value
estimation — two factors that react differently to the level of temporal discretization. Intuitively,
employing a finer temporal resolution leads to a better approximation of the continuous-time system
from discrete measurements; however, under a fixed data budget, denser data within each trajectory
results in fewer trajectories, leading to increased estimation variance due to system stochasticity. This
implies that, for a given data cost, it can be beneficial to increase temporal spacing between recorded
data points beyond a pre-set measurement step-size. This holds true for any system with stochastic
dynamics, even if the learner has access to exact (noiseless) state measurements.
∗

All authors contributed equally

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

