MGDD: A Meta Generator for
Fast Dataset Distillation
Songhua Liu Xinchao Wang∗
National University of Singapore
songhua.liu@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Existing dataset distillation (DD) techniques typically rely on iterative strategies
to synthesize condensed datasets, where datasets before and after distillation are
forward and backward through neural networks a massive number of times. Despite
the promising results achieved, the time efficiency of prior approaches is still far
from satisfactory. Moreover, when different sizes of synthetic datasets are required,
they have to repeat the iterative training procedures, which is highly cumbersome
and lacks flexibility. In this paper, different from the time-consuming forwardbackward passes, we introduce a generative fashion for dataset distillation with
significantly improved efficiency. Specifically, synthetic samples are produced by
a generator network conditioned on the initialization of DD, while synthetic labels
are obtained by solving a least-squares problem in a feature space. Our theoretical
analysis reveals that the errors of synthetic datasets solved in the original space
and then processed by any conditional generators are upper-bounded. To find a
satisfactory generator efficiently, we propose a meta-learning algorithm, where a
meta generator is trained on a large dataset so that only a few steps are required to
adapt to a target dataset. The meta generator is termed as MGDD in our approach.
Once adapted, it can handle arbitrary sizes of synthetic datasets, even for those
unseen during adaptation. Experiments demonstrate that the generator adapted
with only a limited number of steps performs on par with those state-of-the-art DD
methods and yields 22× acceleration.

1

Introduction

Dataset distillation (DD) introduced by Wang et al. [51] aims to compress an original dataset T
into a much smaller synthetic set S, such that the performance of a neural network, trained with the
condensed dataset S, is similar to the network trained with T . The derived synthetic datasets not only
save the cost of storage and transmission but also significantly reduce the computational resources
and time required by training models using original datasets. As such, DD finds its application across
a wide spectrum of domains and is receiving increasing attention from the community.
The typical paradigm of DD is to optimize S in an iterative loop, as shown in Fig. 1(a). In each
iteration, a new network is sampled, leveraged by which a matching metric is calculated for S and T ,
and the matching loss is then back-propagated through the network to update S. Recently, a large
number of approaches have been dedicated to exploring advanced matching objectives to improve
the training performance of distilled datasets, including matching training performance via meta
learning [51, 7], matching feature regression performance [37, 38, 61, 32, 33], matching training
gradients [60, 58, 20], matching training trajectories [2, 8, 4], and matching feature statistics [59, 50].
Although impressive results have been achieved and it has been demonstrated that neural networks
trained by a synthetic dataset with even only 1 image per class can yield reasonable performance
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

