Optimal Parameter and Neuron Pruning for
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Chao Chen1 , Zhihang Fu1∗, Kai Liu2 , Ze Chen1 , Mingyuan Tao1 , Jieping Ye1
1
Alibaba Cloud 2 Zhejiang University
{ercong.cc, zhihang.fzh, yejieping}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
For a machine learning model deployed in real world scenarios, the ability of detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) samples is indispensable and challenging. Most
existing OOD detection methods focused on exploring advanced training skills or
training-free tricks to prevent the model from yielding overconfident confidence
score for unknown samples. The training-based methods require expensive training
cost and rely on OOD samples which are not always available, while most trainingfree methods can not efficiently utilize the prior information from the training
data. In this work, we propose an Optimal Parameter and Neuron Pruning (OPNP)
approach, which aims to identify and remove those parameters and neurons that
lead to over-fitting. The main method is divided into two steps. In the first step, we
evaluate the sensitivity of the model parameters and neurons by averaging gradients
over all training samples. In the second step, the parameters and neurons with
exceptionally large or close to zero sensitivities are removed for prediction. Our
proposal is training-free, compatible with other post-hoc methods, and exploring
the information from all training data. Extensive experiments are performed on
multiple OOD detection tasks and model architectures, showing that our proposed
OPNP consistently outperforms the existing methods by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, deep neural networks have achieved dramatic performance gains in computer
vision [7], natural language processing [38], and AI for Science [25]. However, when deploying
those deep learning models in real world scenarios, the model will provide a false prediction result
for unseen categories, which will lead to serious security issues. A promising approach to address
this problem is Out-of-Distribution (OOD) detection [51], which aims to distinguish whether the
given sample is from training class or unknown category. The deep learning models with good OOD
detection ability know what they don’t know and can be used safely in real world applications.
Recently, a large number of works have been proposed to address the OOD detection problem
[22, 21, 26]. Early representative methods utilized the Maximum Softmax Probability (MSP) [21] or
Mahalanobis distance [26] as score function. The main challenge is that modern overparameterized
deep neural networks can easily produce overconfident predictions on OOD samples, making the
in-distribution (ID) data and OOD data inseparable. To alleviate the overconfident problem, some
training-based methods and post-hoc methods have been proposed. The training-based methods
mitigate the overconfident problem by incorporating OOD samples in training process [22] or
synthesizing virtual outliers to regularize the model’s decision boundary [9]. The post-hoc methods
mainly focused on optimizing score function [24, 29, 31], or rectifying activations [43, 6] to make the
ID and OOD samples more separable. The training-based methods are controllable and interpretable,
but they rely on expensive training cost and additional OOD samples, which are not always available.
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

