Debiasing Pretrained Generative Models by Uniformly
Sampling Semantic Attributes

Walter Gerych1 ∗ , Kevin Hickey1 , Luke Buquicchio1 , Kavin Chandrasekaran1 , Abdulaziz Alajaji2 ,
Elke Rundensteiner1 , Emmanuel Agu1
1
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA
2
King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
Generative models are being increasingly used in science and industry applications.
Unfortunately, they often perpetuate the biases present in their training sets, such
as societal biases causing certain groups to be underrepresented in the data. For
instance, image generators may overwhelmingly produce images of white people
due to few non-white samples in their training data. It is imperative to debias
generative models so they synthesize an equal number of instances for each group,
while not requiring retraining of the model to avoid prohibitive expense. We
thus propose a distribution mapping module that produces samples from a fair
noise distribution, such that the pretrained generative model produces semantically
uniform outputs - an equal number of instances for each group - when conditioned
on these samples. This does not involve retraining the generator, nor does it require
any real training data. Experiments on debiasing generators trained on popular
real-world datasets show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Background. Generative models have become a cornerstone of modern machine learning, allowing
for the synthesis of realistic data for many domains, including images [19, 35], audio [22], and text
[11, 4]. However, even leading generative models often reproduce the biases present in their training
data [13, 26], such as image generation models strongly over-representing white males [24]. As
generative models are increasingly used for data augmentation to train downstream models [5] in
domains from scientific to medical fields [25, 9], biased synthesized data could lead to results that
are skewed or inaccurate. This can exacerbate existing issues such as facial recognition models
performing significantly worse on non-white individuals [29] or healthcare models being much
less accurate for certain minority groups [23]. Further, with the rapid growth of generative models
in commercial applications, the potential financial, legal and ethical costs of biased outputs are
significant. Thus, it is imperative to develop methods that mitigate bias in generative models to ensure
that their outputs are fair and equitable by generating a roughly equal number of samples of each
group. We call such outputs semantically uniform, and the attribute that they are uniform over - such
as gender or race - the semantic attribute.
State-of-the-art. Existing methods for addressing bias in generative models often train a new model
from scratch [27, 37, 2], though this is computationally expensive, requires significant labeled data,
and wastes resources already previously spent training the existing (biased) generative model. Latent
attribute editing methods modify the samples in the latent space of generative models to produce
controlled changes in the output, and could potentially be used to correct for bias [17]. However, this
requires making limiting assumptions such as that semantic attributes correspond to linear directions
∗

Corresponding author: wgerych@wpi.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

