Efficient Uncertainty Quantification and Reduction for
Over-Parameterized Neural Networks
Ziyi Huang, Henry Lam, Haofeng Zhang ∗
Columbia University
New York, NY, USA
zh2354,khl2114,hz2553@columbia.edu

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is important for reliability assessment and enhancement of machine learning models. In deep learning, uncertainties arise not only
from data, but also from the training procedure that often injects substantial noises
and biases. These hinder the attainment of statistical guarantees and, moreover,
impose computational challenges on UQ due to the need for repeated network
retraining. Building upon the recent neural tangent kernel theory, we create statistically guaranteed schemes to principally characterize, and remove, the uncertainty
of over-parameterized neural networks with very low computation effort. In particular, our approach, based on what we call a procedural-noise-correcting (PNC)
predictor, removes the procedural uncertainty by using only one auxiliary network
that is trained on a suitably labeled dataset, instead of many retrained networks
employed in deep ensembles. Moreover, by combining our PNC predictor with
suitable light-computation resampling methods, we build several approaches to
construct asymptotically exact-coverage confidence intervals using as low as four
trained networks without additional overheads.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty quantification (UQ) concerns the dissection and estimation of various sources of errors
in a prediction model. It has growing importance in machine learning, as it helps assess and enhance
the trustworthiness and deployment safety across many real-world tasks ranging from computer
vision [67, 21] and natural language processing [113, 103] to autonomous driving [90, 91], as well as
guiding exploration in sequential learning [9, 1, 119]. In the deep learning context, UQ encounters
unique challenges on both the statistical and computational fronts. On a high level, these challenges
arise from the over-parametrized and large-scale nature of neural networks so that, unlike classical
statistical models, the prediction outcomes incur not only noises from the data, but also importantly
the training procedure itself [73, 94]. This elicits a deviation from the classical statistical theory that
hinders the attainment of established guarantees. Moreover, because of the sizes of these models,
conventional procedures such as resampling [37, 30, 102] demand an amount of computation that
could quickly become infeasible.
Our main goal of this paper is to propose a UQ framework for over-parametrized neural networks in
regression that has simultaneous statistical coverage guarantee, in the sense of classical frequentist
asymptotic exactness, and low computation cost, in the sense of requiring only few (as low as four)
neural network trainings, without other extra overheads. A main driver of these strengths in our
framework is a new implementable concept, which we call the Procedural-Noise-Correcting (PNC)
predictor. It consists of an auxiliary network that is trained on a suitably artificially labeled dataset,
with behavior mimicking the variability coming from the training procedure. To reach our goal, we
∗

Authors are listed alphabetically.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

