LICO: Explainable Models with
Language-Image COnsistency

Yiming Lei1 , Zilong Li1 , Yangyang Li2 , Junping Zhang1 , Hongming Shan3,4∗
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence and
MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Fudan University
4
Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-inspired Technology
{ymlei, jpzhang, hmshan}@fudan.edu.cn,
zilongli23@m.fudan.edu.cn, yyli@amss.ac.cn

Abstract
Interpreting the decisions of deep learning models has been actively studied since
the explosion of deep neural networks. One of the most convincing interpretation
approaches is salience-based visual interpretation, such as Grad-CAM, where the
generation of attention maps depends merely on categorical labels. Although
existing interpretation methods can provide explainable decision clues, they often
yield partial correspondence between image and saliency maps due to the limited
discriminative information from one-hot labels. This paper develops a LanguageImage COnsistency model for explainable image classification, termed LICO, by
correlating learnable linguistic prompts with corresponding visual features in a
coarse-to-fine manner. Specifically, we first establish a coarse global manifold
structure alignment by minimizing the distance between the distributions of image
and language features. We then achieve fine-grained saliency maps by applying
optimal transport (OT) theory to assign local feature maps with class-specific
prompts. Extensive experimental results on eight benchmark datasets demonstrate
that the proposed LICO achieves a significant improvement in generating more
explainable attention maps in conjunction with existing interpretation methods
such as Grad-CAM. Remarkably, LICO improves the classification performance of
existing models without introducing any computational overhead during inference.
Source code is made available at https://github.com/ymLeiFDU/LICO.

1

Introduction

Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown excellent performance in many fields, the lack
of interpretability is still a barrier to landing in some high-stakes scenarios such as medical diagnosis,
autonomous driving, etc. Therefore, the literature proposes various interpretation methods for DNNs
and reveals the decision clues of DNNs to some extent.
Popular interpretation methods can be roughly categorized into two types: 1) gradient backpropagation-based, and 2) class activation mapping (CAM)-based. Both of them mainly take image
classification as the pretext task and then generate explainable noisy gradients and saliency maps,
respectively. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), CAM-based methods often explore a better weighting scheme
for integrating feature maps of a given input image. The gradient-based methods, in Fig. 1(b), also
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

