Provable Training for Graph Contrastive Learning

Yue Yu1 , Xiao Wang2∗ , Mengmei Zhang1 , Nian Liu1 , Chuan Shi1∗
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Beihang University, China
yuyue1218@bupt.edu.cn, xiao_wang@buaa.edu.cn,
{zhangmm, nianliu, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) has emerged as a popular training approach
for learning node embeddings from augmented graphs without labels. Despite the
key principle that maximizing the similarity between positive node pairs while
minimizing it between negative node pairs is well established, some fundamental
problems are still unclear. Considering the complex graph structure, are some
nodes consistently well-trained and following this principle even with different
graph augmentations? Or are there some nodes more likely to be untrained
across graph augmentations and violate the principle? How to distinguish these
nodes and further guide the training of GCL? To answer these questions, we
first present experimental evidence showing that the training of GCL is indeed
imbalanced across all nodes. To address this problem, we propose the metric
"node compactness", which is the lower bound of how a node follows the GCL
principle related to the range of augmentations. We further derive the form of node
compactness theoretically through bound propagation, which can be integrated into
binary cross-entropy as a regularization. To this end, we propose the PrOvable
Training (POT1 ) for GCL, which regularizes the training of GCL to encode node
embeddings that follows the GCL principle better. Through extensive experiments
on various benchmarks, POT consistently improves the existing GCL approaches,
serving as a friendly plugin.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are successful in many graph-related applications, e.g., node
classification [10, 20] and link prediction [33, 27]. Traditional GNNs follow a semi-supervised
learning paradigm requiring task-specific high-quality labels, which are expensive to obtain [9]. To
alleviate the dependence on labels, graph contrastive learning (GCL) is proposed and has received
considerable attention recently [35, 31, 25, 21, 29]. As a typical graph self-supervised learning
technique, GCL shows promising results on many downstream tasks [22, 30, 23].
The learning process of GCL usually consists of the following steps: generate two graph augmentations [35]; feed these augmented graphs into a graph encoder to learn the node embeddings, and
then optimize the whole training process based on the InfoNCE principle [15, 35, 36], where the
positive and negative node pairs are selected from the two augmentations. With this principle ("GCL
principle" for short), GCL learns the node embeddings where the similarities between the positive
node pairs are maximized while the similarities between the negative node pairs are minimized.
However, it is well known that the real-world graph structure is complex and different nodes may have
different properties [1, 2, 11, 36]. When generating augmentations and training on the complex graph
∗
1

Corresponding authors.
Code available at https://github.com/VoidHaruhi/POT-GCL

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

