Quantum speedups for stochastic optimization

Aaron Sidford and Chenyi Zhang
{sidford,chenyiz}@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of minimizing a continuous function given given access
to a natural quantum generalization of a stochastic gradient oracle. We provide
two new methods for the special case of minimizing a Lipschitz convex function.
Each method obtains a dimension versus accuracy trade-off which is provably
unachievable classically and we prove that one method is asymptotically optimal
in low-dimensional settings. Additionally, we provide quantum algorithms for
computing a critical point of a smooth non-convex function at rates not known
to be achievable classically. To obtain these results we build upon the quantum
multivariate mean estimation result of Cornelissen et al. [25] and provide a general
quantum variance reduction technique of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimization is central to modern machine learning. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD),
and its many variants, are used broadly for solving challenges in data science and learning theory.
In theory, SGD and stochastic optimization, have been the subject of decades of extensive study.
[19, 68, 27] established that SGD achieves optimal rates for minimizing Lipschitz convex functions1
(even in one dimension) and stochastic optimization methods have been established for a range of
problems [72, 70, 73, 74]. More recently, the complexity of stochastic gradient methods for smooth
non-convex optimization, e.g., critical point computation, were established [3, 29, 30, 49, 50].
Given the foundational nature of stochastic optimization and the potential promise and increased
study of quantum algorithms, it is natural to ask whether quantum computation could enable
improved rates for solving these problems. There has been work studying whether access to
quantum counterparts of classic optimization oracle can yield faster rates for semidefinite programs [13, 12, 43, 75, 76, 54], convex optimization [21, 5, 20], and non-convex optimization [23, 63, 80]. Notably, [52] showed that with just access to the quantum analog of an zeroth-order
oracle, i.e., an oracle that when queried at a point outputs the value of the function at that point, it
is possible to simulate access to a classic gradient oracle with a single query. This tool immediately
yields improved rates for, e.g., convex function minimization, with a zeroth-order oracle.
Unfortunately, despite this progress and the established power of quantum evaluation oracles, obtaining further improvements has been challenging. A line of work established a variety of striking
lower bounds ruling out quantum speedups for fundamental optimization problems [31, 32, 82]. For
example, [31] showed that when given access to the quantum analog of a first-order oracle, i.e.,
an oracle that when queried at a point outputs the value of the function as well as the gradient at
that point, quantum algorithms have no improved rates for non-smooth convex optimization over
GD and SGD when the dimension is large. [82] extended this result to the non-convex setting and
1
We assume all objective functions are differentiable. Similar to related work, see e.g., [15], our results can
be generalized to non-differentiable settings since convex functions are almost everywhere differentiable and
our algorithms and corresponding convergence analysis are robust to polynomially small numerical errors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

