This Looks Like Those: Illuminating Prototypical
Concepts Using Multiple Visualizations

Chiyu Ma∗

Brandon Zhao∗

Chaofan Chen

Cynthia Rudin

Dartmouth College
chiyu.ma.gr@dartmouth.edu

Caltech
byzhao@caltech.edu

University of Maine
chaofan.chen@maine.edu

Duke University
cynthia@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
We present ProtoConcepts, a method for interpretable image classification combining deep learning and case-based reasoning using prototypical parts. Existing
work in prototype-based image classification uses a “this looks like that” reasoning
process, which dissects a test image by finding prototypical parts and combining
evidence from these prototypes to make a final classification. However, all of the
existing prototypical part-based image classifiers provide only one-to-one comparisons, where a single training image patch serves as a prototype to compare with a
part of our test image. With these single-image comparisons, it can often be difficult
to identify the underlying concept being compared (e.g., “is it comparing the color
or the shape?”). Our proposed method modifies the architecture of prototype-based
networks to instead learn prototypical concepts which are visualized using multiple
image patches. Having multiple visualizations of the same prototype allows us to
more easily identify the concept captured by that prototype (e.g., “the test image
and the related training patches are all the same shade of blue”), and allows our
model to create richer, more interpretable visual explanations. Our experiments
show that our “this looks like those” reasoning process can be applied as a modification to a wide range of existing prototypical image classification networks while
achieving comparable accuracy on benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

As machine learning models are increasingly adopted in high-impact, high-stakes domains such
as healthcare [2, 13], self-driving cars [24], facial recognition [23], etc., the design of humaninterpretable models has become essential for ensuring accountability and transparency of their
decisions. In particular, a class of models called prototype networks have combined the power of
deep learning with the explainability of case-based reasoning to make accurate, human-interpretable
decisions on fine-grained image classification tasks [3, 6, 19, 25, 26, 36]. These models make
decisions by dissecting an image into informative feature patches, then comparing them to prototypical
parts learned during training. Evidence of similarity to each prototypical part is then combined to
make a final classification.
When evaluating the interpretability of an image classification network, it is important to consider not
only the model’s capability to explain its reasoning process, but also the quality of its explanations.
The image features analyzed by prototype networks can encode a variety of visual properties, such
as color, shape, texture, contrast, or saturation. Because each prototype in the existing prototype
network corresponds exactly to a single patch of a single training image, it can be difficult for human
users to understand the exact semantic content underlying a prototype’s visualization. Although there
has been some work in quantifying the importance of each of these feature categories in prototypes
[20], the exact semantic content in an image patch can still remain ambiguous (e.g. “Texture is
∗

Denotes equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

