G EN E VAL: An Object-Focused Framework for
Evaluating Text-to-Image Alignment

Dhruba Ghosh1
1

Hannaneh Hajishirzi1,2 ∗
2

University of Washington
∗

Allen Institute for AI

Ludwig Schmidt1,2,3 ∗
3

LAION

denotes equal contribution

Abstract
Recent breakthroughs in diffusion models, multimodal pretraining, and efficient
finetuning have led to an explosion of text-to-image generative models. Given
human evaluation is expensive and difficult to scale, automated methods are critical
for evaluating the increasingly large number of new models. However, most current
automated evaluation metrics like FID or CLIPScore only offer a holistic measure of
image quality or image-text alignment, and are unsuited for fine-grained or instancelevel analysis. In this paper, we introduce G EN E VAL, an object-focused framework
to evaluate compositional image properties such as object co-occurrence, position,
count, and color. We show that current object detection models can be leveraged
to evaluate text-to-image models on a variety of generation tasks with strong
human agreement, and that other discriminative vision models can be linked to this
pipeline to further verify properties like object color. We then evaluate several opensource text-to-image models and analyze their relative generative capabilities on
our benchmark. We find that recent models demonstrate significant improvement
on these tasks, though they are still lacking in complex capabilities such as spatial
relations and attribute binding. Finally, we demonstrate how G EN E VAL might be
used to help discover existing failure modes, in order to inform development of the
next generation of text-to-image models. Our code to run the G EN E VAL framework
is publicly available at https://github.com/djghosh13/geneval.

1

Introduction

Text-to-image (T2I) models have exploded in popularity in recent years. After the introduction of
DALL-E [33], breakthroughs in diffusion models quickly led to the development of more capable T2I
models like DALL-E 2 [1] and Stable Diffusion [36]. Since then, T2I models have found varied use
cases in creative matters like art and research applications like training data generation. Research into
parameter-efficient finetuning methods has also led to a large number of new models and finetuned
checkpoints of popular models. Currently, the Huggingface Hub1 hosts over 4,000 T2I-related models
and repositories.
The current gold standard for evaluating T2I models is typically human preference comparison
between models, which is costly to scale up. Thus, the increase in number of T2I models makes
manual evaluation inadequate. This raises the need for reliable, automated evaluation methods.
However, traditional automated evaluation methods cannot analyze compositional capabilities and
lack fine-grained reporting. Metrics such as the Frechet Inception Distance [16] solely evaluate image
quality without taking the prompt into account. Other common metrics such as CLIPScore [15] rely
1

https://huggingface.co/models

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

