On the explainable properties of 1-Lipschitz Neural
Networks: An Optimal Transport Perspective

Mathieu Serrurier1

Franck Mamalet2

Thomas Fel3,4

Louis Béthune1

Thibaut Boissin2
1

2

Université Paul-Sabatier, IRIT, Toulouse, France
Institut de Recherche Technologique Saint-Exupéry, Toulouse, France
3
Carney Institute for Brain Science,Brown University, USA
4
Innovation & Research Division, SNCF, France

Abstract
Input gradients have a pivotal role in a variety of applications, including adversarial
attack algorithms for evaluating model robustness, explainable AI techniques for
generating Saliency Maps, and counterfactual explanations. However, Saliency
Maps generated by traditional neural networks are often noisy and provide limited
insights. In this paper, we demonstrate that, on the contrary, the Saliency Maps of
1-Lipschitz neural networks, learned with the dual loss of an optimal transportation
problem, exhibit desirable XAI properties: They are highly concentrated on the
essential parts of the image with low noise, significantly outperforming state-of-theart explanation approaches across various models and metrics. We also prove that
these maps align unprecedentedly well with human explanations on ImageNet. To
explain the particularly beneficial properties of the Saliency Map for such models,
we prove this gradient encodes both the direction of the transportation plan and
the direction towards the nearest adversarial attack. Following the gradient down
to the decision boundary is no longer considered an adversarial attack, but rather
a counterfactual explanation that explicitly transports the input from one class to
another. Thus, Learning with such a loss jointly optimizes the classification objective and the alignment of the gradient, i.e. the Saliency Map, to the transportation
plan direction. These networks were previously known to be certifiably robust by
design, and we demonstrate that they scale well for large problems and models,
and are tailored for explainability using a fast and straightforward method.

1

Introduction

The Lipschitz constant of a function expresses the extent to which the output may vary for a small
shift in the input. As a composition of numerous functions, the Lipschitz constant of a neural
network can be arbitrarily high, particularly when trained for a classification task [8]. Adversarial
attacks [45] exploit this weakness by selecting minor modifications, such as imperceptible noise,
for a given example to change the predicted class and deceive the network. Consequently, Saliency
Maps [59] – gradient of output with respect to the input –, serve as the basis for most adversarial
attacks and often highlight noisy patterns that fool the model instead of meaningful modifications,
rendering them generally unsuitable for explaining model decisions. Therefore, several methods
requiring more complex computations, such as SmoothGrad [61], Integrated Gradient [64], or GradCAM [55], have been proposed to provide smoother explanations. Recently, the XAI community
has investigated the link between explainability and robustness and proposed methods and metrics
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

