Reliable Off-Policy Learning for Dosage Combinations

Jonas Schweisthal, Dennis Frauen, Valentyn Melnychuk & Stefan Feuerriegel
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
{jonas.schweisthal,frauen,melnychuk,feuerriegel}@lmu.de

Abstract
Decision-making in personalized medicine such as cancer therapy or critical care
must often make choices for dosage combinations, i.e., multiple continuous treatments. Existing work for this task has modeled the effect of multiple treatments
independently, while estimating the joint effect has received little attention but
comes with non-trivial challenges. In this paper, we propose a novel method
for reliable off-policy learning for dosage combinations. Our method proceeds
along three steps: (1) We develop a tailored neural network that estimates the
individualized dose-response function while accounting for the joint effect of multiple dependent dosages. (2) We estimate the generalized propensity score using
conditional normalizing flows in order to detect regions with limited overlap in
the shared covariate-treatment space. (3) We present a gradient-based learning
algorithm to find the optimal, individualized dosage combinations. Here, we ensure
reliable estimation of the policy value by avoiding regions with limited overlap.
We finally perform an extensive evaluation of our method to show its effectiveness.
To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first work to provide a method for reliable
off-policy learning for optimal dosage combinations.

1

Introduction

In personalized medicine, decision-making frequently involves complex choices for dosage combinations. For example, in cancer therapy, patients with chemotherapy or immunotherapy receive
a combination of two or three drugs, and, for each, the dosage must be carefully personalized [16,
82]. In critical care, medical professionals must simultaneously control multiple parameters for
mechanical ventilation, including respiratory rate and tidal volume [20].
One way to find optimal dosages (i.e., multiple continuous treatments) is through randomized
controlled trials. Yet, such randomized controlled trials are often impractical due to the complexity
of dosing problems or even unethical [62]. Instead, there is a direct need for learning optimal,
individualized dosage combinations from observational data (so-called off-policy learning).
Several methods for off-policy learning aim at discrete treatments [1, 3, 4, 14, 23, 37, 40, 74, 76] and
are thus not applicable to dosage combinations. In contrast to that, there are only a few methods that
aim at off-policy learning for continuous treatments, that is, dosages [6, 10, 41, 44, 87]. To achieve
this, some of these methods utilize the individualized dose-response function, which is typically not
available and must be estimated from observational data. However, existing works model the effect of
multiple continuous treatments independently. Because of that, existing works ignore the dependence
structure among dosage combinations, that is, drug-drug interactions. For example, in chemotherapy,
the combination of antineoplastic agents with drugs such as warfarin can have adverse effects on
patient health [61]. In contrast to that, methods for off-policy learning that account for the joint effect
of dosage combinations have received little attention and present the focus of our paper.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

