Towards Efficient and Accurate Winograd
Convolution via Full Quantization

Tianqi Chen1,2 , Weixiang Xu1 , Weihan Chen1 , Peisong Wang1,2,3†, Jian Cheng1,2,3,4†
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
AIRIA 4 Maicro.ai
{chentianqi2023, xuweixiang2018,chenweihan2018}@ia.ac.cn,
{peisong.wang,jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
The Winograd algorithm is an efficient convolution implementation, which performs calculations in the transformed domain. To further improve the computation
efficiency, recent works propose to combine it with model quantization. Although
Post-Training Quantization has the advantage of low computational cost and has
been successfully applied in many other scenarios, a severe accuracy drop exists
when utilizing it in Winograd convolution. Besides, despite the Winograd algorithm
consisting of four stages, most existing methods only quantize the element-wise
multiplication stage, leaving a considerable portion of calculations in full precision.
In this paper, observing the inconsistency among different transformation procedures, we present PTQ-Aware Winograd (PAW) to optimize them collaboratively
under a unified objective function. Moreover, we explore the full quantization of
faster Winograd (tile size ≥ 4) for the first time. We further propose a hardwarefriendly method called Factorized Scale Quantization (FSQ), which can effectively
balance the significant range differences in the Winograd domain. Experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, e.g., with 8-bit quantization and a
tile size of 6, our method outperforms the previous Winograd PTQ method by
8.27% and 5.38% in terms of the top-1 accuracy on ResNet-18 and ResNet-34,
respectively.

1

Introduction

Recently, Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in
various computer vision tasks [1; 2; 3; 4]. However, the high computation and storage cost hinders
their deployment on resource-limited devices. To address this problem, various solutions have been
proposed in the literature, including network pruning [5], low-rank decomposition [6], network
quantization [7; 8; 9; 10; 11] and faster convolution implementation [12; 13]. In this paper, we focus
on network quantization, faster convolution implementation, and their combination.
Model quantization converts the floating-point weights and activations to low-bit integers. According
to whether data with labels are required for training, quantization can be divided into two categories:
Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) [14; 15; 16; 17] and Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) [18; 19;
20; 21]. Although QAT can achieve promising performance, training the network requires many GPU
resources and a full training dataset. Therefore, it is not always practical when either the training
dataset is unavailable (e.g., privacy and commercial training data) or rapid deployment is required.
On the contrary, as PTQ only needs few-shot, unlabeled calibration data and fewer computation
resources, it is widely applicable in the industry.
†

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

