History Filtering in Imperfect Information Games:
Algorithms and Complexity

Christopher Solinas1 , Douglas Rebstock1 , Nathan R. Sturtevant1,2 , Michael Buro1
1
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
2
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
{solinas,drebstoc,nathanst,mburo}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Historically applied exclusively to perfect information games, depth-limited search
with value functions has been key to recent advances in AI for imperfect information
games. Most prominent approaches with strong theoretical guarantees require
subgame decomposition—a process in which a subgame is computed from public
information and player beliefs. However, subgame decomposition can itself require
non-trivial computations, and its tractability depends on the existence of efficient
algorithms for either full enumeration or generation of the histories that form the
root of the subgame. Despite this, no formal analysis of the tractability of such
computations has been established in prior work, and application domains have
often consisted of games, such as poker, for which enumeration is trivial on modern
hardware.
Applying these ideas to more complex domains requires understanding their cost.
In this work, we introduce and analyze the computational aspects and tractability of
filtering histories for subgame decomposition. We show that constructing a single
history from the root of the subgame is generally intractable, and then provide a
necessary and sufficient condition for efficient enumeration. We also introduce
a novel Markov Chain Monte Carlo-based generation algorithm for trick-taking
card games—a domain where enumeration is often prohibitively expensive. Our
experiments demonstrate its improved scalability in the trick-taking card game Oh
Hell. These contributions clarify when and how depth-limited search via subgame
decomposition can be an effective tool for sequential decision-making in imperfect
information settings.

1

Introduction

Games are a standard model for sequential decision-making. As the number of sequential decisions
needed to play increases, the size of the game’s state space can grow exponentially—quickly becoming
too large to search exhaustively. Depth-limited search navigates this issue by replacing decision
points below a certain depth with a value function that captures or approximates the value of playing
the subgame from that position onward. This can massively boost scalability and has been key to
several famous results in perfect information games including Checkers (Schaeffer and Lake [1996]),
Chess (Campbell et al. [2002]) and Go (Silver et al. [2017]).
The same idea has recently been successfully applied to certain imperfect information games such as
poker (Brown and Sandholm [2019]; Moravčík et al. [2017])—achieving similarly impressive results
by defeating human experts. In contrast to the perfect information setting, for which computing
the value function only requires evaluating the current history, most successful depth-limited search
algorithms in imperfect information games require evaluating whole sets of histories and their
reach probabilities. This information is used to generalize the concept of a subgame and its value
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

