Learning Environment-Aware Affordance for 3D
Articulated Object Manipulation under Occlusions

Ruihai Wu1,4∗ Kai Cheng2∗
Yan Shen
Chuanruo Ning 2 Guanqi Zhan 3 Hao Dong 1,4†
1
CFCS, School of CS, PKU 2 School of EECS, PKU 3 University of Oxford
4
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of CS, PKU
1,4

Abstract
Perceiving and manipulating 3D articulated objects in diverse environments is
essential for home-assistant robots. Recent studies have shown that point-level
affordance provides actionable priors for downstream manipulation tasks. However,
existing works primarily focus on single-object scenarios with homogeneous agents,
overlooking the realistic constraints imposed by the environment and the agent’s
morphology, e.g., occlusions and physical limitations. In this paper, we propose
an environment-aware affordance framework that incorporates both object-level
actionable priors and environment constraints. Unlike object-centric affordance
approaches, learning environment-aware affordance faces the challenge of combinatorial explosion due to the complexity of various occlusions, characterized by
their quantities, geometries, positions and poses. To address this and enhance data
efficiency, we introduce a novel contrastive affordance learning framework capable
of training on scenes containing a single occluder and generalizing to scenes with
complex occluder combinations. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed approach in learning affordance considering environment constraints.

1

Introduction

Articulated objects, such as doors and drawers, exist everywhere in our daily life. Perceiving and
manipulating these objects present crucial yet challenging tasks in computer vision and robotics.
Unlike rigid objects, articulated objects exhibit diverse articulation types and functionally important
articulated parts crucial for human and robot interactions. Numerous research endeavors have been
investigating articulated objects broadly, encompassing joint parameters estimation [41, 47], part
pose estimation [22, 23], kinematic structure estimation [34, 33], digital twins generalization [13, 10],
articulated part robotic manipulation [25, 44, 46, 4] and few-shot policy adaptation [42].
However, most existing works for manipulating articulated objects primarily focus on single-object
scenarios with homogeneous agents, such as flying grippers [46, 25, 44] or fixed-position robot
arms [6]. Consequently, these approaches tend to develop object-centric representations and policies,
neglecting the realistic constraints imposed by both the environment and the agent’s morphology.
These constraints are commonplace in real-world scenarios and their oversight limits the applicability
and performance of the manipulation tasks. For example, successfully opening a cabinet door that is
obstructed by occluders not only depends on the properties of the target door but also heavily relies
on the robot’s position and the way it interacts (e.g., colliding or bypassing) with the occluders.
We take a significant step towards manipulating articulated objects in a more realistic setting, i.e.,
considering constraints imposed by the environment and robot. Such a task encounters the combi∗
†

Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by coin flip.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

