Convergence of Mean-field Langevin dynamics:
Time-space discretization, stochastic gradient,
and variance reduction
Taiji Suzuki1,2 , Denny Wu3,4 , Atsushi Nitanda2,5
1

University of Tokyo, 2 RIKEN AIP, 3 New York University,
4
Flatiron Institute, 5 Kyushu Institute of Technology

taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, dennywu@nyu.edu, nitanda@ai.kyutech.ac.jp

Abstract
The mean-field Langevin dynamics (MFLD) is a nonlinear generalization of the
Langevin dynamics that incorporates a distribution-dependent drift, and it naturally
arises from the optimization of two-layer neural networks via (noisy) gradient
descent. Recent works have shown that MFLD globally minimizes an entropyregularized convex functional in the space of measures. However, all prior analyses
assumed the infinite-particle or continuous-time limit, and cannot handle stochastic
gradient updates. We provide a general framework to prove a uniform-in-time
propagation of chaos for MFLD that takes into account the errors due to finiteparticle approximation, time-discretization, and stochastic gradient. To demonstrate
the wide applicability of our framework, we establish quantitative convergence
rate guarantees to the regularized global optimal solution for (i) a wide range of
learning problems such as mean-field neural network and MMD minimization, and
(ii) different gradient estimators including SGD and SVRG. Despite the generality
of our results, we achieve an improved convergence rate in both the SGD and
SVRG settings when specialized to the standard Langevin dynamics.

1

Introduction

In this work we consider the mean-field Langevin dynamics (MFLD) given by the following McKeanVlasov stochastic differential equation:
√
δF (µt )
dXt = −∇
(Xt )dt + 2λdWt ,
(1)
δµ
where µt = Law(Xt ), F : P2 (Rd ) → R is a convex functional, Wt is the d-dimensional standard
Brownian motion, and δF
δµ denotes the first-variation of F . Importantly, MFLD is the Wasserstein
gradient flow that minimizes an entropy-regularized convex functional as follows:
min {F (µ) + λEnt(µ)}.
(2)
µ∈P2

While the above objective can also be solved using other methods such as double-loop algorithms
based on iterative linearization (Nitanda et al., 2020, 2023; Oko et al., 2022), MFLD remains attractive
due to its simple structure and connection to neural network optimization. Specifically, the learning
of two-layer neural networks can be lifted into an infinite-dimensional optimization problem in the
space of measures (i.e., the mean-field limit), for which the convexity of loss function can be exploited
to show the global convergence of gradient-based optimization (Nitanda and Suzuki, 2017; Mei et al.,
2018; Chizat and Bach, 2018; Rotskoff and Vanden-Eijnden, 2018; Sirignano and Spiliopoulos, 2020).
Under this viewpoint, MFLD Eq. (1) corresponds to the continuous-time limit of the noisy gradient
descent update on an infinite-width neural network, where the injected Gaussian noise encourages
“exploration” and facilities global convergence (Mei et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2019).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

