Deep Learning with Kernels through RKHM and the
Perron–Frobenius Operator

Yuka Hashimoto
NTT Network Service Systems Laboratories /
RIKEN AIP,
Tokyo, Japan
yuka.hashimoto@ntt.com

Masahiro Ikeda
RIKEN AIP / Keio University,
Tokyo, Japan
masahiro.ikeda@riken.jp

Hachem Kadri
Aix-Marseille University, CNRS, LIS,
Marseille, France
hachem.kadri@lis-lab.fr

Abstract
Reproducing kernel Hilbert C ∗ -module (RKHM) is a generalization of reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) by means of C ∗ -algebra, and the Perron–Frobenius
operator is a linear operator related to the composition of functions. Combining
these two concepts, we present deep RKHM, a deep learning framework for kernel
methods. We derive a new Rademacher generalization bound in this setting and
provide a theoretical interpretation of benign overfitting by means of Perron–
Frobenius operators. By virtue of C ∗ -algebra, the dependency of the bound on
output dimension is milder than existing bounds. We show that C ∗ -algebra is a
suitable tool for deep learning with kernels, enabling us to take advantage of the
product structure of operators and to provide a clear connection with convolutional
neural networks. Our theoretical analysis provides a new lens through which one
can design and analyze deep kernel methods.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods and deep neural networks are two major topics in machine learning. Originally, they
had been investigated independently. However, their interactions have been researched recently. One
important perspective is deep kernel learning [1, 2, 3]. In this framework, we construct a function
with the composition of functions in RKHSs, which is learned by given training data. Representer
theorems were shown for deep kernel methods, which guarantee the representation of solutions of
minimization problems only with given training data [4, 5]. We can combine the flexibility of deep
neural networks with the representation power and solid theoretical understanding of kernel methods.
Other important perspectives are neural tangent kernel [6, 7] and convolutional kernel [8], which
enable us to understand neural networks using the theory of kernel methods. In addition, Bietti et
al. [9] proposed a regularization of deep neural network through a kernel perspective.
The generalization properties of kernel methods and deep neural networks have been investigated. One
typical technique for bounding generalization errors is to use the Rademacher complexity [10, 11].
For kernel methods, generalization bounds based on the Rademacher complexity can be derived by
the reproducing property. Bounds for deep kernel methods and vector-valued RKHSs (vvRKHSs)
were also derived [5, 12, 13]. Table 1 shows existing Rademacher generalization bounds for kernel
methods. Generalization bounds for deep neural networks have also been actively studied [14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19]. Recently, analyzing the generalization property using the concept of benign overfitting
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

