Understanding Social Reasoning in Language Models
with Language Models
Kanishk Gandhi ∗ J.-Philipp Fränken ∗ Tobias Gerstenberg Noah D. Goodman
Stanford University
{kanishk.gandhi, jphilipp}@stanford.edu

Abstract
As Large Language Models (LLMs) become increasingly integrated into our
everyday lives, understanding their ability to comprehend human mental states
becomes critical for ensuring effective interactions. However, despite the recent
attempts to assess the Theory-of-Mind (ToM) reasoning capabilities of LLMs, the
degree to which these models can align with human ToM remains a nuanced topic
of exploration. This is primarily due to two distinct challenges: (1) the presence
of inconsistent results from previous evaluations, and (2) concerns surrounding
the validity of existing evaluation methodologies. To address these challenges,
we present a novel framework for procedurally generating evaluations with LLMs
by populating causal templates. Using our framework, we create a new social
reasoning benchmark (BigToM) for LLMs which consists of 25 controls and 5,000
model-written evaluations. We find that human participants rate the quality of
our benchmark higher than previous crowd-sourced evaluations and comparable
to expert-written evaluations. Using BigToM, we evaluate the social reasoning
capabilities of a variety of LLMs and compare model performances with human
performance. Our results suggest that GPT4 has ToM capabilities that mirror
human inference patterns, though less reliable, while other LLMs struggle.2

1

Introduction

Humans continually try to understand what others think, want, and feel.
We try to understand what people have done and predict what they might do next by inferring their
mental states. This capability, often referred to as “Theory of Mind” (ToM), is the foundation of
social interaction [45, 22, 25, 10, 38]. With Large Language Models (LLMs) playing a growing role
in our lives, assessing their ability to model human mental states is key for guaranteeing effective
interactions. This involves evaluating the current abilities of LLMs, understanding their failure
modes, and discovering ways to improve them. LLMs with ToM-like abilities could be better at
teaching us, learning from us, communicating with us, collaborating with us, and understanding us
[15, 20, 30, 11, 36].
Recent attempts at understanding social reasoning in LLMs have used crowd-sourced data, SocialIQA
[32], data from synthetic templates, ToMi [21], or (modified) tests from psychology designed to
evaluate human capabilities [e.g. 24, 42, 18, 5, 23, 41]. Sap et al. [33] used SocialIQA and ToMi to
show that GPT-3 had limitied social reasoning capabilities. However, their findings are challenging
to interpret due to limitations in their methodology. SocialIQA has several ambiguous examples
and stories that do not effectively test the desired social reasoning behaviors. In comparison, ToMi
suffers from ambiguous narratives with unclear perceptual descriptions and additional confounding
factors in reasoning like memory loads or tracking requirements. Moreover, both of these datasets
lack control conditions making it difficult to identify precisely where models make mistakes. The
results of studies with tests developed by psychologists show some signs of ToM capabilites in LLMs
∗

2

Equal Contribution.
https://sites.google.com/view/social-reasoning-lms

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

