Semi-Supervised Contrastive Learning for Deep
Regression with Ordinal Rankings from Spectral
Seriation
Weihang Dai1 , Yao Du1 , Hanru Bai3 , Kwang-Ting Cheng1 , Xiaomeng Li1,2∗
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
HKUST Shenzhen-Hong Kong Collaborative Innovation Research Institute, Futian, Shenzhen
3
Fudan University
eexmli@ust.hk

Abstract
Contrastive learning methods can be applied to deep regression by enforcing label
distance relationships in feature space. However, these methods are limited to
labeled data only unlike for classification, where unlabeled data can be used for
contrastive pretraining. In this work, we extend contrastive regression methods
to allow unlabeled data to be used in a semi-supervised setting, thereby reducing
the reliance on manual annotations. We observe that the feature similarity matrix
between unlabeled samples still reflect inter-sample relationships, and that an
accurate ordinal relationship can be recovered through spectral seriation algorithms
if the level of error is within certain bounds. By using the recovered ordinal
relationship for contrastive learning on unlabeled samples, we can allow more data
to be used for feature representation learning, thereby achieve more robust results.
The ordinal rankings can also be used to supervise predictions on unlabeled samples,
which can serve as an additional training signal. We provide theoretical guarantees
and empirical support through experiments on different datasets, demonstrating that
our method can surpass existing state-of-the-art semi-supervised deep regression
methods. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to explore using
unlabeled data to perform contrastive learning for regression. Code is available at
https://github.com/xmed-lab/CLSS.

1

Introduction

Contrastive learning is an effective technique for improving feature representations in deep neural
networks (DNNs) [3, 4, 19, 33, 10]. These methods involve identifying positive and negative sample
pairs based on feature similarity, where positive pairs are usually defined as augmented samples from
the same input or samples from the same class. Early works such as SimCLR [3], MoCo [4], and
SupCon [19], showed that pretraining DNNs through contrastive learning can lead to state-of-the-art
classification results due to improved feature representations. These techniques have since been
extended to segmentation [33, 43], video recognition [10], multi-modality learning [28], as well as
deep regression [8, 42, 37] to great effect.
It is possible to perform contrastive learning for classification in an unsupservised manner, which
allows large amounts of unlabeled data to be used [3, 4, 28]. Unsupervised contrastive learning is not
possible for deep regression tasks however, because in order for feature representations to be effective
for regression, they must reflect label distance relationships in feature space [8, 42, 37]. Contrastive
regression loss functions ensure that sample pairs with smaller label distances have features that are
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

