Locally Invariant Explanations: Towards Stable and
Unidirectional Explanations through Local Invariant
Learning

Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy∗
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, USA
knatesa@us.ibm.com

Amit Dhurandhar∗
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, USA
adhuran@us.ibm.com
Kartik Ahuja
Mila
Montreal, Canada
kartik.ahuja@mila.quebec

Vijay Arya
IBM Research
Bangalore, India
vijay.arya@in.ibm.com

Abstract
Locally interpretable model agnostic explanations (LIME) method is one of the
most popular methods used to explain black-box models at a per example level.
Although many variants have been proposed, few provide a simple way to produce
high fidelity explanations that are also stable and intuitive. In this work, we
provide a novel perspective by proposing a model agnostic local explanation
method inspired by the invariant risk minimization (IRM) principle – originally
proposed for (global) out-of-distribution generalization – to provide such high
fidelity explanations that are also stable and unidirectional across nearby examples.
Our method is based on a game theoretic formulation where we theoretically show
that our approach has a strong tendency to eliminate features where the gradient
of the black-box function abruptly changes sign in the locality of the example we
want to explain, while in other cases it is more careful and will choose a more
conservative (feature) attribution, a behavior which can be highly desirable for
recourse. Empirically, we show on tabular, image and text data that the quality of
our explanations with neighborhoods formed using random perturbations are much
better than LIME and in some cases even comparable to other methods that use
realistic neighbors sampled from the data manifold. This is desirable given that
learning a manifold to either create realistic neighbors or to project explanations is
typically expensive or may even be impossible. Moreover, our algorithm is simple
and efficient to train, and can ascertain stable input features for local decisions of a
black-box without access to side information such as a (partial) causal graph as has
been seen in some recent works.

1

Introduction

Deployment and usage of neural black-box models has significantly grown in industry over the last
few years creating the need for new tools to help users understand and trust models [24]. Even wellstudied application domains such as image recognition require some form of prediction understanding
in order for the user to incorporate the model into important decisions [46, 33]. An example of
this could be a doctor who is advised by a model of a positive cancer diagnosis based on an image
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

