Where2Explore: Few-shot Affordance Learning for
Unseen Novel Categories of Articulated Objects

Chuanruo Ning1,3 Ruihai Wu2,3,5 Haoran Lu1,3 Kaichun Mo 4 Hao Dong 3,5∗
School of EECS, PKU 2 School of CS, PKU 3 CFCS, School of CS, PKU 4 NVIDIA
5
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of CS, PKU

1

Abstract
Articulated object manipulation is a fundamental yet challenging task in robotics.
Due to significant geometric and semantic variations across object categories, previous manipulation models struggle to generalize to novel categories. Few-shot learning is a promising solution for alleviating this issue by allowing robots to perform a
few interactions with unseen objects. However, extant approaches often necessitate
costly and inefficient test-time interactions with each unseen instance. Recognizing
this limitation, we observe that despite their distinct shapes, different categories
often share similar local geometries essential for manipulation, such as pullable
handles and graspable edges - a factor typically underutilized in previous few-shot
learning works. To harness this commonality, we introduce ‘Where2Explore’,
an affordance learning framework that effectively explores novel categories with
minimal interactions on a limited number of instances. Our framework explicitly
estimates the geometric similarity across different categories, identifying local
areas that differ from shapes in the training categories for efficient exploration
while concurrently transferring affordance knowledge to similar parts of the objects.
Extensive experiments in simulated and real-world environments demonstrate our
framework’s capacity for efficient few-shot exploration and generalization.

1

Introduction

Articulated objects, such as doors, drawers, scissors, and faucets, are ubiquitous in our daily lives.
Therefore, the ability of robots to manipulate these objects is of critical importance. Many previous
works have been done on perceiving and manipulating articulated objects [25, 35, 38, 3]. However,
due to the significant variance in the objects’ structure, 3D geometry, and articulation types across
categories, developing efficient perception and manipulation systems that can generalize to those
variations remains challenging [7, 25, 41].
An intuitive solution to equip models with generalized manipulation knowledge is training them on
large-scale datasets. However, conducting real-world interactions with diverse objects or acquiring 3D
models encompassing potential categories can be prohibitively time-consuming and costly. Moreover,
this approach could still fail with the emergence of new object categories or designs (e.g., a cup with
novel geometries resembling a gourd as shown in Figure 1).
Since encountering novel objects is inevitable in real-world applications, few-shot learning, which
allows robots to propose interactions with novel objects and adapt their understanding to them,
has emerged as a promising solution. However, previous few-shot learning works for articulated
object manipulation usually focus on instance-level exploration and adaptation, requiring test-time
interactions on each novel object [35, 27]. This limitation hinders the efficiency and safety of
real-world applications of robots.
This paper investigates the open question of cross-category few-shot learning, in which the model is
required to understand how to manipulate a novel category via interactions with a limited number of
objects. After the few-shot exploration, the model should be able to manipulate other unseen objects
within the same category without further test-time interactions.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

