Diverse Conventions for Human-AI Collaboration
Bidipta Sarkar
Stanford University
bidiptas@stanford.edu

Andy Shih
Stanford University
andyshih@cs.stanford.edu

Dorsa Sadigh
Stanford University
dorsa@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Conventions are crucial for strong performance in cooperative multi-agent games,
because they allow players to coordinate on a shared strategy without explicit
communication. Unfortunately, standard multi-agent reinforcement learning techniques, such as self-play, converge to conventions that are arbitrary and non-diverse,
leading to poor generalization when interacting with new partners. In this work,
we present a technique for generating diverse conventions by (1) maximizing their
rewards during self-play, while (2) minimizing their rewards when playing with
previously discovered conventions (cross-play), stimulating conventions to be semantically different. To ensure that learned policies act in good faith despite the
adversarial optimization of cross-play, we introduce mixed-play, where an initial
state is randomly generated by sampling self-play and cross-play transitions and the
player learns to maximize the self-play reward from this initial state. We analyze
the benefits of our technique on various multi-agent collaborative games, including
Overcooked, and find that our technique can adapt to the conventions of humans,
surpassing human-level performance when paired with real users.1

1

Introduction

In multi-agent cooperative games, understanding the intent of other players is crucial for seamless
coordination. For example, imagine a game where teams of two players work together to cook meals
for customers. Players have to manage the ingredients, use the stove, and deliver meals. As the
team works together, they decide how tasks should be allocated among themselves so resources
are used effectively. For example, player 1 could notice that player 2 tends to stay near the stove,
so they instead spend more time preparing ingredients and delivering food, allowing player 2 to
continue working at the stove. Through these interactions, the team creates a “convention” in the
environment, which is an arbitrary solution to a recurring coordination problem [20, 3]. In the context
of reinforcement learning, we can represent a specific convention as the joint policy function that
each agent uses to choose their action given their own observation. If we wish to train an AI agent to
work well with humans, it also needs to be aware of common conventions and be flexible to changing
its strategy to adapt to human behavior [2, 29].
One approach to training an AI agent in a cooperative setting, called self-play [33], mimics the
behavior of forming conventions by training a team of agents together to increase their reward in the
environment, causing each player to adapt to the team’s behavior. Eventually, self-play converges to
an equilibrium, where each player’s policy maximizes the score if their team does not change.
Unfortunately, self-play results in incredibly brittle policies that cannot work well with humans who
may have different conventions [29], including conventions that are more intuitive for people to use.
In the cooking task, self-play could converge to a convention that expects player 2 to bring onions
to AI player 1 from the right side. If a human player instead decides to bring onions from the left
side to the AI player 1, the AI’s policy may not react appropriately since this is not an interaction
1

Supplemental videos can be found on our website along with source code and anonymized user study data.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

