Efficient Algorithms for Generalized Linear Bandits
with Heavy-tailed Rewards

Bo Xue1,2 , Yimu Wang3 , Yuanyu Wan4 , Jinfeng Yi5 , Lijun Zhang6,7,∗
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
The City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China
3
Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
4
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China
5
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
6
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
7
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
boxue4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, yimu.wang@uwaterloo.ca, wanyy@zju.edu.cn
yijinfeng@jd.com, zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn
1

Abstract
This paper investigates the problem of generalized linear bandits with heavy-tailed
rewards, whose (1 + ϵ)-th moment is bounded for some ϵ ∈ (0, 1]. Although there
exist methods for generalized linear bandits, most of them focus on bounded or subGaussian rewards and are not well-suited for many real-world scenarios, such as
financial markets and web-advertising. To address this issue, we propose two novel
algorithms based on truncation and mean of medians. These algorithms achieve an
1
e
1+ϵ ), where d is the dimension of contextual
almost optimal regret bound of O(dT
information and T is the time horizon. Our truncation-based algorithm supports
online learning, distinguishing it from existing truncation-based approaches. Additionally, our mean-of-medians-based algorithm requires only O(log T ) rewards
and one estimator per epoch, making it more practical. Moreover, our algorithms
improve the regret bounds by a logarithmic factor compared to existing algorithms
when ϵ = 1. Numerical experimental results confirm the merits of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandits (MAB) is a powerful framework to model the sequential decision-making
process with limited information [Robbins, 1952], which has been found applications in various areas
such as medical trails [Villar et al., 2015] and advertisement placement [Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi,
2012]. In the classical K-armed bandit problem, an agent selects one of the K arms and receives a
reward drawn independently and identically distributed from an unknown distribution associated with
the chosen arm. The goal of the agent is to maximize the cumulative rewards through the trade-off
between exploration and exploitation, i.e., pulling the arms that may potentially give better outcomes
while also exploiting the knowledge gained from previous trials to select the optimal arm.
One fundamental limitation of MAB is that it ignores contextual information in some scenarios such
as advertisement placement [Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020], where features of users and products
can provide valuable guidance for decision making. In these cases, decisions should not only rely on
rewards from previous epochs but also the contextual information from both past and current epochs.
Stochastic Linear Bandits (SLB) has emerged as the most popular model in the last decade to address
this limitation, assuming a linear relationship between the contextual vector and the expected reward
∗

Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

