Revisiting Scalarization in Multi-Task Learning:
A Theoretical Perspective

Yuzheng Hu1† Ruicheng Xian1⋆ Qilong Wu1⋆ Qiuling Fan2 Lang Yin1
1
Department of Computer Science 2 Department of Mathematics
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Han Zhao1†

{yh46,rxian2,qilong3,qiuling2,langyin2,hanzhao}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Linear scalarization, i.e., combining all loss functions by a weighted sum, has been
the default choice in the literature of multi-task learning (MTL) since its inception.
In recent years, there is a surge of interest in developing Specialized Multi-Task
Optimizers (SMTOs) that treat MTL as a multi-objective optimization problem.
However, it remains open whether there is a fundamental advantage of SMTOs
over scalarization. In fact, heated debates exist in the community comparing these
two types of algorithms, mostly from an empirical perspective. To approach the
above question, in this paper, we revisit scalarization from a theoretical perspective.
We focus on linear MTL models and study whether scalarization is capable of
fully exploring the Pareto front. Our findings reveal that, in contrast to recent
works that claimed empirical advantages of scalarization, scalarization is inherently
incapable of full exploration, especially for those Pareto optimal solutions that
strike the balanced trade-offs between multiple tasks. More concretely, when the
model is under-parametrized, we reveal a multi-surface structure of the feasible
region and identify necessary and sufficient conditions for full exploration. This
leads to the conclusion that scalarization is in general incapable of tracing out
the Pareto front. Our theoretical results partially answer the open questions in
Xin et al. (2021), and provide a more intuitive explanation on why scalarization
fails beyond non-convexity. We additionally perform experiments on a real-world
dataset using both scalarization and state-of-the-art SMTOs. The experimental
results not only corroborate our theoretical findings, but also unveil the potential of
SMTOs in finding balanced solutions, which cannot be achieved by scalarization.

1

Introduction

When labeled data from multiple tasks are available, multi-task learning (MTL) aims to learn
a joint model for these tasks simultaneously in order to improve generalization (Caruana, 1997;
Zhang and Yang, 2021; Ruder, 2017). One common approach towards this goal is learning a joint
feature representation that is shared among multiple tasks, where each task then uses a separate
task-specific head for its own prediction. The hope is that by sharing a joint feature representation,
the effective sample size for feature learning will be larger than that for single-task learning, hence
leading to better generalization across related tasks. This simple and natural idea has proven to be
successful in many applications, including object segmentation (Misra et al., 2016), natural language
processing (Collobert and Weston, 2008), autonomous driving (Yu et al., 2020a), to name a few.
One typical approach to learning the shared feature model from multiple tasks is called linear scalarization, where the learner provides a set of convex coefficients (in the form of a probability vector) to
†
⋆

Corresponding author.
Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

