Safe Exploration in Reinforcement Learning:
A Generalized Formulation and Algorithms

Akifumi Wachi
LINE Corporation
akifumi.wachi@linecorp.com

Wataru Hashimoto
Osaka University
hashimoto@is.eei.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp

Xun Shen
Osaka University
shenxun@eei.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp

Kazumune Hashimoto
Osaka University
hashimoto@eei.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Safe exploration is essential for the practical use of reinforcement learning (RL) in
many real-world scenarios. In this paper, we present a generalized safe exploration
(GSE) problem as a unified formulation of common safe exploration problems.
We then propose a solution of the GSE problem in the form of a meta-algorithm
for safe exploration, MASE, which combines an unconstrained RL algorithm with
an uncertainty quantifier to guarantee safety in the current episode while properly
penalizing unsafe explorations before actual safety violation to discourage them in
future episodes. The advantage of MASE is that we can optimize a policy while
guaranteeing with a high probability that no safety constraint will be violated
under proper assumptions. Specifically, we present two variants of MASE with
different constructions of the uncertainty quantifier: one based on generalized
linear models with theoretical guarantees of safety and near-optimality, and another
that combines a Gaussian process to ensure safety with a deep RL algorithm to
maximize the reward. Finally, we demonstrate that our proposed algorithm achieves
better performance than state-of-the-art algorithms on grid-world and Safety Gym
benchmarks without violating any safety constraints, even during training.

1

Introduction

Safe reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising paradigm that enables policy optimizations for
safety-critical decision-making problems (e.g., autonomous driving, healthcare, and robotics), where
it is necessary to incorporate safety requirements to prevent RL policies from posing risks to humans
or objects [14]. As a result, safe exploration has received significant attention in recent years as a
crucial issue for ensuring the safety of RL during both the learning and execution phases [6].
Safe exploration in RL has typically been addressed by formulating a constrained RL problem
in which the policy optimization is subject to safety constraints [9, 18]. While there have been
many attempts under different types of constraint representations (e.g., expected cumulative cost [3],
CVaR [29]), satisfying constraints almost surely or with high probability received less attention to
date. Imagine safety-critical applications such as planetary exploration where even a single constraint
violation may result in catastrophic failure. NASA’s engineers hope Mars rovers to ensure safety at
least with high probability [8]; thus, constraint satisfaction “on average” does not fit their purpose.
While several algorithms have addressed this problem with this stricter notion of safety, there are
several formulations in terms of how the constraints are represented, including cumulative [32],
state [39], and instantaneous constraints [41], which respectively correspond to Problems 1, 2, and 3
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

