Feature Dropout: Revisiting the Role of
Augmentations in Contrastive Learning

Alex Tamkin, Margalit Glasgow, Xiluo He, Noah Goodman
Stanford University

Abstract
What role do augmentations play in contrastive learning? Recent work suggests
that good augmentations are label-preserving with respect to a specific downstream
task. We complicate this picture by showing that label-destroying augmentations
can be useful in the foundation model setting, where the goal is to learn diverse,
general-purpose representations for multiple downstream tasks. We perform contrastive learning experiments on a range of image and audio datasets with multiple
downstream tasks (e.g. synthetic datasets combining two classes, such as images
and digits, and naturalistic datasets labeled with dozens of attributes). In controlled
experiments where we destroy features at different rates, we find that destroying
one feature a modest fraction of the time can improve learning of other features,
while still enabling the dropped out feature to be learned well. Additionally, we
show how this hypothesis can help explain the success of Viewmaker Networks,
which generate augmentations that appear to target and destroy different features
in the input examples, yet often result in better performance than standard augmentations across tasks. To support our empirical results, we theoretically analyze a
simple contrastive learning setting with a linear model. In this setting, we show that
label-destroying augmentations are crucial for preventing one set of features from
suppressing the learning of features useful for another downstream task. Our results
highlight the need for analyzing the interaction between multiple downstream tasks
when trying to explain the success of foundation models.

1

Introduction

In recent years, foundation models [5] have exhibited remarkable progress on a range of AI tasks
[13; 31; 37; 36; 6; 11; 25; 1; 38]. A crucial characteristic of foundation models is that they can be
adapted for a range of downstream tasks. For example, a foundation model trained on ImageNet
should ideally not only perform well at object classification, but should also have learned general
features useful for localization, segmentation, and other visual tasks. Indeed, this is borne out by
recent work showing the high accuracy of foundation models on a range of downstream tasks [9], as
well as a range of analysis work showing that models learn high-level semantic features including
texture, color, pose, and style [19].
One popular strategy for training foundation models involves training models to match transformed
versions (known as views or augmentations) of the same input. For example, image views might
include common data augmentations such as cropping or color jitter [9], while views for speech
might include pitch modulation or spectrogram masking [27; 35]. This family of objectives includes
contrastive approaches such as SimCLR and MoCo, as well as non-contrastive approaches such as
BYOL and SwAV [9; 23; 20; 7].
Given the central importance of these views for defining the self-supervised task, much work
has focused on the question of what views lead to high-quality representations. The prevailing
consensus, exemplified by Tian et al. [52], holds that views should be label-preserving with respect
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

