ProteinInvBench: Benchmarking Protein Inverse
Folding on Diverse Tasks, Models, and Metrics

Zhangyang Gao 1,2, † , Cheng Tan 1,2, † , Yijie Zhang 3 , Xingran Chen 4 , Lirong Wu 1,2 , Stan Z. Li 2, ∗
1
Zhejiang University
2
AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University
3
McGill University, 4 University of Michigan

Abstract
Protein inverse folding has attracted increasing attention in recent years. However,
we observe that current methods are usually limited to the CATH dataset and the
recovery metric. The lack of a unified framework for ensembling and comparing different methods hinders the comprehensive investigation. In this paper, we
propose ProteinInvBench, a new benchmark for protein design, which comprises
extended protein design tasks, integrated models, and diverse evaluation metrics.
We broaden the application of methods originally designed for single-chain protein design to new scenarios of multi-chain and de novo protein design. Recent
impressive methods, including GraphTrans, StructGNN, GVP, GCA, AlphaDesign,
ProteinMPNN, PiFold and KWDesign are integrated into our framework. In addition to the recovery, we also evaluate the confidence, diversity, sc-TM, efficiency,
and robustness to thoroughly revisit current protein design approaches and inspire
future work. As a result, we establish the first comprehensive benchmark for protein
design, which is publicly available at https://github.com/A4Bio/OpenCPD.

1

Introduction

Protein inverse folding is a fundamental problem in biology and has many applications in medicine,
agriculture, and bioenergy [1–4]. It has thereby attracted increasing attention in both the machine
learning and biology communities [5, 6]. Traditional physical-inspired methods suffer from the
problem of expensive computation and unsatisfactory accuracy. Recently, deep learning methods
have shown great potential in science areas [7–30], including protein inverse folding, by simplifying
the process and improving accuracy [12, 31–62]. Among them, we observe that graph-based methods
achieve state-of-the-art performance. However, previous methods are usually limited to the CATH
dataset and the recovery metric. We emphasize that recovery is not the only important metric for
protein design. Other metrics such as confidence, diversity, TM-score, efficiency, and robustness
are also important for comprehensively revisiting current approaches. Also, the evaluation dataset
should be further extended from CATH dataset to broader or more difficult cases to facilitate practical
applications. All these challenges motivate us to establish ProteinInvBench, a unified benchmark for
protein inverse folding, in which multiple tasks, models, and metrics are introduced and integrated.
ProteinInvBench extends the task of protein design from single-chain to multi-chain and de novo
protein design. To our knowledge, many computational protein design methods [41, 46, 47, 50, 63]
have only been evaluated on the outdated single-chain structure dataset CATH4.2. Furthermore, few
studies [48, 56] have investigated protein design performance in multi-chain tasks, and even fewer
have evaluated the performance comparison on de novo protein structures. To fill this knowledge gap,
†

Equal Contribution, ∗ Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

