Evaluating and Improving Tool-Augmented
Computation-Intensive Math Reasoning

Beichen Zhang13∗, Kun Zhou23∗ , Xilin Wei4 , Wayne Xin Zhao13†,
Jing Sha5 , Shijin Wang56 , Ji-Rong Wen123
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China.
2
School of Information, Renmin University of China.
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods.
4
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University.
5
iFLYTEK Research, 6 iFLYTEK AI Research (Central China).
{zhangbeichen724,wiselnn570,batmanfly}@gmail.com, francis_kun_zhou@163.com
{jingsha,sjwang3}@iflytek.com,jrwen@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Chain-of-thought prompting (CoT) and tool augmentation have been validated in
recent work as effective practices for improving large language models (LLMs)
to perform step-by-step reasoning on complex math-related tasks. However, most
existing math reasoning datasets may not be able to fully evaluate and analyze the
ability of LLMs in manipulating tools and performing reasoning, as they often only
require very few invocations of tools or miss annotations for evaluating intermediate
reasoning steps, thus supporting only outcome evaluation. To address the issue, we
construct CARP, a new Chinese dataset consisting of 4,886 computation-intensive
algebra problems with formulated annotations on intermediate steps, facilitating
the evaluation of the intermediate reasoning process. In CARP, we test four LLMs
with CoT prompting, and find that they are all prone to make mistakes at the
early steps of the solution, leading to incorrect answers. Based on this finding,
we propose a new approach that can facilitate the deliberation on reasoning steps
with tool interfaces, namely DELI. In DELI, we first initialize a step-by-step
solution based on retrieved exemplars, then iterate two deliberation procedures that
check and refine the intermediate steps of the generated solution, from both tool
manipulation and natural language reasoning perspectives, until solutions converge
or the maximum iteration is achieved. Experimental results on CARP and six other
datasets show that the proposed DELI mostly outperforms competitive baselines,
and can further boost the performance of existing CoT methods. Our data and code
are available at https://github.com/RUCAIBox/CARP.

1

Introduction

Recently, large language models (LLMs) (e.g., GPT-3 and ChatGPT) have shown remarkable zeroshot and few-shot performance on various tasks [1–6], including language generation and question
answering. As LLMs have been pre-trained on a vast amount of text data that covers a broad spectrum
of world knowledge, existing work also shows that LLMs can solve complex tasks, e.g., math
reasoning [7–12] and college entrance exam [4, 13].
To evaluate the capacity of LLMs for solving complex tasks, math reasoning datasets have been
widely used as testbeds, e.g., GSM8K [14] and MATH [15], where the math problems can not
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

