Combining Behaviors with the
Successor Features Keyboard

Wilka Carvalho∗,1
Andre Saraiva2
Angelos Filos2
2
2
Andrew Kyle Lampinen
Loic Matthey
Richard L. Lewis3
Honglak Lee3
Satinder Singh2,3
Danilo J. Rezende2
Daniel Zoran2
1
2
3
Harvard University
Google DeepMind
University of Michigan

Abstract
The Option Keyboard (OK) was recently proposed as a method for transferring behavioral knowledge across tasks. OK transfers knowledge by adaptively combining
subsets of known behaviors using Successor Features (SFs) and Generalized Policy
Improvement (GPI). However, it relies on hand-designed state-features and task encodings which are cumbersome to design for every new environment. In this work,
we propose the “Successor Features Keyboard” (SFK), which enables transfer with
discovered state-features and task encodings. To enable discovery, we propose the
“Categorical Successor Feature Approximator” (CSFA), a novel learning algorithm
for estimating SFs while jointly discovering state-features and task encodings.
With SFK and CSFA, we achieve the first demonstration of transfer with SFs in a
challenging 3D environment where all the necessary representations are discovered.
We first compare CSFA against other methods for approximating SFs and show
that only CSFA discovers representations compatible with SF&GPI at this scale.
We then compare SFK against transfer learning baselines and show that it transfers
most quickly to long-horizon tasks.

1

Introduction

Consider a household robot that learns
tasks for interacting with objects such as
finding and moving them around. When
this robot is deployed to a house and needs
to perform combinations of these tasks,
collecting data for reinforcement learning
(RL) will be expensive. Thus, ideally this
robot can effectively transfer its knowledge
to efficiently learn these novel tasks with
minimal interactions in the environment. Figure 1: Diagram of transfer with the Successor
We study this form of transfer in Deep RL. Features Keyboard (SFK). SFK uses SF-based “keys”
to represent behaviors by how much of some feature
One promising method for transfer is the
(known as a “cumulant”) they obtain. SFK dynamically
Option Keyboard (OK)[1, 2], which transselects from behaviors with GPI by generating preferfers to new tasks by adaptively combining
ence “queries” over these features. The “value” of each
subsets of known behaviors. OK combines
behavior is then computed with a dot-product and the
known behaviors by leveraging Successor
highest value is used to generate behavior. Prior work
Features (SFs) and Generalized Policy Imhas hand-designed the features that define queries and
provement (GPI) [3, 4]. SFs are predictive
SFs. Here, we study the problem of transferring with
∗
Contact author: wcarvalho@g.harvard.edu. SFK while discovering all necessary representations.
Work done during internship.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

