HQA-Attack: Toward High Quality Black-Box
Hard-Label Adversarial Attack on Text
Zhi Xu
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, China
xu.zhi.dut@gmail.com

Han Liu
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, China
liu.han.dut@gmail.com
Xiaotong Zhang˚
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, China
zxt.dut@hotmail.com

Feng Zhang
Peking University
Beijing, China
zfeng.maria@gmail.com

Fenglong Ma
The Pennsylvania State University
Pennsylvania, USA
fenglong@psu.edu

Hongyang Chen
Zhejiang Lab
Hangzhou, China
dr.h.chen@ieee.org
Xianchao Zhang˚
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, China
xczhang@dlut.edu.cn

Hong Yu
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, China
hongyu@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Black-box hard-label adversarial attack on text is a practical and challenging task,
as the text data space is inherently discrete and non-differentiable, and only the
predicted label is accessible. Research on this problem is still in the embryonic
stage and only a few methods are available. Nevertheless, existing methods rely on
the complex heuristic algorithm or unreliable gradient estimation strategy, which
probably fall into the local optimum and inevitably consume numerous queries,
thus are difficult to craft satisfactory adversarial examples with high semantic
similarity and low perturbation rate in a limited query budget. To alleviate above
issues, we propose a simple yet effective framework to generate high quality textual
adversarial examples under the black-box hard-label attack scenarios, named HQAAttack. Specifically, after initializing an adversarial example randomly, HQA-attack
first constantly substitutes original words back as many as possible, thus shrinking
the perturbation rate. Then it leverages the synonym set of the remaining changed
words to further optimize the adversarial example with the direction which can
improve the semantic similarity and satisfy the adversarial condition simultaneously.
In addition, during the optimizing procedure, it searches a transition synonym
word for each changed word, thus avoiding traversing the whole synonym set and
reducing the query number to some extent. Extensive experimental results on
five text classification datasets, three natural language inference datasets and two
real-world APIs have shown that the proposed HQA-Attack method outperforms
other strong baselines significantly.
˚

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

