Self-Weighted Contrastive Learning among Multiple
Views for Mitigating Representation Degeneration

Jie Xu1 Shuo Chen2 Yazhou Ren1 Xiaoshuang Shi1
Heng Tao Shen1 Gang Niu2 Xiaofeng Zhu1,∗
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
2
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan

Abstract
Recently, numerous studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of contrastive
learning (CL), which learns feature representations by pulling in positive samples
while pushing away negative samples. Many successes of CL lie in that there exists
semantic consistency between data augmentations of the same instance. In multiview scenarios, however, CL might cause representation degeneration when the
collected multiple views inherently have inconsistent semantic information or their
representations subsequently do not capture sufficient discriminative information.
To address this issue, we propose a novel framework called SEM: SElf-weighted
Multi-view contrastive learning with reconstruction regularization. Specifically,
SEM is a general framework where we propose to first measure the discrepancy between pairwise representations and then minimize the corresponding self-weighted
contrastive loss, and thus making SEM adaptively strengthen the useful pairwise
views and also weaken the unreliable pairwise views. Meanwhile, we impose a
self-supervised reconstruction term to regularize the hidden features of encoders,
to assist CL in accessing sufficient discriminative information of data. Experiments
on public multi-view datasets verified that SEM can mitigate representation degeneration in existing CL methods and help them achieve significant performance
improvements. Ablation studies also demonstrated the effectiveness of SEM with
different options of weighting strategies and reconstruction terms.

1

Introduction

Contrastive learning (CL) explicitly enlarges the feature representation similarity between semanticrelevant samples, and it is adept at capturing high-level semantics while discarding irrelevant information. This learning paradigm has facilitated many research and application fields, such as visual
representation [1, 2], text understanding [3, 4], and cross-modal agreement [5, 6, 7]. Samples with
consistent semantics are typically constructed as positive sample pairs for CL loss (e.g., InfoNCE [8]),
which motivates multi-view learning scenarios [9, 10] where researchers focus on exploring common
semantics among multi-view data. However, this kind of data usually is with heterogeneous views
and thus cannot be directly processed by previous CL methods with two shared network branches.
To handle this situation, many multi-view contrastive learning (MCL) methods [11, 12, 13, 14]
have been proposed, which treats multiple views as positive sample pairs and achieves important
progresses in exploring multi-view common semantics (see Sec. 2 for details). Nevertheless, we find
that CL might cause representation degeneration that the representations of high-quality views tend
to degenerate. This may make the MCL methods perform worse than the optimal single view (see
Sec. 3.1 and Sec. 4.1), and thus heavily limiting the usability of MCL in practical scenarios. Although
∗

Corresponding Author (seanzhuxf@gmail.com). Code link: https://github.com/SubmissionsIn/SEM.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

