Bayesian Optimization with Cost-varying
Variable Subsets
Sebastian Shenghong Tay1 2 , Chuan Sheng Foo2 3 , Daisuke Urano4 ,
Richalynn Chiu Xian Leong4 , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), A*STAR, Singapore
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
4
Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, Singapore
sebastian.tay@u.nus.edu, foo_chuan_sheng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg,
daisuke@tll.org.sg, richalynn@tll.org.sg, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We introduce the problem of Bayesian optimization with cost-varying variable
subsets (BOCVS) where in each iteration, the learner chooses a subset of query
variables and specifies their values while the rest are randomly sampled. Each
chosen subset has an associated cost. This presents the learner with the novel challenge of balancing between choosing more informative subsets for more directed
learning versus leaving some variables to be randomly sampled to reduce incurred
costs. This paper presents a novel Gaussian process upper confidence bound-based
algorithm for solving the BOCVS problem that is provably no-regret. We analyze
how the availability of cheaper control sets helps in exploration and reduces overall
regret. We empirically show that our proposed algorithm can find significantly
better solutions than comparable baselines with the same budget.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) is a powerful framework for the sample-efficient optimization of costly-toevaluate black-box objective functions [11] and has been successfully applied to many experimental
design problems of significance such as hyperparameter optimization [6, 39], chemical synthesis [30],
and particle accelerator control [29], among others. Conventional BO assumes that the learner has
full control over all query variables (i.e., all variables in the input to the objective function). However,
in many real-world optimization problems, some of the query variables may be subject to randomness
affecting their values. In some cases, the randomness affecting a specific variable can be eliminated
(by allowing the learner to select its value), but at a cost. We illustrate with a few concrete scenarios:
In precision agriculture, consider a farm aiming to find the optimal conditions for largest crop yield
where the query variables are a set of soil nutrient concentrations (e.g., Ca, B, NH3 , K) and pH. The
farm may rely on the naturally-occurring quantities of these nutrients in the available soil, but these
quantities will be randomly sampled. Alternatively, they may control some subset of these quantities
(via manufactured soil and fertilizers) at a higher cost. In advanced manufacturing where random
variation occurs in every operation [34], certain specifications of a product may be left unspecified
by the manufacturer and randomly determined, or specified but at a higher cost. In ad revenue
maximization or crowdsourcing where information is gathered from a large number of individuals via
ad platforms or crowdsourcing platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk, suppose that the query
variables describe the demographics of the individual, such as country of origin or income level. The
learner may allow the platform to randomly assign the task to any individuals, or the learner may
demand a specific subgroup of individuals at a higher cost. In all these practical scenarios, the goal is
to find the maximizer with as little incurred cost as possible. At each query iteration, the learner is
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

