Bayesian Learning via Q-Exponential Process

Shuyi Li

Michael O’Connor

Shiwei Lan ∗

School of Mathematical & Statistical Sciences
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287

Abstract
Regularization is one of the most fundamental topics in optimization, statistics
and machine learning. To get sparsity in estimating a parameter u ∈ Rd , an
ℓq penalty term, ∥u∥q , is usually added to the objective function. What is the
probabilistic distribution corresponding to such ℓq penalty? What is the correct
stochastic process corresponding to ∥u∥q when we model functions u ∈ Lq ? This
is important for statistically modeling high-dimensional objects such as images,
with penalty to preserve certain properties, e.g. edges in the image. In this
work, we generalize the q-exponential distribution (with density proportional to)
exp (− 21 |u|q ) to a stochastic process named q-exponential (Q-EP) process that
corresponds to the Lq regularization of functions. The key step is to specify
consistent multivariate q-exponential distributions by choosing from a large family
of elliptic contour distributions. The work is closely related to Besov process which
is usually defined in terms of series. Q-EP can be regarded as a definition of Besov
process with explicit probabilistic formulation, direct control on the correlation
strength, and tractable prediction formula. From the Bayesian perspective, QEP provides a flexible prior on functions with sharper penalty (q < 2) than the
commonly used Gaussian process (GP, q = 2). We compare GP, Besov and Q-EP
in modeling functional data, reconstructing images and solving inverse problems
and demonstrate the advantage of our proposed methodology.

1

INTRODUCTION

Regularization on function spaces is one of the fundamental questions in statistics and machine
learning. High-dimensional objects such as images can be viewed as discretized functions defined
on 2d or 3d domains. Statistical models for these objects on function spaces demand regularization
to induce sparsity, prevent over-fitting, produce meaningful reconstruction, etc. Gaussian process
[GP 38, 24] has been widely used as an L2 penalty (negative log-density as a quadratic form) or a
prior on the function space. Despite the flexibility, sometimes random candidate functions drawn
from GP are over-smooth for modeling certain objects such as images with sharp edges. To address
this issue, researchers have proposed a class of L1 penalty based priors including Laplace random
field [37, 34, 28] and Besov process [31, 15, 25, 16]. They have been extensively applied in spatial
modeling [37], signal processing [28], imaging analysis [44, 34] and inverse problems [31, 15].
Figure 1 demonstrates an application of nonparametric regression models on functions endowed with
GP, Besov and our proposed q-exponential process (Q-EP) priors respectively to reconstruct a blurry
image of a satellite. Q-EP model generates the best reconstruction, indicating its advantage over GP
in modeling objects with abrupt changes or sharp contrast such as “edges" in image.
⋆

For these high-dimensional (refer to its discretization) inhomogeneous objects on d ⋆ domains D ⊂ Rd ,
particularly 2d images with sharp edges (d ⋆ = 2), one can model them as a random function u from a
∗ slan@asu.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

