Cocktail : Mixing Multi-Modality Controls for
Text-Conditional Image Generation
Minghui Hu† , Jianbin Zheng⋆ , Daqing Liu‡ , Chuanxia Zheng§ , Chaoyue Wang¶ , Dacheng Tao¶ , and
Tat-Jen Cham†
†

Nanyang Technological University, ⋆ South China University of Technology, § University of Oxford,
¶
The University of Sydney, ‡ JD Explore Academy

Abstract
Text-conditional diffusion models are able to generate high-fidelity images with
diverse contents. However, linguistic representations frequently exhibit ambiguous
descriptions of the envisioned objective imagery, requiring the incorporation of
additional control signals to bolster the efficacy of text-guided diffusion models.
In this work, we propose Cocktail, a pipeline to mix various modalities into
one embedding, amalgamated with a generalized ControlNet (gControlNet), a
controllable normalisation (ControlNorm), and a spatial guidance sampling method,
to actualize multi-modal and spatially-refined control for text-conditional diffusion
models. Specifically, we introduce a hyper-network gControlNet, dedicated to the
alignment and infusion of the control signals from disparate modalities into the
pre-trained diffusion model. gControlNet is capable of accepting flexible modality
signals, encompassing the simultaneous reception of any combination of modality
signals, or the supplementary fusion of multiple modality signals. The control
signals are then fused and injected into the backbone model according to our
proposed ControlNorm. Furthermore, our advanced spatial guidance sampling
methodology proficiently incorporates the control signal into the designated region,
thereby circumventing the manifestation of undesired objects within the generated
image. We demonstrate the results of our method in controlling various modalities,
proving high-quality synthesis and fidelity to multiple external signals. The codes
are released at https://mhh0318.github.io/cocktail/.

1

Introduction

Text-conditional diffusion models [41, 39, 42, 34] have actualized the capacity for high-quality
generative capabilities. These models facilitate the generation of an array of high-calibre images
through the utilization of concise textual prompts. However, linguistic representations pose inherent
challenges in accurately encapsulating the precise imagery anticipated by the user, owing to the
potential ambiguities and subjective interpretations of verbal descriptions within the context of visual
synthesis. Moreover, minor alterations to the textual prompts also yield distinct visual outputs,
underscoring the absence of refined control over the generative process.
Modifying the prior is a series of existing solutions for multi-modal control, e.g., the control of the
entire prior space [39, 48, 23, 22, 57] as demonstrated in Fig. 1(a). These approaches centered on the
whole prior lack the capacity for localised image modifications and the preservation of background
elements. Moreover, these models typically require training from scratch, which demands a substantial
amount of resources.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

