Connecting Multi-modal Contrastive Representations
Zehan Wang1 Yang Zhao2 Xize Cheng1 Haifeng Huang1 Jiageng Liu1 Li Tang1
Linjun Li1 Yongqi Wang1 Aoxiong Yin1 Ziang Zhang1 Zhou Zhao1, 3∗
1

Zhejiang University 2 ByteDance 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{wangzehan01}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-modal Contrastive Representation (MCR) learning aims to encode different
modalities into a semantically aligned shared space. This paradigm shows remarkable generalization ability on numerous downstream tasks across various modalities.
However, the reliance on massive high-quality data pairs limits its further development on more modalities. This paper proposes a novel training-efficient method
for learning MCR without paired data called Connecting Multi-modal Contrastive
Representations (C-MCR). Specifically, given two existing MCRs pre-trained on
(A, B) and (B, C) modality pairs, we project them to a new space and use the
data from the overlapping modality B to aligning the two MCRs in the new space.
Meanwhile, since the modality pairs (A, B) and (B, C) are already aligned within
each MCR, the connection learned by overlapping modality can also be transferred
to non-overlapping modality pair (A, C). To unleash the potential of C-MCR, we
further introduce a semantic-enhanced inter- and intra-MCR connection method.
We first enhance the semantic consistency and completion of embeddings across
different modalities for more robust alignment. Then we utilize the inter-MCR
alignment to establish the connection, and employ the intra-MCR alignment to
better maintain the connection for inputs from non-overlapping modalities. To
demonstrate the effectiveness of C-MCR, we take the field of audio-visual and 3Dlanguage learning as examples. Specifically, we connect CLIP and CLAP via texts
to derive audio-visual representations, and integrate CLIP and ULIP via images for
3D-language representations. Remarkably, without using any paired data, C-MCR
for audio-visual achieves state-of-the-art performance on audio-image retrieval,
audio-visual source localization, and counterfactual audio-image recognition tasks.
Furthermore, C-MCR for 3D-language also attains advanced zero-shot 3D point
cloud classification accuracy on ModelNet40. Our project page is available at
https://c-mcr.github.io/C-MCR/

1

Introduction

Multi-modal Contrastive Representation (MCR) learning aims to map inputs from different modalities
to a shared representation space. With the impressive generalization performance of vision-language
contrastive pre-training models [1, 2, 3, 4] demonstrated on various downstream tasks [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10],
learning MCR spaces between multiple modalities has become a promising area of research, attracting
increasing attention [11, 12, 13, 14, 15].
However, the generalization ability of MCR primarily benefits from the accessibility of massive data
pairs from the web. For modalities where obtaining semantically matching data pairs is significantly
more costly, the representations directly learned from limited data pairs are unreliable. On the other
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

