Tuning Multi-mode Token-level Prompt Alignment
across Modalities
Dongsheng Wang, Miaoge Li, Xinyang Liu, MingSheng Xu, Bo Chen∗
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
{wds,limiaoge,xinyangatk,msxu}@stu.xidian.edu.cn
bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn
Hanwang Zhang
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Advancements in prompt tuning of vision-language models have underscored their
potential in enhancing open-world visual concept comprehension. However, prior
works only primarily focus on single-mode (only one prompt for each modality)
and holistic level (image or sentence) semantic alignment, which fails to capture
the sample diversity, leading to sub-optimal prompt discovery. To address the limitation, we propose a multi-mode token-level tuning framework that leverages the
optimal transportation to learn and align a set of prompt tokens across modalities.
Specifically, we rely on two essential factors: 1) multi-mode prompts discovery,
which guarantees diverse semantic representations, and 2) token-level alignment,
which helps explore fine-grained similarity. Consequently, the similarity can be
calculated as a hierarchical transportation problem between the modality-specific
sets. Extensive experiments on popular image recognition benchmarks show the
superior generalization and few-shot abilities of our approach. The qualitative analysis demonstrates that the learned prompt tokens have the ability to capture diverse
visual concepts. The code is available at https://github.com/wds2014/ALIGN.

1

Introduction

Recently, prompt tuning has experienced significant advancements in adapting large pre-trained
vision language models (PVLs) such as CLIP [1] and BLIP [2] to downstream tasks [3–6]. A
typical PVL model consists of two branch networks: the text and image encoders. These networks
are used to extract the corresponding modality features. PVLs are often contrastively pre-trained
on Web-scale image-text pairs, which encourage the alignment of visual concepts with natural
language in the shared semantic space. One of the core ideas behind prompt tuning is to formulate
the downstream tasks into the original pre-training pipeline. For example, CLIP designs category
descriptions with a manual prompt template “a photo of a {class}”, which works well in generic
image recognition. Unlike fine-tuning, where the entire model is tuned using task-specific objectives,
demands prohibitive computing cost, and poses a risk of knowledge shift issues [7–9], prompt tuning
fixes the model parameters instead and optimizes prompt vectors, which act as demonstrations to
help extract task-related features. This significantly benefits the representations via PVLs, even in
performing zero-shot inference without training samples.
However, identifying optimal prompts for PVLs is not a trivial task, which usually needs to solve
the intricate semantic alignments between the textual and visual modalities. Inspired by the success
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

