Learning and Processing the Ordinal Information of
Temporal Sequences in Recurrent Neural Circuits

Xiaolong Zou1,4,5,∗
zouxiaolong@qiyuanlab.com
Jie Cheng7
jiecheng2009@gmail.com

Zhikun Chu2,∗
chukunzhi@outlook.com
Bo Hong1,6
hongbo@tsinghua.edu.cn

Qinghai Guo7
guoqinghai@huawei.com
Si Wu4,5
siwu@pku.edu.cn

Yuanyuan Mi3,⊤
miyuanyuan@tsinghua.edu.cn
1, Qiyuan Lab, Beijing, China.
2, Center for Neurointelligence, School of Medicine, Chongqing University.
3, Department of Psychology, Tsinghua University
4, School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences,
Beijing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental Health,
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research,
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Center of Quantitative Biology,
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China
5, Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing,China.
6, Biomedical Engineering,School of Medicine, Tsinghua University
7, Huawei Technologies.
*: Equal contributions. ⊤ : Corresponding authors.

Abstract
Temporal sequence processing is fundamental in brain cognitive functions. Experimental data has indicated that the representations of ordinal information and
contents of temporal sequences are disentangled in the brain, but the neural mechanism underlying this disentanglement remains largely unclear. Here, we investigate
how recurrent neural circuits learn to represent the abstract order structure of
temporal sequences, and how the disentangled representation of order structure
facilitates the processing of temporal sequences. We show that with an appropriate
training protocol, a recurrent neural circuit can learn tree-structured attractor dynamics to encode the corresponding tree-structured orders of temporal sequences.
This abstract temporal order template can then be bound with different contents,
allowing for flexible and robust temporal sequence processing. Using a transfer
learning task, we demonstrate that the reuse of a temporal order template facilitates
the acquisition of new temporal sequences, if these sequences share the same or
partial ordinal structure. Using a key-word spotting task, we demonstrate that the
tree-structured attractor dynamics improves the robustness of temporal sequence
discrimination, if the ordinal information is the key to differentiate these sequences.
We hope that this study gives us insights into the mechanism of representing the
ordinal information of temporal sequences in the brain, and helps us to develop
brain-inspired temporal sequence processing algorithms.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

