Cappy: Outperforming and Boosting Large
Multi-Task LMs with a Small Scorer
Bowen Tan1∗, Yun Zhu2 , Lijuan Liu2 , Eric Xing1,3,5 , Zhiting Hu4 , Jindong Chen2
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Google Research, 3 Petuum Inc., 4 UC San Diego,
5
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{btan2, epxing}@andrew.cmu.edu, zhh019@ucsd.edu,
{yunzhu, lijuanliu, jdchen}@google.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) such as T0, FLAN, and OPT-IML, excel in multitasking under a unified instruction-following paradigm, where they also exhibit
remarkable generalization abilities to unseen tasks. Despite their impressive performance, these LLMs, with sizes ranging from several billion to hundreds of
billions of parameters, demand substantial computational resources, making their
training and inference expensive and inefficient. Furthermore, adapting these models to downstream applications, particularly complex tasks, is often unfeasible
due to the extensive hardware requirements for finetuning, even when utilizing
parameter-efficient approaches such as prompt tuning. Additionally, the most
powerful multi-task LLMs, such as OPT-IML-175B and FLAN-PaLM-540B, are
not publicly accessible, severely limiting their customization potential. To address
these challenges, we introduce a pretrained small scorer, Cappy, designed to enhance the performance and efficiency of multi-task LLMs. With merely 360 million
parameters, Cappy functions either independently on classification tasks or serve as
an auxiliary component for LLMs, boosting their performance. Moreover, Cappy
enables efficiently integrating downstream supervision without requiring LLM finetuning nor the access to their parameters. Our experiments demonstrate that, when
working independently on 11 language understanding tasks from PromptSource,
Cappy outperforms LLMs that are several orders of magnitude larger. Besides, on
45 complex tasks from BIG-Bench, Cappy boosts the performance of the advanced
multi-task LLM, FLAN-T5, by a large margin. Furthermore, Cappy is flexible
to cooperate with other LLM adaptations, including finetuning and in-context
learning, offering additional performance enhancement. 2

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have led to a new paradigm that seeks to unify various natural
language processing (NLP) tasks within an instruction-following framework. This paradigm is
exemplified by the recent multi-task LLMs, such as T0 [23], FLAN [30, 4], and OPT-IML [10].
These models are trained with data from many tasks: for each task, following a task-specific template,
each labeled example is converted into an instruction (e.g., "Put the concepts together to
form a sentence: ski, mountain, skier.") and a corresponding response (e.g., "Skier
skis down the mountain"). Such (instruction, response) pairs are then used to train the
LLM, resulting in a conditional generation model that takes input of a data example as an instruction
∗

Work done during an internship at Google.
Code and model available at https://github.com/tanyuqian/cappy and https://huggingface.
co/btan2/cappy-large, respectively.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

