Automatic Clipping: Differentially Private Deep
Learning Made Easier and Stronger

Zhiqi Bu
AWS AI
zhiqibu@amazon.com

Yu-Xiang Wang
AWS AI, UC Santa Barbara
yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Sheng Zha
AWS AI
zhasheng@amazon.com

George Karypis
AWS AI
gkarypis@amazon.com

Abstract
Per-example gradient clipping is a key algorithmic step that enables practical
differential private (DP) training for deep learning models. The choice of clipping
threshold R, however, is vital for achieving high accuracy under DP. We propose
an easy-to-use replacement, called automatic clipping, that eliminates the need
to tune R for any DP optimizers, including DP-SGD, DP-Adam, DP-LAMB and
many others. The automatic variants are as private and computationally efficient
as existing DP optimizers, but require no DP-specific hyperparameters and thus
make DP training as amenable as the standard non-private training. We give a
rigorous convergence analysis of automatic DP-SGD in the non-convex setting,
showing that it can enjoy an asymptotic convergence rate that matches the standard
SGD, under a symmetric gradient noise assumption of the per-sample gradients
(commonly used in the non-DP literature). We demonstrate on various language
and vision tasks that automatic clipping outperforms or matches the state-of-the-art,
and can be easily employed with minimal changes to existing codebases1 .

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved impressive progress in a wide range of tasks. These successes are
made available, in part, by the collection of large datasets, sometimes containing sensitive private
information of individual data points. Prior works have illustrated that deep learning models pose
severe privacy risks to individual subjects in the training data and are susceptible to various practical
attacks. For example, machine learning services such as Google Prediction API and Amazon Machine
Learning can leak membership information from the purchase records [65]; the GPT2 language
models auto-complete texts that contain someone’s full name, phone number, email address, etc.,
from the training data that it memorizes, if invoked by specific prefixes [11].
Differential privacy (DP) [24, 26, 25] is a formal definition of privacy that has been shown to prevent
the aforementioned privacy risks in deep learning [1]. At a high level, the key difference between the
DP deep learning and the standard one isP
whether the gradient is privately released. In other words,
while the standard optimizers update on i gi , the DP optimizers update on the private gradient:
1

Code for our experiments is available at FastDP library https://github.com/awslabs/fast-differential-privacy.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

