Supported Value Regularization for Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Yixiu Mao1 , Hongchang Zhang1 , Chen Chen1 , Yi Xu2 , Xiangyang Ji1
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
myx21@mails.tsinghua.edu, xyji@tsinghua.edu

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning suffers from the extrapolation error and value overestimation caused by out-of-distribution (OOD) actions. To mitigate this issue, value
regularization approaches aim to penalize the learned value functions to assign
lower values to OOD actions. However, existing value regularization methods lack
a proper distinction between the regularization effects on in-distribution (ID) and
OOD actions, and fail to guarantee optimal convergence results of the policy. To
this end, we propose Supported Value Regularization (SVR), which penalizes the
Q-values for all OOD actions while maintaining standard Bellman updates for
ID ones. Specifically, we utilize the bias of importance sampling to compute the
summation of Q-values over the entire OOD region, which serves as the penalty
for policy evaluation. This design automatically separates the regularization for ID
and OOD actions without manually distinguishing between them. In tabular MDP,
we show that the policy evaluation operator of SVR is a contraction, whose fixed
point outputs unbiased Q-values for ID actions and underestimated Q-values for
OOD actions. Furthermore, the policy iteration with SVR guarantees strict policy
improvement until convergence to the optimal support-constrained policy in the
dataset. Empirically, we validate the theoretical properties of SVR in a tabular
maze environment and demonstrate its state-of-the-art performance on a range of
continuous control tasks in the D4RL benchmark.

1

Introduction

Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims to learn a policy from a fixed dataset collected by some
behavior policy [24, 26]. It can tap into existing large-scale datasets [15, 30] for safe and efficient
learning. However, it suffers from the extrapolation error [10] caused by out-of-distribution (OOD)
actions, which can further result in severe overestimation of value functions [26].
To mitigate this issue, value regularization approaches attempt to penalize the Q-values of OOD
actions to introduce conservatism in value estimation [23, 20, 46, 14, 3, 6]. However, we observe
that existing value regularization methods not only fall short in penalizing all OOD Q-values but
also may introduce detrimental changes to in-distribution (ID) ones. Specifically, most of them
involve adding penalties to the critic learning objective [23, 50, 27, 6, 48]. However, due to the
difficulty of distinguishing between ID and OOD actions, they typically adopt the idea of being
pessimistic about the actions under the current policy and optionally optimistic about the ones within
the dataset [23, 50, 46, 6]. Rather than relying on ID or OOD, this regularization is essentially based
on the policy density, which we show is problematic when the dataset is heavily corrupted by suboptimal actions. Other works involve reducing the Bellman target with uncertainty quantifiers [14, 3]
or ensembles [2, 34]. However, if not incorporating additional penalties, they do not provide learning
signals on OOD Q-values, logically only suppressing the overestimation in the ID region [14, 2].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

