S ELF -R EFINE:
Iterative Refinement with Self-Feedback
Aman Madaan1 , Niket Tandon2 , Prakhar Gupta1 , Skyler Hallinan3 , Luyu Gao1 ,
Sarah Wiegreffe2 , Uri Alon1∗, Nouha Dziri2 , Shrimai Prabhumoye4 , Yiming Yang1 ,
Shashank Gupta2 , Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder5 , Katherine Hermann6 ,
Sean Welleck2,3 , Amir Yazdanbakhsh6 , Peter Clark2
1
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
University of Washington 4 NVIDIA 5 UC San Diego 6 Google Deepmind
selfrefine@googlegroups.com

Abstract
Like humans, large language models (LLMs) do not always generate the best
output on their first try. Motivated by how humans refine their written text, we
introduce S ELF -R EFINE, an approach for improving initial outputs from LLMs
through iterative feedback and refinement. The main idea is to generate an initial
output using an LLM; then, the same LLM provides feedback for its output and uses
it to refine itself, iteratively. S ELF -R EFINE does not require any supervised training
data, additional training, or reinforcement learning, and instead uses a single LLM
as the generator, refiner, and feedback provider. We evaluate S ELF -R EFINE across 7
diverse tasks, ranging from dialog response generation to mathematical reasoning,
using state-of-the-art (GPT-3.5 and GPT-4) LLMs. Across all evaluated tasks,
outputs generated with S ELF -R EFINE are preferred by humans and automatic
metrics over those generated with the same LLM using conventional one-step
generation, improving by ∼20% absolute on average in task performance. Our work
demonstrates that even state-of-the-art LLMs like GPT-4 can be further improved at
test-time using our simple, standalone approach.2 .

1

Introduction

Although large language models (LLMs) can generate coherent outputs, they often fall short in
addressing intricate requirements. This mostly includes tasks with multifaceted objectives, such
as dialogue response generation, or tasks with hard-to-define goals, such as enhancing program
readability. In these scenarios, modern LLMs may produce an intelligible initial output, yet may
benefit from further iterative refinement—i.e., iteratively mapping a candidate output to an improved
one—to ensure that the desired quality is achieved. Iterative refinement typically involves training
a refinement model that relies on domain-specific data (e.g., Reid and Neubig (2022); Schick et al.
(2022a); Welleck et al. (2022)). Other approaches that rely on external supervision or reward models
require large training sets or expensive human annotations (Madaan et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022),
which may not always be feasible to obtain. These limitations underscore the need for an effective
refinement approach that can be applied to various tasks without requiring extensive supervision.
Iterative self -refinement is a fundamental characteristic of human problem-solving (Simon, 1962;
Flower and Hayes, 1981; Amabile, 1983). Iterative self-refinement is a process that involves creating
an initial draft and subsequently refining it based on self-provided feedback. For example, when
∗
2

Now at Google DeepMind
Code and data at https://selfrefine.info/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

