Kiki or Bouba? Sound Symbolism in
Vision-and-Language Models

Morris Alper and Hadar Averbuch-Elor
Tel Aviv University

Abstract
Although the mapping between sound and meaning in human language is assumed
to be largely arbitrary, research in cognitive science has shown that there are
non-trivial correlations between particular sounds and meanings across languages
and demographic groups, a phenomenon known as sound symbolism. Among the
many dimensions of meaning, sound symbolism is particularly salient and welldemonstrated with regards to cross-modal associations between language and the
visual domain. In this work, we address the question of whether sound symbolism
is reflected in vision-and-language models such as CLIP and Stable Diffusion.
Using zero-shot knowledge probing to investigate the inherent knowledge of these
models, we find strong evidence that they do show this pattern, paralleling the
well-known kiki–bouba effect in psycholinguistics. Our work provides a novel
method for demonstrating sound symbolism and understanding its nature using
computational tools. Our code will be made publicly available1 .

1

Introduction

“What’s in a name? That which we call a rose by any other name would smell as sweet."
—William Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet
Philosophers of language have long debated whether the mapping between sound and meaning in
speech is arbitrary. Discussions on this topic date back to the Socratic dialogues of Plato, as well
as early modern philosophers such as John Locke and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz [30]. Charles de
Saussure, the seminal early 20th century linguist and semiotician, famously stated that le signe est
arbitraire2 . In Saussure’s view, words are simply arbitrary conventions and their sounds have no
inherent connection to their meanings; hence the French word chien and its English translation dog
both equally denote the same animal despite sharing no sounds in common [15].
Although the concept of the arbitrariness of the sign was influential on modern linguistics, there
are many evident cases where it does not hold which have attracted great interest among modern
researchers. Cases of sound symbolism in language, where the sounds themselves in a word have
some connection to what they describe, include onomatopoeic phrases such as kapow (a punch or
banging sound) and glub-glub (water bubbling). Beyond direct imitation, it has been noted that
English and other languages show correlations between certain phonetic structures and types of
meaning, such as the array of English words beginning with cr- denoting brittleness (crush, crunch,
crash, crack, crackle, crinkle, ...). This raises natural questions including how universal these patterns
of iconicity are between languages and cultures, whether they are rooted in psychological tendencies
that influence language or vice versa, what acoustic properties of speech sounds influence iconicity,
and the extent to which less obvious iconic patterns shape language in general.
1

via our project page https://kiki-bouba.github.io/
“the sign is arbitrary”

2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

