A Pseudo-Semantic Loss for Autoregressive Models
with Logical Constraints

Kareem Ahmed
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
ahmedk@cs.ucla.edu

Kai-Wei Chang
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
kwchang@cs.ucla.edu

Guy Van den Broeck
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Neuro-symbolic AI bridges the gap between purely symbolic and neural approaches
to learning. This often requires maximizing the likelihood of a symbolic constraint
w.r.t. the neural network’s output distribution. Such output distributions are typically assumed to be fully-factorized. This limits the applicability of neuro-symbolic
learning to the more expressive autoregressive distributions, e.g., transformers. Under such distributions, computing the likelihood of even simple constraints is
#P-hard. Instead of attempting to enforce the constraint on the entire output distribution, we propose to do so on a random, local approximation thereof. More
precisely, we optimize the likelihood of the constraint under a pseudolikelihoodbased approximation centered around a model sample. Our approximation is
factorized, allowing the reuse of solutions to sub-problems—a main tenet for efficiently computing neuro-symbolic losses. Moreover, it is a local, high-fidelity
approximation of the likelihood, exhibiting low entropy and KL-divergence around
the model sample. We evaluate our approach on Sudoku and shortest-path prediction cast as autoregressive generation, and observe that we greatly improve upon the
base model’s ability to predict logically-consistent outputs. We also evaluate on the
task of detoxifying large language models. Using a simple constraint disallowing
a list of toxic words, we are able to steer the model’s outputs away from toxic
generations, achieving SoTA detoxification compared to previous approaches.

1

Introduction

Neuro-symbolic AI aims to consolidate purely statistical approaches, chiefly using neural networks,
with purely symbolic approaches for learning and reasoning. It has thus far shown great promise in addressing many of the shortcomings of both paradigms, developing scalable approaches that learn from
unstructured data while leveraging domain knowledge to ensure the explainability, trusted behavior
as well as reduce the amount of labeled data required by typically data-hungry deep neural networks.
More specifically, a common approach to neuro-symbolic learning consists in injecting knowledge
regarding the underlying problem domain into the training process as an auxiliary form of supervision.
Such knowledge typically takes the form of a sentence in logic, and relates the outputs of the neural
network, delineating assignments to the output variables that constitute a valid object from those
that do not. For instance, only an assignment to the cells of a Sudoku puzzle such that each row,
column, and 3 × 3 square contain all of the digits from 1 to 9 constitutes a valid Sudoku solution.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

