On Occlusions in Video Action Detection: Benchmark
Datasets And Training Recipes

Rajat Modi1∗, Vibhav Vineet2 , Yogesh Singh Rawat1
CRCV, University of Central Florida1 , and Microsoft Research2

Abstract
This paper explores the impact of occlusions in video action detection. We facilitate this study by introducing five new benchmark datasets namely O-UCF
and O-JHMDB consisting of synthetically controlled static/dynamic occlusions,
OVIS-UCF and OVIS-JHMDB consisting of occlusions with realistic motions and
Real-OUCF for occlusions in realistic-world scenarios. We formally confirm an
intuitive expectation: existing models suffer a lot as occlusion severity is increased
and exhibit different behaviours when occluders are static vs when they are moving.
We discover several intriguing phenomenon emerging in neural nets: 1) transformers can naturally outperform CNN models which might have even used occlusion as
a form of data augmentation during training 2) incorporating symbolic-components
like capsules to such backbones allows them to bind to occluders never even seen
during training and 3) Islands of agreement can emerge in realistic images/videos
without instance-level supervision, distillation or contrastive-based objectives2 (eg.
video-textual training). Such emergent properties allow us to derive simple yet
effective training recipes which lead to robust occlusion models inductively satisfying the first two stages of the binding mechanism (grouping/segregation). Models leveraging these recipes outperform existing video action-detectors under occlusion by 32.3% on O-UCF, 32.7% on O-JHMDB & 2.6% on Real-OUCF in
terms of the vMAP metric. The code for this work has been released at https:
//github.com/rajatmodi62/OccludedActionBenchmark.

1

Introduction

Deep learning[41] has led to significant advances in object detection/segmentation for both image[16,
19] and video domain[84]. Such deep neural networks are in turn widely used in self-driving cars and
safety critical scenarios. A key concern for such applications is whether they are able to perform well
when encountering realistic occlusions: e.g. are they able to reliably localize a pedestrian even when
an occluder (say a dog) comes in front of him. However, one major limitations being existing dataset
test split doesn’t contain such occlusions. This raises a concern, whether these models will be robust
to real-world occlusions or not.
One would suspect that the inherent inductive biases of these architectures would be enough to induce
natural occlusion robustness. To verify the hypothesis, we run two preliminary setups: (Fig. 1)
(A) Firstly, superimposing a single occluder (eg bus) over the actor, and, (B) Then, we analyze the
performance if the occlusion is shifted to background (i.e. no occlusion over actor at all). We observe
a relative drop of 20-50% across multiple existing state-of-the-art approaches [46, 13]. This verifies
∗

Corresponding Author, email: rajatmodi@ucf.edu
Grouping pixels is a perceptual phenomenon of the visual-cortex[59] . Assigning a group to a class is a
property of language. If a group is identified by multiple-names, then a neural-net can learn this one-many
mapping via contrastive objectives[75]. But grouping should also emerge without language since organisms can
continue to perceive objects even without ears/tongue.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

