Keep Various Trajectories: Promoting Exploration of
Ensemble Policies in Continuous Control

1

Chao Li1,4 Chen Gong2 Qiang He3 Xinwen Hou1†
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Virginia, USA
3
Ruhr University Bochum, Germany
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{lichao2021, xinwen.hou}@ia.ac.cn
fzv6en@virginia.edu, qianghe97@gmail.com

Abstract
The combination of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) with ensemble methods
has been proved to be highly effective in addressing complex sequential decisionmaking problems. This success can be primarily attributed to the utilization of
multiple models, which enhances both the robustness of the policy and the accuracy
of value function estimation. However, there has been limited analysis of the
empirical success of current ensemble RL methods thus far. Our new analysis
reveals that the sample efficiency of previous ensemble DRL algorithms may
be limited by sub-policies that are not as diverse as they could be. Motivated
by these findings, our study introduces a new ensemble RL algorithm, termed
Trajectories-awarE Ensemble exploratioN (TEEN). The primary goal of TEEN
is to maximize the expected return while promoting more diverse trajectories.
Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that TEEN not only enhances the
sample diversity of the ensemble policy compared to using sub-policies alone but
also improves the performance over ensemble RL algorithms. On average, TEEN
outperforms the baseline ensemble DRL algorithms by 41% in performance on the
tested representative environments.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) [1] has demonstrated significant potential in addressing a
range of complex sequential decision-making problems, such as video games [2; 3; 4], autonomous
driving [5; 6], robotic control tasks [7; 8], board games [9; 10], etc. Although the combination
of high-capacity function approximators, such as deep neural networks (DNNs), enables DRL to
solve more complex tasks, two notorious problems impede the widespread use of these DRL in
real-world domains. i) function approximation error: Q-learning algorithm converges to sub-optimal
solutions due to the error propagation [11; 12; 13], e.g., the maximization of random function
approximation errors accumulate into consistent overestimation bias [14]. ii) sample inefficiency,
model-free algorithm is notorious for requiring sample diversity—training of neural networks requires
a large number of samples which is hard to acquire in real-world scenarios.
Ensemble reinforcement learning shows great potential in solving the issues mentioned above by
combining multiple models of the value function and (or) policy [14; 15; 16; 17; 18; 19; 20] to
improve the accuracy and diversity. For instance, Max-Min Q-learning [11] reduces estimation
bias by utilizing an ensemble of estimates and selecting the minimum value as the target estimate.
Bootstrapped DQN [15] and SUNRISE [16] train an ensemble of value functions and policies,
†

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

