On the Consistency of Maximum Likelihood
Estimation of Probabilistic Principal Component
Analysis

Arghya Datta∗
Université de Montréal
Department of Mathematics and Statistics

Sayak Chakrabarty†
Northwestern University
Department of Computer Science

Abstract
Probabilistic principal component analysis (PPCA) is currently one of the
most used statistical tools to reduce the ambient dimension of the data. From
multidimensional scaling to the imputation of missing data, PPCA has a broad
spectrum of applications ranging from science and engineering to quantitative
finance.
Despite this wide applicability in various fields, hardly any theoretical guarantees
exist to justify the soundness of the maximum likelihood (ML) solution for this
model. In fact, it is well known that the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
can only recover the true model parameters up to a rotation. The main obstruction
is posed by the inherent identifiability nature of the PPCA model resulting from
the rotational symmetry of the parameterization. To resolve this ambiguity, we
propose a novel approach using quotient topological spaces and in particular, we
show that the maximum likelihood solution is consistent in an appropriate quotient
Euclidean space. Furthermore, our consistency results encompass a more general
class of estimators beyond the MLE. Strong consistency of the ML estimate and
consequently strong covariance estimation of the PPCA model have also been
established under a compactness assumption.

1

Introduction

In the era of big data, principal component analysis (PCA) is a standard dimension reduction tool
frequently used in exploratory data analysis. PCA is however not a statistical model, implying that
uncertainty quantification is not available. Uncertainty quantification is desirable in some situations,
like when principal components have an interpretation. Probabilistic principal component analysis
(PPCA) is a model introduced by Tipping and Bishop [1999] to remedy the situation. It consists of
an additive model with a normal noise term. Let p > q be two given positive integers. The PPCA
model can be written as x = Wz + ε, where x ∈ Rp denotes a random vector that is observed after
a linear transformation W is applied to a latent (hidden) variable z ∈ Rq up to a gaussian noise
ε ∼ N (0, σ 2 Ip ). We assume that our data is centered, meaning x has zero mean. In practice, the
latent variable z is not observed and is conventionally assumed to be normally distributed. Given a
set of n data points or observations {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rp , the two unknown parameters W and σ 2
are estimated by maximum likelihood estimation (MLE).
PPCA is a very well-known and pervasive technique used in dimension reduction of high-dimensional
data and used in figuring out the relevant dimensions in large-scale data mining. It must be said that
∗
†

arghya.datta@umontreal.ca
sayakchakrabarty2025@u.northwestern.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

