Finite-Time Analysis of Single-Timescale Actor-Critic

Lin Zhao∗
National University of Singapore
elezhli@nus.edu.sg

Xuyang Chen
National University of Singapore
chenxuyang@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Actor-critic methods have achieved significant success in many challenging applications. However, its finite-time convergence is still poorly understood in the
most practical single-timescale form. Existing works on analyzing single-timescale
actor-critic have been limited to i.i.d. sampling or tabular setting for simplicity.
We investigate the more practical online single-timescale actor-critic algorithm on
continuous state space, where the critic assumes linear function approximation
and updates with a single Markovian sample per actor step. Previous analysis
has been unable to establish the convergence for such a challenging scenario. We
demonstrate that the online single-timescale actor-critic method provably finds an
e −2 ) sample complexity under standard
ϵ-approximate stationary point with O(ϵ
assumptions, which can be further improved to O(ϵ−2 ) under the i.i.d. sampling.
Our novel framework systematically evaluates and controls the error propagation
between the actor and critic. It offers a promising approach for analyzing other
single-timescale reinforcement learning algorithms as well.

1

Introduction

Actor-critic (AC) methods have achieved great success in solving many challenging reinforcement
learning (RL) problems [17, 20, 24]. AC updates the actor (i.e., the policy) using the estimated
policy gradient (PG), which is a function of the Q-value under the policy. Meanwhile, it employs
a bootstrapping critic to estimate the Q-value, which often helps reduce variance and accelerates
convergence in practice.
Despite the empirical success, the non-asymptotic convergence analysis of AC in the most practical
single-timescale form remains underexplored. A large body of existing works consider the doubleloop variants, where the critic runs many steps to accurately estimate the Q-value for a given actor
[37, 16, 27, 2]. This leads to a decoupled convergence analysis of the critic and the actor, which
involves a policy evaluation sub-problem in the inner loop and a perturbed gradient descent in the
outer loop. Its finite-time convergence is relatively well understood [16, 37, 35]. Nevertheless, the
double-loop setting is mainly for ease of analysis, which is barely adopted in practice. Since it
requires an accurate critic estimation, it is typically sample inefficient. In fact, it is unclear whether an
inner loop of accurate policy evaluation is really necessary since it only corresponds to one transient
policy among many iterations.
Another body of works considers the (single-loop) two-timescale variants [31, 9, 36, 13], where the
actor and the critic are updated simultaneously in each iteration with stepsizes of different timescales.
The actor stepsize is typically smaller than that of the critic, with their ratio converging to zero as
the iteration number goes to infinity. Hence, the actor is updated much slower than the critic. The
two-timescale allows the critic to approximate the desired Q-value in an asymptotic way, which
enables a decoupled convergence analysis of the actor and the critic. This variant is occasionally
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

