Test-Time Distribution Normalization
for Contrastively Learned Vision-language Models

Yifei Zhou∗
University of California, Berkeley
yifei zhou@berkeley.edu

Juntao Ren∗
Cornell University
jlr429@cornell.edu

Fengyu Li∗
Cornell University
fl334@cornell.edu

Ser-Nam Lim
University of Central Florida
sernam@ucf.edu

Ramin Zabih
Cornell University
rdz@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Advances in the field of vision-language contrastive learning have made it possible
for many downstream applications to be carried out efficiently and accurately by
simply taking the dot product between image and text representations. One of the
most representative approaches proposed recently known as CLIP [50] has garnered
widespread adoption due to its effectiveness. CLIP is trained with an InfoNCE loss
that takes into account both positive and negative samples to help learn a much more
robust representation space. This paper reveals that the common downstream practice of taking a dot product is only a zeroth-order approximation of the optimization
goal, resulting in a loss of information during test-time. Intuitively, since the model
has been optimized based on the InfoNCE loss, test-time procedures should also be
in alignment. The question lies in how one can retrieve any semblance of negative
samples information during inference in a computationally efficient way. To this
end, we propose Distribution Normalization (DN), where we approximate the mean
representation of a batch of test samples and use such a mean to represent what
would be analogous to negative samples in the InfoNCE loss. DN requires no
retraining or fine-tuning and can be effortlessly applied during inference. Extensive
experiments on a wide variety of downstream tasks exhibit a clear advantage of DN
over the dot product on top of other existing test-time augmentation methods. Our
code is available at https://github.com/fengyuli2002/distribution-normalization.

1

Introduction

Contrastive Learning [20, 3, 60, 6, 52] has become an important area of research in recent years due
to its widespread success in self-supervised representation learning. The key idea behind contrastive
learning is to group positive samples that share similar semantics (e.g., images resulting from applying
different augmentations to the same image), while separating semantically different negative samples
(e.g., different images with different data augmentations). On the heels of this progress, contrastive
learning has also been shown to be very effective for creating a joint representation space between
images and text [50, 46, 75, 10]. The CLIP approach proposed in [50] is at the forefront of this
research effort and has been shown to be the state-of-the-art in multiple downstream tasks. The model
is generally pre-trained on a large amount of image-text pairs that form the positive samples, while the
negative samples are composed from random pairing of images and text. After the model is trained,
similarities between text and images can be measured by simply taking a dot product between their
corresponding representations. Such a paradigm has opened the doors to state-of-the-art performance
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

