Cheap and Quick: Efficient Vision-Language
Instruction Tuning for Large Language Models

Gen Luo13 , Yiyi Zhou12 , Tianhe Ren1 , Shengxin Chen1 , Xiaoshuai Sun12 , Rongrong Ji123∗
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518000, China.
{luogen,chenshengxin,rentianhe}@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
{zhouyiyi,xssun,rrji}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, growing interest has been aroused in extending the multimodal capability
of large language models (LLMs), e.g., vision-language (VL) learning, which is
regarded as the next milestone of artificial general intelligence. However, existing
solutions are prohibitively expensive, which not only need to optimize excessive
parameters, but also require another large-scale pre-training before VL instruction
tuning. In this paper, we propose a novel and affordable solution for the effective
VL adaption of LLMs, called Mixture-of-Modality Adaptation (MMA). Instead
of using large neural networks to connect the image encoder and LLM, MMA
adopts lightweight modules, i.e., adapters, to bridge the gap between LLMs and
VL tasks, which also enables the joint optimization of the image and language
models. Meanwhile, MMA is also equipped with a routing algorithm to help LLMs
achieve an automatic shift between single- and multi-modal instructions without
compromising their ability of natural language understanding. To validate MMA,
we apply it to a recent LLM called LLaMA and term this formed large visionlanguage instructed model as LaVIN. To validate MMA and LaVIN, we conduct
extensive experiments under two setups, namely multimodal science question
answering and multimodal dialogue. The experimental results not only demonstrate
the competitive performance and the superior training efficiency of LaVIN than
existing multimodal LLMs, but also confirm its great potential as a general-purpose
chatbot. More importantly, the actual expenditure of LaVIN is extremely cheap,
e.g., only 1.4 training hours with 3.8M trainable parameters, greatly confirming
the effectiveness of MMA. Our project is released at https://luogen1996.
github.io/lavin.

1

Introduction

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) [3, 37, 5, 52, 38] have continuously pushed the upper
limit of natural language understanding with ever increasing parameter sizes and pre-training data
scales. The introduction of instruction tuning [30, 31, 35] also enables LLMs to engage in human-like
conversations and handle various natural language processing (NLP) tasks [29, 44, 45], approaching
artificial general intelligence, e.g., GPT-3.5 [33]. The next milestone is often regarded to extend these
LLMs with multimodal capabilities, e.g., vision-language (VL) learning, making LLMs applicable to
more real-world application scenarios. Such a target has been recently realized by GPT-4 [34], which
is likely to adopt a large-scale vision-language corpus to directly train a multimodal GPT.
∗

corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

