Rethinking Semi-Supervised Imbalanced Node
Classification from Bias-Variance Decomposition

Divin Yan† , Gengchen Wei† , Chen Yang† , Shengzhong Zhang† , Zengfeng Huang†∗
†

Fudan University, {yanl21, gcwei22, yanc22}@m.fudan.edu.cn
{szzhang17, huangzf}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper introduces a new approach to address the issue of class imbalance
in graph neural networks (GNNs) for learning on graph-structured data. Our
approach integrates imbalanced node classification and Bias-Variance Decomposition, establishing a theoretical framework that closely relates data imbalance to
model variance. We also leverage graph augmentation technique to estimate the
variance, and design a regularization term to alleviate the impact of imbalance.
Exhaustive tests are conducted on multiple benchmarks, including naturally imbalanced datasets and public-split class-imbalanced datasets, demonstrating that our
approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods in various imbalanced scenarios.
This work provides a novel theoretical perspective for addressing the problem of
imbalanced node classification in GNNs.

1

Introduction

Graphs are ubiquitous in the real world, encompassing social networks, financial networks, chemical
molecules [22, 46, 9] and so on. Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) [16, 35, 9] have shown
exceptional proficiency in representation learning on graphs, facilitating their broad application in
various fields. Nevertheless, the process of learning on graphs, analogous to its counterparts in
computer vision and natural language processing, frequently encounters significant obstacles in the
form of skewed or insufficient data, leading to the prevalent issue of class imbalance. It is undeniable
that real-world data often exhibits biases and numerous categories, which entail data limitations and
distribution shifts to be common. Furthermore, coupled with the fact that GNNs often feature shallow
architectures to prevent "over-smoothing" or "information loss", training with such datasets leads to
severe over-fitting problems in minor classes.
Designing GNN imbalanced learning schemes for graph-structured data poses unique challenges,
unlike image data. Graph-structured data often requires consideration of the data’s topology and
environment, and empirical evidence [6, 24, 31] shows that topological asymmetries can also affect
the model’s performance. However, due to the extremely irregular and structured nature of the
data, quantifying and solving topological asymmetry is difficult and computationally intensive.
As a result, existing methods such as oversampling [28, 50, 24] and loss function engineering [6,
31] are problematic for achieving satisfactory outcomes. In depth, the modeling approach for
data personalization exhibits very poor scalability and generalization capability. Furthermore, the
prevalence of this problem has prompted the community to seek a more effective framework for
imbalanced learning. Thus, a more fundamental and theoretical perspective is urgently needed
when considering the imbalance node classification problem.
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

