Judging LLM-as-a-Judge
with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena

arXiv:2306.05685v4 [cs.CL] 24 Dec 2023

Lianmin Zheng1∗
Zhanghao Wu1

Yonghao Zhuang3

Eric P. Xing35
1

UC Berkeley

2

Wei-Lin Chiang1∗

Hao Zhang12

UC San Diego

3

Ying Sheng4∗

Zi Lin2

Siyuan Zhuang1

Zhuohan Li1

Joseph E. Gonzalez1

Carnegie Mellon University

Dacheng Li13

Ion Stoica1
4

Stanford

5

MBZUAI

Abstract
Evaluating large language model (LLM) based chat assistants is challenging due to
their broad capabilities and the inadequacy of existing benchmarks in measuring
human preferences. To address this, we explore using strong LLMs as judges to
evaluate these models on more open-ended questions. We examine the usage and
limitations of LLM-as-a-judge, including position, verbosity, and self-enhancement
biases, as well as limited reasoning ability, and propose solutions to mitigate some
of them. We then verify the agreement between LLM judges and human preferences
by introducing two benchmarks: MT-bench, a multi-turn question set; and Chatbot
Arena, a crowdsourced battle platform. Our results reveal that strong LLM judges
like GPT-4 can match both controlled and crowdsourced human preferences well,
achieving over 80% agreement, the same level of agreement between humans.
Hence, LLM-as-a-judge is a scalable and explainable way to approximate human
preferences, which are otherwise very expensive to obtain. Additionally, we show
our benchmark and traditional benchmarks complement each other by evaluating
several variants of LLaMA and Vicuna. The MT-bench questions, 3K expert votes,
and 30K conversations with human preferences are publicly available at https:
//github.com/lm-sys/FastChat/tree/main/fastchat/llm_judge.

1

Introduction

There has been a proliferation of LLM-based chat assistants (chatbots) that leverage supervised
instruction fine-tuning and reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) to unlock new
instruction following and conversational abilities [31, 2, 30, 8, 52, 48, 14]. Once aligned with
humans, these chat models are strongly preferred by human users over the original, unaligned models
on which they are built. However, the heightened user preference does not always correspond to
improved scores on traditional LLM benchmarks – benchmarks like MMLU [19] and HELM [24]
cannot effectively tell the difference between these aligned models and the base models. This
phenomenon suggests that there is a fundamental discrepancy between user perceptions of the
usefulness of chatbots and the criteria adopted by conventional benchmarks.
We argue that this discrepancy primarily arises due to existing evaluation that only measures LLMs’
core capability on a confined set of tasks (e.g., multi-choice knowledge or retrieval questions),
without adequately assessing its alignment with human preference in open-ended tasks, such as the
ability to accurately adhere to instructions in multi-turn dialogues. As a demonstration, we show
∗

Joint first authors. This paper is an extended version of our earlier blog post [8].

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

