Exploiting Connections between Lipschitz Structures
for Certifiably Robust Deep Equilibrium Models

Aaron J. Havens∗1 Alexandre Araujo∗2 Siddharth Garg2
Farshad Khorrami2 Bin Hu1
1

CSL & ECE, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
2
ECE, New York University

Abstract
Recently, deep equilibrium models (DEQs) have drawn increasing attention
from the machine learning community. However, DEQs are much less understood in terms of certified robustness than their explicit network counterparts.
In this paper, we advance the understanding of certified robustness of DEQs
via exploiting the connections between various Lipschitz network parameterizations for both explicit and implicit models. Importantly, we show that various
popular Lipschitz network structures, including convex potential layers (CPL),
SDP-based Lipschitz layers (SLL), almost orthogonal layers (AOL), Sandwich
layers, and monotone DEQs (MonDEQ) can all be reparameterized as special
cases of the Lipschitz-bounded equilibrium networks (LBEN) without changing the prescribed Lipschitz constant in the original network parameterization.
A key feature of our reparameterization technique is that it preserves the Lipschitz prescription used in different structures. This opens the possibility of
achieving improved certified robustness of DEQs via a combination of network
reparameterization, structure-preserving regularization, and LBEN-based finetuning. We also support our theoretical understanding with new empirical results,
which show that our proposed method improves the certified robust accuracy of
DEQs on classification tasks. All codes and experiments are made available at
https://github.com/AaronHavens/ExploitingLipschitzDEQ.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep equilibrium models (DEQs) have drawn increasing attention from the deep learning
community [3]. In DEQs, the output is defined as the solution to an input-dependent fixed point
equation. Specifically, consider a DEQ with input x and output y. Then y is typically determined
from x as follows
z = σ(W z + U x + bz ), y = Gz + by ,
(1)
where σ denotes some nonlinear activation function, e.g. ReLU. DEQs can be viewed as an implicit
model that directly solves the fixed point of an infinitely-deep network. Since DEQs have implicit
depth, they have the potential to reduce the large memory footprint required to train finite-depth
feed-forward networks via explicit back-propagation. Noticeably, DEQs have shown great promise in
achieving comparable performance on computer vision tasks [4, 33, 6, 28, 23].
Despite great potential, there are many open issues to be explored and understood for DEQs. There has
been a body of recent works focusing on developing and understanding DEQ structures for addressing
well-posedness, training stability, and adversarial robustness [47, 35, 31, 7, 30, 46, 5, 17, 25, 48, 13].
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

