FineMoGen: Fine-Grained Spatio-Temporal
Motion Generation and Editing

Mingyuan Zhang1 Huirong Li1 Zhongang Cai1,2 Jiawei Ren1 Lei Yang2 Ziwei Liu1
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, 2 SenseTime Research

Abstract
Text-driven motion generation has achieved substantial progress with the emergence of diffusion models. However, existing methods still struggle to generate
complex motion sequences that correspond to fine-grained descriptions, depicting
detailed and accurate spatio-temporal actions. This lack of fine controllability limits
the usage of motion generation to a larger audience. To tackle these challenges, we
present FineMoGen, a diffusion-based motion generation and editing framework
that can synthesize fine-grained motions, with spatial-temporal composition to the
user instructions. Specifically, FineMoGen builds upon diffusion model with a
novel transformer architecture dubbed Spatio-Temporal Mixture Attention (SAMI).
SAMI optimizes the generation of the global attention template from two perspectives: 1) explicitly modeling the constraints of spatio-temporal composition; and 2)
utilizing sparsely-activated mixture-of-experts to adaptively extract fine-grained
features. To facilitate a large-scale study on this new fine-grained motion generation task, we contribute the HuMMan-MoGen dataset, which consists of 2,968
videos and 102,336 fine-grained spatio-temporal descriptions. Extensive experiments validate that FineMoGen exhibits superior motion generation quality over
state-of-the-art methods. Notably, FineMoGen further enables zero-shot motion
editing capabilities with the aid of modern large language models (LLM), which
faithfully manipulates motion sequences with fine-grained instructions. Project
Page: https://mingyuan-zhang.github.io/projects/FineMoGen.html.

1

Introduction

While traditional text-driven motion generation tasks have empowered models to generate motion
sequences based on text, two issues still persist: 1) Users can hardly control the generated actions
with fine-grained spatio-temporal details; 2) Users struggle to further edit the already generated
animations. These two drawbacks significantly limit the application scenarios of these algorithms.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose a new task, Fine-grained Spatio-temporal Motion Generation
and Editing. We anticipate that the new algorithm framework derived from this task will better accept
detailed commands from users and interactively optimize the generated action sequences according
to users’ further needs. This would thus allow text-driven motion generation technology to be utilized
more widely by the general public.
Previous work has made some initial strides in fine-grained motion generation, but often ends up in
one of two extremes: 1) it heavily relies on full supervision, producing good generation results but
requiring extensive and detailed annotation [11]; 2) it fully depends on zero-shot inference, allowing
use in various scenarios, but the generated results often contain many artifacts [20, 18]. These work
have not deeply explored the fine-grained correspondence between text and motion. This fine-grained
relationship is represented spatially as the coordination of body parts and temporally as semantic
consistency. With the help of such granular relationships, a sequence of motions that is spatially
reasonable and temporally semantically consistent can be composed from the bottom up. To better
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

