SEGA: Instructing Text-to-Image Models
using Semantic Guidance

Manuel Brack1,2 Felix Friedrich2,3 Dominik Hintersdorf2 Lukas Struppek2
Patrick Schramowski1,2,3,4 Kristian Kersting1,2,3,5
1
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI),
2
Computer Science Department, TU Darmstadt 3 Hessian.AI,
4
LAION, 5 Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt
brack@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models have recently received a lot of interest for their
astonishing ability to produce high-fidelity images from text only. However, achieving one-shot generation that aligns with the user’s intent is nearly impossible, yet
small changes to the input prompt often result in very different images. This leaves
the user with little semantic control. To put the user in control, we show how to
interact with the diffusion process to flexibly steer it along semantic directions.
This semantic guidance (S EGA) generalizes to any generative architecture using
classifier-free guidance. More importantly, it allows for subtle and extensive edits,
changes in composition and style, as well as optimizing the overall artistic conception. We demonstrate S EGA’s effectiveness on both latent and pixel-based diffusion
models such as Stable Diffusion, Paella and DeepFloyd-IF using a variety of tasks,
thus providing strong evidence for its versatility, flexibility and improvements over
existing methods1 .

1 Introduction
The recent popularity of text-to-image diffusion models (DMs) [28, 25, 27] can largely be attributed to
their versatility, expressiveness, andÐmost importantlyÐthe intuitive interface they provide to users.
The generation’s intent can easily be expressed in natural language, with the model producing faithful
interpretations of a text prompt. Despite the impressive capabilities of these models, the initially
generated images are rarely of high quality. Accordingly, a human user will likely be unsatisfied
with certain aspects of the initial image, which they will attempt to improve over multiple iterations.
Unfortunately, the diffusion process is rather fragile as small changes to the input prompt lead to
entirely different images. Consequently, fine-grained semantic control over the generation process is
necessary, which should be as easy and versatile to use as the initial generation.
Previous attempts to influence dedicated concepts during the generation process require additional
segmentation masks, extensions to the architecture, model fine-tuning, or embedding optimization
[1, 8, 13, 35]. While these techniques produce satisfactory results, they disrupt the fast, exploratory
workflow that is the strong suit of diffusion models in the first place. We propose Semantic Guidance
(S EGA) to uncover and interact with semantic directions inherent to the model. S EGA requires no
additional training, no extensions to the architecture, nor external guidance and is calculated within a
single forward pass. We demonstrate that this semantic control can be inferred from simple textual
descriptions using the model’s noise estimate alone. With this, we also refute previous research
1
Implementation available in diffusers:
https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/api/pipelines/semantic_stable_diffusion

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

