Compression with Bayesian Implicit Neural
Representations

Zongyu Guo˚
University of Science and
Technology of China
guozy@mail.ustc.edu.cn
Jiajun He
University of Cambridge
jh2383@cam.ac.uk

Gergely Flamich˚
University of Cambridge
gf332@cam.ac.uk

Zhibo Chen
University of Science and
Technology of China
chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
University of Cambridge
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Many common types of data can be represented as functions that map coordinates to signal values, such as pixel locations to RGB values in the case of an image. Based on this view, data can be compressed by overfitting a compact neural
network to its functional representation and then encoding the network weights.
However, most current solutions for this are inefficient, as quantization to low-bit
precision substantially degrades the reconstruction quality. To address this issue,
we propose overfitting variational Bayesian neural networks to the data and compressing an approximate posterior weight sample using relative entropy coding
instead of quantizing and entropy coding it. This strategy enables direct optimization of the rate-distortion performance by minimizing the β-ELBO, and target
different rate-distortion trade-offs for a given network architecture by adjusting β.
Moreover, we introduce an iterative algorithm for learning prior weight distributions and employ a progressive refinement process for the variational posterior that
significantly enhances performance. Experiments show that our method achieves
strong performance on image and audio compression while retaining simplicity.
Our code is available at https://github.com/cambridge-mlg/combiner.

1

Introduction

With the celebrated development of deep learning, we have seen tremendous progress of neural data
compression, particularly in the field of lossy image compression [1–4]. Taking inspiration from
deep generative models, especially variational autoencoders (VAEs, [5]), neural image compression
models have outperformed the best manually designed image compression schemes, in terms of
both objective metrics, such as PSNR and MS-SSIM [6, 7] and perceptual quality [8, 9]. However,
these methods’ success is largely thanks to their elaborate architectures designed for a particular data
modality. Unfortunately, this makes transferring their insights across data modalities challenging.
A recent line of work [10–12] proposes to solve this issue by reformulating it as a model compression
problem: we treat a single datum as a continuous signal that maps coordinates to values, to which
we overfit a small neural network called its implicit neural representation (INR). While INRs were
originally proposed in [13] to study structural relationships in the data, Dupont et al. [10] have
demonstrated that we can also use them for compression by encoding their weights. Since the data
˚

Equal Contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

