When Visual Prompt Tuning Meets Source-Free
Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation

Xinhong Ma, Yiming Wang, Hao Liu, Tianyu Guo, Yunhe Wang∗
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{maxinhong, wangyiming22, liuhao296, tianyu.guo, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com

Abstract
Source-free domain adaptive semantic segmentation aims to adapt a pre-trained
source model to the unlabeled target domain without accessing the private source
data. Previous methods usually fine-tune the entire network, which suffers from
expensive parameter tuning. To avoid this problem, we propose to utilize visual
prompt tuning for parameter-efficient adaptation. However, the existing visual
prompt tuning methods are unsuitable for source-free domain adaptive semantic
segmentation due to the following two reasons: (1) Commonly used visual prompts
like input tokens or pixel-level perturbations cannot reliably learn informative
knowledge beneficial for semantic segmentation. (2) Visual prompts require sufficient labeled data to fill the gap between the pre-trained model and downstream
tasks. To alleviate these problems, we propose a universal unsupervised visual
prompt tuning (Uni-UVPT) framework, which is applicable to various transformerbased backbones. Specifically, we first divide the source pre-trained backbone
with frozen parameters into multiple stages, and propose a lightweight prompt
adapter for progressively encoding informative knowledge into prompts and enhancing the generalization of target features between adjacent backbone stages.
Cooperatively, a novel adaptive pseudo-label correction strategy with a multiscale
consistency loss is designed to alleviate the negative effect of target samples with
noisy pseudo labels and raise the capacity of visual prompts to spatial perturbations.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that Uni-UVPT achieves state-of-the-art performance on GTA5 → Cityscapes and SYNTHIA → Cityscapes tasks and can serve
as a universal and parameter-efficient framework for large-model unsupervised
knowledge transfer. Code will be available at https://gitee.com/mindspore/
models/tree/master/research/cv/uni-uvpt and https://github.com/
huawei-noah/noah-research/tree/master/uni-uvpt.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a critical computer vision task, which aims to segment and parse a scene
image into different image regions associated with semantic categories. The success of these
semantic segmentation techniques relies on large-scale densely-labeled datasets. However, it is
prohibitively expensive to collect high-quality annotations. Besides, most semantic segmentation
methods ignore the distribution shift between training and testing data, making them fail to generalize
when deployed in conditions different from training such as cross-city [8] or cross-weather [39]
scenarios. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [11] is an intuitive direction to address the
above two issues by transferring knowledge from existing models trained on source datasets to the
unlabeled target domain. Typical UDA approaches require joint access to both labeled source and
unlabeled target data during training, making them unsuitable for Source-Free Unsupervised Domain
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

