Regularized Behavior Cloning for
Blocking the Leakage of Past Action Information

Seokin Seo1 , HyeongJoo Hwang1 , Hongseok Yang1,2 , Kee-Eung Kim1,2
1
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST
2
School of Computing, KAIST
siseo@ai.kaist.ac.kr, hjhwang@ai.kaist.ac.kr,
hongseok.yang@kaist.ac.kr, kekim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
For partially observable environments, imitation learning with observation histories
(ILOH) assumes that control-relevant information is sufficiently captured in the
observation histories for imitating the expert actions. In the offline setting where
the agent is required to learn to imitate without interaction with the environment,
behavior cloning (BC) has been shown to be a simple yet effective method for
imitation learning. However, when the information about the actions executed in
the past timesteps leaks into the observation histories, ILOH via BC often ends up
imitating its own past actions. In this paper, we address this catastrophic failure
by proposing a principled regularization for BC, which we name Past Action
Leakage Regularization (PALR). The main idea behind our approach is to leverage
the classical notion of conditional independence to mitigate the leakage. We
compare different instances of our framework with natural choices of conditional
independence metric and its estimator. The result of our comparison advocates
the use of a particular kernel-based estimator for the conditional independence
metric. We conduct an extensive set of experiments on benchmark datasets in
order to assess the effectiveness of our regularization method. The experimental
results show that our method significantly outperforms prior related approaches,
highlighting its potential to successfully imitate expert actions when the past action
information leaks into the observation histories.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) aims at learning a policy that recovers an expert’s behavior from a demonstration dataset. Leveraging the information about state and expert action available in the dataset,
IL has been successful in many real-world applications [4, 12, 26, 27, 32, 38, 43]. Although IL
problems can be addressed using either online [17, 36] or offline algorithms [20, 33, 48], real-world
tasks often impose restrictions on interacting with the environment due to safety, cost, and ethical
concerns. Consequently, the practical necessity lies in the development of effective offline IL algorithms. Behavior cloning (BC) [33] is one of the most prominent offline IL algorithms, which
learns to predict an expert’s action for each given state using an offline expert dataset via supervised
learning. BC has gained widespread recognition [7, 42] for providing a straightforward and effective
solution, especially when full access to state information is available and the dataset is sufficiently
extensive. However, when the state information is only partially available in an observation at each
timestep, which is closer to the realistic scenario (e.g. an autonomous vehicle with a limited number
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

