A benchmark of categorical encoders
for binary classification
Federico Matteucci1 , Vadim Arzamasov1 , and Klemens Böhm1
1
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
{federico.matteucci, vadim.arzamasov, klemens.boehm}@kit.edu

Abstract
Categorical encoders transform categorical features into numerical representations that are indispensable for a wide range of machine learning models. Existing encoder benchmark studies lack generalizability because of their limited
choice of 1. encoders, 2. experimental factors, and 3. datasets. Additionally, inconsistencies arise from the adoption of varying aggregation strategies.
This paper is the most comprehensive benchmark of categorical encoders to
date, including an extensive evaluation of 32 configurations of encoders from
diverse families, with 48 combinations of experimental factors, and on 50
datasets. The study shows the profound influence of dataset selection, experimental factors, and aggregation strategies on the benchmark’s conclusions —
aspects disregarded in previous encoder benchmarks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/DrCohomology/EncoderBenchmarking.

1

Introduction

Learning from categorical data poses additional challenges compared to numerical data, due to
a lack of inherent structure such as order, distance, or kernel. The conventional solution is to
transform categorical attributes into a numerical form, i.e., encode them, before feeding them to a
downstream Machine Learning (ML) model. Various encoders have been proposed, followed by
several benchmark studies. However, their combined results remain inconclusive, as we now describe.
Many factors impact the generalizability [26] of a benchmark of encoders, including: 1. the compared
encoders, 2. the number of datasets, 3. the quality metrics, 4. the ML models used, and 5. the tuning
strategy. We also hypothesize that 6. the aggregation strategy used to summarize the results of
multiple experiments may affect the conclusions of a study. Existing encoder benchmarks, reviewed
in Section 2, only partially control for these factors. First, none of these studies uses more than
15 datasets of a given type (regression or classification). Second, despite these studies collectively
covering a substantial number of encoders, they often focus on specific encoder families, resulting in
comparison gaps between the best encoders. For instance, the best-performing encoders from [28]
(Cross-Validated GLMM) and [44] (Mean-Target) have not been studied together yet. Third, the
results of existing studies are often not comparable due to variations in the selected quality metrics.
For instance, [28] measures quality with ROC AUC, [4] with average precision, and [41] with accuracy.
Fourth, existing studies tune ML models in different ways, yielding incompatible evaluations. For
instance, [28, 41] do not tune, while [4, 5, 8, 44] tune but do not specify if they tune the ML model on
encoded data or if they tune the entire ML pipeline. Last, no benchmark study of categorical encoders
explores the impact of aggregation strategies, which is substantial according to our experiments. For
instance, [5] ranks the encoders by average ranking across all datasets, while [28] computes the
median ranking with Kemeny-Young aggregation [46].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

