Bilevel Coreset Selection in Continual Learning:
A New Formulation and Algorithm

Jie Hao
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University
jhao6@gmu.edu

Kaiyi Ji
Department of CSE
University at Buffalo
kaiyiji@buffalo.edu

Mingrui Liu∗
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University
mingruil@gmu.edu

Abstract
Coreset is a small set that provides a data summary for a large dataset, such that
training solely on the small set achieves competitive performance compared with
a large dataset. In rehearsal-based continual learning, the coreset is typically
used in the memory replay buffer to stand for representative samples in previous tasks, and the coreset selection procedure is typically formulated as a bilevel
problem. However, the typical bilevel formulation for coreset selection explicitly performs optimization over discrete decision variables with greedy search,
which is computationally expensive. Several works consider other formulations
to address this issue, but they ignore the nested nature of bilevel optimization
problems and may not solve the bilevel coreset selection problem accurately. To
address these issues, we propose a new bilevel formulation, where the inner problem tries to find a model which minimizes the expected training error sampled
from a given probability distribution, and the outer problem aims to learn the
probability distribution with approximately K (coreset size) nonzero entries such
that learned model in the inner problem minimizes the training error over the
whole data. To ensure the learned probability has approximately K nonzero entries, we introduce a novel regularizer based on the smoothed top-K loss in the
upper problem. We design a new optimization algorithm that provably converges
to the ϵ-stationary point with O(1/ϵ4 ) computational complexity. We conduct
extensive experiments in various settings in continual learning, including balanced
data, imbalanced data, and label noise, to show that our proposed formulation
and new algorithm significantly outperform competitive baselines. From bilevel
optimization point of view, our algorithm significantly improves the vanilla greedy
coreset selection method in terms of running time on continual learning benchmark
datasets. The code is available at https://github.com/MingruiLiu-ML-Lab/
Bilevel-Coreset-Selection-via-Regularization.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved tremendous successes in various domains, including computer vision [41, 30], natural language processing [72, 15], generative modeling [26] and
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

