Sharpness-Aware Minimization
Leads to Low-Rank Features
Maksym Andriushchenko
EPFL
maksym.andriushchenko@epfl.ch

Dara Bahri
Google Research
dbahri@google.com

Hossein Mobahi
Google Research
hmobahi@google.com

Nicolas Flammarion
EPFL
nicolas.flammarion@epfl.ch

Abstract
Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) is a recently proposed method that minimizes the sharpness of the training loss of a neural network. While its generalization improvement is well-known and is the primary motivation, we uncover an additional intriguing effect of SAM: reduction of the feature rank which
happens at different layers of a neural network. We show that this low-rank
effect occurs very broadly: for different architectures such as fully-connected
networks, convolutional networks, vision transformers and for different objectives such as regression, classification, language-image contrastive training. To
better understand this phenomenon, we provide a mechanistic understanding
of how low-rank features arise in a simple two-layer network. We observe
that a significant number of activations gets entirely pruned by SAM which directly contributes to the rank reduction. We confirm this effect theoretically and
check that it can also occur in deep networks, although the overall rank reduction mechanism can be more complex, especially for deep networks with preactivation skip connections and self-attention layers. We make our code available
at https://github.com/tml-epfl/sam-low-rank-features.

1

Introduction

Understanding generalization and features learned by overparametrized deep networks is the key
topic of modern machine learning. The training objective of deep networks typically has many
global optima where the training points are perfectly fitted (Zhang et al., 2017), but very different
features and generalization performance are obtained (Chizat et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019). It has
been observed recently that the sharpness of a minimum—i.e. how quickly the loss can change in
some neighborhood around a minimum in the parameter space—correlates with the generalization
error (Keskar et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2020). The idea of minimizing the sharpness during training to
improve generalization has motivated recent works that propose to use worst-case perturbations of
the weights on every iteration of training (Foret et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2020). We
refer to this family of methods collectively as sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) and focus on
the version proposed in Foret et al. (2021) that uses a single step of normalized gradient ascent to
approximate the worst-case weight perturbation.
Contributions. In our paper, we are interested in shedding more light on the effect of SAM on the
structure of the features learned by the network. In particular, our main observation is that:
Sharpness-aware minimization on overparametrized neural networks leads to low-rank features.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

