Weakly-Supervised Audio-Visual Segmentation

Shentong Mo1,2 Bhiksha Raj1,2
1
CMU, 2 MBZUAI

Abstract
Audio-visual segmentation is a challenging task that aims to predict pixel-level
masks for sound sources in a video. Previous work applied a comprehensive
manually designed architecture with countless pixel-wise accurate masks as supervision. However, these pixel-level masks are expensive and not available in
all cases. In this work, we aim to simplify the supervision as the instance-level
annotation, i.e., weakly-supervised audio-visual segmentation. We present a novel
Weakly-Supervised Audio-Visual Segmentation framework, namely WS-AVS, that
can learn multi-scale audio-visual alignment with multi-scale multiple-instance
contrastive learning for audio-visual segmentation. Extensive experiments on AVSBench demonstrate the effectiveness of our WS-AVS in the weakly-supervised
audio-visual segmentation of single-source and multi-source scenarios.

1

Introduction

When we hear a dog barking, we are naturally aware of where the dog is in the room due to
the strong correspondence between audio signals and visual objects in the world. This human
perception intelligence attracts many researchers to explore audio-visual joint learning for visual
sound localization and segmentation. In this work, we aim to segment sound source masks from both
frames and audio in a video without relying on expensive annotations of pixel-level masks, i.e., only
the instance-level annotation is given for training.
Audio-visual segmentation (AVS) [1] is a recently rising problem that predicts a pixel-level map
of objects that produce sound at the time of frames. A related problem to this recent task is sound
source localization, which aims to locate visual regions within the frame that correspond to the
sound. Sound source localization (SSL) [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] estimates a rough location of
the sounding objects at a patch level, while the goal of AVS is to estimate pixel-wise segmentation
masks for all sound sources. AVS requires a more comprehensive manually designed architecture
than SSL since it needs to identify the exact shape of sounding objects. However, this complicated
network for AVS requires countless pixel-wise accurate masks as supervision, which costs numerous
labor and resources. In contrast, we aim to get rid of these costly pixel-level annotations to achieve
weakly-supervised audio-visual segmentation.
Many weakly-supervised methods [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20] have been proposed
to be successful in the visual segmentation community, where they replaced accurate pixel-level
annotations with weak labels, including scribbles [13, 15], bounding boxes [11, 12], points [14],
and image-level class labels [16, 17]. Typically, CAM [18] was proposed with a CNN-based image
classifier to generate pseudo segmentation masks at the pixel level using coarse object localization
maps. With coarse localization maps, following works tried to obtain the full extent of objects by
regions expansion [21, 22, 23], stochastic inference [24], boundary constraints [25, 26, 27], or object
regions mining and erasing [28, 29]. However, only one modality, i.e., image is involved in these
aforementioned CAM-based weakly-supervised approaches. In this work, we need to tackle with two
distinctive modalities (audio and vision), where a well-designed cross-modal fusion is required to
aggregate audio-visual features with high similarity in the semantic space.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

