FIND: A Function Description Benchmark for
Evaluating Interpretability Methods

Sarah Schwettmann1∗ Tamar Rott Shaham1∗
Joanna Materzynska1 Neil Chowdhury1 Shuang Li1
Jacob Andreas1 David Bau2 Antonio Torralba1
1

MIT CSAIL

2

Northeastern University

Abstract
Labeling neural network submodules with human-legible descriptions is useful for
many downstream tasks: such descriptions can surface failures, guide interventions,
and perhaps even explain important model behaviors. To date, most mechanistic
descriptions of trained networks have involved small models, narrowly delimited
phenomena, and large amounts of human labor. Labeling all human-interpretable
sub-computations in models of increasing size and complexity will almost certainly
require tools that can generate and validate descriptions automatically. Recently,
techniques that use learned models in-the-loop for labeling have begun to gain
traction, but methods for evaluating their efficacy are limited and ad-hoc. How
should we validate and compare open-ended labeling tools? This paper introduces
FIND (Function INterpretation and Description), a benchmark suite for evaluating
the building blocks of automated interpretability methods. FIND contains functions
that resemble components of trained neural networks, and accompanying descriptions of the kind we seek to generate. The functions are procedurally constructed
across textual and numeric domains, and involve a range of real-world complexities,
including noise, composition, approximation, and bias. We evaluate methods that
use pretrained language models (LMs) to produce code-based and natural language
descriptions of function behavior. Additionally, we introduce a new interactive
method in which an Automated Interpretability Agent (AIA) generates function
descriptions. We find that an AIA, built with an off-the-shelf LM augmented with
black-box access to functions, can sometimes infer function structure—acting as a
scientist by forming hypotheses, proposing experiments, and updating descriptions
in light of new data. However, FIND also reveals that LM-based descriptions
capture global function behavior while missing local details. These results suggest
that FIND will be useful for characterizing the performance of more sophisticated
interpretability methods before they are applied to real-world models.

1

Introduction

The central task of interpretability research is to explain the functions that AI systems learn from
data. Investigating these functions requires experimentation with trained models, using tools that
incorporate varying degrees of human input. Hand-tooled approaches that rely on close manual
inspection [Zeiler and Fergus, 2014, Zhou et al., 2014, Mahendran and Vedaldi, 2015, Olah et al.,
2017, 2020, Elhage et al., 2021] or search for predefined phenomena [Wang et al., 2022, Nanda
et al., 2022] are increasingly complemented by more automatic approaches that enable larger-scale
analysis [Bau et al., 2020, Mu and Andreas, 2020, Hernandez et al., 2022, Oikarinen and Weng, 2023,
∗

Indicates equal contribution. Address correspondence to: schwett@mit.edu, tamarott@mit.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

