Accelerating Value Iteration with Anchoring

Jongmin Lee1
Ernest K. Ryu1,2
Department of Mathematical Science, Seoul National University
2
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
1

Abstract
Value Iteration (VI) is foundational to the theory and practice of modern reinforcement learning, and it is known to converge at a O(γ k )-rate, where γ is the discount
factor. Surprisingly, however, the optimal rate in terms of Bellman error for the
VI setup was not known, and finding a general acceleration mechanism has been
an open problem. In this paper, we present the first accelerated VI for both the
Bellman consistency and optimality operators. Our method, called Anc-VI, is
based on an anchoring mechanism (distinct from Nesterov’s acceleration), and it
reduces the Bellman error faster than standard VI. In particular, Anc-VI exhibits
a O(1/k)-rate for γ ≈ 1 or even γ = 1, while standard VI has rate O(1) for
γ ≥ 1 − 1/k, where k is the iteration count. We also provide a complexity lower
bound matching the upper bound up to a constant factor of 4, thereby establishing
optimality of the accelerated rate of Anc-VI. Finally, we show that the anchoring
mechanism provides the same benefit in the approximate VI and Gauss–Seidel VI
setups as well.

1

Introduction

Value Iteration (VI) is foundational to the theory and practice of modern dynamic programming
(DP) and reinforcement learning (RL). It is well known that when a discount factor γ < 1 is used,
(exact) VI is a contractive iteration in the ∥·∥∞ -norm and therefore converges. The progress of VI is
measured by the Bellman error in practice (as the distance to the fixed point is not computable), and
much prior work has been dedicated to analyzing the rates of convergence of VI and its variants.
Surprisingly, however, the optimal rate in terms of Bellman error for the VI setup was not known, and
finding a general acceleration mechanism has been an open problem. The classical O(γ k )-rate of VI
is inadequate as many practical setups use γ ≈ 1 or γ = 1 for the discount factor. (Not to mention
that VI may not converge when γ = 1.) Moreover, most prior works on accelerating VI focused on
the Bellman consistency operator (policy evaluation) as its linearity allows eigenvalue analyses, but
the Bellman optimality operator (control) is the more relevant object in modern RL.
Contribution. In this paper, we present the first accelerated VI for both the Bellman consistency
and optimality operators. Our method, called Anc-VI, is based on an “anchoring” mechanism (distinct
from Nesterov’s acceleration), and it reduces the Bellman error faster than standard VI. In particular,
Anc-VI exhibits a O(1/k)-rate for γ ≈ 1 or even γ = 1, while standard VI has rate O(1) for
γ ≥ 1 − 1/k, where k is the iteration count. We also provide a complexity lower bound matching the
upper bound up to a constant factor of 4, thereby establishing optimality of the accelerated rate of
Anc-VI. Finally, we show that the anchoring mechanism provides the same benefit in the approximate
VI and Gauss–Seidel VI setups as well.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

