Real-World Image Super-Resolution as
Multi-Task Learning

Wenlong Zhang1,2 , Xiaohui Li2,3 , Guangyuan Shi1 , Xiangyu Chen2,4,5
Xiaoyun Zhang3 , Yu Qiao2,5 , Xiao-Ming Wu1†, Chao Dong2,5†
1
The HongKong Polytechnic University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 University of Macau
5
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, CAS
wenlong.zhang@connect.polyu.hk, xiao-ming.wu@polyu.edu.hk, chao.dong@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we take a new look at real-world image super-resolution (real-SR)
from a multi-task learning perspective. We demonstrate that the conventional
formulation of real-SR can be viewed as solving multiple distinct degradation tasks
using a single shared model. This poses a challenge known as task competition
or task conflict in multi-task learning, where certain tasks dominate the learning
process, resulting in poor performance on other tasks. This problem is exacerbated
in the case of real-SR, due to the involvement of numerous degradation tasks.
To address the issue of task competition in real-SR, we propose a task grouping
approach. Our approach efficiently identifies the degradation tasks where a real-SR
model falls short and groups these unsatisfactory tasks into multiple task groups.
We then utilize the task groups to fine-tune the real-SR model in a simple way,
which effectively mitigates task competition and facilitates knowledge transfer.
Extensive experiments demonstrate our method achieves significantly enhanced
performance across a wide range of degradation scenarios. The source code is
available at https://github.com/XPixelGroup/TGSR.

1

Introduction

Real-world image super-resolution (real-SR) aims to enhance the resolution and quality of lowresolution images captured in real-world scenarios. Real-SR algorithms enable improved image
quality and better visual understanding, making them valuable in a wide range of applications [43, 46,
45, 14, 17]. Unlike non-blind SR [9, 56, 55] and classical blind SR [13, 18, 38] that assumes a simple
degradation process, real-SR deals with complex and unknown degradations present in real-world
imaging conditions, such as noise, blur, compression artifacts, and sensor limitations. The diversity
of real-world degradations and unknown degradation parameters make it challenging to reverse the
specific degradation effects and accurately recover high-resolution details.
Prior studies tackle real-SR by designing various degradation models to simulate the degradation
process in real-world scenarios. For instance, they generate synthetic paired training data with a
shuffled degradation model (BSRGAN [50]), a high-order degradation model (RealESRGAN [39]),
or a three-level degradation model (DASR [25]). Existing methods commonly train a single realSR network with training data generated by a sophisticated degradation model, aiming to cover
as many degradation cases as possible during the training process. Under this framework, recent
works have focused on enhancing various aspects of the real-SR network, including improving the
backbone network architecture [26], optimizing inference efficiency [25], enhancing generalization
capabilities [23], and improving modulation ability [31].
†

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

