Train ’n Trade: Foundations of Parameter Markets
Tzu-Heng Huang, Harit Vishwakarma, Frederic Sala
Department of Computer Science
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{thuang273, hvishwakarma}@wisc.edu, fredsala@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Organizations typically train large models individually. This is costly and
time-consuming, particularly for large-scale foundation models. Such vertical
production is known to be suboptimal. Inspired by this economic insight, we
ask whether it is possible to leverage others’ expertise by trading the constituent
parts in models, i.e., sets of weights, as if they were market commodities. While
recent advances in aligning and interpolating models suggest that doing so may
be possible, a number of fundamental questions must be answered to create viable
parameter markets. In this work, we address these basic questions, propose a
framework containing the infrastructure necessary for market operations to take
place, study strategies for exchanging parameters, and offer means for agents to
monetize parameters. Excitingly, compared to agents who train siloed models from
scratch, we show that it is possible to mutually gain by using the market, even in
competitive settings. This suggests that the notion of parameter markets may be a
useful paradigm for improving large-scale model training in the future.

1

Introduction

Costs to build powerful state-of-the-art machine learning models, such as foundation models (e.g.,
GPT-3 [1], T5 [2], PaLM [3], BLOOM-176B [4] and OPT-175B [5]), have increased enormously.
These costs can easily reach millions of dollars and even exceed that amount. For example, training
the 11 billion-parameter T5 model is estimated to take around 1.3 million dollars for a single training
run [6]. Unfortunately, few organizations and fewer individuals are sufficiently well-capitalized to
afford such training costs.
One approach to reduce expense is to broadly distribute training workloads, such as in decentralized
training [7, 8, 9, 10]. However, this is limiting; even in the decentralized setting, participants must
first agree to train a shared model and at least minimally coordinate the training process. For this
reason, such techniques cannot be applied when organizations develop different models for different
purposes on different timelines. In these scenarios—the most common solution in large-scale model
development—models are trained individually regardless of high cost.
A natural question is whether such vertical production can be broken down into parts that can be
more easily built, re-used, and exchanged. Taking inspiration from other areas of manufacturing,
we observe that most products are not built in vertical silos, but from components that are traded
in markets. Economic agents, even when competing against each other, buy, sell, and trade such
components to leverage the expertise of other agents so that production costs can be lowered.
This leads us to ask whether subsets of trained weights can be thought of as constituent parts to be
bought and sold on parameter markets. Such markets may provide mutual benefits for both buyers
and sellers. Buyers are able to purchase well-trained parameter sets directly as commodities to
leverage the training expertise of others and then use them to improve model performance. Sellers
(i.e., owners of partially or fully-trained models) are able to monetize parameters as a second profit
center, in addition to the downstream activity enabled by using their models.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

