Discriminative Feature Attributions: Bridging Post
Hoc Explainability and Inherent Interpretability

Usha Bhalla*
Harvard University
usha_bhalla@g.harvard.edu

Suraj Srinivas*
Harvard University
ssrinivas@seas.harvard.edu

Himabindu Lakkaraju
Harvard University
hlakkaraju@hbs.edu

Abstract
With the increased deployment of machine learning models in various real-world
applications, researchers and practitioners alike have emphasized the need for
explanations of model behaviour. To this end, two broad strategies have been
outlined in prior literature to explain models. Post hoc explanation methods
explain the behaviour of complex black-box models by identifying features critical
to model predictions; however, prior work has shown that these explanations
may not be faithful, in that they incorrectly attribute high importance to features
that are unimportant or non-discriminative for the underlying task. Inherently
interpretable models, on the other hand, circumvent these issues by explicitly
encoding explanations into model architecture, meaning their explanations are
naturally faithful, but they often exhibit poor predictive performance due to their
limited expressive power. In this work, we identify a key reason for the lack of
faithfulness of feature attributions: the lack of robustness of the underlying blackbox models, especially to the erasure of unimportant distractor features in the input.
To address this issue, we propose Distractor Erasure Tuning (DiET), a method
that adapts black-box models to be robust to distractor erasure, thus providing
discriminative and faithful attributions. This strategy naturally combines the ease
of use of post hoc explanations with the faithfulness of inherently interpretable
models. We perform extensive experiments on semi-synthetic and real-world
datasets, and show that DiET produces models that (1) closely approximate the
original black-box models they are intended to explain, and (2) yield explanations
that match approximate ground truths available by construction. Our code is made
public here.

1

Introduction

An important desideratum of machine learning models is for their predictions to be explainable. This
allows both human domain experts as well as laypeople to better understand and trust the decisions
made by models, and furthermore, is also a regulatory requirement for high-stakes settings. For
example, both the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [1] and the US AI Bill of
Rights [2], require organizations to provide explanations for decisions made in high-stakes settings.
A common approach to producing such explanations from black-box models in a post hoc manner is
via feature attribution, which aims to identify important input features influencing a model prediction.
These methods typically work by locally approximating non-linear models with linear ones [3] under
some input perturbations such as feature erasure. Intuitively, if the underlying model is more sensitive
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

