Parts of Speech–Grounded Subspaces in
Vision-Language Models
James Oldfield1∗ Christos Tzelepis1 Yannis Panagakis2,3
Mihalis A. Nicolaou4 Ioannis Patras1
1
Queen Mary University of London 2 National and Kapodistrian University of Athens
3
Archimedes/Athena RC 4 The Cyprus Institute

Abstract
Latent image representations arising from vision-language models have proved
immensely useful for a variety of downstream tasks. However, their utility is limited by their entanglement with respect to different visual attributes. For instance,
recent work has shown that CLIP image representations are often biased towards
specific visual properties (such as objects or actions) in an unpredictable manner.
In this paper, we propose to separate representations of the different visual modalities in CLIP’s joint vision-language space by leveraging the association between
parts of speech and specific visual modes of variation (e.g. nouns relate to objects,
adjectives describe appearance). This is achieved by formulating an appropriate
component analysis model that learns subspaces capturing variability corresponding to a specific part of speech, while jointly minimising variability to the rest. Such
a subspace yields disentangled representations of the different visual properties of
an image or text in closed form while respecting the underlying geometry of the
manifold on which the representations lie. What’s more, we show the proposed
model additionally facilitates learning subspaces corresponding to specific visual
appearances (e.g. artists’ painting styles), which enables the selective removal of entire visual themes from CLIP-based text-to-image synthesis. We validate the model
both qualitatively, by visualising the subspace projections with a text-to-image
model and by preventing the imitation of artists’ styles, and quantitatively, through
class invariance metrics and improvements to baseline zero-shot classification.

1

Introduction

Many recent advances in machine learning have been driven by vision-language (VL) models’ ability
to learn powerful, generalisable image representations from natural language supervision [1, 2, 3]. The
image features from VL models well-capture representations of many visual attributes as evidenced
by the broad applicability they have found for use in downstream tasks. The image or text encoders
of CLIP in particular [1] have been used for controllable image synthesis [4, 5, 6], image captioning
[7, 8], and multiple other discriminative tasks [9, 10, 11]. However, modelling the many different
visual modalities in a single vector representation is not without its drawbacks–recent work shows
that CLIP’s visual representations are often entangled. For example, Goh et al. [12] find that specific
neurons fire in response to both images containing a visual concept and images of text relating to the
same concept. This leaves CLIP open to vulnerabilities in the form of ‘Typographic attacks’–writing
another class name as text on the image can often cause CLIP to predict this class with a higher
probability than that of the original image’s true category. Other recent works show that CLIP’s visual
representations encode task-specific attributes (such as of the object or action depicted in an image) in
∗

Corresponding author: j.a.oldfield@qmul.ac.uk

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

