Optimizing Prompts for Text-to-Image Generation

Yaru Hao,∗ Zewen Chi,∗ Li Dong, Furu Wei
Microsoft Research
https://github.com/microsoft/LMOps

Abstract
Well-designed prompts can guide text-to-image models to generate amazing images.
However, the performant prompts are often model-specific and misaligned with user
input. Instead of laborious human engineering, we propose prompt adaptation, a
general framework that automatically adapts original user input to model-preferred
prompts. Specifically, we first perform supervised fine-tuning with a pretrained
language model on a small collection of manually engineered prompts. Then we
use reinforcement learning to explore better prompts. We define a reward function
that encourages the policy to generate more aesthetically pleasing images while
preserving the original user intentions. Experimental results on Stable Diffusion
show that our method outperforms manual prompt engineering in terms of both
automatic metrics and human preference ratings. Moreover, reinforcement learning
further boosts performance, especially on out-of-domain prompts. The pretrained
checkpoints are available at https://aka.ms/promptist. The demo can be
found at https://aka.ms/promptist-demo.

1

Introduction

Generative foundation models can be prompted to follow user instructions, including language
models [Brown et al., 2020, Chowdhery et al., 2022, Smith et al., 2022], and text-to-image models [Ramesh et al., 2021a, 2022, Saharia et al., 2022, Rombach et al., 2022]. It has been recognized
that prompt design plays an essential role in the generation quality. We need to adjust the prompt
to make the model better understand our intentions and produce higher-quality results [Reynolds
and McDonell, 2021, Zhou et al., 2022b]. The problem is severe in text-to-image models because
the capacity of their text encoders, such as CLIP text encoder [Radford et al., 2021] in Stable Diffusion [Rombach et al., 2022], is relatively small. Empirical observations also confirm that common
user input is often insufficient to produce aesthetically pleasing images with current models.
Prior efforts implement manual prompt engineering towards specific text-to-image models [Liu and
Chilton, 2021, Oppenlaender, 2022, Parsons, 2022], typically adding some modifiers to the original
input. However, it is laborious and sometimes infeasible to conduct manual prompt engineering.
Besides, the manually engineered prompts often cannot be transferred between various model versions.
Therefore, it is necessary to find a systematic way to automatically align user intentions and various
model-preferred prompts.
In this work, we propose a prompt adaptation framework for automatic prompt engineering via
reinforcement learning. Specifically, we first perform supervised fine-tuning with a pretrained
language model (e.g., GPT) on a small collection of manually engineered prompts. The finetuned
model is used to initialize the prompt policy network for reinforcement learning. Next, the model
is trained by exploring optimized prompts of user inputs, where diverse beam search [Vijayakumar
et al., 2016] is used to ensure generation quality and diversity. The training objective is to maximize
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

