Taking the neural sampling code very seriously: A
data-driven approach for evaluating generative models
of the visual system
Suhas Shrinivasan1, † , Konstantin-Klemens Lurz1 , Kelli Restivo2 ,
George H. Denfield3 , Andreas S. Tolias2, 5 , Edgar Y. Walker4,* , Fabian H. Sinz1, 2*
1
Institute for Computer Science and Campus Institute for Data Science,
University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany
2
Center for Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence, Department of Neuroscience,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, USA
3
Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York City, USA
4
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, and Computational Neuroscience Center,
University of Washington, Seattle, USA
5
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University, Houston, USA
†
Correspondence: suhas.shrinivasan@uni-goettingen.de, * Equal contribution

Abstract
Prevailing theories of perception hypothesize that the brain implements perception
via Bayesian inference in a generative model of the world. One prominent theory,
the Neural Sampling Code (NSC), posits that neuronal responses to a stimulus
represent samples from the posterior distribution over latent world state variables
that cause the stimulus. Although theoretically elegant, NSC does not specify the
exact form of the generative model or prescribe how to link the theory to recorded
neuronal activity. Previous works assume simple generative models and test their
qualitative agreement with neurophysiological data. Currently, there is no precise
alignment of the normative theory with neuronal recordings, especially in response
to natural stimuli, and a quantitative, experimental evaluation of models under NSC
has been lacking. Here, we propose a novel formalization of NSC, that (a) allows
us to directly fit NSC generative models to recorded neuronal activity in response
to natural images, (b) formulate richer and more flexible generative models, and
(c) employ standard metrics to quantitatively evaluate different generative models
under NSC. Furthermore, we derive a stimulus-conditioned predictive model of
neuronal responses from the trained generative model using our formalization that
we compare to neural system identification models. We demonstrate our approach
by fitting and comparing classical- and flexible deep learning-based generative
models on population recordings from the macaque primary visual cortex (V1) to
natural images, and show that the flexible models outperform classical models in
both their generative- and predictive-model performance. Overall, our work is an
important step towards a quantitative evaluation of NSC. It provides a framework
that lets us learn the generative model directly from neuronal population recordings,
paving the way for an experimentally-informed understanding of probabilistic
computational principles underlying perception and behavior.

1

Introduction

Our environment is riddled with sensory stimuli that are noisy, ambiguous, and often incomplete,
necessitating organisms to handle uncertainty in their sensory observations. Bayesian models of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

