YouTubePD: A Multimodal Benchmark for
Parkinson’s Disease Analysis
∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

Andy Zhou1
Samuel Li1
Pranav Sriram2
Xiang Li1
Jiahua Dong1
1
1
3
Ansh Sharma
Yuanyi Zhong
Shirui Luo
Maria Jaromin3
Volodymyr Kindratenko1,2,3
George Heintz4
Christopher Zallek5
Yu-Xiong Wang1,2,3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
National Center for Supercomputing Applications, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
4
Health Care Engineering Systems Center, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
5
OSF Healthcare Illinois Neurological Institute - Neurology
https://uiuc-yuxiong-lab.github.io/YouTubePD

Abstract
The healthcare and AI communities have witnessed a growing interest in the development of AI-assisted systems for automated diagnosis of Parkinson’s Disease
(PD), one of the most prevalent neurodegenerative disorders. However, the progress
in this area has been significantly impeded by the absence of a unified, publicly
available benchmark, which prevents comprehensive evaluation of existing PD analysis methods and the development of advanced models. This work overcomes these
challenges by introducing YouTubePD – the first publicly available multimodal
benchmark designed for PD analysis. We crowd-source existing videos featured
with PD from YouTube, exploit multimodal information including in-the-wild
videos, audios, and facial landmarks across 200+ subject videos, and provide dense
and diverse annotations from a clinical expert. Based on our benchmark, we propose three challenging and complementary tasks encompassing both discriminative
and generative tasks, along with a comprehensive set of corresponding baselines.
Experimental evaluation showcases the potential of modern deep learning and computer vision techniques, in particular the generalizability of the models developed
on our YouTubePD to real-world clinical settings, while revealing their limitations.
We hope that our work paves the way for future research in this direction.

1

Introduction

As one of the most prevalent neurodegenerative disorders, Parkinson’s Disease (PD) affects over
10 million people worldwide, and the number of PD subjects is projected to double within the
next 20 years [2]. Notably, PD is a progressive disease, with symptoms becoming increasingly
pronounced and severe over time. Meanwhile, the diagnostic and treatment costs associated with
PD are substantial, amounting up to $14 billion in the United States alone [2]. Therefore, there is
an urgent need for developing AI-assisted systems for automated PD assessment in the healthcare
and AI communities. Such systems can facilitate the recognition of undiagnosed people with PD,
aid clinicians in their evaluation, and play a crucial role in the continuing care of people with PD by
monitoring disease progression and tracking responses to therapies.
However, the progress in this area has been significantly impeded by the absence of a unified, publicly
available benchmark. For AI-driven applications, the first and foremost endeavor lies in establishing
* Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

