A Logic for Expressing Log-Precision Transformers
William Merrill
New York University
willm@nyu.edu

Ashish Sabharwal
Allen Institute for AI
ashishs@allenai.org

Abstract
One way to interpret the reasoning power of transformer-based language models
is to describe the types of logical rules they can resolve over some input text.
Recently, Chiang et al. (2023) showed that finite-precision transformer classifiers
can be equivalently expressed in a generalization of first-order logic. However,
finite-precision transformers are a weak transformer variant because, as we show,
a single head can only attend to a constant number of tokens and, in particular,
cannot represent uniform attention. Since attending broadly is a core capability for
transformers, we ask whether a minimally more expressive model that can attend
universally can also be characterized in logic. To this end, we analyze transformers
whose forward pass is computed in log n precision on contexts of length n. We
prove any log-precision transformer classifier can be equivalently expressed as
a first-order logic sentence that, in addition to standard universal and existential
quantifiers, may also contain majority-vote quantifiers. This is the tightest known
upper bound and first logical characterization of log-precision transformers.
Any log-precision transformer can be re-expressed as a sentence in FO(M) logic, e.g.:

Mi. a(i) ^ Mj. b(j) ^ ¬9k, `. (a(k) ^ b(`) ^ ` < k)
(m a’s followed by m b’s, i.e., am bm )

aaaabbbb 3

aaabbbbb 7

baaaabbb 7

Figure 1: A first-order logic with majority (FO(M)) sentence for am bm . In addition to standard 8
and 9 quantifiers over string indices, FO(M) allows majority quantifiers (M) that take a majority-vote
across indices. a(i) indicates whether token i is a (and analogously for b). We prove FO(M) can
express any function computed by a log-precision transformer.

1

Introduction

The incredible success of deep learning models, especially very large language and vision transformers
with hundreds of billions of parameters (Brown et al., 2020; Thoppilan et al., 2022), has come at the
cost of increasingly limited understanding of how these models actually work and when they might
fail. This raises many concerns, such as around their safe deployment, fairness, and accountability.
Does the inner working of a transformer defy description in a simpler symbolic system that we
can better understand? Or can transformer computation be described using a familiar symbolic
formalism? Understanding how to view the reasoning process of a transformer in terms of logic could
potentially expand our ability to formally reason about their behavior over large domains of inputs.
Chiang et al. (2023) provide a partial answer to this question, showing that any finite-precision
transformer classifier can be expressed as a sentence in a variant of first-order logic with counting
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

