QuadAttacK: A Quadratic Programming Approach to
Learning Ordered Top-K Adversarial Attacks

Thomas Paniagua, Ryan Grainger and Tianfu Wu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, NC State
{tapaniag, rpgraing, twu19}@ncsu.edu
https://thomaspaniagua.github.io/quadattack_web/

Abstract
The adversarial vulnerability of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has been wellknown and widely concerned, often under the context of learning top-1 attacks (e.g.,
fooling a DNN to classify a cat image as dog). This paper shows that the concern is
much more serious by learning significantly more aggressive ordered top-K clearbox 1 targeted attacks proposed in [Zhang and Wu, 2020]. We propose a novel and
rigorous quadratic programming (QP) method of learning ordered top-K attacks
with low computing cost, dubbed as QuadAttacK. Our QuadAttacK directly
solves the QP to satisfy the attack constraint in the feature embedding space (i.e.,
the input space to the final linear classifier), which thus exploits the semantics of the
feature embedding space (i.e., the principle of class coherence). With the optimized
feature embedding vector perturbation, it then computes the adversarial perturbation
in the data space via the vanilla one-step back-propagation. In experiments, the
proposed QuadAttacK is tested in the ImageNet-1k classification using ResNet50, DenseNet-121, and Vision Transformers (ViT-B and DEiT-S). It successfully
pushes the boundary of successful ordered top-K attacks from K = 10 up to
K = 20 at a cheap budget (1 × 60) and further improves attack success rates for
K = 5 for all tested models, while retaining the performance for K = 1.

1

Introduction

As the development of machine deep learning and Artificial Intelligence (AI) continues to accelerate,
the need to address potential vulnerabilities of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) becomes increasingly
crucial towards building safe-enabled and trustworthy learning and AI systems. Among these
vulnerabilities, adversarial attacks [Xie et al., 2017, Kos et al., 2018, Sharif et al., 2016, Ebrahimi
et al., 2018, Qin et al., 2019, Lin et al., 2017, Papernot et al., 2017, Liu et al., 2017, Xie et al.,
2019b, Dong et al., 2019, Goodfellow et al., 2015, Kannan et al., 2018, Madry et al., 2017, Xie
et al., 2019a], that can almost arbitrarily manipulate the prediction of a trained DNN for a given
testing data by learning visually imperceptible perturbations, especially under clear-box target attack
settings, are of particular interest in terms of revealing the shortcut learning of discriminatively-trained
DNNs [Geirhos et al., 2020]. Clear-box targeted adversarial attacks are often learned under the top-1
attack setting with the objective of causing catastrophic performance drop of the top-1 accuracy on
adversarial examples against the clean counterparts.
To generalize the vanilla setting of learning top-1 attacks, much more aggressive ordered top-K
attacks have been proposed in [Zhang and Wu, 2020], which aim to learn adversarial examples that
manipulate a trained DNN to predict any specified K attack targets in any given order as the top-K
predicted classes. As shown in Fig. 5, in the ImageNet-1k [Russakovsky et al., 2015] classification
1

This is often referred to as white/black-box attacks in the literature. We choose to adopt neutral terminology,
clear/opaque-box attacks in this paper, and omit the prefix clear-box for simplicity.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

