Gradient-Free Kernel Stein Discrepancy

Matthew A. Fisher1 , Chris. J Oates1,2
1
2

Newcastle University, UK
Alan Turing Institute, UK

Abstract
Stein discrepancies have emerged as a powerful statistical tool, being applied to
fundamental statistical problems including parameter inference, goodness-of-fit
testing, and sampling. The canonical Stein discrepancies require the derivatives
of a statistical model to be computed, and in return provide theoretical guarantees
of convergence detection and control. However, for complex statistical models,
the stable numerical computation of derivatives can require bespoke algorithmic
development and render Stein discrepancies impractical. This paper focuses on
posterior approximation using Stein discrepancies, and introduces a collection of
non-canonical Stein discrepancies that are gradient-free, meaning that derivatives
of the statistical model are not required. Sufficient conditions for convergence
detection and control are established, and applications to sampling and variational
inference are presented.

1

Introduction

Stein discrepancies were introduced in Gorham and Mackey [2015], as a way to measure the quality
of an empirical approximation to a continuous statistical model involving an intractable normalisation constant. Rooted in Stein’s method [Stein, 1972], the idea is to consider empirical averages of
a large collection of test functions, each of which is known to integrate to zero under the statistical model. To date, test functions have been constructed by combining derivatives of the statistical
model with reproducing kernels [Chwialkowski et al., 2016, Liu et al., 2016, Gorham and Mackey,
2017, Gong et al., 2021a,b], random features [Huggins and Mackey, 2018], diffusion coefficients and
functions with bounded derivatives [Gorham et al., 2019], neural networks [Grathwohl et al., 2020],
and polynomials [Chopin and Ducrocq, 2021]. The resulting discrepancies have been shown to be
powerful statistical tools, with diverse applications including parameter inference [Barp et al., 2019,
Matsubara et al., 2022], goodness-of-fit testing [Jitkrittum et al., 2017, Fernandez et al., 2020], and
sampling [Liu and Lee, 2017, Chen et al., 2018, 2019, Riabiz et al., 2022, Hodgkinson et al., 2020,
Fisher et al., 2021]. However, one of the main drawbacks of these existing works is the requirement
that derivatives both exist and can be computed.
The use of non-differentiable statistical models is somewhat limited but includes, for example,
Bayesian analyses where Laplace priors are used [Park and Casella, 2008, Ročková and George,
2018]. Much more common is the situation where derivatives exist but cannot easily be computed.
In particular, for statistical models with parametric differential equations involved, one often requires different, more computationally intensive numerical methods to be used if the sensitivities
(i.e. derivatives of the solution with respect to the parameters) are to be stably computed [Cockayne
and Duncan, 2021]. For large-scale partial differential equation models, as used in finite element
simulation, computation of sensitivities can increase simulation times by several orders of magnitude, if it is practical at all.
The motivation and focus of this paper is on computational methods for posterior approximation,
and to this end we propose a collection of non-canonical Stein discrepancies that are gradient free,
meaning that computation of the derivatives of the statistical model is not required. Gradient-free
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

