Social Motion Prediction with Cognitive Hierarchies

Wentao Zhu 1∗ Jason Qin 1∗ Yuke Lou 1 Hang Ye 1
Xiaoxuan Ma 1 Hai Ci 1 Yizhou Wang 1, 2
1

Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
Humans exhibit a remarkable capacity for anticipating the actions of others and
planning their own actions accordingly. In this study, we strive to replicate this
ability by addressing the social motion prediction problem. We introduce a new
benchmark, a novel formulation, and a cognition-inspired framework. We present
Wusi, a 3D multi-person motion dataset under the context of team sports, which
features intense and strategic human interactions and diverse pose distributions. By
reformulating the problem from a multi-agent reinforcement learning perspective,
we incorporate behavioral cloning and generative adversarial imitation learning to
boost learning efficiency and generalization. Furthermore, we take into account
the cognitive aspects of the human social action planning process and develop a
cognitive hierarchy framework to predict strategic human social interactions. We
conduct comprehensive experiments to validate the effectiveness of our proposed
dataset and approach.

1

Introduction

Human beings are inherently social creatures. Concretely, individuals unconsciously anticipate the
actions of others and make informed decisions about their own behaviors in social contexts [13, 19,
54], which enables individuals to cooperate and compete with others in a variety of scenarios, from
pedestrian traffic [25, 44] to team sports [64, 50]. Notably, task experts demonstrate exceptional skill
in predicting others’ movements in advance [37, 70].
To better understand and replicate this ability, the research community has proposed the task of
future prediction for multiple interacting agents given their historical observations. The majority
of prior work in this area focuses on modeling and predicting agent interactions at the trajectory
level [42, 39, 52, 5, 34, 58, 75, 59, 43, 72] and has demonstrated promising results in applications
such as autonomous driving [38, 49, 17, 36, 16, 27]. However, trajectory-based approaches can only
reflect coarse-grained interactions (e.g., collision avoidance, social distancing) and fail to capture
the rich and fine-grained human actions. To this end, some studies have investigated the multiperson motion prediction problem, which aims to forecast both trajectories and poses for a group
of people [2, 3, 67, 68, 22, 63, 48, 73]. Despite recent advancements, there remain several critical
challenges in this field. Firstly, existing multi-person motion datasets are primarily designed for
human pose estimation tasks [65, 1, 31], and consequently, do not place particular emphasis on
human interactions. Individuals in these datasets tend to move casually and interact with others at
random, making future predictions both difficult and less meaningful. Secondly, the majority of prior
methods concentrate on developing neural network architectures for end-to-end supervised training
while overlooking the cognitive aspects of human social action planning. These two challenges are
closely related and necessitate a comprehensive solution.
∗

Equal Contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

