Mutual-Information Regularized Multi-Agent
Policy Iteration

Jiangxing Wang
School of Computer Science
Peking University

Deheng Ye
Tencent Inc.
dericye@tencent.com

jiangxiw@stu.pku.edu.cn

Zongqing Lu†
School of Computer Science
Peking University
BAAI
zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the success of cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithms,
most of them focus on a single team composition, which prevents them from
being used in more realistic scenarios where dynamic team composition is possible.
While some studies attempt to solve this problem via multi-task learning in a fixed
set of team compositions, there is still a risk of overfitting to the training set, which
may lead to catastrophic performance when facing dramatically varying team compositions during execution. To address this problem, we propose to use mutual
information (MI) as an augmented reward to prevent individual policies from relying too much on team-related information and encourage agents to learn policies
that are robust in different team compositions. Optimizing this MI-augmented
objective in an off-policy manner can be intractable due to the existence of dynamic
marginal distribution. To alleviate this problem, we first propose a multi-agent
policy iteration algorithm with a fixed marginal distribution and prove its convergence and optimality. Then, we propose to employ the Blahut–Arimoto algorithm
and an imaginary team composition distribution for optimization with approximate
marginal distribution as the practical implementation. Empirically, our method
demonstrates strong zero-shot generalization to dynamic team compositions in
complex cooperative tasks.

1

Introduction

The cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) problem has attracted the attention
of many researchers for being a well-abstracted model for many real-world problems, such as
traffic signal control (Wang et al., 2021), autonomous warehouse (Zhou et al., 2021), and even
AutoML (Wang et al., 2022) as the feedback to the machine learning community. In a cooperative
MARL problem, we aim to train a group of agents that can cooperate to achieve a common goal. Such
a common goal is often defined by a global reward function that is shared among all agents. Although
this objective is naturally centralized, we want agents to be able to execute in a fully decentralized
manner. Under such a requirement, Kraemer and Banerjee (2016) proposed the centralized training
with decentralized execution (CTDE) framework, where a centralized critic is learned to evaluate the
performance of the joint policy in terms of the global reward and a group of decentralized individual
policies are learned via the centralized critic to realize decentralized execution.
With a centralized critic, multi-agent policy gradient methods directly use it to guide the update
of each decentralized individual policy. Based on this idea, a series of studies (Lowe et al., 2017;
Kuba et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2020) have been proposed with different optimization
†

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

