CAPP-130: A Corpus of Chinese Application Privacy
Policy Summarization and Interpretation

Pengyun Zhu1 , Long Wen1 , Jinfei Liu1,2∗, Feng Xue1 , Jian Lou1,2 , Zhibo Wang1 , Kui Ren1
1
Zhejiang University
2
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center
{22121092, wenlongcs, jinfeiliuB , henryxue, jian.lou,
zhibowang, kuiren}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
A privacy policy serves as an online internet protocol crafted by service providers,
which details how service providers collect, process, store, manage, and use personal information when users engage with applications. However, these privacy
policies are often filled with technobabble and legalese, making them “incomprehensible”. As a result, users often agree to all terms unknowingly, even some
terms may conflict with the law, thereby posing a considerable risk to personal
privacy information. One potential solution to alleviate this challenge is to automatically summarize privacy policies using NLP techniques. However, existing
techniques primarily focus on extracting key sentences, resulting in comparatively
shorter agreements, but failing to address the poor readability caused by the “incomprehensible” of technobabble and legalese. Moreover, research on Chinese
application privacy policy summarization is currently almost nonexistent, and there
is a lack of a high-quality corpus suitable for addressing readability issues. To
tackle these challenges, we introduce a fine-grained CAPP-130 corpus and a TCSIpp framework. CAPP-130 contains 130 Chinese privacy policies from popular
applications that have been carefully annotated and interpreted by legal experts,
resulting in 52, 489 annotations and 20, 555 rewritten sentences. TCSI-pp first
extracts sentences related to the topic specified by users and then uses a generative
model to rewrite the sentences into comprehensible summarization. Built upon
TSCI-pp, we construct a summarization tool TSCI-pp-zh by selecting RoBERTa
from six classification models for sentence extraction and selecting mT5 from five
generative models for sentence rewriting. Experimental results show that TCSI-ppzh outperforms GPT-4 and other baselines in Chinese application privacy policy
summarization, demonstrating exceptional readability and reliability. Our data,
annotation guidelines, benchmark models, and source code are publicly available
at https: // github. com/ EnlightenedAI/ CAPP-130 .

1

Introduction

A privacy policy is a legal document that outlines how the service providers collect, process, store,
manage, and use the personal information of individuals who interact with its applications. This
pivotal agreement is designed to safeguard personal data from misuse, thwart breaches of personal
privacy, and uphold data security. Service providers are exclusively permitted to collect, process,
store, manage, and use personal information in accordance with the stipulations outlined in the
agreement, and strictly with the explicit consent and authorization given by users.
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

