Learning to Modulate pre-trained Models in RL

Thomas Schmied1 , Markus Hofmarcher2 , Fabian Paischer1 ,
Razvan Pascanu3,4 , Sepp Hochreiter1
1
ELLIS Unit Linz and LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning,
2
JKU LIT SAL eSPML Lab, Institute for Machine Learning,
Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria
3
Google DeepMind, 4 UCL
schmied@ml.jku.at

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been successful in various domains like robotics,
game playing, and simulation. While RL agents have shown impressive capabilities
in their specific tasks, they insufficiently adapt to new tasks. In supervised learning, this adaptation problem is addressed by large-scale pre-training followed by
fine-tuning to new down-stream tasks. Recently, pre-training on multiple tasks has
been gaining traction in RL. However, fine-tuning a pre-trained model often suffers
from catastrophic forgetting. That is, the performance on the pre-training tasks deteriorates when fine-tuning on new tasks. To investigate the catastrophic forgetting
phenomenon, we first jointly pre-train a model on datasets from two benchmark
suites, namely Meta-World and DMControl. Then, we evaluate and compare a
variety of fine-tuning methods prevalent in natural language processing, both in
terms of performance on new tasks, and how well performance on pre-training
tasks is retained. Our study shows that with most fine-tuning approaches, the performance on pre-training tasks deteriorates significantly. Therefore, we propose a
novel method, Learning-to-Modulate (L2M), that avoids the degradation of learned
skills by modulating the information flow of the frozen pre-trained model via a
learnable modulation pool. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
the Continual-World benchmark, while retaining performance on the pre-training
tasks. Finally, to aid future research in this area, we release a dataset encompassing
50 Meta-World and 16 DMControl tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been instrumental in training agents capable of achieving notable
successes, both in simulation, and in the real-world (Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2019; Berner
et al., 2019; Arjona-Medina et al., 2019; Bellemare et al., 2020; Degrave et al., 2022). However,
such agents are usually highly specialized and incapable of performing well outside of a narrowlydefined task. Furthermore, adapting a pre-trained agent to a new task by fine-tuning usually results
in decreased performance on prior tasks. This effect is well-known in the literature as catastrophic
forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen, 1989).
A common paradigm to learn multiple tasks concurrently is multi-task learning (Caruana, 1997).
However, typically, not all tasks we want an agent to learn are available at training time. In this case,
new tasks must be learned in a sequential manner. Learning a new task ideally exploits knowledge
from previously learned tasks and does not adversely affect the performance on these prior tasks.
Recent works have demonstrated that models based on the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017) excel at learning multiple tasks concurrently from large offline datasets (Lee et al., 2022; Reed
et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2022; Brohan et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2022; Shridhar et al., 2022). We want
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

