Modelling Human Visual Motion Processing with Trainable
Motion Energy Sensing and a Self-attention Network

Zitang Sun1 Yen-Ju Chen1 Yung-Hao Yang1 Shin’ya Nishida12∗
1
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
2
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation
{sun.zitang.73u, chen.yenju.44z, yang.yunghao.8v}
@st.kyoto-u.ac.jp; nishida.shinya.2x@kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Visual motion processing is essential for humans to perceive and interact with dynamic environments. Despite extensive research in cognitive neuroscience, imagecomputable models that can extract informative motion flow from natural scenes
in a manner consistent with human visual processing have yet to be established.
Meanwhile, recent advancements in computer vision (CV), propelled by deep
learning, have led to significant progress in optical flow estimation, a task closely
related to motion perception. Here we propose an image-computable model of human motion perception by bridging the gap between biological and CV models.
Specifically, we introduce a novel two-stages approach that combines trainable
motion energy sensing with a recurrent self-attention network for adaptive motion
integration and segregation. This model architecture aims to capture the computations in V1-MT, the core structure for motion perception in the biological visual
system, while providing the ability to derive informative motion flow for a wide
range of stimuli, including complex natural scenes. In silico neurophysiology reveals that our model’s unit responses are similar to mammalian neural recordings
regarding motion pooling and speed tuning. The proposed model can also replicate human responses to a range of stimuli examined in past psychophysical studies. The experimental results on the Sintel benchmark demonstrate that our model
predicts human responses better than the ground truth, whereas the state-of-the-art
CV models show the opposite. Our study provides a computational architecture
consistent with human visual motion processing, although the physiological correspondence may not be exact. 1

1

Introduction

Visual motion perception is essential not only for humans and animals to perceive and interact with
the world but also for artificial agents to process various dynamic visual tasks. As such, visual motion estimation has been extensively studied by both biological vision and computer vision research
communities. The key issue lies in estimating optical flow, an array of instantaneous image motion
vectors [1, 2].
Vision science has revealed that optical flow estimation in the human visual system (HVS) is primarily served by a pathway that includes the primary visual cortex (V1 [3, 4]) and middle temporal
(MT [5, 6]) area. A significant portion of neurons in area V1 are sensitive to the direction of local
motion, while those in area MT integrate and segregate local motion signals for global flow interpretation. The MT process also helps to overcome the aperture problem[7]. Several computational
models of area MT have been proposed [8, 9], but mechanisms that can fully encapsulate a variety
1

Project Website: Click here

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

