On the Statistical Consistency of Risk-Sensitive
Bayesian Decision-Making

Prateek Jaiswal
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
jaiswalp@stat.tamu.edu

Harsha Honnappa
School of Industrial Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47906
honnappa@purdue.edu

Vinayak A. Rao
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
varao@purdue.edu

Abstract
We study data-driven decision-making problems in the Bayesian framework, where
the expectation in the Bayes risk is replaced by a risk-sensitive entropic risk
measure with respect to the posterior distribution. We focus on problems where
calculating the posterior distribution is intractable, a typical situation in modern
applications with large datasets and complex data generating models. We leverage
a dual representation of the entropic risk measure to introduce a novel risk-sensitive
variational Bayesian (RSVB) framework for jointly computing a risk-sensitive posterior approximation and the corresponding decision rule. Our general framework
includes loss-calibrated VB [16] as a special case. We also study the impact of
these computational approximations on the predictive performance of the inferred
decision rules. We compute the convergence rates of the RSVB approximate posterior and the corresponding optimal value. We illustrate our theoretical findings in
parametric and nonparametric settings with the help of three examples.

1

Introduction

This paper focuses on risk-sensitive Bayesian decision-making, considering objective functions of
the form
min ϱγΠn (R(a, θ)) := γ −1 log EΠn [exp(γR(a, θ))].
a∈A

(SO)

Here A is the decision/action space, θ is a random model parameter lying in an arbitrary measurable
space (Θ, T ), and R(a, θ) : A × Θ 7→ R is a problem-specific model risk function. For any B ⊆ Θ,
Πn (B) := Π(B|X̃n ) is the Bayesian posterior distribution over the parameters given observations
X̃n from the true model Pθn0 (≡ P0n ) with parameter θ0 ∈ Θ. The scalar γ ∈ R is user-specified
and characterizes the sensitivity of the decision-maker (DM) to the distribution Πn . Recall that
the posterior distribution is obtained by updating a prior probability distribution Π(·), capturing
subjective beliefs of the decision maker over Θ, according to the Bayes rule
dΠ(θ|X̃n ) ∝ dΠ(θ)dPθn (X̃n ),

(1)

where dPθn (X̃n ) is the likelihood of observing X̃n . We denote the corresponding densities (if they
exist) for the model, prior, and posterior as pnθ (·), π(·), and π(·|X̃n ) respectively.
The functional ϱγ· in (SO) is also known as the entropic risk measure, and models a range of riskaverse or risk-seeking behaviors in a succinct manner through the parameter γ. Consider only
strictly positive γ, and observe that limγ↓0 γ1 log EΠn [exp(γR(a, θ))] = EΠn (R(a, θ)); that is, there
is no sensitivity to potential risks due to large tail effects and the decision-maker is risk neutral.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

