PID-Inspired Inductive Biases for Deep Reinforcement
Learning in Partially Observable Control Tasks

Ian Char
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ichar@cs.cmu.edu

Jeff Schneider
Machine Learning Department, Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
schneide@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has shown immense potential for learning to
control systems through data alone. However, one challenge deep RL faces is
that the full state of the system is often not observable. When this is the case, the
policy needs to leverage the history of observations to infer the current state. At
the same time, differences between the training and testing environments makes
it critical for the policy not to overfit to the sequence of observations it sees at
training time. As such, there is an important balancing act between having the
history encoder be flexible enough to extract relevant information, yet be robust to
changes in the environment. To strike this balance, we look to the PID controller for
inspiration. We assert the PID controller’s success shows that only summing and
differencing are needed to accumulate information over time for many control tasks.
Following this principle, we propose two architectures for encoding history: one
that directly uses PID features and another that extends these core ideas and can be
used in arbitrary control tasks. When compared with prior approaches, our encoders
produce policies that are often more robust and achieve better performance on a
variety of tracking tasks. Going beyond tracking tasks, our policies achieve 1.7x
better performance on average over previous state-of-the-art methods on a suite of
locomotion control tasks. 1

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) holds great potential for solving complex tasks through data alone,
and there have already been exciting applications of RL in video game playing [70], language model
tuning [53], and robotic control [2]. Despite these successes, there still remain significant challenges
in controlling real-world systems that stand in the way of realizing RL’s full potential [20]. One
major hurdle is the issue of partial observability, resulting in a Partially Observable Markov Decision
Process (POMDP). In this case, the true state of the system is unknown and the policy must leverage
its history of observations. Another hurdle stems from the fact that policies are often trained in
an imperfect simulator, which is likely different from the true environment. Combining these two
challenges necessitates striking a balance between extracting useful information from the history
and avoiding overfitting to modelling error. Therefore, introducing the right inductive biases to the
training procedure is crucial.
The use of recurrent network architectures in deep RL for POMDPs was one of the initial proposed
solutions [29] and remains a prominent approach for control tasks [47, 75, 50]. Theses architectures
are certainly flexible; however, it is unclear whether they are the best choice for control tasks,
1

Code available at https://github.com/IanChar/GPIDE

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

