Posterior Contraction Rates for Matérn Gaussian
Processes on Riemannian Manifolds
Paul Rosa
University of Oxford

Viacheslav Borovitskiy
ETH Zürich

Alexander Terenin
University of Cambridge
and Cornell University

Judith Rousseau
University of Oxford

Abstract
Gaussian processes are used in many machine learning applications that rely on
uncertainty quantification. Recently, computational tools for working with these
models in geometric settings, such as when inputs lie on a Riemannian manifold,
have been developed. This raises the question: can these intrinsic models be
shown theoretically to lead to better performance, compared to simply embedding
all relevant quantities into Rd and using the restriction of an ordinary Euclidean
Gaussian process? To study this, we prove optimal contraction rates for intrinsic
Matérn Gaussian processes defined on compact Riemannian manifolds. We also
prove analogous rates for extrinsic processes using trace and extension theorems
between manifold and ambient Sobolev spaces: somewhat surprisingly, the rates
obtained turn out to coincide with those of the intrinsic processes, provided that
their smoothness parameters are matched appropriately. We illustrate these rates
empirically on a number of examples, which, mirroring prior work, show that
intrinsic processes can achieve better performance in practice. Therefore, our work
shows that finer-grained analyses are needed to distinguish between different levels
of data-efficiency of geometric Gaussian processes, particularly in settings which
involve small data set sizes and non-asymptotic behavior.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes provide a powerful way to quantify uncertainty about unknown regression
functions via the formulation of Bayesian learning. Motivated by applications in the physical and
engineering sciences, a number of recent papers [11, 9, 10, 37] have studied how to extend this model
class to spaces with geometric structure, in particular Riemannian manifolds including important
special cases such as spheres and Grassmannians [4], hyperbolic spaces and spaces of positive definite
matrices [5], as well as general manifolds approximated numerically by a mesh [11].
These Riemannian Gaussian process models are starting to be applied for statistical modeling, and
decision-making settings such as Bayesian optimization. For example, in a robotics setting, Jaquier
et al. [27] has shown that using Gaussian processes with the correct geometric structure allows one to
learn quantities such as the orientation of a robotic arm with less data compared to baselines. The
same model class has also been used by Coveney et al. [15] to perform Gaussian process regression
on a manifold which models the geometry of a human heart for downstream applications in medicine.
Given these promising empirical results, it is important to understand whether these learning algorithms have good theoretical properties, as well as their limitations. Within the Bayesian framework,
a natural way to quantify data-efficiency and generalization error is to posit a data-generating mech37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

