Learning to Configure Separators in Branch-and-Cut
Sirui Li⇤
MIT
siruil@mit.edu

Wenbin Ouyang*
MIT
oywenbin@mit.edu

Max B. Paulus
ETH Zürich
max.paulus@inf.ethz.ch

Cathy Wu
MIT
cathywu@mit.edu

Abstract
Cutting planes are crucial in solving mixed integer linear programs (MILP) as they
facilitate bound improvements on the optimal solution. Modern MILP solvers rely
on a variety of separators to generate a diverse set of cutting planes by invoking
the separators frequently during the solving process. This work identifies that
MILP solvers can be drastically accelerated by appropriately selecting separators
to activate. As the combinatorial separator selection space imposes challenges for
machine learning, we learn to separate by proposing a novel data-driven strategy
to restrict the selection space and a learning-guided algorithm on the restricted
space. Our method predicts instance-aware separator configurations which can
dynamically adapt during the solve, effectively accelerating the open source MILP
solver SCIP by improving the relative solve time up to 72% and 37% on synthetic
and real-world MILP benchmarks. Our work complements recent work on learning
to select cutting planes and highlights the importance of separator management.

1

Introduction

Mixed Integer Linear Programs (MILP) have been widely used in logistics [15], management [12],
and production planning [17]. Modern MILP solvers typically employ a Branch-and-Cut (B&C)
framework that utilizes a Branch-and-Bound (B&B) tree search procedure to partition the search
space. As illustrated in Fig. 1, cutting plane algorithms are applied within each node of the B&B tree,
tightening the Linear Programming (LP) relaxation of the node and improving the lower bound.
This paper presents a machine learning approach to accelerate MILP solvers. Modern MILP solvers
implement various cutting plane algorithms, also referred to as separators, to generate cutting planes
that tighten the LP solutions. Different separators have varying performance and execution times
depending on the specific MILP instance. Typical solvers use simple heuristics to select separators,
which can limit the ability to exploit commonalities across problem instances. While there is a
growing body of work considering the ‘branch’ and ‘cut’ aspects of B&C [18, 35, 51, 42], profiling
the open-source academic MILP solver SCIP [8], we find generating cutting planes through separators
is a major contributor to the total solve time, and deactivating unused separators leads to faster solves
and fewer B&B tree nodes. That is, a well-configured separator setup allows the selected cutting
planes to more effectively tighten the LP solution, leading to fewer nodes in the B&B tree.
To our knowledge, the problem of how to leverage machine learning for this critical task of separator
configuration, namely the selection of separators to activate and deactivate during the MILP solving
process has not been considered. Therefore, the goal of this paper is to explore the extent to which
⇤

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

