Type-to-Track: Retrieve Any Object
via Prompt-based Tracking

Pha Nguyen1 , Kha Gia Quach2 , Kris Kitani3 , Khoa Luu1
1

CVIU Lab, University of Arkansas 2 pdActive Inc. 3 Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
1
2
3
{panguyen, khoaluu}@uark.edu
kquach@ieee.org
kkitani@cs.cmu.edu
uark-cviu.github.io/Type-to-Track

(a) Appearance on a fine-grained scale

(b) and on a class-agnostic scale.

Figure 1: An example of the responsive Type-to-Track. The user provides a video sequence and a prompting
request. During tracking, the system is able to discriminate appearance attributes to track the target subjects
accordingly and iteratively responds to the user’s tracking request. Each box color represents a unique identity.

Abstract
One of the recent trends in vision problems is to use natural language captions
to describe the objects of interest. This approach can overcome some limitations
of traditional methods that rely on bounding boxes or category annotations. This
paper introduces a novel paradigm for Multiple Object Tracking called Type-toTrack, which allows users to track objects in videos by typing natural language
descriptions. We present a new dataset for that Grounded Multiple Object Tracking
task, called GroOT, that contains videos with various types of objects and their
corresponding textual captions describing their appearance and action in detail.
Additionally, we introduce two new evaluation protocols and formulate evaluation
metrics specifically for this task. We develop a new efficient method that models
a transformer-based eMbed-ENcoDE-extRact framework (MENDER) using the
third-order tensor decomposition. The experiments in five scenarios show that our
MENDER approach outperforms another two-stage design in terms of accuracy
and efficiency, up to 14.7% accuracy and 4× speed faster.

1

Introduction

Tracking the movement of objects in videos is a challenging task that has received significant attention
in recent years. Various methods have been proposed to tackle this problem, including deep learning
techniques. However, despite these advances, there is still room for improvement in intuitiveness
and responsiveness. One potential way to improve object tracking in videos is to incorporate user
input into the tracking process. Traditional Visual Object Tracking (VOT) methods typically require
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

