Private Everlasting Prediction

Moni Naor∗

Kobbi Nissim†

Uri Stemmer‡

Chao Yan§

Abstract
A private learner is trained on a sample of labeled points and generates
a hypothesis that can be used for predicting the labels of newly sampled
points while protecting the privacy of the training set [Kasiviswannathan
et al., FOCS 2008]. Past research uncovered that private learners may need
to exhibit significantly higher sample complexity than non-private learners
as is the case of learning of one-dimensional threshold functions [Bun et
al., FOCS 2015, Alon et al., STOC 2019].
We explore prediction as an alternative to learning. A predictor answers a
stream of classification queries instead of outputting a hypothesis. Earlier
work has considered a private prediction model with a single classification
query [Dwork and Feldman, COLT 2018]. We observe that when answering
a stream of queries, a predictor must modify the hypothesis it uses over
time, and in a manner that cannot rely solely on the training set.
We introduce private everlasting prediction taking into account the privacy
of both the training set and the (adaptively chosen) queries made to the
predictor. We then present a generic construction of private everlasting
predictors in the PAC model. The sample complexity of the initial training
sample in our construction is quadratic (up to polylog factors) in the VC
dimension of the concept class. Our construction allows prediction for
all concept classes with finite VC dimension, and in particular threshold
functions over infinite domains, for which (traditional) private learning is
known to be impossible.

1

Introduction

A PAC learner for a concept class C is given labeled examples S = {(xi , yi )}i∈[n] drawn i.i.d.
from an unknown underlying probability distribution D over a data domain X and outputs
a hypothesis h that can be used for predicting the label of fresh points xn+1 , xn+2 , . . . sampled
from the same underlying probability distribution D [Valiant, 1984]. It is well known that
when points are labeled by a concept selected from a concept class C = {c : X → {0, 1}} then
learning is possible with sample complexity proportional to VC(C).
∗ Department of Computer Science and Applied Math, Weizmann Institute of Science.
moni.naor@weizmann.ac.il. Incumbent of the Judith Kleeman Professorial Chair. Research supported in part by grants from the Israel Science Foundation (no.2686/20), by the Simons Foundation
Collaboration on the Theory of Algorithmic Fairness and by the Israeli Council for Higher Education
(CHE) via the Weizmann Data Science Research Center.
† Department of Computer Science, Georgetown University. kobbi.nissim@georgetown.edu. Research supported in part by by NSF grant No. CNS-2001041 and a gift to Georgetown University.
‡ Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, and Google Research. u@uri.co.il.
Partially supported by the Israel Science Foundation (grant 1871/19) and by Len Blavatnik and the
Blavatnik Family foundation.
§ Department of Computer Science, Georgetown University. cy399@georgetown.edu. Research
supported in part by by a gift to Georgetown University.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

