Adversarial Model for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Mohak Bhardwaj∗
University of Washington
mohakb@cs.washington.edu
Byron Boots
University of Washington
bboots@cs.washington.edu

Tengyang Xie∗
Microsoft Research & UW-Madison
tx@cs.wisc.edu

Nan Jiang
UIUC
nanjiang@illinois.edu

Ching-An Cheng
Microsoft Research, Redmond
chinganc@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose a novel model-based offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) framework, called Adversarial Model for Offline Reinforcement Learning (ARMOR),
which can robustly learn policies to improve upon an arbitrary reference policy regardless of data coverage. ARMOR is designed to optimize policies for the worstcase performance relative to the reference policy through adversarially training
a Markov decision process model. In theory, we prove that ARMOR, with a
well-tuned hyperparameter, can compete with the best policy within data coverage
when the reference policy is supported by the data. At the same time, ARMOR
is robust to hyperparameter choices: the policy learned by ARMOR, with any admissible hyperparameter, would never degrade the performance of the reference
policy, even when the reference policy is not covered by the dataset. To validate
these properties in practice, we design a scalable implementation of ARMOR,
which by adversarial training, can optimize policies without using model ensembles in contrast to typical model-based methods. We show that ARMOR achieves
competent performance with both state-of-the-art offline model-free and modelbased RL algorithms and can robustly improve the reference policy over various
hyperparameter choices.2

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) is a technique for learning decision-making policies from
logged data (Lange et al., 2012; Levine et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021a). In comparison with alternate learning techniques, such as off-policy RL and imitation learning (IL), offline
RL reduces the data assumption needed to learn good policies and does not require collecting new
data. Theoretically, offline RL can learn the best policy that the given data can explain: as long as
the offline data includes the scenarios encountered by a near-optimal policy, an offline RL algorithm
can learn such a near-optimal policy, even when the data is collected by highly sub-optimal policies
and/or is not diverse. Such robustness to data coverage makes offline RL a promising technique for
solving real-world problems, as collecting diverse or expert-quality data in practice is often expensive or simply infeasible.
The fundamental principle behind offline RL is the concept of pessimism, which considers worstcase outcomes for scenarios without data. In algorithms, this is realized by (explicitly or implicitly) constructing performance lower bounds in policy learning which penalizes uncertain actions.
∗
2

Equal contribution
Open source code is available at: https://sites.google.com/view/armorofflinerl/.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

