Bitstream-Corrupted Video Recovery:
A Novel Benchmark Dataset and Method
Tianyi Liu1∗ Kejun Wu1∗ Yi Wang2†‡ Wenyang Liu1 Kim-Hui Yap1† Lap-Pui Chau2
1
School of EEE, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Department of EEE, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
{liut0038, wang1241, wenyang001}@e.ntu.edu.sg,
{kejun.wu, ekhyap}@ntu.edu.sg,
lap-pui.chau@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
The past decade has witnessed great strides in video recovery by specialist technologies, like video inpainting, completion, and error concealment. However, they
typically simulate the missing content by manual-designed error masks, thus failing
to fill in the realistic video loss in video communication (e.g., telepresence, live
streaming, and internet video) and multimedia forensics. To address this, we introduce the bitstream-corrupted video (BSCV) benchmark, the first benchmark dataset
with more than 28,000 video clips, which can be used for bitstream-corrupted video
recovery in the real world. The BSCV is a collection of 1) a proposed threeparameter corruption model for video bitstream, 2) a large-scale dataset containing
rich error patterns, multiple corruption levels, and flexible dataset branches, and 3)
a new video recovery framework that serves as a benchmark. We evaluate stateof-the-art video inpainting methods on the BSCV dataset, demonstrating existing
approaches’ limitations and our framework’s advantages in solving the bitstreamcorrupted video recovery problem. The benchmark and dataset are released at
https://github.com/LIUTIGHE/BSCV-Dataset.

1

Introduction

As Cisco’s report [1] shows, video traffic is expected to account for 82% of all internet traffic by 2022,
making it the commonest multimedia type on the internet. However, due to unreliable channels and
physical damage of the storage medium, videos are vulnerable to generated errors in the case of packet
loss during transmission and context corruption during compression and storage [2]. Meanwhile,
malicious attacks on the video decoder ecosystem may cause the risk of severe damage to video
bitstreams [3]. Therefore, bitstream damage during compression, storage, and transmission chains
is a common and crucial problem. The various types of damage factors yield different corruption
degrees and error patterns in decoded frames, which are irreversible and unpredictable. Recovering
the video content in corrupted bitstreams is of vital importance but beset with difficulties.
Researchers have been dedicated to video recovery at the encoding, transmission, and decoding
stages [4]. Reed-Solomon codes [5] add redundant information during the encoding stage to enable
error correction for the receiver. Checksum [6] is used in the transmission process to detect errors and
∗

Equal first contribution
Corresponding author
‡
Yi Wang was with NTU when this research was conducted and is currently with Hong Kong PolyU.
†

Submitted to the 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets
and Benchmarks. Do not distribute.

