EgoTracks: A Long-term Egocentric Visual Object
Tracking Dataset

Hao Tang1 , Kevin J Liang1 , Kristen Grauman1,2 , Matt Feiszli1,∗ , Weiyao Wang1,∗
FAIR, Meta1 , UT Austin2 , Equal Contribution∗
{haotang, kevinjliang, grauman, mdf, weiyaowang}@meta.com

Abstract
Visual object tracking is key to many egocentric vision problems. However, the full
spectrum of challenges of egocentric tracking faced by an embodied AI is underrepresented in many existing datasets, which tend to focus on short, third-person
videos. Egocentric video has several distinguishing characteristics from those commonly found in past datasets: frequent large camera motions and hand interactions
with objects commonly lead to occlusions or objects exiting the frame, and object
appearance can change rapidly due to widely different points of view, scale, or
object states. Embodied tracking is also naturally long-term, and being able to consistently (re-)associate objects to their appearances and disappearances over as long
as a lifetime is critical. Previous datasets under-emphasize this re-detection problem, and their “framed” nature has led to adoption of various spatiotemporal priors
that we find do not necessarily generalize to egocentric video. We thus introduce
EgoTracks, a new dataset for long-term egocentric visual object tracking. Sourced
from the Ego4D dataset, EgoTracks presents a significant challenge to recent stateof-the-art single-object trackers, which we find score more poorly on our new
dataset than existing popular benchmarks, according to traditional tracking metrics.
We further show improvements that can be made to the STARK tracker to significantly increase its performance on egocentric data, resulting in a baseline model we
call EgoSTARK. We publicly release our annotations and benchmark (https://
github.com/EGO4D/episodic-memory/tree/main/EgoTracks), hoping our
dataset leads to further advancements in tracking.

1

Introduction

First-person or “egocentric” computer vision aims to capture the real-world perceptual problems
faced by an embodied AI; it has drawn strong recent interest as an underserved but highly relevant
domain of vision, with important applications ranging from robotics [67, 18] to augmented and
mixed reality [2, 70, 29]. Visual object tracking (VOT), long a fundamental problem in vision, is a
core component to many egocentric tasks, including tracking the progress of an action or activity,
(re-)association of objects in one’s surroundings, and predicting future states of the environment.
Yet, while the VOT field has made many significant advancements over the past decade, tracking in
egocentric video remains underexplored. This lack of attention is in large part due to the absence
of a large-scale egocentric tracking dataset for training and evaluation. While the community has
proposed a number of popular tracking datasets in recent years, including OTB [81], TrackingNet [60],
GOT-10k [33], and LaSOT [21], we find that the strong performance that state-of-the-art trackers
achieve on these benchmarks does not translate well to egocentric video, thus establishing a strong
need for such a tracking dataset.
We attribute this performance gap to the many unique aspects of egocentric views compared to the
more traditional third-person views of previous datasets. In contrast to intentionally “framed” video,
egocentric videos are often uncurated, meaning they tend to capture many attention shifts between
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

