Beyond Confidence: Reliable Models Should Also
Consider Atypicality

Mert Yuksekgonul
Stanford University
merty@stanford.edu

Linjun Zhang
Rutgers University
lz412@stat.rutgers.edu

James Zou‡
Stanford University
jamesz@stanford.edu

Carlos Ernesto Guestrin‡
Stanford University, CZ Biohub
guestrin@stanford.edu

Abstract
While most machine learning models can provide confidence in their predictions,
confidence is insufficient to understand a prediction’s reliability. For instance, the
model may have a low confidence prediction if the input is not well-represented
in the training dataset or if the input is inherently ambiguous. In this work, we
investigate the relationship between how atypical (rare) a sample or a class is
and the reliability of a model’s predictions. We first demonstrate that atypicality
is strongly related to miscalibration and accuracy. In particular, we empirically
show that predictions for atypical inputs or atypical classes are more overconfident
and have lower accuracy. Using these insights, we show incorporating atypicality
improves uncertainty quantification and model performance for discriminative
neural networks and large language models. In a case study, we show that using
atypicality improves the performance of a skin lesion classifier across different skin
tone groups without having access to the group attributes. Overall, we propose that
models should use not only confidence but also atypicality to improve uncertainty
quantification and performance. Our results demonstrate that simple post-hoc
atypicality estimators can provide significant value.1

1

Introduction

Typicality is an item’s resemblance to other category members [RM75]. For example, while a dove
and a sparrow are typical birds, a penguin is an atypical bird. Many works from cognitive science (e.g.,
[Rip89, RSS73, MP80]) suggest that typicality plays a crucial role in category understanding. For
instance, humans have been shown to learn, remember, and refer to typical items faster [Mur04].
Similarly, the representativeness heuristic is the tendency of humans to use the typicality of an event
as a basis for decisions [TK74]. This cognitive bias is effective for making swift decisions, but
it can lead to poor judgments of uncertainty. For instance, the likelihood of typical events can be
overestimated [TK74] or uncertainty judgments can be inferior for atypical events [TK92].
While it is hard to quantify the uncertainty of human judgments, machine learning models provide
confidence in their predictions. However, confidence alone can be insufficient to understand the
reliability of a prediction. For instance, a low-confidence prediction could arise from an ambiguity
that is easily communicated, or due to the sample being underrepresented in the training distribution.
1
‡

Our code is available at https://github.com/mertyg/beyond-confidence-atypicality
Joint Advisors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

