Towards Efficient Image Compression Without
Autoregressive Models

Muhammad Salman Ali 1 , Yeongwoong Kim1 , Maryam Qamar 1 ,
Sung-Chang Lim2 , Donghyun Kim2 , Chaoning Zhang1 , Sung-Ho Bae∗1 , Hui Yong Kim∗1
1
Kyung Hee University, Republic of Korea
2
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), Republic of Korea
{salmanali, duddnd7575, maryamqamar}@khu.ac.kr,
{sclim, kimddng}@etri.re.kr,
chaoningzhang1990@gmail.com
{shbae, hykim.v}@khu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, learned image compression (LIC) has garnered increasing interest with its
rapidly improving performance surpassing conventional codecs. A key ingredient
of LIC is a hyperprior-based entropy model, where the underlying joint probability
of the latent image features is modeled as a product of Gaussian distributions
from each latent element. Since latents from the actual images are not spatially
independent, autoregressive (AR) context based entropy models were proposed to
handle the discrepancy between the assumed distribution and the actual distribution.
Though the AR-based models have proven effective, the computational complexity
is significantly increased due to the inherent sequential nature of the algorithm.
In this paper, we present a novel alternative to the AR-based approach that can
provide a significantly better trade-off between performance and complexity. To
minimize the discrepancy, we introduce a correlation loss that forces the latents to
be spatially decorrelated and better fitted to the independent probability model. Our
correlation loss is proved to act as a general plug-in for the hyperprior (HP) based
learned image compression methods. The performance gain from our correlation
loss is ‘free’ in terms of computation complexity for both inference time and
decoding time. To our knowledge, our method gives the best trade-off between
the complexity and performance: combined with the Checkerboard-CM, it attains
90% and when combined with ChARM-CM, it attains 98% of the AR-based
BD-Rate gains yet is around 50 times and 30 times faster than AR-based methods
respectively.

1

Introduction

In the digital world, visual media has proven to be a mixed blessing. On the one hand, it provides a
mechanism to disseminate a plethora of data, information, and knowledge in a form easily consumable
by humans Silk et al. [2021], while on the other, improved quality and increased content is very
quickly pushing the boundaries of data storage, communication, and processing technologies Kim
et al. [2021]. A software-driven solution to skew the balance of this state has been extensively
presented in the form of lossy compression techniques Wallace [1991], Rabbani and Joshi [2002],
Ballé et al. [2017]. In the case of images, these techniques aim to reduce the data size while
maintaining its context. Traditional image codecs like JPEG Wallace [1991] and JPEG2000 Rabbani
and Joshi [2002] use mathematically well-defined transformations such as discrete cosine transform
(DCT) and discrete wavelet transform (DWT). These context-less transformations lead to reduced
efficiency in terms of maintaining an optimal balance between the image quality and bitrate of the
encoded image. In complex and varied images, this problem is especially pronounced, leading to
the inclusion of various artifacts such as ringing and blocking Ballé et al. [2017]. In recent years,
∗

Corresponding Authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

