Collaborative Score Distillation
for Consistent Visual Editing

Subin Kim∗,1

Kyungmin Lee∗,1
June Suk Choi1
Jongheon Jeong1
2
1
Kihyuk Sohn
Jinwoo Shin
1
2
KAIST
Google Research
∗
{subin-kim, kyungmnlee}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Generative priors of large-scale text-to-image diffusion models enable a wide range
of new generation and editing applications on diverse visual modalities. However,
when adapting these priors to complex visual modalities, often represented as
multiple images (e.g., video or 3D scene), achieving consistency across a set of
images is challenging. In this paper, we address this challenge with a novel method,
Collaborative Score Distillation (CSD). CSD is based on the Stein Variational
Gradient Descent (SVGD). Specifically, we propose to consider multiple samples
as “particles” in the SVGD update and combine their score functions to distill
generative priors over a set of images synchronously. Thus, CSD facilitates the
seamless integration of information across 2D images, leading to a consistent visual
synthesis across multiple samples. We show the effectiveness of CSD in a variety
of editing tasks, encompassing the visual editing of panorama images, videos, and
3D scenes. Our results underline the competency of CSD as a versatile method
for enhancing inter-sample consistency, thereby broadening the applicability of
text-to-image diffusion models.1

1

Introduction

Text-to-image diffusion models [1, 2, 3, 4] have been scaled up by using billions of image-text
pairs [5, 6] and efficient architectures [7, 8, 9, 4], showing impressive capability in synthesizing
high-quality, realistic, and diverse images with the text given as an input. Furthermore, they have
branched into various applications, such as image-to-image translation [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16],
controllable generation [17], or personalization [18, 19]. One of the latest applications in this regard
is to translate the capability into other complex modalities, viz., beyond 2D images [20, 21] without
modifying diffusion models using modality-specific training data. This paper focuses on the problem
of adapting the knowledge of pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models to more complex highdimensional visual manipulation tasks beyond 2D images without modifying diffusion models using
modality-specific training data.
We start from an intuition that many complex visual data, e.g., videos and 3D scenes, are represented
as a set of images constrained by modality-specific consistency. For example, a video is a set of frames
requiring temporal consistency, and a 3D scene is a set of multi-view frames with view consistency.
Unfortunately, image diffusion models do not have a built-in capability to ensure consistency between
a set of images for synthesis or editing because their generative sampling process does not take
into account the consistency when using the image diffusion model as is. As such, when applying
image diffusion models to manipulate these complex data without consistency in consideration, it
*
1

Equal contribution.
Visualizations are available at the website https://subin-kim-cv.github.io/CSD.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

