High dimensional, tabular deep learning with an
auxiliary knowledge graph

Camilo Ruiz1,2,∗ , Hongyu Ren1,∗ , Kexin Huang1 , Jure Leskovec1
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
2
Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University
∗
Equal contribution
{caruiz, hyren, kexinh, jure}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models exhibit strong performance on datasets with abundant
labeled samples. However, for tabular datasets with extremely high d-dimensional
features but limited n samples (i.e. d ≫ n), machine learning models struggle to
achieve strong performance due to the risk of overfitting. Here, our key insight is
that there is often abundant, auxiliary domain information describing input features
which can be structured as a heterogeneous knowledge graph (KG). We propose
P LATO, a method that achieves strong performance on tabular data with d ≫ n
by using an auxiliary KG describing input features to regularize a multilayer
perceptron (MLP). In P LATO, each input feature corresponds to a node in the
auxiliary KG. In the MLP’s first layer, each input feature also corresponds to
a weight vector. P LATO is based on the inductive bias that two input features
corresponding to similar nodes in the auxiliary KG should have similar weight
vectors in the MLP’s first layer. P LATO captures this inductive bias by inferring the
weight vector for each input feature from its corresponding node in the KG via a
trainable message-passing function. Across 6 d ≫ n datasets, P LATO outperforms
13 state-of-the-art baselines by up to 10.19%.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models have reached state-of-the-art performance in domains with abundant labeled
data like computer vision [76, 10] and natural language processing [70, 12, 52]. However, for tabular
datasets in which the number d of features vastly exceeds the number n of samples, machine learning
models struggle to achieve strong performance [24, 41]. Crucially, many tabular datasets from
scientific domains [21, 30, 79, 17, 16, 33] have high-dimensional features but limited labeled samples
due to the high time and labor costs of experiments. For these and other tabular datasets with d ≫ n,
the performance of machine learning models is currently limited.
The key challenge for machine learning models when d ≫ n is the risk of overfitting. Indeed, deep
models can have a large number of trainable weights, yet training is limited by the comparatively
small number of labeled samples. As a result, tabular deep learning approaches so far have focused on
data-rich regimes with far more samples than features (n ≫ d) [19, 18, 59]. In the low-data regime
with far more features than samples (d ≫ n), the dominant approaches for single tabular datasets
are still statistical methods [24]. These statistical methods reduce the dimensionality of the input
space [1, 41, 66, 67], select features [64, 8, 14, 46], impose regularization penalties on parameter
magnitudes [45], or use ensembles of weak tree-based models [15, 7, 34, 42, 51].
Here, we present a novel problem setting and framework that enables tabular deep learning when
d ≫ n (Figure 1). Our key insight is that there is often abundant, auxiliary domain information
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

