Ignorance is Bliss:
Robust Control via Information Gating

Manan Tomar∗
University of Alberta

Riashat Islam
McGill University

Sergey Levine
University of California, Berkeley

Matthew E. Taylor
University of Alberta

Philip Bachman
Microsoft Research Montreal

Abstract
Informational parsimony provides a useful inductive bias for learning representations that achieve better generalization by being robust to noise and spurious
correlations. We propose information gating as a way to learn parsimonious representations that identify the minimal information required for a task. When gating
information, we can learn to reveal as little information as possible so that a task
remains solvable, or hide as little information as possible so that a task becomes
unsolvable. We gate information using a differentiable parameterization of the
signal-to-noise ratio, which can be applied to arbitrary values in a network, e.g.,
erasing pixels at the input layer or activations in some intermediate layer. When
gating at the input layer, our models learn which visual cues matter for a given
task. When gating intermediate layers, our models learn which activations are
needed for subsequent stages of computation. We call our approach InfoGating.
We apply InfoGating to various objectives such as multi-step forward and inverse
dynamics models, Q-learning, and behavior cloning, highlighting how InfoGating
can naturally help in discarding information not relevant for control. Results show
that learning to identify and use minimal information can improve generalization
in downstream tasks. Policies based on InfoGating are considerably more robust
to irrelevant visual features, leading to improved pretraining and finetuning of RL
models.
Original Input
Masking
Encoder

Regular
Encoder

Masking
Decoder

Downstream
Loss

+
Output Mask

InfoGated Input

Figure 1: InfoGating at the input layer predicts a mask conditioned on the original input and then processes the
masked input to compute representations that minimize a downstream loss. The mask is encouraged to remove
as much of the original input as possible without hurting performance on the downstream task. The mask is
applied by taking a convex combination of the input and Gaussian noise, weighted by the mask.

1

Introduction

Pretraining models on large, diverse datasets and transferring their representations to downstream
applications is becoming common practice in deep learning. Such representations should capture
useful information from available data while ignoring irrelevant features and noise [7, 8]. For instance,
an object recognition model may achieve high accuracy on its training set while strongly relying
on “spurious” correlations between background features and important objects. When transferred to
∗

Correspondence to manan.tomar@gmail.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

