Leveraging Locality and Robustness to Achieve
Massively Scalable Gaussian Process Regression

Robert Allison
Department of Mathematics
Bristol University
marfa@bristol.ac.uk

Anthony Stephenson
Department of Mathematics
Bristol University

Samuel F
Alan Turing Institute

Edward Pyzer-Knapp
IBM Research

Abstract
The accurate predictions
 and principled uncertainty measures provided by GP
regression incur O n3 cost which is prohibitive for modern-day large-scale applications. This has motivated extensive work on computationally efficient approximations. We introduce a new perspective by exploring robustness properties and
limiting behaviour of GP nearest neighbour (GPnn) prediction. We demonstrate
through theory and simulation that as the data-size n increases, accuracy of estimated parameters and GP model assumptions become increasingly irrelevant to
GPnn predictive accuracy. Consequently, it is sufficient to spend small amounts of
work on parameter estimation in order to achieve high MSE accuracy, even in the
presence of gross misspecification. In contrast, as n → ∞, uncertainty calibration
and NLL are shown to remain sensitive to just one parameter, the additive noisevariance; but we show that this source of inaccuracy can be corrected for, thereby
achieving both well-calibrated uncertainty measures and accurate predictions at
remarkably low computational cost. We exhibit a very simple GPnn regression
algorithm with stand-out performance compared to other state-of-the-art GP approximations as measured on large UCI datasets. It operates at a small fraction of
those other methods’ training costs, for example on a basic laptop taking about 30
seconds to train on a dataset of size n = 1.6 × 106 .

1

Introduction

We first briefly review the computational cost of exact GP regression and the motivation for this paper:
Given n training samples X, y, where X ∈ Rn×d has feature vector xi ∈ Rd in its i’th row and
y ∈ Rn , exact GP regression [36] makes use of an n × n gram matrix K = KX,θ constructed from a
pre-specified positive definite covariance function c(·, ·) : Rd × Rd → R+ together with length-scale,
additive-noise variance and kernel-scale “hyperparameters” θ = (l, σξ2 , σf2 ). In the training phase
estimates of the hyperparameters, θ̂ = (ˆl, σ̂ξ2 , σ̂f2 ), are obtained by minimising the loss function
1 T −1
{y Kθ y + log |Kθ | + n log(2π)}.
2
Then for subsequent predictions the predictive distribution at a point x∗ ∈ Rd is defined by
y ∗ | X, y ∼ N (µ∗ , σ ∗ 2 )
loss(θ) = − log p(y|X, θ) =

∗

µ =k
σ

∗2

∗T

K

−1

(1)
(2)

y

(3)

= σ̂f2 − k∗ T K −1 k∗ + σ̂ξ2

(4)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

