Propagating Knowledge Updates to LMs
Through Distillation

Shankar Padmanabhan, Yasumasa Onoe, Michael J.Q. Zhang, Greg Durrett, Eunsol Choi
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
shankarpadmanabhan@utexas.edu

Abstract
Modern language models have the capacity to store and use immense amounts
of knowledge about real-world entities, but it remains unclear how to update
such knowledge stored in model parameters. While prior methods for updating
knowledge in LMs successfully inject atomic facts, updated LMs fail to make
inferences based on injected facts. In this work, we demonstrate that a context
distillation-based approach can both impart knowledge about entities and propagate
that knowledge to enable broader inferences. Our approach consists of two stages:
transfer set generation and distillation on the transfer set. We first generate a
transfer set by prompting a language model to generate continuations from the
entity definition. Then, we update the model parameters so that the distribution
of the LM (the ’student’) matches the distribution of the LM conditioned on
the definition (the ’teacher’) on the transfer set. Our experiments demonstrate
that this approach is more effective at propagating knowledge updates than finetuning and other gradient-based knowledge-editing methods. Moreover, it does not
compromise performance in other contexts, even when injecting the definitions of
up to 150 entities at once.

1

Introduction

As large language models (LLMs) are used for a wider variety of applications, it is crucial to
ensure that they contain up-to-date information about the world. One potential solution is retrieval
augmentation, which prepends retrieved texts to the language model’s context [20, 29, 35, 34].
However, this raises inference costs and becomes impractical when updating large amounts of
information. An alternative approach, and our goal in this work, is to internalize the new knowledge
into the language model via parameter updates [36, 44, 8, 26, 22, 12].
Recent work on injecting LLMs with information about emerging entities [32] demonstrates that
updating parameters effectively enables models to acquire updated facts (Rishi Sunak is the prime
minister of the UK), but struggles to teach models how to propagate this knowledge, or make
inferences based on it (what might Rishi Sunak do tomorrow?). This contrasts with results from
retrieval augmentation [20, 35] and chain-of-thought prompting [40], which show that LLMs can
make such inferences when information is placed in the prompt.
This work aims to bridge the gap between the two approaches in knowledge injection. We use a
form of knowledge distillation [13] called context distillation [1] that updates an LM to act like it is
conditioned on a given context, even when that context is not shown. Our approach consists of two
steps: transfer set generation and distillation on the generated transfer set. The transfer set consists of
continuations of the entity definition sentence generated by prompting a language model. To distill on
this transfer set, we minimize the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between the model’s predictions
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

