StyleGAN knows Normal, Depth, Albedo, and More

Anand Bhattad

Daniel McKee
Derek Hoiem
D.A. Forsyth
University of Illinois Urbana Champaign
https://anandbhattad.github.io/stylegan knows/

(a) Image

(b) Normal

(c) Depth

(d) Albedo

(e) Shading

(f) Segment

Figure 1: StyleGAN has easily accessible and accurate representations of intrinsic images, without
ever having seen an intrinsic image. Simply by finding an appropriate offset to the latent variables
for each type, we make StyleGAN reveal intrinsic images of many types for a synthesized image
(a), including: surface normal (b), depth maps (c), albedo (d), shading (e), segmentation (f). No
new weight learning or fine-tuning is required. Top row: shows StyleGAN intrinsics; bottom row
those predicted by SOTA predictors [28, 10, 20, 18]. Note that StyleGAN “knows” where bedside
and other lamps are better than a SOTA segmenter [18] does (it should; it put them there!) and that
StyleGAN “knows” fine detail in normal maps (around bedside lamp) that is hard for current methods
to predict.

Abstract
Intrinsic images, in the original sense, are image-like maps of scene properties like
depth, normal, albedo or shading. This paper demonstrates that StyleGAN can
easily be induced to produce intrinsic images. Our procedure is straightforward.
We show that, if StyleGAN produces G(w) from latent w, then for each type of
intrinsic image, there is a fixed offset dc so that G(w + dc ) is that type of intrinsic
image for G(w). Here dc is independent of w. The StyleGAN we used was
pretrained by others, so this property is not some accident of our training regime.
We show that there are image transformations StyleGAN will not produce in this
fashion, so StyleGAN is not a generic image regression engine.
It is conceptually exciting that an image generator should “know” and represent
intrinsic images. There may also be practical advantages to using a generative
model to produce intrinsic images. The intrinsic images obtained from StyleGAN
compare well both qualitatively and quantitatively with those obtained by using
SOTA image regression techniques; but StyleGAN’s intrinsic images are robust to
relighting effects, unlike SOTA methods.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

