Conditional Mutual Information for Disentangled
Representations in Reinforcement Learning

Mhairi Dunion
University of Edinburgh
mhairi.dunion@ed.ac.uk

Trevor McInroe
University of Edinburgh
t.mcinroe@ed.ac.uk

Josiah P. Hanna
University of Wisconsin – Madison
jphanna@cs.wisc.edu

Kevin Sebastian Luck
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
k.s.luck@vu.nl
Stefano V. Albrecht
University of Edinburgh
s.albrecht@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) environments can produce training data with spurious correlations between features due to the amount of training data or its limited
feature coverage. This can lead to RL agents encoding these misleading correlations in their latent representation, preventing the agent from generalising if the
correlation changes within the environment or when deployed in the real world.
Disentangled representations can improve robustness, but existing disentanglement
techniques that minimise mutual information between features require independent
features, thus they cannot disentangle correlated features. We propose an auxiliary
task for RL algorithms that learns a disentangled representation of high-dimensional
observations with correlated features by minimising the conditional mutual information between features in the representation. We demonstrate experimentally,
using continuous control tasks, that our approach improves generalisation under
correlation shifts, as well as improving the training performance of RL algorithms
in the presence of correlated features.

1

Introduction

Real-world environments are diverse and unpredictable; we often cannot control correlations between
environment features or even know they exist. As such, real-world Reinforcement Learning (RL)
training environments can contain spurious correlations between features that are unknown or
unintended by the data collector, e.g. an object correlated with colour. Furthermore, an RL agent
influences the data collection through its actions, which may shift the data distribution to contain
feature correlations as the agent learns, e.g. the agent position is correlated with a goal position as it
learns an optimal policy. For RL agents to be resilient in the real world, it is beneficial to learn robust
representations of high-dimensional observations (e.g. images). However, an agent trained with
correlated data may learn a representation that encodes the spurious correlation and, therefore, cannot
generalise when the correlation no longer holds (Träuble et al., 2021). For example, an autonomous
driving agent trained in an environment where aggressive drivers often have green cars can encode
this correlation that does not hold in real world.
Methods for disentanglement aim to separate the ground truth factors of variation that generated a highdimensional observation, such as an image, into meaningful subspaces in the learned representation
(Bengio et al., 2013). Both Higgins et al. (2017b) and Dunion et al. (2023) show that disentanglement
improves generalisation to visual changes in RL environments that were not seen during training. A
disentangled representation can be robust to environment changes because a change in one image
factor causes only a subset of features in the representation to change, while the remaining features can
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

