Birth of a Transformer: A Memory Viewpoint

Alberto Bietti∗
Flatiron Institute

Vivien Cabannes
FAIR, Meta

Diane Bouchacourt
FAIR, Meta

Hervé Jégou
FAIR, Meta

Léon Bottou
FAIR, Meta

Abstract
Large language models based on transformers have achieved great empirical successes. However, as they are deployed more widely, there is a growing need to
better understand their internal mechanisms in order to make them more reliable.
These models appear to store vast amounts of knowledge from their training data,
and to adapt quickly to new information provided in their context or prompt. We
study how transformers balance these two types of knowledge by considering a
synthetic setup where tokens are generated from either global or context-specific
bigram distributions. By a careful empirical analysis of the training process on a
simplified two-layer transformer, we illustrate the fast learning of global bigrams
and the slower development of an “induction head” mechanism for the in-context
bigrams. We highlight the role of weight matrices as associative memories, provide
theoretical insights on how gradients enable their learning during training, and
study the role of data-distributional properties.

1

Introduction

As large language models (LLMs) are growing in usage and deployment, it is increasingly important
to open the black box and understand how they work. A better understanding can help with interpretability of how these models make decisions, and will be crucial to improve these models and
mitigate their failure cases, such as hallucinations or reasoning errors.
An important ingredient in the success of recent LLMs is their ability to learn and reason from
information present in their context [6]. These “in-context” learning capabilities are often attributed
to the transformer architecture [52], in particular its self-attention blocks, which are able to carefully
select parts of the input sequence in order to infer plausible next tokens. Additionally, predictions
may require “global” knowledge, such as syntactic rules or general facts, which may not appear in
the context and thus needs to be stored in the model.
In order to better understand how transformers develop these capabilities during training, we introduce
a synthetic dataset that exhibits both aspects. It consists of sequences generated from a bigram
language model, but where some of the bigrams are specific to each sequence. Then, the model needs
to rely on in-context learning for good prediction on the sequence-specific bigrams, while the global
bigrams can be guessed from global statistics conditioned on the current token. While one-layer
transformers fail to reliably predict the in-context bigrams, we find that two-layer transformers
succeed by developing an induction head mechanism [16, 40], namely a “circuit” of two attention
heads that allows the transformer to predict b from a context [· · · , a, b, · · · , a], and which appears to
be ubiquitous in transformer language models [40, 54].
In order to obtain a fine-grained understanding of how this in-context mechanism emerges during
training, we further simplify the two-layer architecture by freezing some of the layers at random
initialization, including embeddings and value matrices. This focuses our study on attention and
feed-forward mechanisms, while avoiding the difficulty of learning representations, which may
∗

Work done while at FAIR, Meta.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

