M2Hub: Unlocking the Potential of Machine Learning
for Materials Discovery

Yuanqi Du1,* Yingheng Wang1,* Yining Huang2 Jianan Canal Li3 Yanqiao Zhu4
Tian Xie5 Chenru Duan6 John M. Gregoire7 Carla P. Gomes1
1
Cornell 2 Northwestern 3 UCB 4 UCLA
5
MSR AI4Science 6 Microsoft Quantum 7 Caltech * Equal Contribution

Abstract
We introduce M2 Hub, a toolkit for advancing machine learning in materials discovery. Machine learning has achieved remarkable progress in modeling molecular
structures, especially biomolecules for drug discovery. However, the development
of machine learning approaches for modeling materials structures lag behind, which
is partly due to the lack of an integrated platform that enables access to diverse
tasks for materials discovery. To bridge this gap, M2 Hub will enable easy access
to materials discovery tasks, datasets, machine learning methods, evaluations, and
benchmark results that cover the entire workflow. Specifically, the first release
of M2 Hub focuses on three key stages in materials discovery: virtual screening,
inverse design, and molecular simulation, including 9 datasets that covers 6 types
of materials with 56 tasks across 8 types of material properties. We further provide
2 synthetic datasets for the purpose of generative tasks on materials. In addition
to random data splits, we also provide 3 additional data partitions to reflect the
real-world materials discovery scenarios. State-of-the-art machine learning methods (including those are suitable for materials structures but never compared in
the literature) are benchmarked on representative tasks. Our codes and library are
publicly available at https://github.com/yuanqidu/M2Hub.

1

Introduction

With the methodological advancements in machine learning, an increasing number of machine
learning models have been developed and applied to solve scientific problems, from simulating
molecular systems with millions of particles to predicting accurate protein structures Zhang et al.
[2018], Jumper et al. [2021]. The primary focus of machine learning in the chemical sciences has
remained in the domain of molecular structures, (bio)molecules including small molecules, proteins,
RNAs, etc. Atz et al. [2021], Rives et al. [2021], Townshend et al. [2021]. However, materials
constitute a large portion of the chemical space which have been significantly less studied, especially
in the machine learning community. Among scientific problems, materials discovery plays a vital
role in driving innovations and progress across various fields spanning energy, electronics, healthcare,
and sustainability Sanchez-Lengeling and Aspuru-Guzik [2018], Gomes et al. [2021]. However, the
traditional trial-and-error approach to materials discovery is expensive and time-consuming. Over
decades, classical machine learning methods have already been widely applied in assisting materials
discovery, Schmidt et al. [2019] yet the impact of machine learning for solid state materials lags
behind its efficacy in other areas of chemical science.
Witnessing the success of machine learning in solving grand challenges in science Wang et al. [2018],
Jumper et al. [2021], one of the key ingredients is the infrastructure that supports the machine learning
community to build the machine learning workflow: data preparation/processing, model development,
performance evaluation, and model improvement based on the evaluation feedback. While effort
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

