Evaluating the Robustness of Interpretability Methods
through Explanation Invariance and Equivariance

Jonathan Crabbé
DAMTP
University of Cambridge
jc2133@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
DAMTP
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Interpretability methods are valuable only if their explanations faithfully describe
the explained model. In this work, we consider neural networks whose predictions
are invariant under a specific symmetry group. This includes popular architectures,
ranging from convolutional to graph neural networks. Any explanation that faithfully explains this type of model needs to be in agreement with this invariance
property. We formalize this intuition through the notion of explanation invariance and equivariance by leveraging the formalism from geometric deep learning.
Through this rigorous formalism, we derive (1) two metrics to measure the robustness of any interpretability method with respect to the model symmetry group; (2)
theoretical robustness guarantees for some popular interpretability methods and
(3) a systematic approach to increase the invariance of any interpretability method
with respect to a symmetry group. By empirically measuring our metrics for explanations of models associated with various modalities and symmetry groups,
we derive a set of 5 guidelines to allow users and developers of interpretability
methods to produce robust explanations.

1

Introduction

With their increasing success in various tasks, such as computer vision [1], natural language processing [2] and scientific discovery [3], deep neural networks (DNNs) have become widespread. State of
the art DNNs typically contain millions to billions parameters and, hence, it is unrealistic for human
users to precisely understand how these models issue predictions. This opacity increases the difficulty
to anticipate how models will perform when deployed [4]; distil knowledge from the model [5] and
gain the trust of stakeholders in high-stakes domains [6, 7]. To address these shortcomings, the
field of interpretable machine learning has received increasing interest [8, 9]. There exists mainly
2 approaches to increase model interpretability [10, 11]. (1) Restrict the model’s architecture to
intrinsically interpretable architectures. A notorious example is given by self-explaining models,
such as attention models explaining their predictions by highlighting features they pay attention
to [12] and prototype-based models motivating their predictions by highlighting related examples
from their training set [13–15]. (2) Use post-hoc interpretability methods in a plug-in fashion after
training the model. The advantage of this approach is that it requires no assumption on the model that
we need to explain. In this work, we focus on several post-hoc methods: feature importance methods
(also known as feature attribution or saliency) that highlight features the model is sensitive to [16–20];
example importance methods that identify influential training examples [21–23] and concept-based
explanations that exhibit how classifiers relate classes to human friendly concepts [24, 25].
With the multiplication of interpretability methods, it has become necessary to evaluate the quality
of their explanations [26]. This stems from the fact that interpretability methods need to faithfully
describe the model in order to provide actionable insights. Existing approaches to evaluate the quality
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

