How Far Can Camels Go? Exploring the State of
Instruction Tuning on Open Resources

Yizhong Wang∗ ♣♠ Hamish Ivison∗ ♣ Pradeep Dasigi♣ Jack Hessel♣
Tushar Khot♣ Khyathi Raghavi Chandu♣ David Wadden♣ Kelsey MacMillan♣
Noah A. Smith♣♠
Iz Beltagy♣
Hannaneh Hajishirzi♣♠
♣ Allen Institute for AI

♠ University of Washington

{yizhongw,hamishi}@allenai.org

Abstract
In this work we explore recent advances in instruction-tuning language models on
a range of open instruction-following datasets. Despite recent claims that open
models can be on par with state-of-the-art proprietary models, these claims are often
accompanied by limited evaluation, making it difficult to compare models across
the board and determine the utility of various resources. We provide a large set of
instruction-tuned models from 6.7B to 65B parameters in size, trained on 12 instruction datasets ranging from manually curated (e.g., OpenAssistant) to synthetic and
distilled (e.g., Alpaca) and systematically evaluate them on their factual knowledge,
reasoning, multilinguality, coding, safety, and open-ended instruction following
abilities through a collection of automatic, model-based, and human-based metrics.
We further introduce T ÜLU , our best performing instruction-tuned model suite
finetuned on a combination of high-quality open resources.
Our experiments show that different instruction-tuning datasets can uncover or
enhance specific skills, while no single dataset (or combination) provides the best
performance across all evaluations. Interestingly, we find that model and human
preference-based evaluations fail to reflect differences in model capabilities exposed
by benchmark-based evaluations, suggesting the need for the type of systemic
evaluation performed in this work. Our evaluations show that the best model in
any given evaluation reaches on average 87% of ChatGPT performance, and 73%
of GPT-4 performance, suggesting that further investment in building better base
models and instruction-tuning data is required to close the gap. We release our
instruction-tuned models, including a fully finetuned 65B T ÜLU , along with our
code, data, and evaluation framework to facilitate future research.2

1

Introduction

The latest generation of large language models has brought unprecedented attention to the potential of
language technologies. To support imperative user requests and a chat interface, these models often
undergo an instruction-tuning step which involves training on supervised input/output pairs. Recent
instruction tuning corpora are often gathered via crowdsourcing (Dolly [12], Open Assistant [26])
or via distillation from another model (Alpaca [43], Vicuna [8]). However, while some public,
instruction-tuned models are advertised as comparable to powerful closed-source proprietary models
such as ChatGPT, most experiments that support such claims only cover a small set of tasks, and
mostly rely on model-based evaluation metrics [8, 56]. We contend that the evaluation setup should
∗
2

Equal contribution.
https://github.com/allenai/open-instruct

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

