Revisiting the Evaluation of Image Synthesis
with GANs
Mengping Yang1,†
1

Ceyuan Yang1,† Yichi Zhang1 Qingyan Bai3 Yujun Shen2 Bo Dai1

Shanghai AI Laboratory

2

Ant Group

3

Tsinghua University

Abstract
A good metric, which promises a reliable comparison between solutions, is essential
for any well-defined task. Unlike most vision tasks that have per-sample groundtruth, image synthesis tasks target generating unseen data and hence are usually
evaluated through a distributional distance between one set of real samples and
another set of generated samples. This study presents an empirical investigation
into the evaluation of synthesis performance, with generative adversarial networks
(GANs) as a representative of generative models. In particular, we make indepth analyses of various factors, including how to represent a data point in the
representation space, how to calculate a fair distance using selected samples, and
how many instances to use from each set. Extensive experiments conducted
on multiple datasets and settings reveal several important findings. Firstly, a
group of models that include both CNN-based and ViT-based architectures serve
as reliable and robust feature extractors for measurement evaluation. Secondly,
Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) provides a better comparison across various
extractors and hierarchical layers in one model. Finally, CKA is more sampleefficient and enjoys better agreement with human judgment in characterizing the
similarity between two internal data correlations. These findings contribute to the
development of a new measurement system, which enables a consistent and reliable
re-evaluation of current state-of-the-art generative models. 1

1

Introduction

Through reproducing realistic data distribution, generative models [67, 2, 19, 38, 28, 52] have enabled
thrilling opportunities to go beyond existing observations via content recreation. Their technical
breakthroughs in recent years also directly lead to the blooming of metaverse, AI Generated Content
(AIGC), and various other downstream applications. However, accurately measuring the progress
and performance of generative models poses significant challenges, as it requires a consistent and
comprehensive evaluation of the divergence between real and synthesized data distributions. Among
existing evaluation metrics [41, 4, 34, 44], Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [22] is the most popular
evaluation paradigm for synthesis comparison. Despite its popularity, recent studies [35, 44, 36, 1, 26]
have identified several flaws in the FID metric that may miscalculate the actual improvements of
generative models. Consequently, there is a pressing need for a more systematic and thorough
investigation in order to provide a more accurate assessment of synthesis performance.
Therefore, this paper presents an empirical study that rigorously revisits the consistency and
comprehensiveness of evaluation paradigms for generative models. Commonly used paradigms
including FID typically contain two key components: a feature extractor ϕ(·) and a distributional
distance d(·). Through ϕ(·), i.e., Inception-V3 [56], a number of real samples (x ∈ X) and synthesized
† denotes equal contribution.
1
code is available at https://github.com/kobeshegu/Synthesis-Measurement-CKA.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

