GEQ: Gaussian Kernel Inspired Equilibrium Models

Mingjie Li1 , Yisen Wang1,2 , Zhouchen Lin1,2,3 ∗
National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
lmjat0111@outlook.com, {yisen.wang, zlin}@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Despite the connection established by optimization-induced deep equilibrium
models (OptEqs) between their output and the underlying hidden optimization
problems, the performance of it along with its related works is still not good enough
especially when compared to deep networks. One key factor responsible for this
performance limitation is the use of linear kernels to extract features in these
models. To address this issue, we propose a novel approach by replacing its linear
kernel with a new function that can readily capture nonlinear feature dependencies
in the input data. Drawing inspiration from classical machine learning algorithms,
we introduce Gaussian kernels as the alternative function and then propose our new
equilibrium model, which we refer to as GEQ. By leveraging Gaussian kernels,
GEQ can effectively extract the nonlinear information embedded within the input
features, surpassing the performance of the original OptEqs. Moreover, GEQ
can be perceived as a weight-tied neural network with infinite width and depth.
GEQ also enjoys better theoretical properties and improved overall performance.
Additionally, our GEQ exhibits enhanced stability when confronted with various
samples. We further substantiate the effectiveness and stability of GEQ through a
series of comprehensive experiments.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) show impressive performance in many real-world tasks on various
data like graphs [43], images [41, 20], sequences [8], and others. However, most neural network
structures are constructed by experience or searching on the surrogate datasets [31, 57]. Therefore,
these architectures cannot be interpretable and such a phenomenon hinders further development.
Apart from the current neural network models, traditional machine learning methods like dictionary
learning [46, 33], subspace clustering [54] and other methods [29, 56, 55, 30] can design their whole
procedure by designing optimization problems with specific regularizers customized from their
mathematical modeling and requirements. Thus, these models are easily interpreted. However, the
traditional machine learning algorithms’ whole procedures do not consider the hidden properties of
features and labels. Therefore, they usually perform worse on tasks with more data.
To link two types of models, OptEqs [52] tries to recover the model’s hidden optimization problem
to make their model “mathematically explainable”. They claim that the output features z̃∗ (we also
called the equilibrium state) with respect to input x, which are obtained by solving the fixed-point
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

