GLOBER: Coherent Non-autoregressive
Video Generation via GLOBal Guided Video DecodER
Mingzhen Sun 1,2
Weining Wang 1
Zihan Qin 1,2
1,2
1,2
Jiahui Sun
Sihan Chen
Jing Liu 1,2,∗
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
sunmingzhen2020@ia.ac.cn weining.wang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn qinzihan2021@ia.ac.cn
sunjiahui19@mails.ucas.ac.cn sihan.chen@nlpr.ia.ac.cn jliu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Video generation necessitates both global coherence and local realism. This work
presents a novel non-autoregressive method GLOBER, which first generates global
features to obtain comprehensive global guidance and then synthesizes video
frames based on the global features to generate coherent videos. Specifically,
we propose a video auto-encoder, where a video encoder encodes videos into
global features, and a video decoder, built on a diffusion model, decodes the
global features and synthesizes video frames in a non-autoregressive manner. To
achieve maximum flexibility, our video decoder perceives temporal information
through normalized frame indexes, which enables it to synthesize arbitrary sub
video clips with predetermined starting and ending frame indexes. Moreover, a
novel adversarial loss is introduced to improve the global coherence and local
realism between the synthesized video frames. Finally, we employ a diffusionbased video generator to fit the global features outputted by the video encoder for
video generation. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
and efficiency of our proposed method1 , and new state-of-the-art results have been
achieved on multiple benchmarks.

1

Introduction

When producing a real video, it is customary to establish the overall information (global guidance),
such as scene layout or character actions and appearances, before filming the details (local characteristics) that draw up each video frame. The global guidance ensures a coherent storyline throughout
the produced video, and the local characteristics provide the necessary details for each video frame.
Similar to real video production, generative models for the video generation task must synthesize
videos with coherent global storylines and realistic local characteristics. However, due to limited
computational resources and the potential infinite number of video frames, how to achieve global
coherence while maintaining local realism remains a significant challenge for video generation tasks.
Inspired by the remarkable performance of diffusion probabilistic models [1; 2; 3], researchers have
developed a variety of diffusion-based methods for video generation. When generating multiple
video frames, strategies of existing methods can be devided into two categories: autoregression and
interpolation strategies. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), the autoregression strategy [4; 5] first generates
an initial video clip, and then employs the last few generated frames as conditions to synthesize
subsequent video frames. The interpolation strategy [6; 7], depicted in in Fig. 1(b), generates
keyframes first and then interpolates adjacent keyframes iteratively. Both strategies utilize generated
video frames as conditions to guide the generation of subsequent video frames, enabling subsequent
1

Our codes have been released in https://github.com/iva-mzsun/GLOBER

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

