L EGAL B ENCH: A Collaboratively Built Benchmark
for Measuring Legal Reasoning in Large Language
Models
Neel Guha1∗, Julian Nyarko∗1 , Daniel E. Ho∗1 , Christopher Ré∗1 , Adam Chilton2 , Aditya Narayana3 ,
Alex Chohlas-Wood1 , Austin Peters1 , Brandon Waldon1 , Daniel N. Rockmore4 , Diego Zambrano1 ,
Dmitry Talisman3 , Enam Hoque5 , Faiz Surani1 , Frank Fagan6 , Galit Sarfaty7 , Gregory M.
Dickinson8 , Haggai Porat9 , Jason Hegland1 , Jessica Wu1 , Joe Nudell1 , Joel Niklaus1 , John Nay10 ,
Jonathan H. Choi11 , Kevin Tobia12 , Margaret Hagan13 , Megan Ma10 , Michael Livermore14 , Nikon
Rasumov-Rahe3 , Nils Holzenberger15 , Noam Kolt7 , Peter Henderson1 , Sean Rehaag16 , Sharad
Goel17 , Shang Gao20 , Spencer Williams18 , Sunny Gandhi19 , Tom Zur9 , Varun Iyer , and Zehua Li1
1

Stanford University, 2 University of Chicago, 3 Maxime Tools, 4 Dartmouth College, 5 LawBeta,
South Texas College of Law Houston, 7 University of Toronto, 8 St. Thomas University Benjamin L.
Crump College of Law, 9 Harvard Law School, 10 Stanford Center for Legal Informatics - CodeX,
11
University of Southern California, 12 Georgetown University Law Center, 13 Stanford Law School,
14
University of Virginia, 15 Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, 16 Osgoode Hall Law
School, York University, 17 Harvard Kennedy School, 18 Golden Gate University School of Law,
19
Luddy School of Informatics - Indiana University Bloomington, 20 Casetext

6

Abstract
The advent of large language models (LLMs) and their adoption by the legal community has given rise to the question: what types of legal reasoning can LLMs
perform? To enable greater study of this question, we present L EGAL B ENCH:
a collaboratively constructed legal reasoning benchmark consisting of 162 tasks
covering six different types of legal reasoning. L EGAL B ENCH was built through
an interdisciplinary process, in which we collected tasks designed and hand-crafted
by legal professionals. Because these subject matter experts took a leading role
in construction, tasks either measure legal reasoning capabilities that are practically useful, or measure reasoning skills that lawyers find interesting. To enable
cross-disciplinary conversations about LLMs in the law, we additionally show
how popular legal frameworks for describing legal reasoning—which distinguish
between its many forms—correspond to L EGAL B ENCH tasks, thus giving lawyers
and LLM developers a common vocabulary. This paper describes L EGAL B ENCH,
presents an empirical evaluation of 20 open-source and commercial LLMs, and
illustrates the types of research explorations L EGAL B ENCH enables.

1

Introduction

Advances in large language models (LLMs) are leading American legal professionals to reexamine
the practice of law [52, 61, 158, 55, 13].2 Proponents have argued that LLMs could alter how lawyers
approach tasks ranging from brief writing to corporate compliance [158]. By making legal services
more accessible, they could eventually help alleviate the United States’ long standing access-to-justice
crisis [35, 132]. This perspective is informed by the observation that LLMs possess special properties
2

In using “LLMs”, we are referring to language models which evince in-context learning capabilities (also
referred to as “foundation models” [13]). This behavior has traditionally been observed in models with at least a
billion parameters.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

