BenchCLAMP: A Benchmark for Evaluating
Language Models on Syntactic and Semantic Parsing

Subhro Roy1 Sam Thomson1 Tongfei Chen1 Richard Shin1
Adam Pauls2∗ Jason Eisner1 Benjamin Van Durme1
1
Microsoft Semantic Machines 2 Scaled Cognition
1
{subhrroy,sathomso,tongfeichen,eush,jeisner,bevandur}@microsoft.com
2
adpauls@scaledcognition.com

Abstract
Recent work has shown that generation from a prompted or fine-tuned language
model can perform well at semantic parsing when the output is constrained to be a
valid semantic representation. We introduce BenchCLAMP, a Benchmark to evaluate Constrained LAnguage Model Parsing, that includes context-free grammars
for seven semantic parsing datasets and two syntactic parsing datasets with varied
output representations, as well as a constrained decoding interface to generate only
valid outputs covered by these grammars. We provide low, medium, and high
resource splits for each dataset, allowing accurate comparison of various language
models under different data regimes. Our benchmark supports evaluation of language models using prompt-based learning as well as fine-tuning. We benchmark
eight language models, including two GPT-3 variants available only through an
API. Our experiments show that encoder-decoder pretrained language models can
achieve similar performance or surpass state-of-the-art methods for syntactic and
semantic parsing when the model output is constrained to be valid.

1

Introduction

Large pretrained language models can achieve state-of-the-art performance on a host of NLP tasks
when fine-tuned on target data [22, 28, 46, 13]. Models like GPT-3 [5], Codex [9] and T0 [31] have
also shown impressive zero- and few-shot performance when prompted only with task descriptions and
examples. Research on large language models is typically validated by performance on downstream
NLP tasks. Past work has evaluated new pretrained language models on classification, extraction,
and generation, among others [22, 13, 20]. However, parsing tasks are generally not considered a
testbed for such evaluation. The outputs of parsing tasks are structured objects such as parse trees or
code. State-of-the-art systems thus involve task- or dataset-specific model architectures and target
representation constraints. Evaluating language models on parsing tasks test capabilities not captured
by commonly used evaluation tasks.
Recently, Shin et al. [36] and Scholak et al. [32] have shown that generation from a fine-tuned
or few-shot prompted language model can perform competitively in semantic parsing tasks,
when the output of the language model is constrained to produce valid meaning representations. However, it is still challenging to set up constrained generation for a new dataset and
language model due to the variation in output formalisms and model-specific tokenization. In
this paper, we introduce a new benchmark called BenchCLAMP (Benchmark for Constrained
Language Model Parsing) that covers nine parsing datasets with seven different output formalisms. We release context-free grammars for each dataset and provide a toolkit to perform
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.
* Work done while at Microsoft Semantic Machines.

