Computing Optimal Nash Equilibria in Multiplayer
Games
Youzhi Zhang
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics
Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation
Chinese Academy of Sciences
youzhi.zhang@cair-cas.org.hk

Bo An
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University
Singnapore
boan@ntu.edu.sg

V. S. Subrahmanian
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
Evanston, USA
vss@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Designing efficient algorithms to compute a Nash Equilibrium (NE) in multiplayer
games is still an open challenge. In this paper, we focus on computing an NE
that optimizes a given objective function. For example, when there is a team of
players independently playing against an adversary in a game (e.g., several groups
in a forest trying to interdict illegal loggers in green security games), these team
members may need to find an NE minimizing the adversary’s utility. Finding an
optimal NE in multiplayer games can be formulated as a mixed-integer bilinear
program by introducing auxiliary variables to represent bilinear terms, leading
to a huge number of bilinear terms, making it hard to solve. To overcome this
challenge, we first propose a general framework for this formulation based on a set
of correlation plans. We then develop a novel algorithm called CRM based on this
framework, which uses Correlation plans with their Relations to restrict the feasible
solution space after the convex relaxation of bilinear terms while Minimizing the
number of correlation plans to reduce the number of bilinear terms. We show
that our techniques can significantly reduce the time complexity, and CRM can be
several orders of magnitude faster than the state-of-the-art baseline.

1

Introduction

One of the important problems in artificial intelligence is the design of algorithms for agents to make
decisions in interactive environments [33]. To this day, many results have been achieved in two-player
non-cooperative environments, for example, security games [39], the game of Go [38], and poker
games [6]. One of the most important solution concepts behind these results is the well-known
Nash Equilibrium (NE) [30]. Indeed, there are many efficient algorithms, e.g., algorithms based
on linear programs [42, 43, 37, 47, 48] or counterfactual regret minimization [56, 5], to compute
Nash equilibria (NEs) in two-player zero-sum games. However, there are fewer results on efficient
algorithms for NEs with theoretical guarantees in multiplayer games (see the discussion in [4]),
and most of these results are for games with particular structures (e.g., polymatrix games [7, 10]).
The main reason is that finding NEs in multiplayer games is hard — it is PPAD-complete even for
zero-sum three-player games [8]. Designing efficient algorithms to compute NEs in multiplayer
games is thus still an open challenge.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

