Smooth Flipping Probability for Differentially Private
Sign Random Projection Methods

Ping Li, Xiaoyun Li
LinkedIn Ads
700 Bellevue Way NE, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{pingli98, lixiaoyun996}@gmail.com

Abstract
We develop a series of differential privacy (DP) algorithms from a family of
random projection (RP) and sign random projection (SignRP) methods. We first
show how to improve the previous DP-RP approach using the “optimal Gaussian
mechanism”. Then, we propose a series of DP-SignRP algorithms that leverage
the robustness
Pp of the “sign flipping probability” of random projections. That is,
given x = i=1 ui wi where u is a p-dimensional data vector and w is a symmetric
random vector, sign(x) only has a fairly small probability to be flipped if there is
a small modification on data u, depending on the specific distribution of w. This
robustness leads to our novel design of “smooth flipping probability” for SignRPtype algorithms with better utility than using the standard randomized response
mechanism. Retrieval and classification experiments demonstrate that, among the
presented DP-RP algorithms, DP-SignOPORP (where OPORP is an improvement
over the celebrated count-sketch algorithms), performs the best in general.
In the industrial practice, DP methods were not very popular for machine learning
or search, largely because the performance typically would drop substantially if
DP is applied. Since our proposed new DP algorithms have significantly improved
the performance, it is anticipated that our work will motivate a wide adoption of
DP in practice. Finally, we stress that, since our methods are applied to the original
data (i.e., feature vectors), the privacy of downstream tasks is naturally protected.

1

Introduction

Protecting data privacy has become an urgent need and a trending research topic recently. Among
many notions of privacy, the “differential privacy” (DP) [30] has gained tremendous attention in both
the research community and industrial applications, and has been widely applied to numerous tasks
such as frequency estimation [32, 26], clustering [36, 34], regression and classification [14, 85], DPSGD [1, 35], principle component analysis [40], empirical risk minimization [15], graph analysis [33],
matrix completion [8, 45], etc. In a machine learning model, there are several choices on when to
deploy differential privacy (DP): (a) at the data collection/processing stage [84, 81, 5, 19]; (b) during
the model training stage [1, 78]; and (c) on the model output (or summary statistics) [29]. Among
them, applying DP as early as at the data collection stage provides strong protection in the sense
that the subsequent operations or outputs will become private by the post-processing property of DP.
Moreover, when the data holder needs to release the data to third-parties, a privacy-preserving data
publishing mechanism (at an early stage) becomes necessary.
In this paper, we focus on the differential privacy of the broad family of random projection (RP)
methods, including RP, sign random projections (SignRP) and count-sketch-type algorithm. Our
algorithms can be applied to data publishing and processing for downstream machine learning tasks.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

