Causes and Effects of Unanticipated Numerical
Deviations in Neural Network Inference Frameworks
Alexander Schlögl

Nora Hofer

Rainer Böhme

Department of Computer Science
Universität Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria
{alexander.schloegl | nora.hofer | rainer.boehme} @ uibk.ac.at

Abstract
Hardware-specific optimizations in machine learning (ML) frameworks can cause
numerical deviations of inference results. Quite surprisingly, despite using a fixed
trained model and fixed input data, inference results are not consistent across platforms, and sometimes not even deterministic on the same platform. We study the
causes of these numerical deviations for convolutional neural networks (CNN) on
realistic end-to-end inference pipelines and in isolated experiments. Results from
75 distinct platforms suggest that the main causes of deviations on CPUs are differences in SIMD use, and the selection of convolution algorithms at runtime on
GPUs. We link the causes and propagation effects to properties of the ML model
and evaluate potential mitigations. We make our research code publicly available.

1

Introduction

The “reproducibility crisis” machine learning is facing, and potentially fueling [18], has drawn attention to efforts that improve reproducibility. They include checklists [27] and guidelines [5; 33],
benchmarks designed with reproducibility in mind [10; 4; 22], reproducibility contests [32], and
repositories like PapersWithCode [30]. However, we find that even with a fully defined environment
and without stochastic processes, runtime optimizations of ML frameworks can cause deviations in
inference results. These are outside of researchers’ control, and cannot be fully avoided at present.
Uncontrolled numerical deviations are detrimental to many aspects of ML. If deviations occur systematically, key assumptions in federated learning [7; 25], heterogeneous ML [36], and proof-oflearning [11] may not hold. The fact that platforms leave fingerprints in the inference results opens
new possibilities for forensics [34]. Finally, numerical deviations have implications on ML security:
specifically crafted “boundary samples” may trigger label flips depending on the hardware [35].
To study the causes and effects of these deviations, we instrument the popular TensorFlow framework (version 2.5.0) on various layers. All our experiments are containerized and automatically
deployed and executed on 75 distinct hardware configurations hosted on the Google Cloud Platform
(GCP), Amazon Web Services (AWS), and on our premises. (Details of our setup are in Section B
of the supplementary material.) For a fixed trained model and input, the 75 platforms produced up to
26 different softmax vectors in the last layer. As label flips remain rare, the existence of deviations
is not apparent in typical performance metrics, such as test set accuracy.
We make three contributions:
1. We offer the so-far most comprehensive evaluation of causes and effects of (known) numerical deviations in CNN inference, spanning a wide range of heterogeneous platforms.
2. We are the first to associate causes of deviations with properties under control of the ML
engineer, such as floating-point precision, layer type, or activation function.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

