Pre-training Contextualized World Models with
In-the-wild Videos for Reinforcement Learning

Jialong Wu∗, Haoyu Ma∗, Chaoyi Deng, Mingsheng Long
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
wujialong0229@gmail.com, {mhy22,dengcy23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised pre-training methods utilizing large and diverse datasets have
achieved tremendous success across a range of domains. Recent work has investigated such unsupervised pre-training methods for model-based reinforcement
learning (MBRL) but is limited to domain-specific or simulated data. In this paper,
we study the problem of pre-training world models with abundant in-the-wild
videos for efficient learning of downstream visual control tasks. However, inthe-wild videos are complicated with various contextual factors, such as intricate
backgrounds and textured appearance, which precludes a world model from extracting shared world knowledge to generalize better. To tackle this issue, we introduce
Contextualized World Models (ContextWM) that explicitly separate context and
dynamics modeling to overcome the complexity and diversity of in-the-wild videos
and facilitate knowledge transfer between distinct scenes. Specifically, a contextualized extension of the latent dynamics model is elaborately realized by incorporating
a context encoder to retain contextual information and empower the image decoder,
which encourages the latent dynamics model to concentrate on essential temporal
variations. Our experiments show that in-the-wild video pre-training equipped with
ContextWM can significantly improve the sample efficiency of MBRL in various
domains, including robotic manipulation, locomotion, and autonomous driving.
Code is available at this repository: https://github.com/thuml/ContextWM.

1

Introduction

Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) holds the promise of sample-efficient learning for
visual control. Typically, a world model [20, 40] is learned to approximate state transitions and control
signals of the environment to generate imaginary trajectories for planning [22] or behavior learning
[71]. In the wake of revolutionary advances in deep learning, world models have been realized as
action-conditional video prediction models [34] or latent dynamics models [22, 21]. However, given
the expressiveness and complexity of deep neural networks, the sample efficiency of MBRL can still
be limited by the failure to learn an accurate and generalizable world model efficiently.
Pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm has been highly successful in computer vision [82, 26] and
natural language processing [57, 13] to fast adapt pre-trained representations for downstream tasks,
while learning tabula rasa is still dominant in MBRL. Recent work has taken the first step towards
pre-training a world model, named Action-free Pre-training from Videos (APV) [68]. However, it
has been conducted by pre-training on domain-specific and carefully simulated video datasets, rather
than abundant in-the-wild video data [17, 18, 30, 83]. Prior attempts of leveraging real-world video
data result in either underfitting for video pre-training or negligible benefits for downstream visual
control tasks [68]. Against this backdrop, we naturally ask the following question:
Can world models pre-trained on diverse in-the-wild videos benefit sample-efficient learning of
downstream visual control tasks?
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

