CORNN: Convex optimization of recurrent neural
networks for rapid inference of neural dynamics

Fatih Dinc∗
Department of Applied Physics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

Adam Shai∗
CNC Program
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

Mark J. Schnitzer†
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
CNC Program
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

Hidenori Tanaka†
Physics & Informatics Laboratories, NTT Research, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA 94085
Center for Brain Science, Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

Abstract
Advances in optical and electrophysiological recording technologies have made it
possible to record the dynamics of thousands of neurons, opening up new possibilities for interpreting and controlling large neural populations in behaving animals.
A promising way to extract computational principles from these large datasets is to
train data-constrained recurrent neural networks (dRNNs). Performing this training
in real-time could open doors for research techniques and medical applications to
model and control interventions at single-cell resolution and drive desired forms of
animal behavior. However, existing training algorithms for dRNNs are inefficient
and have limited scalability, making it a challenge to analyze large neural recordings even in offline scenarios. To address these issues, we introduce a training
method termed Convex Optimization of Recurrent Neural Networks (CORNN)1 . In
studies of simulated recordings, CORNN attained training speeds ∼100-fold faster
than traditional optimization approaches while maintaining or enhancing modeling
accuracy. We further validated CORNN on simulations with thousands of cells that
performed simple computations such as those of a 3-bit flip-flop or the execution of
a timed response. Finally, we showed that CORNN can robustly reproduce network
dynamics and underlying attractor structures despite mismatches between generator
and inference models, severe subsampling of observed neurons, or mismatches
in neural time-scales. Overall, by training dRNNs with millions of parameters in
subminute processing times on a standard computer, CORNN constitutes a first
step towards real-time network reproduction constrained on large-scale neural
recordings and a powerful computational tool for advancing the understanding of
neural computation.

1

Introduction

Understanding the relationship between neural dynamics and computational function is fundamental
to neuroscience research [1]. To infer computational structure from neural population dynamics,
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
These authors co-supervised this work.
1
CORNN software and reproduction code are available at https://github.com/schnitzer-lab/CORNN-public

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

