Accelerated Quasi-Newton Proximal Extragradient:
Faster Rate for Smooth Convex Optimization

Ruichen Jiang
ECE Department
The University of Texas at Austin
rjiang@utexas.edu

Aryan Mokhtari
ECE Department
The University of Texas at Austin
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we present an accelerated quasi-Newton proximal extragradient
method for solving unconstrained smooth convex optimization problems. With
access only to the gradients of the objective function,
we prove that our method
√

d log k
1
can achieve a convergence rate of O min{ k2 , k2.5 } , where d is the problem
dimension and k is the number of iterations. In particular, in the regime where k =
O(d), our method matches the optimal rate of O( k12 ) by Nesterov’s accelerated
gradient (NAG). Moreover, in the the regime
where k = Ω(d log d), it outperforms
√

log k
NAG and converges at a faster rate of O dk2.5
. To the best of our knowledge,
this result is the first to demonstrate a provable gain for a quasi-Newton-type
method over NAG in the convex setting. To achieve such results, we build our
method on a recent variant of the Monteiro-Svaiter acceleration framework and
adopt an online learning perspective to update the Hessian approximation matrices,
in which we relate the convergence rate of our method to the dynamic regret of a
specific online convex optimization problem in the space of matrices.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the following unconstrained convex minimization problem
min

x∈Rd

f (x),

(1)

where the objective function f : Rd → R is convex and differentiable. We are particularly interested
in quasi-Newton methods, which are among the most popular iterative methods for solving the
problem in (1) [1–8]. Like gradient descent and other first-order methods, quasi-Newton methods
require only the objective’s gradients to update the iterates. On the other hand, they can better
exploit the local curvature of f by constructing a Hessian approximation matrix and using it as
a preconditioner, leading to superior convergence performance. In particular, when the objective
function in (1) is strictly convex or strongly convex, it has long been proved that quasi-Newton
methods achieve an asymptotic superlinear convergence rate [7–15], which significantly improves
the linear convergence rate obtained by first-order methods. More recently,
√there has been progress
on establishing a local non-asymptotic superlinear rate of the form O((1/ k)k ) for classical quasiNewton methods and their variants [16–22].
However, all of the results above only apply under the restrictive assumption that the objective
function f is strictly or strongly convex. In the more general setting where f is merely convex, to the
best of our knowledge, there is no result that demonstrates any form of convergence improvement by
quasi-Newton methods over first-order methods. More precisely, it is well known that Nesterov’s
accelerated gradient (NAG) [23] can achieve a convergence rate of O(1/k 2 ) if f is convex and
has Lipschitz gradients. On the other hand, under the same setting, asymptotic convergence of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

