GSLB: The Graph Structure Learning Benchmark
Zhixun Li1 Liang Wang2,3 Xin Sun4 Yifan Luo5 Yanqiao Zhu6 Dingshuo Chen2,3
Yingtao Luo7 Xiangxin Zhou2,3 Qiang Liu2,3∗ Shu Wu2,3 Liang Wang2,3,4 Jeffrey Xu Yu1∗
1

Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China
5
School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
6
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
7
Heinz College of Information Systems and Public Policy, Machine Learning Department
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University

# Primary contact: zxli@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Graph Structure Learning (GSL) has recently garnered considerable attention due
to its ability to optimize both the parameters of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
and the computation graph structure simultaneously. Despite the proliferation of
GSL methods developed in recent years, there is no standard experimental setting
or fair comparison for performance evaluation, which creates a great obstacle to
understanding the progress in this field. To fill this gap, we systematically analyze
the performance of GSL in different scenarios and develop a comprehensive Graph
Structure Learning Benchmark (GSLB) curated from 20 diverse graph datasets
and 16 distinct GSL algorithms. Specifically, GSLB systematically investigates the
characteristics of GSL in terms of three dimensions: effectiveness, robustness, and
complexity. We comprehensively evaluate state-of-the-art GSL algorithms in nodeand graph-level tasks, and analyze their performance in robust learning and model
complexity. Further, to facilitate reproducible research, we have developed an
easy-to-use library for training, evaluating, and visualizing different GSL methods.
Empirical results of our extensive experiments demonstrate the ability of GSL
and reveal its potential benefits on various downstream tasks, offering insights
and opportunities for future research. The code of GSLB is available at: https:
//github.com/GSL-Benchmark/GSLB.

1

Introduction

Graphs, structures made of vertices and edges, are ubiquitous in real-world applications. A wide
variety of applications spanning social network [51, 9], molecular property prediction [40, 14], fake
news detection [45, 1], and fraud detection [23, 27] have found graphs instrumental in modeling
complex systems. In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have attracted increasing attention
due to their powerful ability to learn node or graph representations. However, most of the GNNs
heavily rely on the assumption that the initial structure of the graph is trustworthy enough to serve as
ground-truth for training. Due to uncertainty and complexity in data collection, graph structures are
inevitably redundant, biased, noisy, incomplete, or the original graph structures are even unavailable,
which will bring great challenges for the deployment of GNNs in real-world applications.
∗

Corresponding authors: Qiang Liu (qiang.liu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn), Jeffrey Xu Yu (yu@se.cuhk.edu.hk)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

