Online PCA in Converging
Self-consistent Field Equations

Xihan Li1 , Xiang Chen2 , Rasul Tutunov3 , Haitham Bou Ammar3 , Lei Wang4 , Jun Wang1
1
University College London 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Huawei R&D U.K.
4
Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{xihan.li,jun.wang}@cs.ucl.ac.uk
{xiangchen.ai,rasul.tutunov,haitham.ammar}@huawei.com
wanglei@iphy.ac.cn

Abstract
Self-consistent Field (SCF) equation is a type of nonlinear eigenvalue problem in
which the matrix to be eigen-decomposed is a function of its own eigenvectors. It is
of great significance in computational science for its connection to the Schrödinger
equation. Traditional fixed-point iteration methods for solving such equations
suffer from non-convergence issues. In this work, we present a novel perspective
on such SCF equations as a principal component analysis (PCA) for non-stationary
time series, in which a distribution and its own top principal components are mutually updated over time, and the equilibrium state of the model corresponds to the
solution of the SCF equations. By the new perspective, online PCA techniques are
able to engage in so as to enhance the convergence of the model towards the equilibrium state, acting as a new set of tools for converging the SCF equations. With
several numerical adaptations, we then develop a new algorithm for converging the
SCF equation, and demonstrated its high convergence capacity with experiments
on both synthesized and real electronic structure scenarios.

1

Introduction

In this work, we are concerned with the convergence issue of solving the following type of nonlinear
eigenvalue problem:
F (v)v = λv
(1)
in which F (v) is a given mapping from an N -dimensional unit vector to an N × N positive semidefinite matrix, λ is the largest eigenvalue of F (v), and v is the normalized eigenvector of F (v)
corresponding to λ. The core challenge of this problem is the involvement of self-consistency, that
is, the form of the eigenvalue equation (i.e., the matrix F (v) to be decomposed) is defined by its
final solution v, but the solution itself is not directly accessible unless the form of the equation is
given, which is a paradox. Such type of nonlinear eigenvalue problem is especially concerned in
computational science, since some variations of Equation (1) like Hartree-Fock equations [10, 11] and
Kohn-Sham equations [15, 19] are the foundation of electronic structure calculation by approximating
the Schrödinger equation, in which F (v) corresponds to the Fock operator approximating the
Hamiltonian operator of a quantum system, and the eigenvector v corresponds to the coefficients of an
orbital wave function under certain basis [33, 25]. Such equations are usually called “self-consistent
field (SCF) equations”.
However, like many other types of nonlinear equations, no existing numerical algorithms can solve
SCF equations with theoretical convergence guarantee, while many works are committed to improve
the practical “successful rate” for the solution to be converged. To be more specific, the iterative
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

