Neural Fields with Hard Constraints
of Arbitrary Differential Order

Fangcheng Zhong
University of Cambridge

Kyle Fogarty
University of Cambridge

Tianhao Wu
University of Cambridge

Alejandro Sztrajman
University of Cambridge

Andrea Tagliasacchi
Simon Fraser University

Petra Bosilj
University of Lincoln

Param Hanji
University of Cambridge
Andrew Spielberg
Harvard University
Cengiz Oztireli
University of Cambridge

Abstract
While deep learning techniques have become extremely popular for solving a
broad range of optimization problems, methods to enforce hard constraints during
optimization, particularly on deep neural networks, remain underdeveloped. Inspired by the rich literature on meshless interpolation and its extension to spectral
collocation methods in scientific computing, we develop a series of approaches
for enforcing hard constraints on neural fields, which we refer to as Constrained
Neural Fields (CNF). The constraints can be specified as a linear operator applied to the neural field and its derivatives. We also design specific model representations and training strategies for problems where standard models may
encounter difficulties, such as conditioning of the system, memory consumption,
and capacity of the network when being constrained. Our approaches are demonstrated in a wide range of real-world applications. Additionally, we develop a
framework that enables highly efficient model and constraint specification, which
can be readily applied to any downstream task where hard constraints need to
be explicitly satisfied during optimization. Source code is publicly available at
https://zfc946.github.io/CNF.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks serve as universal function approximators [10] and have achieved tremendous
success across a wide variety of tasks. Gradient-based learning algorithms enable optimizing the
parameters of networks to approximate any desired model. However, despite the existence of
numerous advanced optimization algorithms, the issue of enforcing strict equality constraints during
training has not been sufficiently addressed. Constrained optimization has a broad spectrum of
real-world applications. For example, in trajectory optimization ([38][Chapter 10], and, e.g., [4, 29]),
the agent poses at the start, end, and potentially intermediate steps are to be explicitly enforced. In
signal representation, it is desirable for the continuous model to interpolate the discrete samples [22].
In physics, the models of interest must comply with fundamental physical principles [14, 27].
Applying traditional solvers for general constrained optimization, such as SQP [26], to neural
networks can be nontrivial. Since traditional methods express constraints as a function of learnable
parameters, this formulation becomes extremely high-dimensional, nonlinear, and non-convex in the
context of neural networks. As the number of constraints increases, the computational complexity
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

