Facilitating Graph Neural Networks with Random
Walk on Simplicial Complexes

Cai Zhou
Tsinghua University
zhouc20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Xiyuan Wang
Peking University
wangxiyuan@pku.edu.cn

Muhan Zhang
Peking University
muhan@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Node-level random walk has been widely used to improve Graph Neural Networks.
However, there is limited attention to random walk on edges and, more generally, on k-simplices. This paper systematically analyzes how random walk on
different orders of simplicial complexes (SC) facilitates GNNs in their theoretical expressivity. First, on 0-simplices or node level, we establish a connection
between existing positional encoding (PE) and structure encoding (SE) methods
through the bridge of random walk. Second, on 1-simplices or edge level, we
bridge edge-level random walk and Hodge 1-Laplacians and design corresponding
edge PE respectively. In the spatial domain, we directly make use of edge level
random walk to construct EdgeRWSE. Based on the spectral analysis of Hodge
1-Laplcians, we propose Hodge1Lap, a permutation equivariant and expressive
edge-level positional encoding. Third, we generalize our theory to random walk on
higher-order simplices and propose the general principle to design PE on simplices
based on random walk and Hodge Laplacians. Inter-level random walk is also
introduced to unify a wide range of simplicial networks. Extensive experiments
verify the effectiveness of our random walk-based methods.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently achieved great success in tasks with graph-structured
data, benefiting many theoretical application areas, including combinatorial optimization, bioinformatics, social-network analysis, etc. [11, 29, 16]. Two important aspects to evaluate GNN
models are their theoretical expressivity in distinguishing non-isomorphic graphs, and their performance on real-world tasks. Positional encoding (PE) and structure encoding (SE) are widely adopted
methods to enhance both theoretical expressivity and real-world performance of GNNs. Generally,
PE encodes the information of the nodes’ local or global positions, while SE provides information
about local or global structures in the graph. For example, Kreuzer et al. [30] uses eigenvectors of
the graph Laplacian, Dwivedi et al. [18] proposes to use diagonal elements of the t-step random
walk matrix, and Bouritsas et al. [9] manually count some predefined structures. There are also some
methods based on pair-wise node distances, such as the shortest path distance [31], the heat kernel
[20], and the graph geodesic [35]. Although some work theoretically analyzes some of these methods
[51], there are still some left-out methods, and people lack a unified perspective to view all these PE
and SE designs. Moreover, most existing methods focus only on node data, while PE and SE on edge
data as well as some higher-order topological structures are waited to be studied.
In addition to PE and SE, geometric deep learning has recently become a central topic. Researchers are
inspired by concepts of differential geometry and algebraic topology, which resulted in many works
on simplices and simplicial complexes [8, 7, 47]. Despite their capability to deal with higher-order
structures, these simplicial networks should follow orientation symmetry, which brings difficulties in
their applications in undirected graphs. This work connects these two separate areas via a central
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

