Sharp Recovery Thresholds of
Tensor PCA Spectral Algorithms

David L. Donoho
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
donoho@stanford.edu

Michael J. Feldman
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
feldman6@stanford.edu

Abstract
Many applications seek to recover low-rank approximations of noisy tensor data.
We consider several practical and effective matricization strategies which construct
specific matrices from such tensors and then apply spectral methods; the strategies
include tensor unfolding, partial tracing, power iteration, and recursive unfolding.
We settle the behaviors of unfolding and partial tracing, identifying sharp thresholds
in signal-to-noise ratio above which the signal is partially recovered. In particular,
we extend previous results to a much larger class of tensor shapes where axis
lengths may be different. For power iteration and recursive unfolding, we prove
that under conditions where previous algorithms partially recovery the signal, these
methods achieve (asymptotically) exact recovery. Our analysis deploys random
matrix theory to obtain sharp thresholds which elude perturbation and concentration
bounds. Specifically, we rely upon recent disproportionate random matrix results,
which describe sequences of matrices with diverging aspect ratio.

1

Introduction

Tensors—multi-way arrays—and tensor methods are fundamental to modern data analysis. Data
given by three or more indices are increasingly the focus in diverse areas including signal and image
processing [9, 19, 22], while high-order moments represented by tensors are of interest in problems
such as community detection and learning latent variable models [1, 2, 8].
The spiked tensor model, introduced by Montanari and Richard [20], is a simple statistical model of
tensor data with latent low-rank structure. Observed data X of dimensions n1 × n2 × · · · × nk are
the sum of a low-rank tensor and noise:
Xi1 ,i2 ,...,ik = λv1,i1 v2,i2 · · · vk,ik + Zi1 ,i2 ,...,ik ,
j ∈ [k], ij ∈ [nj ] ,
(1)
where k ≥ 2 is the tensor order, λ is a signal strength, vj ∈ Snj −1 , j ∈ [k], are unit vectors, and Z is
a noise tensor. Noise entries are assumed to be independent standard Gaussians:
i.i.d

Zi1 ,i2 ,...,ik ∼ N (0, 1) ,
j ∈ [k], ij ∈ [nj ] .
Estimation of v1 , . . . , vk and the low-rank component of X generalizes to tensors the problem of
low-rank matrix approximation—principal component analysis (PCA)—and is therefore known as
tensor PCA.
This model reduces for k = 2 to the spiked matrix model, with maximum likelihood estimators of
v1 and v2 given by the first left and right singular vectors v̂1 and v̂2 of X, respectively. For k ≥ 3,
however, computation of the maximum likelihood estimators of the low rank component amounts to
solving an NP hard problem (Hillar and Lim [14]),
X
sup
Xi1 ,i2 ,...,ik u1,i1 · · · uk,ik ,
(2)
j∈[k],uj ∈Sj−1 i ,...,i
1

k

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

