Distributionally Robust Ensemble of Lottery Tickets
Towards Calibrated Sparse Network Training

Hitesh Sapkota Dingrong Wang Zhiqiang Tao
Rochester Institute of Technology

Qi Yu ∗

{hxs1943, dw7445, zhiqiang.tao, qi.yu}@rit.edu

Abstract
The recently developed sparse network training methods, such as Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) and its variants, have shown impressive learning capacity by finding
sparse sub-networks from a dense one. While these methods could largely sparsify
deep networks, they generally focus more on realizing comparable accuracy to
dense counterparts yet neglect network calibration. However, how to achieve calibrated network predictions lies at the core of improving model reliability, especially
when it comes to addressing the overconfident issue and out-of-distribution cases.
In this study, we propose a novel Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO)
framework to achieve an ensemble of lottery tickets towards calibrated network
sparsification. Specifically, the proposed DRO ensemble aims to learn multiple
diverse and complementary sparse sub-networks (tickets) with the guidance of
uncertainty sets, which encourage tickets to gradually capture different data distributions from easy to hard and naturally complement each other. We theoretically
justify the strong calibration performance by showing how the proposed robust
training process guarantees to lower the confidence of incorrect predictions. Extensive experimental results on several benchmarks show that our proposed lottery
ticket ensemble leads to a clear calibration improvement without sacrificing accuracy and burdening inference costs. Furthermore, experiments on OOD datasets
demonstrate the robustness of our approach in the open-set environment.

1

Introduction

While there is remarkable progress in developing deep neural networks with densely connected layers,
most of these dense networks have poor calibration performance [9], limiting their applicability in
safety-critical domains like self-driving cars [4] and medical diagnosis [11]. The poor calibration
is mainly due to the fact that there exists a good number of wrongly classified data samples (i.e.,
low accuracy) with high confidence resulting from the memorization effect introduced by an overparameterized architecture [27]. Recent sparse network training methods, such as Lottery Ticket
Hypothesis (LTH) [6] and its variants [3, 2, 38, 18, 16, 35] generally assume that there exists a
sparse sub-network (i.e., lottery ticket) in a randomly initialized dense network, which could be
trained in isolation and also match the performance of its dense counterpart network in terms of
accuracy. While these methods may, to some extent, alleviate the overconfident issue, most of them
require pre-training of a dense network followed by multi-step iterative pruning, making the overall
training process highly costly, especially for large dense networks. Even for techniques that do not
rely on pre-training and iterative pruning (e.g., Edge Popup or EP [25]), their learning goal focuses
on pushing the accuracy up to the original dense networks and hence may still exhibit a severely
over-fitting behavior, leading to a poor calibration performance as demonstrated in Figure 1 (b).
Inspired by the recent success of using ensembles to estimate uncertainties [13, 34], a potential
solution to realize well-calibrated predictions would be training multiple sparse sub-networks and
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

