Understanding and Improving Feature Learning for
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Yongqiang Chen1∗, Wei Huang2∗, Kaiwen Zhou1∗
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 RIKEN AIP
{yqchen,kwzhou,jcheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk wei.huang.vr@riken.jp
1

Yatao Bian3 , Bo Han4 , James Cheng1
Tencent AI Lab 4 Hong Kong Baptist University
yatao.bian@gmail.com bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
3

Abstract
A common explanation for the failure of out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization
is that the model trained with empirical risk minimization (ERM) learns spurious
features instead of invariant features. However, several recent studies challenged
this explanation and found that deep networks may have already learned sufficiently
good features for OOD generalization. Despite the contradictions at first glance, we
theoretically show that ERM essentially learns both spurious and invariant features,
while ERM tends to learn spurious features faster if the spurious correlation is
stronger. Moreover, when fed the ERM learned features to the OOD objectives, the
invariant feature learning quality significantly affects the final OOD performance,
as OOD objectives rarely learn new features. Therefore, ERM feature learning
can be a bottleneck to OOD generalization. To alleviate the reliance, we propose
Feature Augmented Training (FeAT), to enforce the model to learn richer features
ready for OOD generalization. FeAT iteratively augments the model to learn new
features while retaining the already learned features. In each round, the retention
and augmentation operations are performed on different subsets of the training data
that capture distinct features. Extensive experiments show that FeAT effectively
learns richer features thus boosting the performance of various OOD objectives1 .

1

Introduction

Understanding feature learning in neural networks is crucial to understanding how they generalize to
different data distributions [2, 11, 12, 62, 67, 70]. Deep networks trained with empirical risk minimization (ERM) learn highly predictive features that generalize surprisingly well to in-distribution
(ID) data [24, 75]. However, ERM also tends to learn spurious features or shortcuts such as image
backgrounds [7, 19, 23, 84] whose correlations with labels do not hold in the out-of-distribution
(OOD) data, and suffers from serious performance degeneration [39]. Therefore, it is widely believed
that the reason for the OOD failures of deep networks is that ERM fails to learn the desired features
that have invariant correlations with labels across different distributions [7].
However, several recent works find that ERM-trained models have already learned sufficiently good
features that are able to generalize to OOD data [33, 38, 63]. In addition, when optimizing various
penalty terms [1, 15, 40, 41, 53, 55, 57, 61, 69, 76, 85] that aim to regularize ERM to capture the
invariant features (termed as OOD objectives), there also exists a curious phenomenon that the
∗
1

Equal Contribution. Work done during Yongqiang’s internship at Tencent AI Lab.
Code is available at https://github.com/LFhase/FeAT.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

