Statistically Valid Variable Importance Assessment
through Conditional Permutations

Ahmad Chamma
Inria, Universite Paris Saclay, CEA
ahmad.chamma@inria.fr

Denis A. Engemann
Roche Pharma Research and Early Development,
Neuroscience and Rare Diseases,
Roche Innovation Center Basel,
F. Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland
denis.engemann@roche.com

Bertrand Thirion
Inria, Universite Paris Saclay, CEA
bertrand.thirion@inria.fr

Abstract
Variable importance assessment has become a crucial step in machine-learning
applications when using complex learners, such as deep neural networks, on
large-scale data. Removal-based importance assessment is currently the reference
approach, particularly when statistical guarantees are sought to justify variable
inclusion. It is often implemented with variable permutation schemes. On the flip
side, these approaches risk misidentifying unimportant variables as important in the
presence of correlations among covariates. Here we develop a systematic approach
for studying Conditional Permutation Importance (CPI) that is model agnostic and
computationally lean, as well as reusable benchmarks of state-of-the-art variable
importance estimators. We show theoretically and empirically that CPI overcomes
the limitations of standard permutation importance by providing accurate type-I
error control. When used with a deep neural network, CPI consistently showed top
accuracy across benchmarks. An experiment on real-world data analysis in a largescale medical dataset showed that CPI provides a more parsimonious selection of
statistically significant variables. Our results suggest that CPI can be readily used
as drop-in replacement for permutation-based methods.

1

Introduction

Machine learning is an area of growing interest for biomedical research [Iniesta et al., 2016, Taylor
and Tibshirani, 2015, Malley et al., 2011] for predicting biomedical outcomes from heterogeneous
inputs [Hung et al., 2020, Zheng and Agresti, 2000, Giorgio et al., 2022, Sechidis et al., 2021].
Biomarker development is increasingly focusing on multimodal data including brain images, genetics,
biological specimens and behavioral data [Coravos et al., 2019, Siebert, 2011, Ye et al., 2008, CastilloBarnes et al., 2018, Yang et al., 2022]. Such high-dimensional settings with correlated inputs put
strong pressure on model identification. With complex, often nonlinear models, it becomes harder
to assess the role of features in the prediction, aka variable importance [Casalicchio et al., 2019,
Altmann et al., 2010]. In epidemiological and clinical studies, one is interested in population-level
feature importance, as opposed to instance-level feature importance.
In that context, variable importance is understood as conditional importance, meaning that it measures
the information carried by one variable on the outcome given the others, as opposed to the easily
accessible marginal importance of the variables. Conditional importance is necessary e.g. to assess
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

