Towards Stable Backdoor Purification through Feature
Shift Tuning

1

Rui Min1* , Zeyu Qin1* , Li Shen2 , Minhao Cheng1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, HKUST
2
JD Explore Academy
{rminaa, zeyu.qin}@connect.ust.hk
mathshenli@gmail.com
minhaocheng@ust.hk

Abstract
It has been widely observed that deep neural networks (DNN) are vulnerable to
backdoor attacks where attackers could manipulate the model behavior maliciously
by tampering with a small set of training samples. Although a line of defense methods is proposed to mitigate this threat, they either require complicated modifications
to the training process or heavily rely on the specific model architecture, which
makes them hard to deploy into real-world applications. Therefore, in this paper,
we instead start with fine-tuning, one of the most common and easy-to-deploy
backdoor defenses, through comprehensive evaluations against diverse attack scenarios. Observations made through initial experiments show that in contrast to the
promising defensive results on high poisoning rates, vanilla tuning methods completely fail at low poisoning rate scenarios. Our analysis shows that with the low
poisoning rate, the entanglement between backdoor and clean features undermines
the effect of tuning-based defenses. Therefore, it is necessary to disentangle the
backdoor and clean features in order to improve backdoor purification. To address
this, we introduce Feature Shift Tuning (FST), a method for tuning-based backdoor
purification. Specifically, FST encourages feature shifts by actively deviating the
classifier weights from the originally compromised weights. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our FST provides consistently stable performance under different attack settings. Without complex parameter adjustments, FST also achieves
much lower tuning costs, only 10 epochs. Our codes are available at https:
//github.com/AISafety-HKUST/stable_backdoor_purification.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are shown vulnerable to various security threats. One of the main security issues is backdoor attack [6, 9, 10] that inserts malicious backdoors into DNNs by manipulating
the training data or controlling the training process.
To alleviate backdoor threats, many defense methods [36] have been proposed, such as robust training
[13, 17, 38] and post-processing purification methods [20, 37, 41]. However, robust training methods
require complex modifications to model training process [13, 38], resulting in substantially increased
training costs, particularly for large models. Pruning-based purification methods are sensitive to
hyperparameters and model architecture [37, 41], which makes them hard to deploy in real-world
applications.
* Equal contribution. Email to zeyu.qin@connect.ust.hk

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

