Persuading Farsighted Receivers in MDPs:
the Power of Honesty

Martino Bernasconi∗
Bocconi University
martino.bernasconi@unibocconi.it

Matteo Castiglioni
Politecnico di Milano
matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it

Alberto Marchesi
Politecnico di Milano
alberto.marchesi@polimi.it

Mirco Mutti∗
Technion
mirco.m@technion.ac.il

Abstract
Bayesian persuasion studies the problem faced by an informed sender who strategically discloses information to influence the behavior of an uninformed receiver.
Recently, a growing attention has been devoted to settings where the sender and
the receiver interact sequentially, in which the receiver’s decision-making problem
is usually modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP). However, previous works
focused on computing optimal information-revelation policies (a.k.a. signaling
schemes) under the restrictive assumption that the receiver acts myopically, selecting actions to maximize the one-step reward and disregarding future rewards. This
is justified by the fact that, when the receiver is farsighted and thus considers future
rewards, finding an optimal Markovian signaling scheme is NP-hard. In this paper,
we show that Markovian signaling schemes do not constitute the “right” class of
policies. Indeed, differently from most of the MDPs settings, we prove that Markovian signaling schemes are not optimal, and general history-dependent signaling
schemes should be considered. Moreover, we also show that history-dependent
signaling schemes circumvent the negative complexity results affecting Markovian
signaling schemes. Formally, we design an algorithm that computes an optimal
and -persuasive history-dependent signaling scheme in time polynomial in 1/
and in the instance size. The crucial challenge is that general history-dependent
signaling schemes cannot be represented in polynomial space. Nevertheless, we
introduce a convenient subclass of history-dependent signaling schemes, called
promise-form, which are as powerful as general history-dependent ones and efficiently representable. Intuitively, promise-form signaling schemes compactly
encode histories in the form of honest promises on future receiver’s rewards.

1

Introduction

Bayesian persuasion [Kamenica and Gentzkow, 2011] is the problem faced by an informed sender
who wants to influence the behavior of an uninformed, self-interested receiver through the provision
of payoff relevant information. Bayesian persuasion captures many fundamental problems arising in
real-world applications, e.g., online advertising [Bro Miltersen and Sheffet, 2012], voting [Alonso and
Câmara, 2016, Castiglioni et al., 2020a, Castiglioni and Gatti, 2021], traffic routing [Bhaskar et al.,
2016, Castiglioni et al., 2021a], recommendation systems [Mansour et al., 2016], security [Rabinovich
et al., 2015, Xu et al., 2016], marketing [Babichenko and Barman, 2017, Candogan, 2019], medical
research [Kolotilin, 2015], and financial regulation [Goldstein and Leitner, 2018].
∗

Work done while the author was at Politecnico di Milano.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

