Improved Algorithms for Stochastic Linear Bandits
Using Tail Bounds for Martingale Mixtures

Hamish Flynn1,2 , David Reeb1 , Melih Kandemir3 , Jan Peters2,4
1
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany
2
Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany
3
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
4
Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Künstliche Intelligenz (DFKI), Germany
hamish@robot-learning.de, david.reeb@de.bosch.com,
kandemir@imada.sdu.dk, jan.peters@tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
We present improved algorithms with worst-case regret guarantees for the stochastic linear bandit problem. The widely used “optimism in the face of uncertainty”
principle reduces a stochastic bandit problem to the construction of a confidence
sequence for the unknown reward function. The performance of the resulting bandit
algorithm depends on the size of the confidence sequence, with smaller confidence
sets yielding better empirical performance and stronger regret guarantees. In this
work, we use a novel tail bound for adaptive martingale mixtures to construct
confidence sequences which are suitable for stochastic bandits. These confidence
sequences allow for efficient action selection via convex programming. We prove
that a linear bandit algorithm based on our confidence sequences is guaranteed to
achieve competitive worst-case regret. We show that our confidence sequences are
tighter than competitors, both empirically and theoretically. Finally, we demonstrate that our tighter confidence sequences give improved performance in several
hyperparameter tuning tasks.

1

Introduction

The stochastic linear bandit problem is a sequential decision-making problem where, in each round
t, a learner chooses an action at and then receives a stochastic reward rt for its choice of action.
The expected value of each reward is a linear function ϕ(at )⊤ θ ∗ of a known feature vector ϕ(at )
associated with the corresponding action, while θ ∗ is unknown. The linear bandit problem has
attracted a great deal of attention because it is expressive enough to be a faithful model of many
real-world decision-making problems, such as news recommendation (Li et al., 2010) and dynamic
pricing (Cohen et al., 2020), yet it is simple enough to make theoretical analysis tractable.
A popular way to design algorithms for linear bandits is to follow the principle of optimism in the
face of uncertainty. This principle states that we should choose actions as if the expected reward
function is as nice as plausibly possible. For linear bandits, the principle can be instantiated with a
confidence sequence Θ0 , Θ1 , . . . for the parameter vector θ ∗ ∈ Θ of the expected reward function. A
confidence sequence is a sequence of subsets of the full parameter space Θ, which is built iteratively
as data becomes available and is constructed such that with high probability over the observed data,
θ ∗ is contained in each confidence set Θt . One can then run an upper confidence bound
 (UCB)
algorithm, which at round t chooses an action at+1 by maximising the UCB maxθ∈Θt ϕ(a)⊤ θ
with respect to a.
The popularity of UCB algorithms stems from the fact that they come with worst-case regret guarantees and often perform well in practice. However, the performance of a UCB algorithm is intimately
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

