Tackling Heavy-Tailed Rewards in Reinforcement
Learning with Function Approximation: Minimax
Optimal and Instance-Dependent Regret Bounds

Jiayi Huang1

Han Zhong1
Liwei Wang1,2
Lin F. Yang3
Center for Data Science, Peking University
2
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
University of California, Los Angeles
{jyhuang, hanzhong}@stu.pku.edu.cn,
wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn, linyang@ee.ucla.edu
1

Abstract
While numerous works have focused on devising efficient algorithms for reinforcement learning (RL) with uniformly bounded rewards, it remains an open question
whether sample or time-efficient algorithms for RL with large state-action space
exist when the rewards are heavy-tailed, i.e., with only finite (1 + ϵ)-th moments
for some ϵ ∈ (0, 1]. In this work, we address the challenge of such rewards in RL
with linear function approximation. We first design an algorithm, H EAVY-OFUL,
for heavy-tailed
an instance-dependent T -round regret of
qPlinear bandits, achieving
1−ϵ
1−ϵ 
T
2
e
2(1+ϵ)
2(1+ϵ)
O dT
, the first of this kind. Here, d is the feature
t=1 νt + dT
dimension, and νt1+ϵ is the (1 + ϵ)-th central moment of the reward at the t-th
round. We further show the above bound is minimax optimal when applied to the
worst-case instances in stochastic and deterministic linear bandits. We then extend
this algorithm to the RL settings with linear function approximation. Our algorithm, termed as H EAVY-LSVI-UCB, achieves
efficient
√ the first1 computationally
√
∗
∗
e
1+ϵ
instance-dependent K-episode regret of O(d HU K
+ d HV K). Here, H
is length of the episode, and U ∗ , V ∗ are instance-dependent quantities scaling with
the central moment of reward and value functions, respectively.
We also provide
√
1
3
1+ϵ
a matching minimax lower bound Ω(dHK
+ d H K) to demonstrate the
optimality of our algorithm in the worst case. Our result is achieved via a novel
robust self-normalized concentration inequality that may be of independent interest
in handling heavy-tailed noise in general online regression problems.

1

Introduction

Designing efficient reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms for large state-action space is a significant
challenge within the RL community. A crucial aspect of RL is understanding the reward functions,
which directly impacts the quality of the agent’s policy. In certain real-world situations, reward
distributions may exhibit heavy-tailed behavior, characterized by the occurrence of extremely large
values at a higher frequency than expected in a normal distribution. Examples include image noise
in signal processing [14], stock price fluctuations in financial markets [12, 18], and value functions
in online advertising [11, 19]. However, much of the existing RL literature assumes rewards to be
either uniformly bounded or light-tailed (e.g., sub-Gaussian). In such light-tailed settings, the primary
challenge lies in learning the transition probabilities, leading most studies to assume deterministic
rewards for ease of analysis [5, 22, 15]. As we will demonstrate, the complexity of learning reward
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

