Layer-Neighbor Sampling — Defusing Neighborhood
Explosion in GNNs

Muhammed Fatih Balın∗†
balin@gatech.edu

Ümit V. Çatalyürek‡ †
umit@gatech.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have received significant attention recently, but
training them at a large scale remains a challenge. Mini-batch training coupled
with sampling is used to alleviate this challenge. However, existing approaches
either suffer from the neighborhood explosion phenomenon or have suboptimal
performance. To address these issues, we propose a new sampling algorithm called
LAyer-neighBOR sampling (LABOR). It is designed to be a direct replacement for
Neighbor Sampling (NS) with the same fanout hyperparameter while sampling up
to 7 times fewer vertices, without sacrificing quality. By design, the variance of
the estimator of each vertex matches NS from the point of view of a single vertex.
Moreover, under the same vertex sampling budget constraints, LABOR converges
faster than existing layer sampling approaches and can use up to 112 times larger
batch sizes compared to NS.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNN) [Hamilton et al., 2017, Kipf and Welling, 2017] have become de
facto models for representation learning on graph-structured data. Hence they have started being
deployed in production systems [Ying et al., 2018, Niu et al., 2020]. These models iteratively
update the node embeddings by passing messages along the direction of the edges in the given graph
with nonlinearities between different layers. With l layers, the computed node embeddings contain
information from the l-hop neighborhood of the seed vertex.
In the production setting, the GNN models need to be trained on billion-scale graphs [Ching et al.,
2015, Ying et al., 2018]. The training of these models takes hours to days even on distributed
systems [Zheng et al., 2022b,a]. As in general Deep Neural Networks (DNN), it is more efficient to
use mini-batch training [Bertsekas, 1994] on GNNs, even though it is a bit trickier in this case. The
node embeddings in GNNs depend recursively on their set of neighbors’ embeddings, so when there
are l layers, this dependency spans the l-hop neighborhood of the node. Real-world graphs usually
have a very small diameter and if l is large, the l-hop neighborhood may very well span the entire
graph, also known as the Neighborhood Explosion Phenomenon (NEP) [Zeng et al., 2020].
To solve these issues, researchers proposed sampling a subgraph of the l-hop neighborhood of the
nodes in the batch. There are mainly three different approaches: Node-based, Layer-based and
Subgraph-based methods. Node-based sampling methods [Hamilton et al., 2017, Chen et al., 2018a,
Liu et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2021] sample independently and recursively for each node. It was
noticed that node-based methods sample subgraphs that are too shallow, i.e., with a low ratio of
number of edges to nodes. Thus layer-based sampling methods were proposed [Chen et al., 2018b,
∗

Part of the GPU acceleration in this work was implemented during an internship at NVIDIA Corporation.
School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
‡
Amazon Web Services. This publication describes work performed at the Georgia Institute of Technology
and is not associated with AWS.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

