Combating Representation Learning Disparity with
Geometric Harmonization
Zhihan Zhou1 Jiangchao Yao1,2† Feng Hong1 Ya Zhang1,2 Bo Han3 Yanfeng Wang1,2†
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Hong Kong Baptist University
{zhihanzhou, Sunarker, feng.hong, ya zhang, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn
bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) as an effective paradigm of representation learning
has achieved tremendous success on various curated datasets in diverse scenarios.
Nevertheless, when facing the long-tailed distribution in real-world applications,
it is still hard for existing methods to capture transferable and robust representation. Conventional SSL methods, pursuing sample-level uniformity, easily leads to
representation learning disparity where head classes dominate the feature regime
but tail classes passively collapse. To address this problem, we propose a novel
Geometric Harmonization (GH) method to encourage category-level uniformity in
representation learning, which is more benign to the minority and almost does not
hurt the majority under long-tailed distribution. Specially, GH measures the population statistics of the embedding space on top of self-supervised learning, and
then infer an fine-grained instance-wise calibration to constrain the space expansion of head classes and avoid the passive collapse of tail classes. Our proposal
does not alter the setting of SSL and can be easily integrated into existing methods
in a low-cost manner. Extensive results on a range of benchmark datasets show
the effectiveness of GH with high tolerance to the distribution skewness. Our code
is available at https://github.com/MediaBrain-SJTU/Geometric-Harmonization.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a great success of self-supervised learning to learn generalizable representation [7, 9, 15, 63]. Such rapid advances mainly benefit from the elegant training on the labelfree data, which can be collected in a large volume. However, the real-world natural sources usually
exhibit the long-tailed distribution [50], and directly learning representation on them can lead to the
distortion issue of the embedding space, namely, the majority dominates the feature regime [75]
and the minority collapses [47]. Thus, it becomes urgent to pay attention to representation learning
disparity, especially as fairness of machine learning draws increasing attention [28, 41, 68, 77].
Different from the flourishing supervised long-tailed learning [29, 46, 68], self-supervised learning
under long-tailed distributions is still under-explored, since there is no labels available for the calibration. Existing explorations to overcome this challenge mainly resort to the possible tailed sample
discovery and provide the implicit bias to representation learning. For example, BCL [77] leverages
the memorization discrepancy of deep neural networks (DNNs) on unknown head classes and tail
classes to drive an instance-wise augmentation. SDCLR [28] contrasts the feature encoder and its
pruned counterpart to discover hard examples that mostly covers the samples from tail classes, and
efficiently enhance the learning preference towards tailed samples. DnC [59] resorts to a divideand-conquer methodology to mitigate the data-intrinsic heterogeneity and avoid the representation
† The corresponding authors are Jiangchao Yao and Yanfeng Wang.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

