Invariant Anomaly Detection under
Distribution Shifts: A Causal Perspective

João B. S. Carvalho, Mengtao Zhang, Robin Geyer, Carlos Cotrini, Joachim M. Buhmann
Institute for Machine Learning
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
{joao.carvalho, mengtao.zhang, robin.geyer, ccarlos, jbuhmann}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Anomaly detection (AD) is the machine learning task of identifying highly discrepant abnormal samples by solely relying on the consistency of the normal
training samples. Under the constraints of a distribution shift, the assumption that
training samples and test samples are drawn from the same distribution breaks down.
In this work, by leveraging tools from causal inference we attempt to increase the
resilience of anomaly detection models to different kinds of distribution shifts. We
begin by elucidating a simple yet necessary statistical property that ensures invariant representations, which is critical for robust AD under both domain and covariate
shifts. From this property, we derive a regularization term which, when minimized,
leads to partial distribution invariance across environments. Through extensive
experimental evaluation on both synthetic and real-world tasks, covering a range
of six different AD methods, we demonstrated significant improvements in out-ofdistribution performance. Under both covariate and domain shift, models regularized with our proposed term showed marked increased robustness. Code is available
at: https://github.com/JoaoCarv/invariant-anomaly-detection.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detectors are the subject of increased interest in fields such as finance (Ahmed et al. [2016],
Hilal et al. [2022]), medicine (Schlegl et al. [2019]), and security (Mothukuri et al. [2021], Siddiqui
et al. [2019], Hosseinzadeh et al. [2021]). Having been trained on a sample from an unknown
distribution, these models are capable of identifying abnormal objects unlikely to come from the
original distribution (Bishop and Nasrabadi [2006]). Anomaly detection (AD) stands apart from
supervised classification as it does not involve anomalies during training, making it challenging to
articulate a model that depicts the class of objects deemed as normal.
AD as a field boasts a plethora of diverse methodologies (Ruff et al. [2021]). Current detectors have
demonstrated the advantage of approaches based on representation learning (Reiss and Hoshen [2021],
Deng and Li [2022]). In this context, an encoder maps objects to representations which capture the
most distinctive features of an object. In addition, it strives to map the class of normal objects onto
a subset characterized by a more regular shape, thereby rendering representations from abnormal
samples easily identifiable by comparison. Central to this second goal is a notable vulnerability of
representation learning-based methods: they hinge on the assumption of independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) training and test data. This implies that normal samples in the training data are expected to be sampled identically in the test data, thereby being mapped to the same vicinity in the representation space - an assumption that is frequently violated in real-world scenarios (Koh et al. [2021]).
Indeed, distribution shifts in the context of AD present a unique challenge because it involves discerning two types of distribution shifts targeting the distribution of the normal objects, pn . Anomalies
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

