REFINE: A Fine-Grained Medication
Recommendation System Using Deep Learning and
Personalized Drug Interaction Modeling

Suman Bhoi1
1

Mong Li Lee1

Wynne Hsu1

National University of Singapore

2

Ngiap Chuan Tan2

SingHealth Polyclinics

sumanbhoi@u.nus.edu, {leeml,whsu}@comp.nus.edu.sg, tan.ngiap.chuan@singhealth.com.sg

Abstract
Patients with co-morbidities often require multiple medications to manage their
conditions. However, existing medication recommendation systems only offer classlevel medications and regard all interactions among drugs to have the same level of
severity. This limits their ability to provide personalized and safe recommendations
tailored to individual needs. In this work, we introduce a deep learning-based finegrained medication recommendation system called REFINE, which is designed to
improve treatment outcomes and minimize adverse drug interactions. In order to
better characterize patient’s health conditions, we model the trend in medication
dosage titrations and lab test responses, and adapt the vision transformer to obtain
effective patient representations. We also model drug interaction severity levels
as weighted graphs to learn safe drug combinations and design a balanced loss
function to avoid overly conservative recommendations and miss medications that
might be needed for certain conditions. Extensive experiments on two real-world
datasets shows that REFINE outperforms state-of-the-art techniques.

1

Introduction

The widespread adoption of digital patient records in hospitals has led to the creation of a rich knowledge base in the form of Electronic Health Records (EHR). This valuable resource can be utilized for
various tasks in the medical domain, such as mortality prediction [19], outcome prediction [14], and
medication recommendation [16, 2]. Concurrently, advances in drug therapy have resulted in growing
interest in research aimed at enabling personalized and safe treatment recommendations for managing
patient conditions. Current medication recommendation systems are coarse-grained, providing recommendation at the class level rather than individual drugs, and are unable to differentiate between
patients who require single versus multiple drugs from the same class. For example, while diabetic
patients are often prescribed Metformin to manage their blood sugar levels, patients with uncontrolled
blood sugar level may be given additional blood glucose lowering drug such as Glipizide which
belong to the same medication class A10B1 as Metformin. As such, the recommended treatment
regime is the same for both types of patients which is suboptimal. Thus, it is essential to develop a
fine-grained recommender system capable of providing recommendations at the drug level.
Existing recommender systems that consider drug interactions assume that all the interactions have
the same severity. This is not true in practice as resources on drug information such as the DDInter
database [23] record different levels of interaction severity, ranging from mild to moderate to severe.
By assuming all interactions are equally severe, existing recommender systems tend to avoid any
combination of drugs with known interactions, even when the benefits outweigh the potential risks.
1

https://www.whocc.no/atc_ddd_index/?code=A10B&showdescription=no

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

