Boosting Spectral Clustering on Incomplete Data via
Kernel Correction and Affinity Learning

Fangchen Yu1 , Runze Zhao1 , Zhan Shi1 , Yiwen Lu1
Jicong Fan1,2 , Yicheng Zeng2 , Jianfeng Mao1,2 , Wenye Li1,2∗
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
{fangchenyu, runzezhao, zhanshi1, yiwenlu1}@link.cuhk.edu.cn
fanjicong@cuhk.edu.cn, statzyc@sribd.cn, jfmao@cuhk.edu.cn, wyli@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Spectral clustering has gained popularity for clustering non-convex data due to its
simplicity and effectiveness. It is essential to construct a similarity graph using a
high-quality affinity measure that models the local neighborhood relations among
the data samples. However, incomplete data can lead to inaccurate affinity measures,
resulting in degraded clustering performance. To address these issues, we propose
an imputation-free framework with two novel approaches to improve spectral
clustering on incomplete data. Firstly, we introduce a new kernel correction method
that enhances the quality of the kernel matrix estimated on incomplete data with a
theoretical guarantee, benefiting classical spectral clustering on pre-defined kernels.
Secondly, we develop a series of affinity learning methods that equip the selfexpressive framework with ℓp -norm to construct an intrinsic affinity matrix with an
adaptive extension. Our methods outperform existing data imputation and distance
calibration techniques on benchmark datasets, offering a promising solution to
spectral clustering on incomplete data in various real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Spectral clustering [1, 2, 3] has become a widely used and effective method for clustering non-convex
data and finds diverse applications in computer vision [4, 5], natural language processing [6, 7], and
bioinformatics [8, 9]. Generally, the first step in spectral clustering involves constructing an affinity
matrix that captures the similarity between data points, followed by performing normalized cut [4]
on the corresponding graph to partition the data into clusters. The quality of the affinity matrix is
a critical factor that determines the effectiveness of the clustering performance [2, 3]. However,
incomplete data is commonly seen in practice, leading to inaccurate affinities and degraded clustering
performance [10, 11, 12]. As such, obtaining a high-quality affinity matrix with missing data is a
challenging task that requires specialized techniques. In this paper, we aim to improve the quality of
affinity matrices, which naturally enhance the performance of spectral clustering on incomplete data.
In recent years, the development of methods to construct affinity matrices with full information for
spectral clustering has garnered significant attention. Two types of affinity matrices are typically
utilized, namely pre-defined similarity matrices [1, 2, 13, 14] and self-expressive affinity matrices
[3, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. Pre-defined similarity matrices are easy to compute and encompass
well-known kernels, including the Gaussian kernel, Exponential kernel, and Polynomial kernel. The
Gaussian kernel is the most widely used due to its simplicity and effectiveness [2]. Differently,
self-expressive affinity matrices learn the affinity matrix C by representing each data point as a
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

