Diffusion-Based Adversarial Sample Generation for
Improved Stealthiness and Controllability

Haotian Xue ∗1

Alexandre Araujo 2

Bin Hu 3

Yongxin Chen 1

1

Georgia Institute of Technology
2
New York University
3
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
Neural networks are known to be susceptible to adversarial samples: small variations of natural examples crafted to deliberately mislead the models. While they
can be easily generated using gradient-based techniques in digital and physical
scenarios, they often differ greatly from the actual data distribution of natural
images, resulting in a trade-off between strength and stealthiness. In this paper, we
propose a novel framework dubbed Diffusion-Based Projected Gradient Descent
(Diff-PGD) for generating realistic adversarial samples. By exploiting a gradient
guided by a diffusion model, Diff-PGD ensures that adversarial samples remain
close to the original data distribution while maintaining their effectiveness. Moreover, our framework can be easily customized for specific tasks such as digital
attacks, physical-world attacks, and style-based attacks. Compared with existing
methods for generating natural-style adversarial samples, our framework enables
the separation of optimizing adversarial loss from other surrogate losses (e.g.,
content/smoothness/style loss), making it more stable and controllable. Finally, we
demonstrate that the samples generated using Diff-PGD have better transferability and anti-purification power than traditional gradient-based methods. Code is
available at https://github.com/xavihart/Diff-PGD

1

Introduction

Neural networks have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in learning features and achieving
outstanding performance in various downstream tasks. However, these networks are known to be
vulnerable to subtle perturbations, called adversarial samples (adv-samples), leading to important
security concerns for critical-decision systems [16]. Numerous threat models have been designed to
generate adversarial samples for both digital space attacks [31, 5], physical world attacks [26, 14],
and also for generating more customized adv-samples given prompts like attack region and style
reference [12, 17]. However, most of these models have not been designed to maintain the realism
of output samples, resulting in adversarial samples that deviate significantly from the distribution
of natural images [22]. Indeed, in the setting of digital world attacks, such as those involving
RGB images, higher success rates, and transferability are associated with larger changes in the
generated samples, leading to a stealthiness-effectiveness trade-off. Additionally, perturbations for
physical-world attacks are substantial, non-realistic, and easily noticeable by humans [47].
Recent works, for both digital and physical settings, have proposed methods to generate more
realistic adversarial samples. For example, [29, 24] introduced a method to optimize the perturbations
added to clean images in semantic space, [23, 26] proposed a GAN-based approach or other prior
knowledge [33] to increase the realism of generated samples. Although the GAN-based approach
∗

Correspondence to: htxue.ai@gatech.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

