Data Selection for Language Models
via Importance Resampling

Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Tengyu Ma, Percy Liang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{xie, shibani, tengyuma, pliang}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Selecting a suitable pretraining dataset is crucial for both general-domain (e.g., GPT3) and domain-specific (e.g., Codex) language models (LMs). We formalize this
problem as selecting a subset of a large raw unlabeled dataset to match a desired target distribution given unlabeled target samples. Due to the scale and dimensionality
of the raw text data, existing methods use simple heuristics or require human experts
to manually curate data. Instead, we extend the classic importance resampling
approach used in low-dimensions for LM data selection. We propose Data Selection
with Importance Resampling (DSIR), an efficient and scalable framework that
estimates importance weights in a reduced feature space for tractability and selects
data with importance resampling according to these weights. We instantiate the
DSIR framework with hashed n-gram features for efficiency, enabling the selection
of 100M documents from the full Pile dataset in 4.5 hours. To measure whether
hashed n-gram features preserve the aspects of the data that are relevant to the target,
we define KL reduction, a data metric that measures the proximity between the
selected pretraining data and the target on some feature space. Across 8 data selection
methods (including expert selection), KL reduction on hashed n-gram features
highly correlates with average downstream accuracy (r = 0.82). When selecting
data for continued pretraining on a specific domain, DSIR performs comparably
to expert curation across 8 target distributions. When pretraining general-domain
models (target is Wikipedia and books), DSIR improves over random selection and
heuristic filtering baselines by 2–2.5% on the GLUE benchmark.1

1

Introduction

Given a fixed compute budget, the choice of pretraining data is critical for the performance of language
models (LMs) [18; 10; 24; 64; 27]. Existing works rely on heuristics to select training data. For
example, GPT-3 [10] and PaLM [14] filter web data for examples that are closer to formal text from
Wikipedia and books as a proxy for high quality, a method which we call heuristic classification.
Specifically, they train a binary classifier to discriminate formal text from web data and select
web examples that have a predicted probability above a noisy threshold [10; 18; 21]. However,
heuristic classification does not guarantee that the selected data is distributed like formal text. As a
second example, domain-specific LMs such as Minerva [45] and Codex [11] (math and code LMs,
respectively) employ domain-adaptive pretraining (DAPT) [24], where the model is initialized from
a base LM and continues to be pretrained on a domain-specific dataset to achieve gains over the base
LM on that domain. The domain-specific datasets are typically manually curated, but a framework
for automating data selection could save effort and increase the amount of relevant training data.
1

Code, selected data, and pretrained models are available at https://github.com/p-lambda/dsir.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

