A Unified Generalization Analysis of Re-Weighting
and Logit-Adjustment for Imbalanced Learning
Zitai Wang1,2
Qianqian Xu3∗
5
Yuan He
Xiaochun Cao6
1

Zhiyong Yang4
Qingming Huang4,3,7∗

SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Tech., CAS
4
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Alibaba Group
6
School of Cyber Science and Tech., Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
7
BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2

wangzitai@iie.ac.cn
xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn
yangzhiyong21@ucas.ac.cn
heyuan.hy@alibaba-inc.com
caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn
qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Real-world datasets are typically imbalanced in the sense that only a few classes
have numerous samples, while many classes are associated with only a few samples.
As a result, a naïve ERM learning process will be biased towards the majority
classes, making it difficult to generalize to the minority classes. To address this
issue, one simple but effective approach is to modify the loss function to emphasize
the learning on minority classes, such as re-weighting the losses or adjusting the
logits via class-dependent terms. However, existing generalization analysis of such
losses is still coarse-grained and fragmented, failing to explain some empirical
results. To bridge this gap, we propose a novel technique named data-dependent
contraction to capture how these modified losses handle different classes. On top
of this technique, a fine-grained generalization bound is established for imbalanced
learning, which helps reveal the mystery of re-weighting and logit-adjustment in a
unified manner. Furthermore, a principled learning algorithm is developed based
on the theoretical insights. Finally, the empirical results on benchmark datasets not
only validate the theoretical results but also demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method.

1

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning has achieved great success with the help of well-collected datasets,
where the number of samples is artificially balanced among classes [1, 2]. However, the real-world
datasets are generally imbalanced in the sense that only a few classes have numerous samples (i.e.,
the majority ones), while the others are associated with only a few samples (i.e., the minority ones)
[3–5]. Owing to this issue, a naïve Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) learning process will be
biased towards the majority classes, and the generalization on the minority ones becomes challenging.
Hence, the imbalanced learning problem has attracted increasing attention in recent years [6–9].
One simple yet effective approach for imbalanced learning is to modify the naïve loss function, such
that the learning process can pay more attention to the minority classes (Please refer to Appendix A for
more orthogonal approaches). In this direction, existing approaches generally fall into two categories:
re-weighting [10, 11] and logit-adjustment [12–16]. The former category assigns larger weights to
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

