No-regret Algorithms for Fair Resource Allocation

Abhishek Sinha, Ativ Joshi
School of Technology and Computer Science
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
Mumbai 400005, India
abhishek.sinha@tifr.res.in
ativ@cmi.ac.in

Rajarshi Bhattacharjee, Cameron Musco,
Mohammad Hajiesmaili
Manning College of Information
and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{rbhattacharj, cmusco,
hajiesmaili}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
We consider a fair resource allocation problem in the no-regret setting against an
unrestricted adversary. The objective is to allocate resources equitably among
several agents in an online fashion so that the difference of the aggregate α-fair
utilities of the agents achieved by an optimal static clairvoyant allocation and the
online policy grows sublinearly with time. The problem inherits its difficulty from
the non-separable nature of the global α-fairness function. Previously, it was shown
that no online policy could achieve a sublinear standard regret in this problem.
In this paper, we propose an efficient online resource allocation policy, called
Online Fair Allocation (OFA), that achieves sublinear cα -approximate regret with
approximation factor cα = (1 − α)−(1−α) ≤ 1.445, for 0 ≤ α < 1. The upper bound
on the cα -regret for this problem exhibits a surprising phase transition phenomenon
– transitioning from a power-law to a constant at the critical exponent α = 1/2. Our
result also resolves an open problem in designing an efficient no-regret policy for
the online job scheduling problem in certain parameter regimes. Along the way, we
introduce new algorithmic and analytical techniques, including greedy estimation
of the future gradients for non-additive global reward functions and bootstrapping
second-order regret bounds, which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

The notion of algorithmic fairness refers to learning algorithms that guarantee fair predictions even
when subjected to adversarially biased training data [Dwork et al., 2012]. Fairness has become a
major criterion for designing and deploying large-scale learning algorithms that affect a diverse user
base. Since the training data could be highly skewed in practice, it is essential to make minimal
assumptions about the data-generating process and design provably robust and fair learning policies.
Guaranteeing fairness becomes even more challenging in the online learning setup as there is no
distinction between the training and test data, and no assumption is made on the input data sequence.
As an example, consider an online recruitment campaign where a learning algorithm decides the
target group (identified by, say, the tuple (race, gender, age)) to which an ad for a job vacancy
is to be displayed. Suppose a revenue-maximizing recommendation algorithm concludes from
past data that more revenue is generated by showing the ad to Group A compared to Group B. In
that case, the ad-serving algorithm will eventually end up showing that ad exclusively to Group A
while discriminating against Group B users of a potential job opportunity [Hao, 2019]. One of the
overarching goals of this paper is to design efficient online learning policies that provably mitigate
this algorithmic bias while maintaining efficiency irrespective of the past data seen so far (refer to
Example B.1 in the Appendix for a closely-related scheduling problem considered in this paper).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

