On Slicing Optimality for Mutual Information

Ammar Fayad∗
MIT

Majd Ibrahim
HIAST

Abstract
Measuring dependence between two random variables is of great importance in
various domains but is difficult to compute in today’s complex environments with
high-dimensional data. Recently, slicing methods have shown to be a scalable approach to measuring mutual information (MI) between high-dimensional variables
by projecting these variables into one-dimensional spaces. Unfortunately, these
methods use uniform distributions of slicing directions, which generally discard
informative features between variables and thus lead to inaccurate quantification of
dependence. In this paper, we propose a principled framework that searches for an
optimal distribution of slices for MI. Importantly, we answer theoretical questions
about finding the optimal slicing distribution in the context of MI and develop
corresponding theoretical analyses. We also develop a practical algorithm, connecting our theoretical results with modern machine learning frameworks. Through
comprehensive experiments in benchmark domains, we demonstrate significant
gains in our information measure than state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Mutual information (MI) measures statistical dependence between two random variables by quantifying the amount of information gained about one variable from an observation of the other
variable (Shannon, 1948). Despite its popularity in various fields (Marinoni and Gamba, 2017;
Hamma et al., 2016), MI suffers from the curse of dimensionality: the estimation of mutual dependence is often stymied by the large dimension of the variables (Kraskov et al., 2004). Recently,
slicing methods (Bonneel et al., 2015; Nadjahi et al., 2020) have demonstrated a scalable approach for
estimating probability divergences and mutual dependence. Specifically, sliced mutual information
(SI; Goldfeld and Greenewald (2021)) measures the average of MI terms between one-dimensional
projections of the high-dimensional variables, where the projecting slicing directions are sampled
uniformly from a unit sphere. Because slicing methods do not compute the dependence directly in
the high-dimensional space but in the low-dimensional space, these methods significantly reduce
computation costs and are scalable. However, a critical problem of these slicing frameworks is
that they generally require many slices for accurate estimation. As we detail later in the paper, the
root cause of this problem is the uniform sampling of the slicing directions: discarding informative
features about the variables and generating noisy slices by equally favoring important and irrelevant
regions of the variables’ spaces. Hence, the uniform sampling fails to capture complex relationships of variables which renders current slicing methods inefficient and can even lead to inaccurate
dependence quantification.
Our contribution. With this insight, this paper aims to address the uniform sampling issue with
the slicing approaches for improving the dependence measurement. Specifically, motivated by the
success of Nguyen et al. (2021) in the generative modeling domain, we seek to find an optimal
distribution of slicing directions in the context of MI that satisfies two criteria: 1) slices are distributed
over maximally informative regions, and 2) slices are scattered over the unit sphere so that no
∗

afayad@mit.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

