Calibrate and Boost Logical Expressiveness of GNN
Over Multi-Relational and Temporal Graphs

Dingmin Wang∗
University of Oxford
dingmin.wang@cs.ox.ac.uk

Yeyuan Chen∗
University of Michigan
yeyuanch@umich.edu

Abstract
As a powerful framework for graph representation learning, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have garnered significant attention in recent years. However, to the
best of our knowledge, there has been no formal analysis of the logical expressiveness of GNNs as Boolean node classifiers over multi-relational graphs, where
each edge carries a specific relation type. In this paper, we investigate FOC 2 , a
fragment of first-order logic with two variables and counting quantifiers. On the
negative side, we demonstrate that the R2 -GNN architecture, which extends the
local message passing GNN by incorporating global readout, fails to capture FOC 2
classifiers in the general case. Nevertheless, on the positive side, we establish that
R2 -GNN models are equivalent to FOC 2 classifiers under certain restricted yet
reasonable scenarios. To address the limitations of R2 -GNN regarding expressiveness, we propose a simple graph transformation technique, akin to a preprocessing
step, which can be executed in linear time. This transformation enables R2 -GNN
to effectively capture any FOC 2 classifiers when applied to the "transformed"
input graph. Moreover, we extend our analysis of expressiveness and graph transformation to temporal graphs, exploring several temporal GNN architectures and
providing an expressiveness hierarchy for them. To validate our findings, we implement R2 -GNN and the graph transformation technique and conduct empirical
tests in node classification tasks against various well-known GNN architectures
that support multi-relational or temporal graphs. Our experimental results consistently demonstrate that R2 -GNN with the graph transformation outperform the
baseline methods on both synthetic and real-world datasets. The code is available
at https://github.com/hdmmblz/multi-graph.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become a standard paradigm for learning with graph structured
data, such as knowledge graphs Park et al. [2019], Tena Cucala et al. [2021], Wang et al. [2023] and
molecules Hao et al. [2020], Gasteiger et al. [2021], Guo et al. [2021]. GNNs take as input a graph
where each node is labelled by a feature vector, and then they recursively update the feature vector of
each node by processing a subset of the feature vectors from the previous layer. For example, many
GNNs update a node’s feature vector by combining its value in the previous layer with the output of
some aggregation function applied to its neighbours’ feature vectors in the previous layer; in this case,
after k iterations, a node’s feature vector can capture structural information about the node’s k-hop
neighborhood. GNNs have proved to be very efficient in many applications like knowledge graph
completion and recommender systems. Most previous work on GNNs mainly revolves around finding
∗

Equal contribution, listed in alphabetical order.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

