Counting Distinct Elements in the Turnstile Model
with Differential Privacy under Continual Observation
Palak Jain
Boston University
palakj@bu.edu
Sofya Raskhodnikova
Boston University
sofya@bu.edu

Iden Kalemaj
Boston University
ikalemaj@bu.edu
Satchit Sivakumar
Boston University
satchit@bu.edu

Adam Smith
Boston University
ads22@bu.edu

Abstract
Privacy is a central challenge for systems that learn from sensitive data sets, especially when a system’s outputs must be continuously updated to reflect changing
data. We consider the achievable error for differentially private continual release
of a basic statistic—the number of distinct items—in a stream where items may
be both inserted and deleted (the turnstile model). With only insertions, existing
algorithms have additive error just polylogarithmic in the length of the stream T .
We uncover a much richer landscape in the turnstile model, even without considering memory restrictions. We show that every differentially private mechanism
that handles insertions and deletions has worst-case additive error at least T 1/4
even under a relatively weak, event-level privacy definition. Then, we identify a
parameter of the input stream, its maximum flippancy, that is low for natural data
streams and for which we give tight parameterized error guarantees. Specifically,
the maximum flippancy is the largest number of times that the contribution of a
single item to the distinct elements count changes over the course of the stream. We
present an item-level differentially private mechanism that, for all turnstile streams
with maximum
p flippancy w, continually outputs the number of distinct elements
with an O( w · poly log T ) additive error, without requiring prior knowledge of
w. We prove that this is the best achievable error bound that depends only on w,
for a large range of values of w. When w is small, the error of our mechanism is
similar to the polylogarithmic in T error in the insertion-only setting, bypassing
the hardness in the turnstile model.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms are frequently run on sensitive data. In this context, a central challenge
is to protect the privacy of individuals whose information is contained in the training set. Differential
privacy [27] provides a rigorous framework for the design and analysis of algorithms that publish
aggregate statistics, such as parameters of machine learning models, while preserving privacy. In this
work, we focus on the model of differential privacy interchangeably called continual observation
and continual release that was introduced by Dwork et al. [25] and Chan et al. [13] to study privacy
in settings when both the data and the published statics are constantly updated. One of the most
fundamental statistics about a data stream is the number of distinct elements it contains (see, e.g., the
book by Leskovec et al. [47]). The problem of counting distinct elements has been widely studied,
starting with the work of Flajolet and Martin [32], and has numerous applications [2, 30, 49, 42, 4],
including monitoring the number of logins from distinct accounts to a streaming service, tracking
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

