Differentially Private Image Classification
by Learning Priors from Random Processes

Xinyu Tang∗ Ashwinee Panda∗ Vikash Sehwag
Princeton University

Prateek Mittal

Abstract
In privacy-preserving machine learning, differentially private stochastic gradient
descent (DP-SGD) performs worse than SGD due to per-sample gradient clipping
and noise addition. A recent focus in private learning research is improving the
performance of DP-SGD on private data by incorporating priors that are learned on
real-world public data. In this work, we explore how we can improve the privacyutility tradeoff of DP-SGD by learning priors from images generated by random
processes and transferring these priors to private data. We propose DP-RandP,
a three-phase approach. We attain new state-of-the-art accuracy when training
from scratch on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, MedMNIST and ImageNet for a range of
privacy budgets ε ∈ [1, 8]. In particular, we improve the previous best reported
accuracy on CIFAR10 from 60.6% to 72.3% for ε = 1. Our code is available at
https://github.com/inspire-group/DP-RandP.

Test Accuracy (%)

85
80
75
70
65
60
1

2

3

4

Our DP-RandP
Hölzl et al. 2023
Klause et al., 2022
Tramèr and Boneh, 2021
Yu et al., 2021

6

8

Our private linear probing
De et al., 2022
Dörmann et al., 2021
Papernot et al., 2021

Figure 2: Comparing our results on CIFigure 1: Our proposed DP training pipeline (DP- FAR10 and previous state-of-the-art for
RandP) has three distinct phases. In Phase I, we sample (ε, 10−5 )-DP setup. Our full DP-RandP
images from random processes and train a feature ex- outperforms all previous works on this
tractor with representation learning to embed image commonly benchmarked dataset and repriors beneficial for visual tasks. In Phase II, we spend duces the privacy cost needed to achieve
a small privacy budget to train a linear classifier on top 80% accuracy from ε = 6 to ε = 3. Even
of extracted features of private data. In Phase III, we our private linear probing from noise prior
update all parameters with our remaining privacy bud- outperforms all previous work at ε = 1 but
get. We demonstrate that incorporating image priors in crucially has diminishing returns, a shortPhase-I significantly improves DP training and adopting coming that we address with our proposed
Phase II before training the whole network in Phase III three-phase DP training framework (DPcan further improve test accuracy in DP training.
RandP).
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

