ARTIC3D: Learning Robust Articulated 3D Shapes
from Noisy Web Image Collections

Chun-Han Yao1*
1

Amit Raj2 Wei-Chih Hung3 Yuanzhen Li2
Ming-Hsuan Yang124 Varun Jampani2

UC Merced

2

Google Research

3

Waymo

4

Michael Rubinstein2

Yonsei University

Abstract
Estimating 3D articulated shapes like animal bodies from monocular images is
inherently challenging due to the ambiguities of camera viewpoint, pose, texture,
lighting, etc. We propose ARTIC3D, a self-supervised framework to reconstruct
per-instance 3D shapes from a sparse image collection in-the-wild. Specifically,
ARTIC3D is built upon a skeleton-based surface representation and is further
guided by 2D diffusion priors from Stable Diffusion. First, we enhance the input images with occlusions/truncation via 2D diffusion to obtain cleaner mask
estimates and semantic features. Second, we perform diffusion-guided 3D optimization to estimate shape and texture that are of high-fidelity and faithful to input
images. We also propose a novel technique to calculate more stable image-level
gradients via diffusion models compared to existing alternatives. Finally, we produce realistic animations by fine-tuning the rendered shape and texture under rigid
part transformations. Extensive evaluations on multiple existing datasets as well
as newly introduced noisy web image collections with occlusions and truncation
demonstrate that ARTIC3D outputs are more robust to noisy images, higher quality
in terms of shape and texture details, and more realistic when animated.

1

Introduction

Articulated 3D animal shapes are widely used in applications such as AR/VR, gaming, and content
creation. However, the articulated models are usually hard to obtain as manually creating them is
labor intensive and 3D scanning real animals in the lab settings is highly infeasible. In this work,
we aim to automatically estimate high-quality 3D articulated animal shapes directly from sparse and
noisy web image collections. This is a highly ill-posed problem due to the variations across images
with diverse backgrounds, lighting, camera viewpoints, animal poses, shapes, and textures, etc. In
addition, we do not assume access to any 3D shape models or per-image annotations like keypoints
and camera viewpoints in our in-the-wild setting.
While several recent methods [39, 33, 38] can produce animatable 3D shapes using a skeleton-based
neural surface or pre-defined mesh template, the success is largely dependent on large-scale image
datasets or manually-filtered clean images for training or optimization. Moreover, the output 3D
shapes and textures are usually unrealistic when viewed from novel viewpoints or pose articulations.
On the other hand, recent success of generative diffusion models [25, 28, 27] shows that one
can generate high-quality images for a given text prompt. DreamFusion [21] and other recent
works [15, 18, 23] further demonstrate the possibility to produce 3D objects/scenes simply using
2D diffusion as multi-view supervision. In this work, we leverage the powerful 2D diffusion prior
*

Work done as a student researcher at Google.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

