Inferring Hybrid Neural Fluid Fields from Videos

Hong-Xing Yu1∗ Yang Zheng1∗ Yuan Gao1
Stanford University1

Yitong Deng1

Bo Zhu2

Jiajun Wu1

Georgia Institute of Technology2

Abstract
We study recovering fluid density and velocity from sparse multiview videos.
Existing neural dynamic reconstruction methods predominantly rely on optical
flows; therefore, they cannot accurately estimate the density and uncover the
underlying velocity due to the inherent visual ambiguities of fluid velocity, as
fluids are often shapeless and lack stable visual features. The challenge is further
pronounced by the turbulent nature of fluid flows, which calls for properly designed
fluid velocity representations. To address these challenges, we propose hybrid
neural fluid fields (HyFluid), a neural approach to jointly infer fluid density and
velocity fields. Specifically, to deal with visual ambiguities of fluid velocity,
we introduce a set of physics-based losses that enforce inferring a physically
plausible velocity field, which is divergence-free and drives the transport of density.
To deal with the turbulent nature of fluid velocity, we design a hybrid neural
velocity representation that includes a base neural velocity field that captures
most irrotational energy and a vortex particle-based velocity that models residual
turbulent velocity. We show that our method enables recovering vortical flow
details. Our approach opens up possibilities for various learning and reconstruction
applications centered around 3D incompressible flow, including fluid re-simulation
and editing, future prediction, and neural dynamic scene composition. Project
website: https://kovenyu.com/HyFluid/.

1

Introduction

Fluid is ubiquitous in our surroundings, from a small breeze in the morning to large-scale atmosphere
flow that would affect the weather in the following week. Understanding and predicting fluid
dynamics play a central role in climate forecasting (Bauer et al., 2015), vehicle design (Bushnell
& Moore, 1991), visual special effect (Pfaff et al., 2010), etc. Yet, it remains an open problem in
scientific machine learning to accurately recover fluid flows from visual observations. Flow motions
can only be seen indirectly, and, unlike solids that have certain shapes and simple constrained motion
patterns, fluid systems have intricate and complex dynamics that exhibit different features across
spatial scales. These characteristics pose unique challenges in the representations and algorithms to
recover physically correct velocity. Recently, physics-informed neural networks (Raissi et al., 2019)
have shown promise in recovering velocity fields from density fields for scientific computing. These
neural methods are scalable and flexible compared to traditional grid-based methods, yet they require
accurate density fields that are unavailable in uncontrolled ordinary scenes.
In this work, we focus on recovering the density† and velocity of fluids from sparsely captured
multiview videos (see Fig. 1 for illustration). We identify three key challenges. Firstly, the fluid
velocity is ambiguous from visual observations. Unlike solid objects characterized by consistent
∗

Equal contributions.
“Density” refers to the concentration of the fluid substance such as smoke soot. Not to be confused with the
physical density, i.e., mass over volume.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

