The Pick-to-Learn Algorithm: Empowering
Compression for Tight Generalization Bounds and
Improved Post-training Performance

Dario Paccagnan
Dept. of Computing
Imperial College London
d.paccagnan@imperial.ac.uk

Marco C. Campi
Dip. di Ingegnerira dell’Informazione
Università di Brescia
marco.campi@unibs.it

Simone Garatti
Dip. di Elettronica Informazione e Bioingegneria
Politecnico di Milano
simone.garatti@polimi.it

Abstract
Generalization bounds are valuable both for theory and applications. On the one
hand, they shed light on the mechanisms that underpin the learning processes; on the
other, they certify how well a learned model performs against unseen inputs. In this
work we build upon a recent breakthrough in compression theory (Campi & Garatti,
2023) to develop a new framework yielding tight generalization bounds of wide
practical applicability. The core idea is to embed any given learning algorithm into
a suitably-constructed meta-algorithm (here called Pick-to-Learn, P2L) in order to
instill desirable compression properties. When applied to the MNIST classification
dataset and to a synthetic regression problem, P2L not only attains generalization
bounds that compare favorably with the state of the art (test-set and PAC-Bayes
bounds), but it also learns models with better post-training performance.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has achieved remarkable results in the last decades, with successful stories ranging
from digit recognition (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), to protein folding (Jumper et al., 2021), traffic
prediction (Li et al., 2017), medical diagnosis (Kononenko, 2001), and beyond. Contrary to that, the
understanding of the mechanisms underpinning generalization, and the availability of bounds for its
evaluation, is still limited. This is unfortunate because generalization bounds are important both to
develop trust in learning methods as well as to allow for a fair comparison among alternatives, which
is relevant to hyper-parameter tuning.
Among the various tools that have been introduced to provide generalization bounds, we recall the VCdimension (Vapnik & Chervonenkis, 1971), Radamacher complexity (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002),
mutual information (Xu & Raginsky, 2017), sharpness (Keskar et al., 2017), compression schemes
(Littlestone & Warmuth, 1986; Floyd & Warmuth, 1995; Graepel et al., 2005), and PAC-Bayes
approaches (Dziugaite & Roy, 2017; Perez-Ortiz et al., 2021). Each of these frameworks is applicable
to specific contexts. For example, the approach based on the VC-theory requires that a model is
selected from a class with finite VC-dimension, while compression schemes are applicable provided
the existence of an informative subset of data points from which the model can be reconstructed. It
has also to be said that the level of precision of the available bounds is highly problem-dependent and
they often take a significant margin from the actual performance.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

