Theoretically Guaranteed Bidirectional Data
Rectification for Robust Sequential Recommendation

Yatong Sun1,2 , Xiaochun Yang1∗ , Zhu Sun3∗ , Bin Wang1 , Yan Wang2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China
2
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia
3
Center for Frontier AI Research, Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore
yatong@stumail.neu.edu.cn, yangxc@mail.neu.edu.cn, sunzhuntu@gmail.com,
binwang@mail.neu.edu.cn, yan.wang@mq.edu.au
1

Abstract
Sequential recommender systems (SRSs) are typically trained to predict the next
item as the target given its preceding (and succeeding) items as the input. Such
a paradigm assumes that every input-target pair is reliable for training. However,
users can be induced to click on items that are inconsistent with their true preferences, resulting in unreliable instances, i.e., mismatched input-target pairs. Current
studies on mitigating this issue suffer from two limitations: (i) they discriminate
instance reliability according to models trained with unreliable data, yet without
theoretical guarantees that such a seemingly contradictory solution can be effective;
and (ii) most methods can only tackle either unreliable input or targets but fail to
handle both simultaneously. To fill the gap, we theoretically unveil the relationship between SRS predictions and instance reliability, whereby two error-bounded
strategies are proposed to rectify unreliable targets and input, respectively. On
this basis, we devise a model-agnostic Bidirectional Data Rectification (BirDRec)
framework, which can be flexibly implemented with most existing SRSs for robust
training against unreliable data. Additionally, a rectification sampling strategy is
devised and a self-ensemble mechanism is adopted to reduce the (time and space)
complexity of BirDRec. Extensive experiments on four real-world datasets verify
the generality, effectiveness, and efficiency of our proposed BirDRec.

1

Introduction

Recently, the study on sequential recommender systems (SRSs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] has garnered much
attention as users’ preferences are inherently dynamic and evolving in real-world scenarios. The
goal of SRSs is learning to predict the next item a user interacts with given the preceding (and
succeeding) items. Therefore, a training instance for SRSs is typically composed of an input item
sequence and its next item as the target. However, distractions in daily lives (e.g. recommendations
from friends, account sharing, and accidental clicks) can induce users to click on items that are
inconsistent with their true preferences, resulting in unreliable training instances with mismatched
input-target pairs. The mismatch can be categorized into Complete Mismatch and Partial Mismatch
when the item caused by distractions acts as an unreliable target and unreliable input of an instance,
respectively. To illustrate, the romantic film ‘La La Land’, in the first instance of Figure 1, serves as
an unreliable target, which is recommended by friends and completely mismatched with the previous
superhero movies. By contrast, in the second instance, ‘La La Land’ acts as an unreliable input
item which renders the input sequence partially mismatched with the target superhero film. Both
∗

denotes the corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

