Break It Down: Evidence for Structural
Compositionality in Neural Networks

1

Michael A. Lepori1∗ Thomas Serre2 Ellie Pavlick1
Department of Computer Science 2 Carney Institute for Brain Science
Brown University

Abstract
Though modern neural networks have achieved impressive performance in both
vision and language tasks, we know little about the functions that they implement.
One possibility is that neural networks implicitly break down complex tasks into
subroutines, implement modular solutions to these subroutines, and compose them
into an overall solution to a task — a property we term structural compositionality.
Another possibility is that they may simply learn to match new inputs to learned
templates, eliding task decomposition entirely. Here, we leverage model pruning
techniques to investigate this question in both vision and language across a variety
of architectures, tasks, and pretraining regimens. Our results demonstrate that
models often implement solutions to subroutines via modular subnetworks, which
can be ablated while maintaining the functionality of other subnetworks. This
suggests that neural networks may be able to learn compositionality, obviating the
need for specialized symbolic mechanisms.

1

Introduction

Though neural networks have come to dominate most subfields of AI, much remains unknown
about the functions that they learn to implement. In particular, there is debate over the role of
compositionality. Compositionality has long been touted as a key property of human cognition,
enabling humans to exhibit flexible and abstract language processing and visual processing, among
other cognitive processes (Marcus, 2003; Piantadosi et al., 2016; Lake et al., 2017; Smolensky et al.,
2022). According to common definitions (Quilty-Dunn et al., 2022; Fodor & Lepore, 2002), a
representational system is compositional if it implements a set of discrete constituent functions that
exhibit some degree of modularity. That is, blue circle is represented compositionally if a system is
able to entertain the concept blue independently of circle, and vice-versa.
It is an open question whether neural networks require explicit symbolic mechanisms to implement
compositional solutions, or whether they implicitly learn to implement compositional solutions during
training. Historically, artificial neural networks have been considered non-compositional systems,
instead solving tasks by matching new inputs to learned templates (Marcus, 2003; Quilty-Dunn et al.,
2022). Neural networks’ apparent lack of compositionality has served as a key point in favor of
integrating explicit symbolic mechanisms into contemporary artificial intelligence systems (Andreas
et al., 2016; Koh et al., 2020; Ellis et al., 2023; Lake et al., 2017). However, modern neural networks,
with no explicit inductive bias towards compositionality, have demonstrated successes on increasingly
complex tasks. This raises the question: are these models succeeding by implementing compositional
solutions under the hood (Mandelbaum et al., 2022)?

∗

Correspondence to: michael_lepori@brown.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

