FeCAM: Exploiting the Heterogeneity of Class
Distributions in Exemplar-Free Continual Learning

Dipam Goswami1,2 Yuyang Liu3,4,5,† Bartłomiej Twardowski 1,2,6 Joost van de Weijer1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
2
Computer Vision Center, Barcelona 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences 6 IDEAS-NCBR
{dgoswami, btwardowski, joost}@cvc.uab.es, sunshineliuyuyang@gmail.com

Abstract
Exemplar-free class-incremental learning (CIL) poses several challenges since it
prohibits the rehearsal of data from previous tasks and thus suffers from catastrophic
forgetting. Recent approaches to incrementally learning the classifier by freezing
the feature extractor after the first task have gained much attention. In this paper,
we explore prototypical networks for CIL, which generate new class prototypes
using the frozen feature extractor and classify the features based on the Euclidean
distance to the prototypes. In an analysis of the feature distributions of classes, we
show that classification based on Euclidean metrics is successful for jointly trained
features. However, when learning from non-stationary data, we observe that the
Euclidean metric is suboptimal and that feature distributions are heterogeneous. To
address this challenge, we revisit the anisotropic Mahalanobis distance for CIL.
In addition, we empirically show that modeling the feature covariance relations is
better than previous attempts at sampling features from normal distributions and
training a linear classifier. Unlike existing methods, our approach generalizes to
both many- and few-shot CIL settings, as well as to domain-incremental settings.
Interestingly, without updating the backbone network, our method obtains state-ofthe-art results on several standard continual learning benchmarks. Code is available
at https://github.com/dipamgoswami/FeCAM.

1

Introduction

In Continual Learning (CL), the learner is expected to accumulate knowledge from the ever-changing
stream of new tasks data. As a result, the model only has access to the data from the current task,
making it susceptible to catastrophic forgetting of previously learned knowledge [46, 37]. This
phenomenon has been extensively studied in the context of Class Incremental Learning (CIL) [36, 61,
9, 74], where the objective is to incrementally learn new classes and achieve the highest accuracy for
all classes encountered so far in a task-agnostic way without knowing from which tasks the evaluated
samples are [56]. While one of the simplest approaches to mitigate forgetting is storing exemplars of
each class, it has limitations due to storage and privacy concerns, e.g., in medical images. Hence, the
focus has shifted towards more challenging exemplar-free CIL methods [80, 63, 43, 41, 35, 2].
In exemplar-free CIL methods, the challenge is to discriminate between old and new classes without
access to old data. While some methods [79, 51, 78, 80] trained the model on new classes favoring
plasticity and used knowledge distillation [20] to preserve old class representations, other methods [43,
3, 13, 41, 35] froze the feature extractor after the first task, thus favoring stability and incrementally
†

The corresponding author is Yuyang Liu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

