Humans in Kitchens: A Dataset for Multi-Person
Human Motion Forecasting with Scene Context

Julian Tanke∗
tanke@iai.uni-bonn.de

Oh-Hun Kwon∗
ohkwon@uni-bonn.de

Felix B Mueller∗ ,†
felix.benjamin.mueller@uni-bonn.de

Andreas Doering∗ ,‡
doering@iai.uni-bonn.de

Juergen Gall∗ ,‡
gall@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Forecasting human motion of multiple persons is very challenging. It requires
to model the interactions between humans and the interactions with objects and
the environment. For example, a person might want to make a coffee, but if the
coffee machine is already occupied the person will have to wait. These complex
relations between scene geometry and persons arise constantly in our daily lives,
and models that wish to accurately forecast human behavior will have to take them
into consideration. To facilitate research in this direction, we propose Humans
in Kitchens, a large-scale multi-person human motion dataset with annotated 3D
human poses, scene geometry and activities per person and frame. Our dataset
consists of over 7.3h recorded data of up to 16 persons at the same time in four
kitchen scenes, with more than 4M annotated human poses, represented by a
parametric 3D body model. In addition, dynamic scene geometry and objects like
chair or cupboard are annotated per frame. As first benchmarks, we propose two
protocols for short-term and long-term human motion forecasting.

1

Introduction

Understanding and anticipating human motion within groups is very challenging and essential in
the context of socially-compliant autonomous robots [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], as they must possess
the ability to understand and respond appropriately to human behavior. Moreover, this topic has
relevance in the fields of neuroscience and social sciences [9, 10, 11], as it enables the development
of computational models that explore the perception of others’ behavior and its influence on one’s
own behavior. For example, imagine a group of persons sitting on a sofa and another person walking
towards it, one would expect the person to sit down on an unoccupied seat on the sofa. Similarly, two
persons in front of a whiteboard are expected to discuss their ideas. However, it is more plausible that
only one of them writes onto the whiteboard while the other observes.
Capturing social interactions and interactions with the environment necessitates a large dataset for
effective training and evaluation. Such dataset must possess three essential characteristics: (a) it
should encompass natural interactions between multiple individuals recorded in a real environment,
∗

University of Bonn
Fraunhofer Institute for Intelligent Analysis and Information Systems IAIS
‡
Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

