CODA: Generalizing to Open and Unseen Domains
with Compaction and Disambiguation

Chaoqi Chen1∗ Luyao Tang2∗ Yue Huang2 Xiaoguang Han3† Yizhou Yu1†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Xiamen University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
cqchen1994@gmail.com, lytang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yhuang2010@xmu.edu.cn
hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
The generalization capability of machine learning systems degenerates notably
when the test distribution drifts from the training distribution. Recently, Domain
Generalization (DG) has been gaining momentum in enabling machine learning
models to generalize to unseen domains. However, most DG methods assume that
training and test data share an identical label space, ignoring the potential unseen
categories in many real-world applications. In this paper, we delve into a more general but difficult problem termed Open Test-Time DG (OTDG), where both domain
shift and open class may occur on the unseen test data. We propose Compaction
and Disambiguation (CODA), a novel two-stage framework for learning compact
representations and adapting to open classes in the wild. To meaningfully regularize the model’s decision boundary, CODA introduces virtual unknown classes
and optimizes a new training objective to insert unknowns into the latent space by
compacting the embedding space of source known classes. To adapt target samples
to the source model, we then disambiguate the decision boundaries between known
and unknown classes with a test-time training objective, mitigating the adaptivity
gap and catastrophic forgetting challenges. Experiments reveal that CODA can
significantly outperform the previous best method on standard DG datasets and
harmonize the classification accuracy between known and unknown classes.

1

Introduction

The ability to generalize to unseen environments is considered a key signature of human intelligence [12]. While deep neural networks have achieved great success in many machine learning
problems, they are brittle to distribution shifts between training and test domains, which often occur
in real-world applications. For example, when deploying object recognition systems in autonomous
vehicles, the ever-changing weather conditions (e.g. fog, rain, and snow) may deteriorate the performance and raise concerns about their reliability over time. This motivates a challenging scenario
named Domain Generalization (DG) [68, 84], which extrapolates learning machines to related yet
previously unseen test domains by identifying the common factors from available source data.
From the perspective of representation learning, the mainstream paradigm for DG includes invariant
risk minimization [2, 1, 89], domain alignment [31], feature disentanglement [45, 36, 78], metalearning [29, 30], and augmentation-based invariant prediction [66, 74, 88]. In spite of the significant
progress in DG, the adaptivity gap [14] between source and target domains naturally exists and
emerges as an inevitable challenge. Therefore, some prior efforts [23, 24, 72, 11] strive to adapt
∗
†

First two authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

