ToolQA: A Dataset for LLM Question Answering
with External Tools
Yuchen Zhuang∗, Yue Yu∗, Kuan Wang∗, Haotian Sun, Chao Zhang
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta GA
{yczhuang, yueyu, kuanwang, haotian.sun, chaozhang}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance in
various NLP tasks, but they still suffer from challenges such as hallucination and
weak numerical reasoning. To overcome these challenges, external tools can be
used to enhance LLMs’ question-answering abilities. However, current evaluation
methods do not distinguish between questions that can be answered using LLMs’
internal knowledge and those that require external information through tool use.
To address this issue, we introduce a new dataset called ToolQA, which is designed
to faithfully evaluate LLMs’ ability to use external tools for question answering.
Our development of ToolQA involved a scalable, automated process for dataset
curation, along with 13 specialized tools designed for interaction with external
knowledge in order to answer questions. Importantly, we strive to minimize the
overlap between our benchmark data and LLMs’ pre-training data, enabling a more
precise evaluation of LLMs’ tool-use reasoning abilities. We conducted an in-depth
diagnosis of existing tool-use LLMs to highlight their strengths, weaknesses, and
potential improvements. Our findings set a new benchmark for evaluating LLMs
and suggest new directions for future advancements. Our data and code are freely
available for the broader scientific community on GitHub 2 .

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated superior performance in a myriad of NLP tasks [4,
9, 43, 42, 55, 61]. These models have captured vast amounts of knowledge from enormous and
diverse corpora during pre-training. After instruction fine-tuning [10, 44, 2], they have demonstrated
impressive capabilities in information-seeking question answering [65, 26]. Despite their remarkable
performance, LLMs face several challenges. For example, they are susceptible to hallucinations—
generating plausible yet ungrounded information—which can mislead users and affect content
integrity [66, 19, 5]. Additionally, they exhibit weaknesses in numerical reasoning, an essential skill
in numerous real-life applications [14, 36, 41, 28, 51, 13]. These limitations highlight the need for
techniques that can enhance LLMs’ question-answering abilities.
Recent research has shown that these issues can be mitigated by augmenting LLMs with external
tools, such as retrieval augmentation [58, 17], math tools [56, 76, 32], and code interpreters [13, 63].
For example, a Wolfram math plugin can enhance numerical reasoning [68], and a verified database
can mitigate hallucinations by providing up-to-date fact-checked knowledge [49]. However, existing
evaluation methodologies struggle to distinguish whether the model is simply recalling pre-trained
information or truly utilizing external tools for problem-solving [37]. This challenge arises, in part,
because the external data used for evaluation may have already been exposed to LLMs during the
pre-training phase [53]. This exposure can lead to a biased evaluation of LLMs’ tool-use abilities, as
the models could just use their ingrained knowledge and their reasoning abilities, bypassing the use
of external tools. As a result, these evaluations cannot accurately reflect the true competency of the
∗
2

These authors contributed equally to this work.
https://github.com/night-chen/ToolQA

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

