Semantic segmentation of sparse irregular point clouds
for leaf/wood discrimination
Yuchen Bai1 Jean-Baptiste Durand2∗ Grégoire Vincent2 Florence Forbes1
1
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LJK, Grenoble, France
2
AMAP, Univ. Montpellier, CIRAD, CNRS, INRAE, IRD, Montpellier, France
{yuchen.bai,florence.forbes}@inria.fr
jean-baptiste.durand@cirad.fr
gregoire.vincent@ird.fr

Abstract
LiDAR (Light Detection And Ranging) has become an essential part of the remote
sensing toolbox used for biosphere monitoring. In particular, LiDAR provides the
opportunity to map forest leaf area with unprecedented accuracy, while leaf area
has remained an important source of uncertainty affecting models of gas exchanges
between the vegetation and the atmosphere. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) are
easy to mobilize and therefore allow frequent revisits, so as to track the response
of vegetation to climate change. However, miniature sensors embarked on UAVs
usually provide point clouds of limited density, which are further affected by a
strong decrease in density from top to bottom of the canopy due to progressively
stronger occlusion. In such a context, discriminating leaf points from wood points
presents a significant challenge due in particular to strong class imbalance and
spatially irregular sampling intensity. Here we introduce a neural network model
based on the Pointnet ++ architecture which makes use of point geometry only
(excluding any spectral information). To cope with local data sparsity, we propose
an innovative sampling scheme which strives to preserve local important geometric
information. We also propose a loss function adapted to the severe class imbalance.
We show that our model outperforms state-of-the-art alternatives on UAV point
clouds. We discuss future possible improvements, particularly regarding much
denser point clouds acquired from below the canopy.

1

Introduction

In the past decades, LiDAR technology has been frequently used to acquire massive 3D data in the
field of forest inventory (Vincent et al. [1]; Ullrich & Pfennigbauer [2]). The acquisition of point
cloud data by employing LiDAR technology is referred to as laser scanning. The collected point cloud
data provides rich details on canopy structure, allowing us to calculate a key variable, leaf area, which
controls water efflux and carbon influx. Monitoring leaf area should help in better understanding
processes underlying flux seasonality in tropical forests, and is expected to enhance the precision
of climate models for predicting the effects of global warming. There are various types of vehicles
for data collection, with ground-based equipment and aircraft being the most commonly employed.
The former operates a bottom-up scanning called terrestrial laser scanning (TLS), providing highly
detailed and accurate 3D data. Scans are often acquired in a grid pattern every 10 m and co-registered
into a single point cloud. However, TLS requires human intervention within the forest, which is
laborious and limits its extensive implementation. Conversely, airborne laser scanning (ALS) is much
faster and can cover much larger areas. Nonetheless, the achieved point density is typically two
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

