Self-Correcting Bayesian Optimization through
Bayesian Active Learning

Carl Hvarfner
carl.hvarfner@cs.lth.se
Lund University

Erik Orm Hellsten
erik.hellsten@cs.lth.se
Lund University

Frank Hutter
fh@cs.uni-freiburg.de
University of Freiburg

Luigi Nardi
luigi.nardi@cs.lth.se
Lund University
Stanford University
DBtune

Abstract
Gaussian processes are the model of choice in Bayesian optimization and active
learning. Yet, they are highly dependent on cleverly chosen hyperparameters to
reach their full potential, and little effort is devoted to finding good hyperparameters
in the literature. We demonstrate the impact of selecting good hyperparameters for
GPs and present two acquisition functions that explicitly prioritize hyperparameter
learning. Statistical distance-based Active Learning (SAL) considers the average
disagreement between samples from the posterior, as measured by a statistical
distance. SAL outperforms the state-of-the-art in Bayesian active learning on several test functions. We then introduce Self-Correcting Bayesian Optimization
(SCoreBO), which extends SAL to perform Bayesian optimization and active learning simultaneously. SCoreBO learns the model hyperparameters at improved rates
compared to vanilla BO, while outperforming the latest Bayesian optimization
methods on traditional benchmarks. Moreover, we demonstrate the importance of
self-correction on atypical Bayesian optimization tasks.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a powerful paradigm for black-box optimization problems, i.e.,
problems that can only be accessed by pointwise queries. Such problems arise in many applications,
ranging from including drug discovery [21] to configuration of combinatorial problem solvers [27, 28],
hardware design [14, 43], hyperparameter tuning [11, 30, 33, 52], and robotics [4, 9, 40, 41].
Gaussian processes (GPs) are a popular choice as surrogate models in BO applications. Given
the data, the model hyperparameters are typically estimated using either Maximum Likelihood or
Maximum a Posteriori estimation (MAP) [49]. Alternatively, a fully Bayesian treatment of the
hyperparameters [46, 55] removes the need to choose any single set through Monte Carlo integration.
This procedure effectively considers all possible hyperparameter values under the current posterior,
thereby accounting for hyperparameter uncertainty. However, the relationship between accurate GP
hyperparameter estimation and BO performance has received little attention [3, 7, 58, 69, 71], and
active reduction of hyperparameter uncertainty is not an integral part of any prevalent BO acquisition
function. In contrast, the field of Bayesian Active Learning (BAL) contains multiple acquisition
functions based solely on reducing hyperparameter-induced measures of uncertainty [26, 34, 50], and
the broader field of Bayesian Experimental Design [1, 10, 48] revolves around acquisition of data to
best learns the model parameters.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

