DISCS: A Benchmark for Discrete Sampling

Katayoon Goshvadi
Google Deepmind
Ruqi Zhang
Purdue University

Haoran Sun
Georgia Tech
Will Grathwohl
Google Deepmind

Xingchao Liu
UT Austin

Azade Nova
Google Deepmind

Dale Schuurmans
Google Deepmind

Hanjun Dai
Google Deepmind

Abstract
Sampling in discrete spaces, with critical applications in simulation and optimization, has recently been boosted by significant advances in gradient-based
approaches that exploit modern accelerators like GPUs. However, two key challenges are hindering further advancement in research on discrete sampling. First,
since there is no consensus on experimental settings and evaluation setups, the
empirical results in different research papers are often not comparable. Second,
implementing samplers and target distributions often requires a nontrivial amount
of effort in terms of calibration and parallelism. To tackle these challenges, we propose DISCS (DISCrete Sampling), a tailored package and benchmark that supports
unified and efficient experiment implementation and evaluations for discrete sampling in three types of tasks: sampling from classical graphical models and energy
based generative models, and sampling for solving combinatorial optimization.
Throughout the comprehensive evaluations in DISCS, we gained new insights into
scalability, design principles for proposal distributions, and lessons for adaptive
sampling design. DISCS efficiently implements representative discrete samplers in
existing research works as baselines and offers a simple interface that researchers
can conveniently add new discrete samplers and directly compare their performance
with the benchmark result in a calibrated setup.

1

Introduction

Sampling in discrete spaces has been an important problem for decades in physics (Edwards &
Anderson, 1975; Baumgärtner et al., 2012), statistics (Robert & Casella, 2013; Carpenter et al.,
2017), and computer science (LeCun et al., 2006; Wang & Cho, 2019). Since sampling from a target
probability distribution π(x) ∝ exp(−f (x)) defined on a discrete space X is typically intractable,
one usually resorts to Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods (Metropolis et al., 1953; Hastings,
1970). However, except for a few algorithms such as Swendsen-Wang for the Ising model (Swendsen
& Wang, 1987) and Hamze-Freitas for hierarchical models (Hamze & de Freitas, 2012), which exploit
the special structure of the underlying problem, sampling in a general discrete space has primarily
relied on Gibbs sampling, which exhibits notoriously poor efficiency in high dimensional spaces.
Recently, a family of locally balanced MCMC samplers for discrete spaces (Zanella, 2020; Grathwohl
π(y)
et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022), using ratio informed proposal distributions, π(x)
,
have significantly improved sampling efficiency by exploiting modern accelerators like GPUs and
TPUs. From the perspective of gradient flow on the Wasserstein manifold of distributions, Gibbs
sampling is simply a coordinate descent algorithm, whereas locally balanced samplers perform
as full gradient descent (Sun et al., 2022a). Despite the advances in locally balanced samplers, a
quantitative benchmark is still missing. As a result, the empirical results in different research papers
may not be comparable. One important reason is that there is no consensus on the experimental
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

