Equivariant Neural Operator Learning with Graphon
Convolution
Chaoran Cheng
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
chaoran7@illinois.edu

Jian Peng
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
jianpeng@illinois.edu

Abstract
We propose a general architecture that combines the coefficient learning scheme
with a residual operator layer for learning mappings between continuous functions in the 3D Euclidean space. Our proposed model is guaranteed to achieve
SE(3)-equivariance by design. From the graph spectrum view, our method can be
interpreted as convolution on graphons (dense graphs with infinitely many nodes),
which we term InfGCN. By leveraging both the continuous graphon structure and
the discrete graph structure of the input data, our model can effectively capture
the geometric information while preserving equivariance. Through extensive experiments on large-scale electron density datasets, we observed that our model
significantly outperformed the current state-of-the-art architectures. Multiple ablation studies were also carried out to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
architecture.

1

Introduction

Continuous functions in the 3D Euclidean space are widely encountered in science and engineering
domains, and learning the mappings between these functions has potentially an amplitude of applications. For example, the Schrödinger equation for the wave-like behavior of the electron in a molecule,
the Helmholtz equation for the time-independent wave functions, and the Navier–Stokes equation
for the dynamics of fluids all output a continuous function spanning over R3 given the initial input.
The discrete structure like the coordinates of the atoms, sources, and sinks also provides crucial
information. Several works have demonstrated the rich geometric information of these data to boost
the performance of other machine learning models, e.g., incorporating electron density data to better
predict the physical properties of molecules [1, 22, 52].
It is common that these data themselves have inherently complicated 3D geometric structures. Work
on directly predicting these structures, however, remains few. The traditional ways of obtaining
such continuous data often rely on quantum chemical computation as the approximation method to
solve ODEs and PDEs. For example, the ground truth electron density is often obtained with ab
initio methods [48, 26] with accurate results but an N 7 computational scaling, making it prohibitive
or inefficient for large molecules. Other methods like the Kohn-Sham density functional theory
(KS-DFT) [24] has an N 3 computational scaling with a relatively large error. Therefore, building an
efficient and accurate machine learning-based electron density estimator will have a positive impact
on this realm.
Similar to the crucial concept of equivariance for discrete 3D scenarios, we can also define equivariance for a function defined on R3 as the property that the output transforms in accordance with the
transformation on the input data. The equivariance property demonstrates the robustness of the model
in the sense that it is independent of the poses of the input structure, thus also serving as an implicit
way of data augmentation such that the model is trained on the whole trajectory of the input sample.
Equivariance on point clouds can be obtained with vector neuron-based models [6, 16, 45, 15] and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

