Reward-Directed Conditional Diffusion: Provable
Distribution Estimation and Reward Improvement

Hui Yuan
Chengzhuo Ni

Kaixuan Huang
Minshuo Chen

Mengdi Wang ∗

Abstract
We explore the methodology and theory of reward-directed generation via conditional diffusion models. Directed generation aims to generate samples with desired
properties as measured by a reward function, which has broad applications in
generative AI, reinforcement learning, and computational biology. We consider the
common learning scenario where the dataset consists of majorly unlabeled data
and a small set of data with noisy reward labels. Our approach leverages a learned
reward function on the smaller data set as a pseudolabeler to label the unlabelled
data. After pseudo-labelling, a conditional diffusion model (CDM) is trained on the
data and samples are generated by setting a target value a as the condition in CDM.
From a theoretical standpoint, we show that this directed generator can effectively
learn and sample from the reward-conditioned data distribution: 1. our model
is capable of recovering the data’s latent subspace representation. 2. the model
generates samples moving closer to the user-specified target. The improvement in
rewards of samples is influenced by a interplay between the strength of the reward
signal, the distribution shift, and the cost of off-support extrapolation. We provide
empirical results to validate our theory and highlight the relationship between
the strength of extrapolation and the quality of generated samples. Our code is
available at https://github.com/Kaffaljidhmah2/RCGDM.

1

Introduction

Controlling the behavior of generative models towards desired properties is a major problem for
deploying deep learning models for real-world usage. As large and powerful pre-trained generative
models achieve steady improvements over the years, one increasingly important question is how to
adopt generative models to fit the needs of a specific domain and to ensure the generation results
satisfying certain constraints (e.g., safety, fairness, physical constraints) without sabotaging the power
of the original pre-trained model [35, 27, 54, 41].
In this paper, we focus on directing the generation of diffusion models [19, 43], a family of scorematching generative models that have demonstrated the state-of-the-art performances in various
domains, such as image generation [39, 38, 4] and audio generation, with fascinating potentials
in broader domains, including text modeling [3, 27], reinforcement learning [21, 1, 36, 28] and
protein structure modeling [26]. Diffusion models are trained to predict a clean version of the noised
input, and generate data by sequentially removing noises and trying to find a cleaner version of
the input. The denoising network (a.k.a. score network) s(x, t) approximates the score function
∇ log pt (x) [45, 46], and controls the behavior of diffusion models. People can incorporate any
control information y as an additional input to s(x, y, t) during the training and inference [38, 54].
∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University. Authors’ emails are: {huiyuan,
kaixuanh, cn10, mc0750, mengdiw}@princeton.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

