Are Diffusion Models Vision-And-Language
Reasoners?
Benno Krojer
Mila & McGill University
benno.krojer@mila.quebec

Elinor Poole-Dayan
McGill University

Christopher Pal
Mila & Polytechnique Montréal
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
ServiceNow Research

Vikram Voleti
Mila & University of Montréal
Stability AI

Siva Reddy
Mila & McGill University
Facebook CIFAR AI Chair
ServiceNow Research

Abstract
Text-conditioned image generation models have recently shown immense qualitative success using denoising diffusion processes. However, unlike discriminative
vision-and-language models, it is a non-trivial task to subject these diffusion-based
generative models to automatic fine-grained quantitative evaluation of high-level
phenomena such as compositionality. Towards this goal, we perform two innovations. First, we transform diffusion-based models (in our case, Stable Diffusion)
for any image-text matching (ITM) task using a novel method called DiffusionITM. Second, we introduce the Generative-Discriminative Evaluation Benchmark
(GDBench) benchmark with 7 complex vision-and-language tasks, bias evaluation
and detailed analysis. We find that Stable Diffusion + DiffusionITM is competitive
on many tasks and outperforms CLIP on compositional tasks like like CLEVR and
Winoground. We further boost its compositional performance with a transfer setup
by fine-tuning on MS-COCO while retaining generative capabilities. We also measure the stereotypical bias in diffusion models, and find that Stable Diffusion 2.1 is,
for the most part, less biased than Stable Diffusion 1.5. Overall, our results point
in an exciting direction bringing discriminative and generative model evaluation
closer. We are releasing code and benchmark setup.1

1

Introduction

Text-to-image generation is rapidly advancing. Generated images are not only highly realistic in
various styles, but also reflect the compositional structure of open-ended text prompts [Chang et al.,
2023, Saharia et al., 2022, Li et al., 2022b]. In this work, we evaluate language-conditioned generative
image models on discriminative tasks to shed light on their fine-grained understanding of vision and
language. A generative objective trains a model to understand how various objects and parts compose
together, and often brings non-trivial emergent capabilities with it such as latent interpolation of
composite concepts [Brock et al., 2019, Rombach et al., 2022]. On the other hand, discriminative
vision-and-language models need only focus on the minimal information required to solve their
discriminative task, which could often be spurious correlations that don’t generalize [Agrawal et al.,
2016]. Such erroneous understanding is then exposed downstream on image-text matching tasks
purposefully designed to catch it, such as image/text retrieval using Winoground [Thrush et al., 2022],
ARO [Yuksekgonul et al., 2023], or ImageCoDe [Krojer et al., 2022]. Following these benchmarks’
releases, there has been a growing focus in the vision-and-language community to fix these problems.
1

https://github.com/McGill-NLP/diffusion-itm

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

