Softmax Output Approximation for
Activation Memory-Efficient Training of
Attention-based Networks
Changhyeon Lee and Seulki Lee
UNIST (Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology)
{changhyeon,seulki.lee}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose to approximate the softmax output, which is the key
product of the attention mechanism, to reduce its activation memory usage when
training attention-based networks (aka Transformers). During the forward pass
of the network, the proposed softmax output approximation method stores only
a small fraction of the entire softmax output required for back-propagation and
evicts the rest of the softmax output from memory. Then, during the backward pass,
the evicted softmax activation output is approximated to compose the gradient to
perform back-propagation for model training. Considering most attention-based
models heavily rely on the softmax-based attention module that usually takes one
of the biggest portions of the network, approximating the softmax activation output
can be a simple yet effective way to decrease the training memory requirement of
many attention-based networks. The experiment with various attention-based models and relevant tasks, i.e., machine translation, text classification, and sentiment
analysis, shows that it curtails the activation memory usage of the softmax-based attention module by up to 84% (6.2× less memory) in model training while achieving
comparable or better performance, e.g., up to 5.4% higher classification accuracy.

1

Introduction

Recently, many attention-based networks, aka Transformers [50], are widely used in many natural
language processing tasks such as machine translation [50, 13], sentiment analysis [52, 29, 34], text
classification [52, 54], and question/answering [47, 53, 20]. Due to their superior performance, they
also have become the backbone of many large language and general task-agnostic models, e.g., GPT
series [41, 5], and are actively expanding to other domains ranging from computer vision (Vision
Transformers [12, 49, 38]) to protein structure predictions (AlphaFold [44, 22]). However, the stellar
performance of attention-based networks comes with significant resource requirements in training,
especially massive memory (RAM) usage. For example, the small-size GPT-2 model [41] is known
to require 27.5 GB of peak memory for its training with a mini-batch of size eight [3]. Hence, the
memory bottleneck problem makes training of attention-based models challenging when massive
memory capacity is not available, e.g., BERT [11] takes 16 TPUs [21], each equipped with 32 TB of
built-in memory, for training, and the regular GPT-2 [41] is reported to be trained with 32 TPUs.
During deep model training, it is required to store various components in memory, i.e., model
parameters, input data, optimizer state, etc., along with activation output, i.e., the intermediate output
of each layer. As the activation output of each layer must be stored in memory for gradient-based
back-propagation [42], the memory capacity required to train a model increases proportionally to the
data sequence length (width), depth of the network, and mini-batch size of the model. Consequently,
as the model gets huge and the training data gets bigger, the activation easily becomes to take up more
memory than other components. Especially, it is more evident in NLP (natural language processing)
tasks, as provided in Figure 1(a) [25], which shows the memory composition required for training
four different attention-based model configurations, ranging from 22 billion to 1 trillion parameters.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

