Offline Reinforcement Learning for Mixture-of-Expert
Dialogue Management

Dhawal Gupta∗
University of Massachusetts
dgupta@cs.umass.edu

Yinlam Chow
Google Research
yinlamchow@google.com

Mohammad Ghavamzadeh†
Amazon
ghavamza@amazon.com

Aza Tulepbergenov
Google Research
atulep@google.com

Craig Boutilier
Google Research
cboutilier@google.com

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown great promise for developing agents for
dialogue management (DM) that are non-myopic, conduct rich conversations, and
maximize overall user satisfaction. Despite the advancements in RL and language
models (LMs), employing RL to drive conversational chatbots still poses significant
challenges. A primary issue stems from RL’s dependency on online exploration
for effective learning, a process that can be costly. Moreover, engaging in online
interactions with humans during the training phase can raise safety concerns, as the
LM can potentially generate unwanted outputs. This issue is exacerbated by the
combinatorial action spaces facing these algorithms, as most LM agents generate
responses at the word level. We develop various RL algorithms, specialized
in dialogue planning, that leverage recent Mixture-of-Expert Language Models
(MoE-LMs)—models that capture diverse semantics, generate utterances reflecting
different intents, and are amenable for multi-turn DM. By exploiting the MoE-LM
structure, our methods significantly reduce the size of the action space and improve
the efficacy of RL-based DM. We evaluate our methods in open-domain dialogue
to demonstrate their effectiveness with respect to the diversity of intent in generated
utterances and overall DM performance.

1

Introduction

Natural language processing (NLP) has made significant strides in recent years, notably in the
field of language generation. Thanks to advances in language modeling, particularly with the use
of the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), NLP models can now generate text that is
often difficult to distinguish from that written by a human. However, despite these advancements,
these models still fall short when it comes to having rich conversations. Current NLP models lack
effective dialogue management: they are good at generating individual sentences, but struggle with
maintaining coherent and engaging conversations. Whereas most compelling conversations generally
span numerous topics, are rather open-ended, and often have an underlying goal (e.g., customer
success, task completion, recommendation). This requires dialogue agents to understand the context
of the conversation and respond appropriately while maintaining the ability to achieve goals.
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a natural approach to learning a policy for a dialogue management
(DM) agent. Earlier work on RL-based dialogue systems relies on specific, hand-crafted semantic
states (Levin and Pieraccini, 1997; Singh et al., 2002; Walker, 2000) or partially observable belief
∗
†

The work was done as a student researcher at Google Research (dhawgupta@google.com).
The work was done prior to joining Amazon, while the author was at Google Research.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

