Causal normalizing flows: from theory to practice
Adrián Javaloy 1,∗ Pablo Sánchez-Martı́n 1,2
1

Isabel Valera 1,3

Department of Computer Science of Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract
In this work, we deepen on the use of normalizing flows for causal inference.
Specifically, we first leverage recent results on non-linear ICA to show that causal
models are identifiable from observational data given a causal ordering, and thus
can be recovered using autoregressive normalizing flows (NFs). Second, we
analyse different design and learning choices for causal normalizing flows to
capture the underlying causal data-generating process. Third, we describe how to
implement the do-operator in causal NFs, and thus, how to answer interventional
and counterfactual questions. Finally, in our experiments, we validate our design
and training choices through a comprehensive ablation study; compare causal NFs
to other approaches for approximating causal models; and empirically demonstrate
that causal NFs can be used to address real-world problems—where mixed discretecontinuous data and partial knowledge on the causal graph is the norm. The code
for this work can be found at https://github.com/psanch21/causal-flows.

1

Introduction
German Credit - Checking account

0.8
Deep learning is increasingly used for causal reasobservational
real data
0.7
estimated
oning, that is, for finding the underlying causal relado(x = 0)
0.6
do(x = 1)
tionships among the observed variables (causal dis0.5
covery), and answering what-if questions (causal
0.4
inference) from available data [28]. Our focus in
0.3
this paper is to solve causal inference problems us0.2
ing only observational data and (potentially partial)
0.1
knowledge on the causal graph of the underlying
0.0
structural causal model (SCM). This is exemplified
Negative
Average
High
in Fig. 1, where our proposed framework is able to
estimate the (unobserved) causal effect of externally Figure 1: Observational and interventional
intervening on the sensitive attribute (red and yellow distributions of the categorical variable checkdistributions), using solely observed data (blue dis- ing account of the German Credit dataset [8],
tribution) and partial information about the causal and their estimated values according to a
relationship between features.
causal normalizing flow. xS is a binary variIn this context, previous works have mostly relied on able representing the users’ sex.
different deep neural networks (DNNs)—e.g., normalizing flows (NFs) [23, 26, 27], generative adversarial networks (GANs) [20, 39], variational
autoencoders (VAEs) [15, 40], Gaussian processes (GPs) [15], or denoising diffusion probabilistic
models (DDPMs) [2]—to iteratively estimate the conditional distribution of each observed variable
given its causal parents, thus using an independent DNN per observed variable. Hence, to predict the
effect of an intervention in the causal data-generating process, these approaches fix the value of the
intervened variables when computing the new value for their children. However, they may also suffer
S

Probability

S

∗

Correspondence to ajavaloy@cs.uni-saarland.de.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

