Effectively Learning Initiation Sets in
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning

Akhil Bagaria∗
Brown University
Providence, RI, USA.
akhil_bagaria@brown.edu
Matt Corsaro
Brown University,
Providence, RI, USA.
matthew_corsaro@brown.edu

Ben Abbatematteo∗
Brown University,
Providence, RI, USA.
abba@brown.edu

Omer Gottesman†
Amazon,
New York, NY, USA.
omergott@gmail.com

Sreehari Rammohan
Brown University,
Providence, RI, USA.
sreehari_rammohan@brown.edu

George Konidaris
Brown University,
Providence, RI, USA.
gdk@cs.brown.edu

Abstract
An agent learning an option in hierarchical reinforcement learning must solve three
problems: identify the option’s subgoal (termination condition), learn a policy, and
learn where that policy will succeed (initiation set). The termination condition is
typically identified first, but the option policy and initiation set must be learned
simultaneously, which is challenging because the initiation set depends on the
option policy, which changes as the agent learns. Consequently, data obtained from
option execution becomes invalid over time, leading to an inaccurate initiation
set that subsequently harms downstream task performance. We highlight three
issues—data non-stationarity, temporal credit assignment, and pessimism—specific
to learning initiation sets, and propose to address them using tools from off-policy
value estimation and classification. We show that our method learns higher-quality
initiation sets faster than existing methods (in M INI G RID and M ONTEZUMA’ S
R EVENGE), can automatically discover promising grasps for robot manipulation (in
ROBOSUITE), and improves the performance of a state-of-the-art option discovery
method in a challenging maze navigation task in MuJoCo.

1

Introduction

Temporal abstraction, which is crucial for scaling RL to long-horizon problems [Konidaris, 2019,
Sutton et al., 2022], is elegantly captured using the options framework [Sutton et al., 1999]. Unlike
primitive actions that only last for a single timestep, options execute a policy until some termination
condition is met. General purpose agents must possess many such options to solve a wide variety of
tasks [White, 2017], but increasing the size of the action set raises both the complexity of learning
and the branching factor of search [Littman et al., 1995]. This necessitates a mechanism for locally
pruning irrelevant options: most options do not apply in a given state and the agent can lower its
effective branching factor by ignoring them [Precup et al., 1998, Wen et al., 2020]. Fortunately, the
options framework includes the concept of initiation sets which captures the idea of local applicability:
an option can only be executed from states inside the initiation set.
It is natural to view an initiation set as the set of states from which option execution is likely
to succeed; in that case, learning it is straightforward when the option’s policy is fixed: run the
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Work done while at Brown University.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

