Classification of Heavy-tailed Features in High
Dimensions: a Superstatistical Approach
Urte Adomaityte
Department of Mathematics
King’s College London
urte.adomaityte@kcl.ac.uk

Gabriele Sicuro
Department of Mathematics
King’s College London
gabriele.sicuro@kcl.ac.uk

Pierpaolo Vivo
Department of Mathematics
King’s College London
pierpaolo.vivo@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
We characterise the learning of a mixture of two clouds of data points with generic
centroids via empirical risk minimisation in the high dimensional regime, under
the assumptions of generic convex loss and convex regularisation. Each cloud
of data points is obtained via a double-stochastic process, where the sample is
drawn from a Gaussian distribution whose variance is itself a random parameter
sampled from a scalar distribution r. As a result, our analysis covers a large family
of data distributions, including the case of power-law-tailed distributions with no
covariance, and allows us to test recent “Gaussian universality” claims. We study
the generalisation performance of the obtained estimator, we analyse the role of
regularisation, and we analytically characterise the separability transition.

1

Introduction

Generalised linear models (GLMs) are still ubiquitous in the theoretical research on machine learning,
despite their simplicity. Their nontrivial phenomenology is often amenable to complete analytical
treatment and has been key to understanding the unexpected behavior of large and complex architectures. Random features models [61, 47, 24], for example, allowed to clarify many aspects of the
well-known double-descent phenomenon in neural networks [54, 8, 9]. A line of research spanning
more than three decades [68, 74] has considered a variety of GLMs to investigate a number of aspects
of learning in high dimensions. Yet, a crucial assumption adopted in many such theoretical models
is that the covariates are obtained from a Gaussian distribution, or from a mixture of Gaussian
distributions [42, 49, 3, 37, 43]. Although such a Gaussian design has served as a convenient working
hypothesis (in some cases experimentally and theoretically justified [67, 44]), it is however not
obvious how much it limits the scope of the results. It is reasonable to expect structure, heavy
tails, and large fluctuations in real (often non-Gaussian) data [1, 62] to play an important role in the
learning process, and it would be therefore desirable to include structured and heavy-tailed-distributed
covariates in our theoretical toolbox.
This paper presents, to the best of our knowledge for the first time, the exact asymptotics for
classification tasks on covariates obtained from a mixture of heavy-tailed distributions. We focus
on supervised binary classification assuming that the sample size = and the dimensionality 3 of the
space where the covariates live are both sent to infinity, keeping their ratio =/3 = U fixed. The paper
fits therefore in the line of works on exact high-dimensional asymptotics for classification learning
via a GLM [49, 43], but, crucially, we relax the usual Gaussian data hypothesis by including in our
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

