Last-Iterate Convergent Policy Gradient
Primal-Dual Methods for Constrained MDPs
Dongsheng Ding∗
University of Pennsylvania
dongshed@seas.upenn.edu

Chen-Yu Wei∗
University of Virginia
chenyu.wei@virginia.edu

Kaiqing Zhang∗
University of Maryland, College Park
kaiqing@umd.edu

Alejandro Ribeiro
University of Pennsylvania
aribeiro@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of computing an optimal policy of an infinite-horizon discounted constrained Markov decision process (constrained MDP). Despite the
popularity of Lagrangian-based policy search methods used in practice, the oscillation of policy iterates in these methods has not been fully understood, bringing
out issues such as violation of constraints and sensitivity to hyper-parameters. To
fill this gap, we employ the Lagrangian method to cast a constrained MDP into
a constrained saddle-point problem in which max/min players correspond to primal/dual variables, respectively, and develop two single-time-scale policy-based
primal-dual algorithms with non-asymptotic convergence of their policy iterates to
an optimal constrained policy. Specifically, we first propose a regularized policy
gradient primal-dual (RPG-PD) method that updates the policy using an entropyregularized policy gradient, and the dual variable via a quadratic-regularized gradient ascent, simultaneously. We prove that the policy primal-dual iterates of
RPG-PD converge to a regularized saddle point with a sublinear rate, while the
policy iterates converge sublinearly to an optimal constrained policy. We further
instantiate RPG-PD in large state or action spaces by including function approximation in policy parametrization, and establish similar sublinear last-iterate policy convergence. Second, we propose an optimistic policy gradient primal-dual
(OPG-PD) method that employs the optimistic gradient method to update primal/dual variables, simultaneously. We prove that the policy primal-dual iterates
of OPG-PD converge to a saddle point that contains an optimal constrained policy,
with a linear rate. To the best of our knowledge, this work appears to be the first
non-asymptotic policy last-iterate convergence result for single-time-scale algorithms in constrained MDPs. We further validate the merits and the effectiveness
of our methods in computational experiments.

1

Introduction

Constrained Markov decision process (Constrained MDP) is the classical model for constrained
dynamic systems in the early stochastic control literature (e.g., [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]) and the recent constrained reinforcement learning (RL) literature (e.g., [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]). It is applicable to many
constrained control problems by integrating other system specifications in constraints, and admits
a natural extension of constrained optimization and Lagrangian in policy space. Lagrangian-based
policy search methods, especially policy-based primal-dual methods that work simultaneously with
∗

Alphabetical order.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

