Temporal Graph Benchmark
for Machine Learning on Temporal Graphs

Shenyang Huang1,2,∗ Farimah Poursafaei1,2,∗ Jacob Danovitch1,2 Matthias Fey3
Weihua Hu3 Emanuele Rossi4 Jure Leskovec7 Michael Bronstein8
Guillaume Rabusseau1,5,6 Reihaneh Rabbany1,2,6
1
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, 2 School of Computer Science, McGill University
3
Kumo.AI, 4 Imperial College London, 5 DIRO, Université de Montréal
6
CIFAR AI Chair, 7 Stanford University, 8 University of Oxford

Abstract
We present the Temporal Graph Benchmark (TGB), a collection of challenging
and diverse benchmark datasets for realistic, reproducible, and robust evaluation of machine learning models on temporal graphs. TGB datasets are of large
scale, spanning years in duration, incorporate both node and edge-level prediction
tasks and cover a diverse set of domains including social, trade, transaction, and
transportation networks. For both tasks, we design evaluation protocols based
on realistic use-cases. We extensively benchmark each dataset and find that the
performance of common models can vary drastically across datasets. In addition,
on dynamic node property prediction tasks, we show that simple methods often
achieve superior performance compared to existing temporal graph models. We
believe that these findings open up opportunities for future research on temporal graphs. Finally, TGB provides an automated machine learning pipeline for
reproducible and accessible temporal graph research, including data loading, experiment setup and performance evaluation. TGB will be maintained and updated
on a regular basis and welcomes community feedback. TGB datasets, data loaders, example codes, evaluation setup, and leaderboards are publicly available at
https://tgb.complexdatalab.com/.

1

Introduction

Many real-world systems such as social networks, transaction networks, and molecular structures can
be effectively modeled as graphs, where nodes correspond to entities and edges are relations between
entities. Recently, significant advances have been made for machine learning on static graphs, led
by the use of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [22, 43, 7] and Graph Transformers [34, 23, 12], and
accelerated by the availability of public datasets and standardized evaluations protocols, such as the
widely adopted Open Graph Benchmark (OGB) [17].
However, most available graph datasets are designed only for static graphs and lack the fine-grained
timestamp information often seen in many real-world networks that evolve over time. Examples
include social networks [32], transportation networks [8], transaction networks [38] and trade
networks [33]. Such networks are formalized as Temporal Graphs (TGs) where the nodes, edges, and
their features change dynamically.
A variety of machine learning approaches tailored for learning on TGs have been proposed in recent
years, often demonstrating promising performance [35, 9, 40, 25, 20]. However, Poursafaei et al. [33]
recently revealed an important issue: these TG methods often portray an over-optimistic performance
∗

Equal contributions

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

