Sequential Memory with Temporal Predictive Coding

Mufeng Tang, Helen Barron, Rafal Bogacz
MRC Brain Network Dynamics Unit, University of Oxford, UK
{mufeng.tang, helen.barron, rafal.bogacz}@bndu.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Forming accurate memory of sequential stimuli is a fundamental function of
biological agents. However, the computational mechanism underlying sequential
memory in the brain remains unclear. Inspired by neuroscience theories and
recent successes in applying predictive coding (PC) to static memory tasks, in this
work we propose a novel PC-based model for sequential memory, called temporal
predictive coding (tPC). We show that our tPC models can memorize and retrieve
sequential inputs accurately with a biologically plausible neural implementation.
Importantly, our analytical study reveals that tPC can be viewed as a classical
Asymmetric Hopfield Network (AHN) with an implicit statistical whitening process,
which leads to more stable performance in sequential memory tasks of structured
inputs. Moreover, we find that tPC exhibits properties consistent with behavioral
observations and theories in neuroscience, thereby strengthening its biological
relevance. Our work establishes a possible computational mechanism underlying
sequential memory in the brain that can also be theoretically interpreted using
existing memory model frameworks.

1

Introduction

The ability to memorize and recall sequences of events with temporal dependencies is crucial for
biological memory systems that also underpins many other neural processes [1–3]. For example,
forming correct memories of words requires humans to memorize not only individual letters but
also the sequential order following which the letters appear (e.g., “cat” and “act”). However, despite
extensive research into models of static, temporally unrelated memories from both neuroscience
and machine learning [4–10], computational modeling of sequential memory is not as developed.
Existing models for sequential memory are either analytically intractable or have not yet been systematically evaluated in challenging sequential memory tasks [11–15], which hinders a comprehensive
understanding of the computational mechanism underlying sequential memory, arguably a more
general form of memory in the natural world than static memories.
In this work, we propose a novel approach to modeling sequential memory based on predictive coding
(PC) [16–18], a biologically plausible neural network model able to reproduce many phenomena
observed in the brain [19], which has also shown to have a close relationship to backpropagation
in artificial neural networks [20, 21]. Using PC to model sequential memory is motivated by two
key factors: Firstly, neuroscience experiments and theories have suggested that (temporal) predictive
processing and memory are two highly related computations in the hippocampus, the brain region
crucial for memory [22, 23]. Secondly, the modeling of static memories (e.g., a single image) using
PC has recently demonstrated significant success [8, 10, 24, 25], raising the question of whether PC
can also be employed to model sequential memory. To take into account the temporal dimension in
sequential memory, in this work we adopt a temporal extension of the original PC models, which has
been employed in filtering problems and in modeling the visual system [26–29]. Here we investigate
its performance in sequential memory tasks. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

