Real3D-AD: A Dataset of Point Cloud Anomaly
Detection
Jiaqi Liu1,∗, Guoyang Xie1,2,∗ , Ruitao Chen1,∗ , Xinpeng Li1 , Jinbao Wang1,† , Yong Liu3 ,
Chengjie Wang3,4 , Feng Zheng1,†
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
2
NICE Group, University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7YX, United Kingdom
3
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shenzhen 518057, China
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
liujq32021@mail.sustech.edu.cn, guoyang.xie@ieee.org
linkingring@163.com, chenrt2022@mail.sustech.edu.cn
li.xin.peng@outlook.com, chaosliu@tencent.com
jasoncjwang@tencent.com, zfeng02@gmail.com

Abstract
High-precision point cloud anomaly detection is the gold standard for identifying the defects of advancing machining and precision manufacturing. Despite
some methodological advances in this area, the scarcity of datasets and the lack
of a systematic benchmark hinder its development. We introduce Real3D-AD,
a challenging high-precision point cloud anomaly detection dataset, addressing
the limitations in the field. With 1,254 high-resolution 3D items (from forty thousand to millions of points for each item), Real3D-AD is the largest dataset for
high-precision 3D industrial anomaly detection to date. Real3D-AD surpasses
existing 3D anomaly detection datasets available regarding point cloud resolution
(0.0010mm-0.0015mm), 360 degree coverage and perfect prototype. Additionally,
we present a comprehensive benchmark for Real3D-AD, revealing the absence
of baseline methods for high-precision point cloud anomaly detection. To address this, we propose Reg3D-AD, a registration-based 3D anomaly detection
method incorporating a novel feature memory bank that preserves local and global
representations. Extensive experiments on the Real3D-AD dataset highlight the
effectiveness of Reg3D-AD. For reproducibility and accessibility, we provide
the Real3D-AD dataset, benchmark source code, and Reg3D-AD on our website:https://github.com/M-3LAB/Real3D-AD.

1

Introduction

Real 3D-AD Motivation: 3D > 2.5D. There is a solid need to propose a high-resolution point
cloud anomaly detection dataset to tap the gap between the academy and industry, which brings the
capabilities of point cloud anomaly detection to the factory floor. Point cloud anomaly detection is
widely deployed in real-world production lines. However, 3D anomaly detection datasets released in
the academy are RGBD (2.5D), which is outside the demand of industrial manufacturing. Advanced
machining and precision manufacturing require no blind spots throughout the inspection process.
Nevertheless, the blind spots exist because RGBD datasets are achieved via single-view scanning.
The lack of a real point cloud anomaly detection dataset hinders the further development of 3D
∗

Contributed Equally, † Corresponding Authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

