Benchmarking Robustness of Adaptation Methods on
Pre-trained Vision-Language Models

1

Shuo Chen1,3∗ Jindong Gu2∗ Zhen Han1† Yunpu Ma1,3 Philip Torr2 Volker Tresp1,4
Institute of Informatics, LMU Munich 2 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
3
Siemens AG 4 Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
shuo.chen@campus.lmu.de, jindong.gu@eng.ox.ac.uk, hanzhen02111@163.com

Abstract
Various adaptation methods, such as LoRA, prompts, and adapters, have been
proposed to enhance the performance of pre-trained vision-language models in
specific domains. As test samples in real-world applications usually differ from
adaptation data, studying the robustness of these adaptation methods against distribution shifts is essential. In this study, we assess the robustness of 11 widely-used
adaptation methods across 4 vision-language datasets under multimodal corruptions. Concretely, we introduce 7 benchmark datasets, including 96 visual and 87
textual corruptions, to investigate the robustness of different adaptation methods,
the impact of available adaptation examples, and the influence of trainable parameter size during adaptation. Our analysis reveals that: 1) Adaptation methods are
more sensitive to text corruptions than visual corruptions. 2) Full fine-tuning does
not consistently provide the highest robustness; instead, adapters can achieve better
robustness with comparable clean performance. 3) Contrary to expectations, our
findings indicate that increasing the number of adaptation data and parameters does
not guarantee enhanced robustness; instead, it results in even lower robustness.
We hope this study could benefit future research in developing robust multimodal
adaptation methods. The benchmark, code, and dataset used in this study can be
accessed at https://adarobustness.github.io.

1

Introduction

Employing large-scale pre-training of vision-language (VL) models has become the standard for work
on VL tasks [38, 70, 39, 71, 70, 2, 71, 77]. These models are typically trained in a self-supervised
manner on unlabeled web-scale datasets in a general domain [54, 1]. To address the domain-specific
challenges and improve performance on downstream tasks, various model adaptation methods have
been proposed [29, 46, 43, 33, 36, 25, 63, 76, 30].
Although adaptation methods can achieve promising results on various VL benchmark datasets,
real-world applications often introduce various distribution shifts that differ from the conditions
encountered during model adaptation [44]. For instance, these shifts can manifest as variations in
lighting conditions in images and typos in texts. Therefore, it is critical to ensure model robustness
against distribution shifts, particularly in safety-critical applications where unexpected wrong decisions can have severe consequences, such as self-driving systems [67, 56, 44] and clinical diagnostics
[35, 47]. However, robustness research for multimodal models is still rare, leaving many essential
questions unanswered: Which adaptation methods perform better on which tasks in terms of both
performance and robustness? How robust are the various multimodal adaptation methods against
∗
†

equal contribution
corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

