On the Relationship Between Relevance and Conflict
in Online Social Link Recommendations
Jon Kleinberg
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
kleinberg@cornell.edu

Yanbang Wang
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
ywangdr@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
In an online social network, link recommendations are a way for users to discover
relevant links to people they may know, thereby potentially increasing their engagement on the platform. However, the addition of links to a social network can
also have an effect on the level of conflict in the network — expressed in terms of
polarization and disagreement. To this date, however, we have very little understanding of how these two implications of link formation relate to each other: are
the goals of high relevance and conflict reduction aligned, or are the links that users
are most likely to accept fundamentally different from the ones with the greatest
potential for reducing conflict? Here we provide the first analysis of this question,
using the recently popular Friedkin-Johnsen model of opinion dynamics. We first
present a surprising result on how link additions shift the level of opinion conflict,
followed by explanation work that relates the amount of shift to structural features
of the added links. We then characterize the gap in conflict reduction between
the set of links achieving the largest reduction and the set of links achieving the
highest relevance. The gap is measured on real-world data, based on instantiations
of relevance defined by 13 link recommendation algorithms. We find that some, but
not all, of the more accurate algorithms actually lead to better reduction of conflict.
Our work suggests that social links recommended for increasing user engagement
may not be as conflict-provoking as people might have thought.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen an explosion in the usage of social media and online social networks. In 2022,
an estimated 4.6 billion people worldwide used online social networks regularly [1]. Online social
networks such as Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter are transforming the society by enabling people to
exchange opinions and knowledge at an unprecedented rate and scale.
However, there are also significant concerns about the disruptive effects of social media, as people
observe the growing level of polarization and disagreement in online communities. Conflicts arise
over topics ranging from politics [2, 3], to entertainment [4, 5] and healthcare [6]. For our purposes in
this paper, we will adopt terminology from the social sciences in distinguishing between polarization
and disagreement as follows: polarization will refer to how much people’s opinions deviate from
the average, and disagreement will refer to how much people directly connected to each other in the
social network differ in their opinions.
Reducing polarization and disagreement can be a benefit both to individual users of these platforms,
who would experience less conflict and stress, and potentially also to the platforms themselves, to the
extent that too much contentiousness can make the platform unattractive to users.
The root causes of increased polarization and disagreement have been the subject of much concern
and debate. One popular idea is Eli Pariser’s “filter bubble” theory [7]. The theory attributes
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

