3D-LLM: Injecting the 3D World
into Large Language Models

Yining Hong
University of California, Los Angeles
Peihao Chen
South China University of Technology

Haoyu Zhen
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shuhong Zheng
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Yilun Du
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Zhenfang Chen
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Chuang Gan
UMass Amherst and MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) and Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have been
proven to excel at multiple tasks, such as commonsense reasoning. Powerful as
these models can be, they are not grounded in the 3D physical world, which involves
richer concepts such as spatial relationships, affordances, physics, layout, and so
on. In this work, we propose to inject the 3D world into large language models and
introduce a whole new family of 3D-LLMs. Specifically, 3D-LLMs can take 3D
point clouds and their features as input and perform a diverse set of 3D-related tasks,
including captioning, dense captioning, 3D question answering, task decomposition,
3D grounding, 3D-assisted dialog, navigation, and so on. Using three types of
prompting mechanisms that we design, we are able to collect over 1M 3D-language
data covering these tasks. To efficiently train 3D-LLMs, we first utilize a 3D
feature extractor that obtains 3D features from rendered multi-view images. Then,
we use 2D VLMs as our backbones to train our 3D-LLMs. By introducing a
3D localization mechanism, 3D-LLMs can better capture 3D spatial information.
Experiments on held-out evaluation dataset, ScanQA, SQA3D and 3DMV-VQA,
outperform state-of-the-art baselines. In particular, experiments on ScanQA show
that our model outperforms state-of-the-art baselines by a large margin (e.g., the
BLEU-1 score surpasses state-of-the-art score by 9%). Furthermore, experiments
on our held-in datasets for 3D captioning, task composition, and 3D-assisted
dialogue show that our model outperforms 2D VLMs. Qualitative examples also
show that our model could perform more tasks beyond the scope of existing LLMs
and VLMs. Project Page: : https://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/3dllm/.

1

Introduction

In the past several years, we have witnessed a surge of large language models (LLMs) (e.g., GPT4
[33]) that excel at multiple tasks, such as communication and commonsense reasoning. Recent
works have explored aligning images and videos with LLM for a new generation of multi-modal
LLMs (e.g., Flamingo [15], BLIP-2 [29]) that equip LLMs with the ability to understand and reason
about 2D images. However, as powerful as the models can be in communication and reasoning,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

