R-divergence for Estimating Model-oriented
Distribution Discrepancy

Zhilin Zhao
Longbing Cao
Data Science Lab, School of Computing & DataX Research Centre
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia
zhaozhl7@hotmail.com, longbing.cao@mq.edu.au

Abstract
Real-life data are often non-IID due to complex distributions and interactions, and
the sensitivity to the distribution of samples can differ among learning models.
Accordingly, a key question for any supervised or unsupervised model is whether
the probability distributions of two given datasets can be considered identical.
To address this question, we introduce R-divergence, designed to assess modeloriented distribution discrepancies. The core insight is that two distributions are
likely identical if their optimal hypothesis yields the same expected risk for each
distribution. To estimate the distribution discrepancy between two datasets, Rdivergence learns a minimum hypothesis on the mixed data and then gauges the
empirical risk difference between them. We evaluate the test power across various
unsupervised and supervised tasks and find that R-divergence achieves state-ofthe-art performance. To demonstrate the practicality of R-divergence, we employ
R-divergence to train robust neural networks on samples with noisy labels.

1

Introduction

Most machine learning methods rely on the basic independent and identically distributed (IID) assumption [7], implying that variables are drawn independently from the same distribution. However,
real-life data and machine learning models often deviate from this IID assumption due to various complexities, such as mixture distributions and interactions [9]. For a given supervised or unsupervised
task [45], a learning model derives an optimal hypothesis from a hypothesis space by optimizing
the corresponding expected risk [53]. However, this optimal hypothesis may not be valid if the
distributions of training and test samples differ [54], resulting in distributional vulnerability [63]. In
fact, an increasing body of research addresses complex non-IID scenarios [8], including open-world
problems [6], out-of-distribution detection [23, 63], domain adaptation [28], and learning with noisy
labels [46]. These scenarios raise a crucial yet challenging question: how to assess the discrepancy
between two probability distributions for a specific learning model?
Empirically, the discrepancy between two probability distributions can be assessed by the divergence
between their respective datasets. However, the actual underlying distributions are often unknown,
with only a limited number of samples available for observation. Whether the samples from two
datasets come from the same distribution is contingent upon the specific learning model being
used. This is because different learning models possess unique hypothesis spaces, loss functions,
target functions, and optimization processes, which result in varying sensitivities to distribution
discrepancies. For instance, in binary classification [26], samples from two datasets might be
treated as positive and negative, respectively, indicating that they stem from different distributions.
Conversely, a model designed to focus on invariant features is more likely to treat all samples as if they
are drawn from the same distribution. For example, in one-class classification [52], all samples are
considered positive, even though they may come from different components of a mixture distribution.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

