Enhancing Robot Program Synthesis Through
Environmental Context
Tianyi Chen
Fudan University
tianychen21@m.fudan.edu.cn
Zhen Dong†
Fudan University
zhendong@fudan.edu.cn

Qidi Wang
Fudan University
21210240038@m.fudan.edu.cn

Liwei Shen
Fudan University
shenliwei@fudan.edu.cn

Xin Peng
Fudan University
pengxin@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Program synthesis aims to automatically generate an executable program that
conforms to the given specification. Recent advancements have demonstrated
that deep neural methodologies and large-scale pretrained language models are
highly proficient in capturing program semantics. For robot programming, prior
works have facilitated program synthesis by incorporating global environments.
However, the assumption of acquiring a comprehensive understanding of the
entire environment is often excessively challenging to achieve. In this work, we
present a framework that learns to synthesize a program by rectifying potentially
erroneous code segments, with the aid of partially observed environments. To
tackle the issue of inadequate attention to partial observations, we propose to first
learn an environment embedding space that can implicitly evaluate the impacts
of each program token based on the precondition. Furthermore, by employing
a graph structure, the model can aggregate both environmental and syntactic
information flow and furnish smooth program rectification guidance. Extensive
experimental evaluations and ablation studies on the partially observed VizDoom
domain authenticate that our method offers superior generalization capability across
various tasks and greater robustness when encountering noises.

1

Introduction

Program synthesis endeavors to produce an executable program that fulfills the prescribed specifications. Given that formulating a definitive and lucid specification can often prove more arduous than
physically authoring the program, a widely-used method is to furnish input/output (I/O) examples as
a close approximation of the requisite specification [16, 17, 27, 34], also known as Programming By
Example (PBE). It allows a more straightforward presentation of the desired program functionality.
The utilization of PBE enables machines to acquire the capacity to implicitly capture a set of regulations and generalize them to analogous scenarios. Over the past few years, PBE has demonstrated its
remarkable potential to elevate automation and ease human labor in numerous domains, including
but not limited to array transformation [3, 46, 56], graphic design [16], and comprehension of human
demonstrations [21, 42].
In the realm of robot programs, a crucial factor is the interaction between the robot and its environment.
In practice, a robot can solely rely on its sensors to perceive the environment by gathering diverse
types of data, which forms the basis for every decision. Consider a robot designed for food delivery,
†

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

