Auditing Fairness by Betting

Ben Chugg1 , Santiago Cortes-Gomez1 , Bryan Wilder1 , Aaditya Ramdas1,2
Departments of Machine Learning1 and Statistics2
Carnegie Mellon University
{benchugg, scortesg, bwilder, aramdas}@cmu.edu

Abstract
We provide practical, efficient, and nonparametric methods for auditing the fairness
of deployed classification and regression models. Whereas previous work relies
on a fixed-sample size, our methods are sequential and allow for the continuous
monitoring of incoming data, making them highly amenable to tracking the fairness
of real-world systems. We also allow the data to be collected by a probabilistic
policy as opposed to sampled uniformly from the population. This enables auditing
to be conducted on data gathered for another purpose. Moreover, this policy may
change over time and different policies may be used on different subpopulations.
Finally, our methods can handle distribution shift resulting from either changes to
the model or changes in the underlying population. Our approach is based on recent
progress in anytime-valid inference and game-theoretic statistics—the “testing by
betting” framework in particular. These connections ensure that our methods are
interpretable, fast, and easy to implement. We demonstrate the efficacy of our
approach on three benchmark fairness datasets.

1

Introduction

As algorithmic decision-making continues to increase in prevalence across both the private and public
sectors [1, 2], there has been an increasing push to scrutinize the fairness of these systems. This
has lead to an explosion of interest in so-called “algorithmic fairness”, and a significant body of
work has focused on both defining fairness and training models in fair ways (e.g., [3–5]). However,
preventing and redressing harms in real systems also requires the ability to audit models in order
to assess their impact; such algorithmic audits are an increasing area of focus for researchers and
practitioners [6–9]. Auditing may begin during model development [10], but as model behavior
often changes over time throughout real-world deployment in response to distribution shift or model
updates [11, 12], it is often necessary to repeatedly audit the performance of algorithmic systems
over time [8, 13]. Detecting whether deployed models continue to meet various fairness criteria is of
paramount importance to deciding whether an automated decision-making system continues to act
reliably and whether intervention is necessary.
In this work, we consider the perspective of an auditor or auditing agency tasked with determining if
a model deployed “in the wild” is fair or not. Data concerning the system’s decisions are gathered
over time (perhaps with the purpose of testing fairness but perhaps for another purpose) and our goal
is to determine if there is sufficient evidence to conclude that the system is unfair. If a system is in
fact unfair, we want to determine so as early as possible, both in order to avert harms to users and
because auditing may require expensive investment to collect or label samples [8, 13]. Following
the recent work of Taskesen et al. [14] and Si et al. [15], a natural statistical framework for thinking
about this problem is hypothesis testing. Informally, consider the null and alternative hypotheses, H0
and H1 , defined respectively as
H0 : the model is fair,

H1 : the model is unfair.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

