SatBird: Bird Species Distribution Modeling with
Remote Sensing and Citizen Science Data

Mélisande Teng
Mila, Université de Montréal
tengmeli@mila.quebec

Amna Elmustafa
Mila, Stanford University
amna.elmustafa@mila.quebec

Yoshua Bengio
Mila, Université de Montréal
yoshua.bengio@mila.quebec
Hugo Larochelle
Mila, Google Research, Google Deepmind
hugolarochelle@google.com

Benjamin Akera
Mila, McGill University
akeraben@mila.quebec

Hager Radi Abdelwahed
Mila
hager.radi@mila.quebec
David Rolnick
Mila, McGill University
drolnick@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Biodiversity is declining at an unprecedented rate, impacting ecosystem services
necessary to ensure food, water, and human health and well-being. Understanding
the distribution of species and their habitats is crucial for conservation policy
planning. However, traditional methods in ecology for species distribution models
(SDMs) generally focus either on narrow sets of species or narrow geographical
areas and there remain significant knowledge gaps about the distribution of species.
A major reason for this is the limited availability of data traditionally used, due
to the prohibitive amount of effort and expertise required for traditional field
monitoring. The wide availability of remote sensing data and the growing adoption
of citizen science tools to collect species observations data at low cost offer an
opportunity for improving biodiversity monitoring and enabling the modelling
of complex ecosystems. We introduce a novel task for mapping bird species to
their habitats by predicting species encounter rates from satellite images, and
present SatBird1 , a satellite dataset of locations in the USA with labels derived
from presence-absence observation data from the citizen science database eBird,
considering summer (breeding) and winter seasons. We also provide a dataset in
Kenya representing low-data regimes. We additionally provide environmental data
and species range maps for each location. We benchmark a set of baselines on
our dataset, including SOTA models for remote sensing tasks. SatBird opens up
possibilities for scalably modelling properties of ecosystems worldwide.

1

Introduction

Climate change is a major driver of biodiversity loss, affecting ecosystem services which, in turn, impacts various human wellbeing aspects [32, 45]. It is crucial to understand the changing distributions
of species globally to inform policy decisions, for example in shaping land use and land conservation
choices. However, there remain large knowledge gaps about species distribution, due principally to
the amount of effort and expertise required for traditional field monitoring. Furthermore, mapping
species habitats at scale can be challenging as habitats have varying scales depending on species.
1

Project Website: https://satbird.github.io/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

