Robust Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training
against Data Poisoning and Backdoor Attacks

Wenhan Yang

Jingdong Gao
Baharan Mirzasoleiman
{hangeryang18, mxuan, baharan}@cs.ucla.edu
Computer Science Department, UCLA

Abstract
Contrastive vision-language representation learning has achieved state-of-the-art
performance for zero-shot classification, by learning from millions of imagecaption pairs crawled from the internet. However, the massive data that powers
large multimodal models such as CLIP, makes them extremely vulnerable to various
types of targeted data poisoning and backdoor attacks. Despite this vulnerability,
robust contrastive vision-language pre-training against such attacks has remained
unaddressed. In this work, we propose RO CLIP, the first effective method for
robust pre-training multimodal vision-language models against targeted data poisoning and backdoor attacks. RO CLIP effectively breaks the association between
poisoned image-caption pairs by considering a relatively large and varying pool
of random captions, and matching every image with the text that is most similar
to it in the pool instead of its own caption, every few epochs.It also leverages
image and text augmentations to further strengthen the defense and improve the
performance of the model. Our extensive experiments show that RO CLIP renders
state-of-the-art targeted data poisoning and backdoor attacks ineffective during
pre-training CLIP models. In particular, RO CLIP decreases the success rate for
targeted data poisoning attacks from 93.75% to 12.5% and that of backdoor attacks
down to 0%, while improving the model’s linear probe performance by 10% and
maintains a similar zero shot performance compared to CLIP. By increasing the
frequency of matching, RO CLIP is able to defend strong attacks, which add up to
1% poisoned examples to the data, and successfully maintain a low attack success
rate of 12.5%, while trading off the performance on some tasks 1 .

1

Introduction

Recent large-scale vision-language models pre-trained on millions of image-caption pairs crawled
from the internet has gained an unprecedented success. Large-scale vision-language models such as
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021) are trained using a multimodal contrastive
loss which pulls the representations of every image-caption pair together while pushing those of
different pairs apart. In doing so, they can learn state-of-the-art image representations, without the
need for a fixed set of predetermined labels to be specified at pte-training time. This enables zero-shot
transfer of the model to downstream tasks, without requiring specialized output heads or dataset
specific customization. Instead, natural language can be used to reference the learned visual concepts
afterwards (Radford et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021). Crucially, alleviating the need for expensive
labeling of training examples enables scaling up the training data to millions of examples. However,
the massive data that powers such large models also makes them extremely vulnerable to various
types of targeted data poisoning and backdoor attacks (Carlini & Terzis, 2021; Yang et al., 2022).
1

Code is available at https://github.com/BigML-CS-UCLA/RoCLIP

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

