Towards Automated Circuit Discovery
for Mechanistic Interpretability

Arthur Conmy∗ Augustine N. Mavor-Parker∗ Aengus Lynch∗
Stefan Heimersheim
Independent
UCL
UCL
University of Cambridge
Adrià Garriga-Alonso∗
FAR AI

Abstract
Through considerable effort and intuition, several recent works have reverseengineered nontrivial behaviors of transformer models. This paper systematizes
the mechanistic interpretability process they followed. First, researchers choose
a metric and dataset that elicit the desired model behavior. Then, they apply activation patching to find which abstract neural network units are involved in the
behavior. By varying the dataset, metric, and units under investigation, researchers
can understand the functionality of each component.
We automate one of the process’ steps: finding the connections between the abstract
neural network units that form a circuit. We propose several algorithms and reproduce previous interpretability results to validate them. For example, the ACDC algorithm rediscovered 5/5 of the component types in a circuit in GPT-2 Small that computes the Greater-Than operation. ACDC selected 68 of the 32,000 edges in GPT-2
Small, all of which were manually found by previous work. Our code is available
at https://github.com/ArthurConmy/Automatic-Circuit-Discovery.

1

Introduction

Rapid progress in transformer language modelling (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019; OpenAI,
2023, inter alia) has directed attention towards understanding the causes of new capabilities (Wei et al.,
2022) in these models. Researchers have identified precise high-level predictors of model performance
(Kaplan et al., 2020), but transformers are still widely considered ‘black-boxes’ (Alishahi, Chrupała,
and Linzen, 2019) like almost all other neural network models (Fong and Vedaldi, 2017; Buhrmester,
Münch, and Arens, 2021).2 Interpretability research aims to demystify machine learning models, for
example by explaining model outputs in terms of domain-relevant concepts (Zhang et al., 2021).
Mechanistic interpretability focuses on reverse-engineering model components into humanunderstandable algorithms (Olah, 2022). Much research in mechanistic interpretability views models
as a computational graph (Geiger et al., 2021), and circuits are subgraphs with distinct functionality
(Wang et al., 2023). The current approach to extracting circuits from neural networks relies on a
lot of manual inspection by humans (Räuker et al., 2022). This is a major obstacle to scaling up
mechanistic interpretability to larger models, more behaviors, and complicated behaviors composed
of many sub-circuits. This work identifies a workflow for circuit research, and automates part of it by
presenting several methods to extract computational graphs from neural networks.
Our main contributions are as follows. First, we systematize the common workflow prevalent in
many existing mechanistic interpretability works, outlining the essential components of this process
∗
2

Work partially done at Redwood Research. Correspondence to arthurconmy@gmail.com
Though this perspective is not universal (Lipton, 2016).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

