Understanding and Improving Ensemble
Adversarial Defense
Yian Deng
Department of Computer Science
The University of Manchester
Manchester, UK, M13 9PL
yian.deng@manchester.ac.uk

Tingting Mu
Department of Computer Science
The University of Manchester
Manchester, UK, M13 9PL
tingting.mu@manchester.ac.uk

Abstract
The strategy of ensemble has become popular in adversarial defense, which trains
multiple base classifiers to defend against adversarial attacks in a cooperative manner. Despite the empirical success, theoretical explanations on why an ensemble of
adversarially trained classifiers is more robust than single ones remain unclear. To
fill in this gap, we develop a new error theory dedicated to understanding ensemble
adversarial defense, demonstrating a provable 0-1 loss reduction on challenging
sample sets in adversarial defense scenarios. Guided by this theory, we propose
an effective approach to improve ensemble adversarial defense, named interactive global adversarial training (iGAT). The proposal includes (1) a probabilistic
distributing rule that selectively allocates to different base classifiers adversarial
examples that are globally challenging to the ensemble, and (2) a regularization
term to rescue the severest weaknesses of the base classifiers. Being tested over various existing ensemble adversarial defense techniques, iGAT is capable of boosting
their performance by up to 17% evaluated using CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets
under both white-box and black-box attacks.

1

Introduction

Many contemporary machine learning models, particularly the end-to-end ones based on deep neural
networks, admit vulnerabilities to small perturbations in the input feature space. For instance,
in computer vision applications, a minor change of image pixels computed by an algorithm can
manipulate the classification results to produce undesired predictions, but these pixel changes can
be imperceptible to human eyes. Such malicious perturbations are referred to as adversarial attacks.
These can result in severe incidents, e.g., medical misdiagnose caused by unauthorized perturbations
in medical imaging [43], and wrong actions taken by autonomous vehicles caused by crafted traffic
images [34].
The capability of a machine learning model to defend adversarial attacks is referred to as adversarial
robustness. A formal way to quantify such robustness is through an adversarial risk, which can
be intuitively understood as the expectation of the worst-scenario loss computed within a local
neighborhood region around a naturally sampled data example [40]. It is formulated as below:


Radv (f ) = E(x,y)∼D max ℓ (ŷ (f (z)) , y) ,
(1)
z∈B(x)

where B(x) denotes a local neighborhood region around the example x sampled from a natural
data distribution D. The neighbourhood is usually defined based on a selected norm, e.g., a region
containing any z satisfying ∥z − x∥ ≤ ε for a constant ε > 0. In general, ℓ(ŷ, y) can be any loss
function quantifying the difference between the predicted output ŷ and the ground-truth output y. A
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

