Spike-driven Transformer

Man Yao1,2∗, Jiakui Hu3,1∗ , Zhaokun Zhou3,2∗ , Li Yuan3,2 ,
Yonghong Tian3,2 , Bo Xu1 , Guoqi Li1†
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangzhou, China
3
Peking University, Beijing, China

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) provide an energy-efficient deep learning option
due to their unique spike-based event-driven (i.e., spike-driven) paradigm. In
this paper, we incorporate the spike-driven paradigm into Transformer by the
proposed Spike-driven Transformer with four unique properties: i) Event-driven,
no calculation is triggered when the input of Transformer is zero; ii) Binary spike
communication, all matrix multiplications associated with the spike matrix can
be transformed into sparse additions; iii) Self-attention with linear complexity at
both token and channel dimensions; iv) The operations between spike-form Query,
Key, and Value are mask and addition. Together, there are only sparse addition
operations in the Spike-driven Transformer. To this end, we design a novel SpikeDriven Self-Attention (SDSA), which exploits only mask and addition operations
without any multiplication, and thus having up to 87.2× lower computation energy
than vanilla self-attention. Especially in SDSA, the matrix multiplication between
Query, Key, and Value is designed as the mask operation. In addition, we rearrange
all residual connections in the vanilla Transformer before the activation functions
to ensure that all neurons transmit binary spike signals. It is shown that the Spikedriven Transformer can achieve 77.1% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K, which
is the state-of-the-art result in the SNN field. All source code and models are
available at https://github.com/BICLab/Spike-Driven-Transformer.

1

Introduction

One of the most crucial computational characteristics of bio-inspired Spiking Neural Networks
(SNNs) [1] is spike-based event-driven (spike-driven): i) When a computation is event-driven, it is
triggered sparsely as events (spike with address information) occur; ii) If only binary spikes (0 or 1)
are employed for communication between spiking neurons, the network’s operations are synaptic
ACcumulate (AC). When implementing SNNs on neuromorphic chips, such as TrueNorth [2], Loihi
[3], and Tianjic [4], only a small fraction of spiking neurons at any moment being active and the rest
being idle. Thus, spike-driven neuromorphic computing that only performs sparse addition operations
is regarded as a promising low-power alternative to traditional AI [5, 6, 7].
Although SNNs have apparent advantages in bio-plausibility and energy efficiency, their applications
are limited by poor task accuracy. Transformers have shown high performance in various tasks for their
self-attention [8, 9, 10]. Incorporating the effectiveness of Transformer with the high energy efficiency
of SNNs is a natural and exciting idea. There has been some research in this direction, but all so far
have relied on “hybrid computing”. Namely, Multiply-and-ACcumulate (MAC) operations dominated
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author, guoqi.li@ia.ac.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

