Bifurcations and loss jumps in RNN training

Lukas Eisenmann1,2,* , Zahra Monfared1,* , Niclas Göring1,2 , and Daniel Durstewitz1,2,3
{lukas.eisenmann,zahra.monfared,daniel.durstewitz}@zi-mannheim.de
Department of Theoretical Neuroscience, Central Institute of Mental Health,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany
2
Faculty of Physics and Astronomy, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
3
Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing, Heidelberg University
*
These authors contributed equally
1

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are popular machine learning tools for modeling
and forecasting sequential data and for inferring dynamical systems (DS) from
observed time series. Concepts from DS theory (DST) have variously been used
to further our understanding of both, how trained RNNs solve complex tasks, and
the training process itself. Bifurcations are particularly important phenomena in
DS, including RNNs, that refer to topological (qualitative) changes in a system’s
dynamical behavior as one or more of its parameters are varied. Knowing the
bifurcation structure of an RNN will thus allow to deduce many of its computational and dynamical properties, like its sensitivity to parameter variations or its
behavior during training. In particular, bifurcations may account for sudden loss
jumps observed in RNN training that could severely impede the training process.
Here we first mathematically prove for a particular class of ReLU-based RNNs
that certain bifurcations are indeed associated with loss gradients tending toward
infinity or zero. We then introduce a novel heuristic algorithm for detecting all
fixed points and k-cycles in ReLU-based RNNs and their existence and stability
regions, hence bifurcation manifolds in parameter space. In contrast to previous
numerical algorithms for finding fixed points and common continuation methods,
our algorithm provides exact results and returns fixed points and cycles up to high
orders with surprisingly good scaling behavior. We exemplify the algorithm on
the analysis of the training process of RNNs, and find that the recently introduced
technique of generalized teacher forcing completely avoids certain types of bifurcations in training. Thus, besides facilitating the DST analysis of trained RNNs, our
algorithm provides a powerful instrument for analyzing the training process itself.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are common and powerful tools for learning sequential tasks or
modeling and forecasting time series data [31, 65, 2, 43, 9, 26]. Typically, RNNs are "black boxes,"
whose inner workings are hard to dissect. Techniques from dynamical system theory (DST) can
significantly aid in this effort, as RNNs are formally discrete-time dynamical systems (DS) [37]. A
better understanding of how RNNs solve their tasks is important for detecting failure modes and
designing better architectures and training algorithms. In scientific machine learning, on the other
hand, RNNs are often employed for reconstructing unknown DS from sets of time series observations
[10, 30, 64, 63, 23, 55], e.g. in climate or disease modeling. In this case, the RNN is supposed
to provide an approximation to the flow of the observed system that reproduces all its dynamical
properties, e.g., cyclic behavior in climate or epidemiological systems. In such scientific or medical
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

