H3T: Efficient Integration of Memory Optimization and
Parallelism for High-Throughput Transformer Training

Yuzhong Wang∗ 1 , Xu Han∗†1 , Weilin Zhao∗1
Guoyang Zeng2 , Zhiyuan Liu† 1, 3 , Maosong Sun†1, 3
1
NLP Group, DCST, IAI, BNRIST, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
ModelBest Inc., Beijing, China
3
Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Ability, Jiangsu Normal University, China
{yz-wang21,zwl23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
zengguoyang@modelbest.cn {hanxu2022,liuzy,sms}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, big models based on Transformers have achieved state-of-the-art
performance on many artificial intelligence (AI) tasks. Despite the success of these
Transformer-based models, their huge parameter size poses a serious challenge
to their training, both from the storage and computation perspectives. To this
end, memory optimization (e.g., rematerialization and offloading) and parallelism
(e.g., data parallelism and model parallelism) are widely explored to make training
Transformers more efficient. In this paper, we propose a framework to automatically
find an efficient integration of memory optimization and parallelism for HighThroughput Transformer Training (named H3T), which is rarely considered by
existing efforts for training big Transformer-based models. Specifically, we design
search algorithms to combine appropriate memory optimization strategies and
parallelism schemes to achieve a balance between memory overhead and training
efficiency. We implement H3T based on an open-source toolkit BMTrain and then
use H3T to train the Transformers of different sizes to evaluate the efficiency of
H3T. The experimental results show that H3T outperforms the most popular deep
learning (DL) toolkit Megatron-DeepSpeed by 1.2× ∼ 4.3× training speed while
reducing 34.6% ∼ 80.5% of memory overhead. Moreover, H3T can use only 64
NVIDIA A100 GPUs to train GPT-3-175B, which is very difficult for existing
DL toolkits. The source code is available at https://github.com/OpenBMB/
BMTrain/tree/h3t.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the emergence of Transformers [47] has significantly advanced the development of the
AI field. Owing to the strong abilities of sequence modeling and transduction brought by the attention
mechanisms, Transformer-based models have achieved state-of-the-art performance on many tasks
and have become the foundation architecture for various AI directions, such as natural language
processing [33, 9, 34, 4], computer vision [10, 23, 22], and multimodal processing [32, 39, 38].
Despite the outstanding performance, with the trend of continuously growing model size, the computation and storage costs become a severe challenge for training most big Transformer-based models.
For example, the popular big model GPT-3 [4] has 175 billion parameters, and all these parameters
require at least 700 GB of memory to store in float32 format, not to mention the forward activations,
∗
†

Indicates equal contribution.
Indicates corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

