Direct Training of SNN using Local Zeroth Order
Method
Bhaskar Mukhoty1,∗

Velibor Bojković1,∗

Giulia De Masi2,6

William de Vazelhes1

Huan Xiong1,5,†

Xiaohan Zhao3

Bin Gu1,4,†

1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
2
ARRC, Technology Innovation Institute, UAE
2
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China
5
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
6
BioRobotics Institute, Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa, Italy

Abstract
Spiking neural networks are becoming increasingly popular for their low energy requirement in real-world tasks with accuracy comparable to traditional ANNs. SNN
training algorithms face the loss of gradient information and non-differentiability
due to the Heaviside function in minimizing the model loss over model parameters.
To circumvent this problem, the surrogate method employs a differentiable approximation of the Heaviside function in the backward pass, while the forward pass
continues to use the Heaviside as the spiking function. We propose to use the zerothorder technique at the local or neuron level in training SNNs, motivated by its regularizing and potential energy-efficient effects and establish a theoretical connection
between it and the existing surrogate methods. We perform experimental validation
of the technique on standard static datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, ImageNet100) and neuromorphic datasets (DVS-CIFAR-10, DVS-Gesture, N-Caltech-101,
NCARS) and obtain results that offer improvement over the state-of-the-art results.
The proposed method also lends itself to efficient implementations of the backpropagation method, which could provide 3-4 times overall speedup in training time.
The code is available at https://github.com/BhaskarMukhoty/LocalZO.

1

Introduction

Biological neural networks are known to be significantly more energy efficient than their artificial
avatars - the artificial neural networks (ANN). Unlike ANNs, biological neurons use spike trains to
communicate and process information asynchronously. [27] To closely emulate biological neurons,
spiking neural networks (SNN) use binary activation to send information to the neighbouring neurons
when the membrane potential exceeds membrane threshold. The event-driven binary activation
simplifies the accumulation of input potential and reduces the computation burden when the spikes
are sparse. Specialized neuromorphic hardware [11] is designed to carry out such event-driven and
sparse computations in an energy-efficient way [32, 20].
∗
†

First co-author
Correspondence to Huan Xiong (huan.xiong.math@gmail.com), and Bin Gu (jsgubin@gmail.com).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

