COOM: A Game Benchmark for Continual
Reinforcement Learning

Tristan Tomilin1 Meng Fang2,1 Yudi Zhang1 Mykola Pechenizkiy1
1
Eindhoven University of Technology 2 University of Liverpool
{t.tomilin,y.zhang5,m.pechenizkiy}@tue.nl
Meng.Fang@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract
The advancement of continual reinforcement learning (RL) has been facing various
obstacles, including standardized metrics and evaluation protocols, demanding
computational requirements, and a lack of widely accepted standard benchmarks.
In response to these challenges, we present COOM (Continual DOOM), a continual
RL benchmark tailored for embodied pixel-based RL. COOM presents a meticulously crafted suite of task sequences set within visually distinct 3D environments,
serving as a robust evaluation framework to assess crucial aspects of continual RL,
such as catastrophic forgetting, knowledge transfer, and sample-efficient learning.
Following an in-depth empirical evaluation of popular continual learning (CL)
methods, we pinpoint their limitations, provide valuable insight into the benchmark
and highlight unique algorithmic challenges. This makes our work the first to
benchmark image-based CRL in 3D environments with embodied perception. The
primary objective of the COOM benchmark is to offer the research community a
valuable and cost-effective challenge. It seeks to deepen our comprehension of
the capabilities and limitations of current and forthcoming CL methods in an RL
setting. The code and environments are open-sourced and accessible on GitHub.

Obstacles

Green

Resized

Monsters

Default

Red

Blue

Shadows

(a) CD8 Sequence. The agent is expected to locate the correct targets in the environment and eliminate them.
The tasks are based on a single scenario (Run and Gun), but the textures and in-game entities vary. The agent
needs to effectively adapt its policy to adjust to the visual distortions.
Pitfall

Arms Dealer

Hide and Seek

Floor is Lava

Chainsaw

Raise the Roof

Run and Gun

Health Gathering

(b) CO8 Sequence. In addition to visual disparities between scenarios, the agent is presented with novel diverse
goals when exposed to a new task. These objectives are often contrasting, e.g., whereas one task requires seeking
enemies, another favours avoiding them entirely.

Figure 1: COOM sequences (encompassing tasks ordered from left to right) for task-incremental
learning are composed of diverse environments built in ViZDoom [25]. The agent perceives its
surroundings from an embodied perspective. The 4-task sequences (CD4 and CO4) are constituted
by environments in the second half, whereas CD16 and CO16 repeat the original sequence.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

