Attacks on Online Learners:
a Teacher-Student Analysis

Riccardo G. Margiotta∗

Sebastian Goldt

Guido Sanguinetti

International School for Advanced Studies, Trieste, Italy

Abstract
Machine learning models are famously vulnerable to adversarial attacks: small adhoc perturbations of the data that can catastrophically alter the model predictions.
While a large literature has studied the case of test-time attacks on pre-trained
models, the important case of attacks in an online learning setting has received
little attention so far. In this work, we use a control-theoretical perspective to study
the scenario where an attacker may perturb data labels to manipulate the learning
dynamics of an online learner. We perform a theoretical analysis of the problem
in a teacher-student setup, considering different attack strategies, and obtaining
analytical results for the steady state of simple linear learners. These results enable
us to prove that a discontinuous transition in the learner’s accuracy occurs when
the attack strength exceeds a critical threshold. We then study empirically attacks
on learners with complex architectures using real data, confirming the insights of
our theoretical analysis. Our findings show that greedy attacks can be extremely
efficient, especially when data stream in small batches.

1

Introduction

Adversarial attacks pose a remarkable threat to modern machine learning (ML), as models based on
deep networks have proven highly vulnerable to such attacks. Understanding adversarial attacks is
therefore of paramount importance, and much work has been done in this direction; see [1, 2] for
reviews. The standard setup of adversarial attacks aims to change the predictions of a trained model
by applying a minimal perturbation to its inputs. In the data poisoning scenario, instead, inputs and/or
outputs of the training data are corrupted by an attacker whose goal is to force the learner to get as close
as possible to a “nefarious” target model, for example to include a backdoor [3, 4]. Data poisoning has
also received considerable attention that has focused on the offline setting, where models are trained
on fixed datasets [5]. An increasing number of real-world applications instead require that machine
learning models are continuously updated using streams of data, often relying on transfer-learning
techniques. In many cases, the streaming data can be subject to adversarial manipulations. Examples
include learning from user-generated data (GPT-based models) and collecting information from the
environment, as in e-commerce applications. Federated learning constitutes yet another important
example where machine learning models are updated over time, and where malicious nodes in the
federation have private access to a subset of the data used for training.
In the online setting, the attacker intercepts the data stream and modifies it to move the learner
towards the nefarious target model, see Fig. 1-A for a schematic where attacks change the labels. In
this streaming scenario, the attacker needs to predict both the future data stream and model states,
accounting for the effect of its own perturbations, so as to decide how to poison the current data batch.
Finding the best possible attack policy for a given data batch and learner state can be formalized as
a stochastic optimal control problem, with opposing costs given by the magnitude of perturbations
∗

R. G. Margiotta (rimargi@sissa.it) is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

