Three-Way Trade-Off in Multi-Objective Learning:
Optimization, Generalization and Conflict-Avoidance

Lisha Chen†
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY, United States
chenl21@rpi.edu

Heshan Fernando†
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY, United States
fernah@rpi.edu

Yiming Ying
University of Sydney
Camperdown, Australia
yiming.ying@sydney.edu.au

Tianyi Chen
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY, United States
chentianyi19@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-objective learning (MOL) often arises in emerging machine learning problems when multiple learning criteria or tasks need to be addressed. Recent works
have developed various dynamic weighting algorithms for MOL, including MGDA
and its variants, whose central idea is to find an update direction that avoids conflicts among objectives. Albeit its appealing intuition, empirical studies show
that dynamic weighting methods may not always outperform static alternatives.
To bridge this gap between theory and practice, we focus on a new variant of
stochastic MGDA - the Multi-objective gradient with Double sampling (MoDo)
algorithm and study its generalization performance and the interplay with optimization through the lens of algorithm stability. We find that the rationale behind
MGDA – updating along conflict-avoidant direction√- may impede dynamic weighting algorithms from achieving the optimal O(1/ n) population risk, where n
is the number of training samples. We further highlight the variability of dynamic weights and their impact on the three-way trade-off among optimization,
generalization, and conflict avoidance that is unique in MOL. Code is available
at https://github.com/heshandevaka/Trade-Off-MOL.

1

Introduction

Multi-objective learning (MOL) emerges frequently in recent machine learning problems such as
learning under fairness and safety constraints [49]; learning across multiple tasks, including multi-task
learning [39] and meta-learning [47]; and, learning across multiple agents that may not share a global
utility including federated learning [40] and multi-agent reinforcement learning [33].
This work considers solving the empirical version of MOL defined on the training dataset as S =
{z1 , . . . , zn }. The performance of a model x ∈ Rd on a datum z for the m-th objective is denoted
as fz,m : Rd 7→ R, and its performance on the entire training dataset S is measured by the m-th
empirical objective fS,m (x) for m ∈ [M ]. MOL optimizes the vector-valued objective, given by
min FS (x) := [fS,1 (x), . . . , fS,M (x)].

x∈Rd
†

(1.1)

Equal contribution.
The work of L. Chen, H. Fernando, and T. Chen was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF)
MoDL-SCALE project 2134168 and the RPI-IBM Artificial Intelligence Research Collaboration (AIRC). The
work of Y. Ying was partially supported by NSF (DMS-2110836, IIS-2103450, and IIS-2110546).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

