From Pixels to UI Actions: Learning to Follow
Instructions via Graphical User Interfaces

Peter Shaw1∗
Panupong Pasupat1

Mandar Joshi1∗
Hexiang Hu1

James Cohan2

Jonathan Berant1

Urvashi Khandelwal1

Kenton Lee1

Kristina Toutanova1
1

Google DeepMind

2

Google

Abstract
Much of the previous work towards digital agents for graphical user interfaces
(GUIs) has relied on text-based representations (derived from HTML or other
structured data sources), which are not always readily available. These input
representations have been often coupled with custom, task-specific action spaces.
This paper focuses on creating agents that interact with the digital world using
the same conceptual interface that humans commonly use — via pixel-based
screenshots and a generic action space corresponding to keyboard and mouse
actions. Building upon recent progress in pixel-based pretraining, we show, for the
first time, that it is possible for such agents to outperform human crowdworkers on
the MiniWob++ benchmark of GUI-based instruction following tasks.

1

Introduction

Systems that can follow instructions to complete tasks through graphical user interfaces (GUIs) can
help automate tedious tasks, improve accessibility, and expand the usefulness of digital assistants
by allowing them to interact with tools and services. Despite the visual nature of GUIs, prior work
has primarily focused on utilizing structured representations of the user interfaces (such as HTML
sources, Document Object Model (DOM) trees, and Android view hierarchies) as well as custom,
task-specific representations of high-level actions based on these structured representations (see §6).
Recent efforts have achieved positive outcomes thanks to the advances of powerful language models
(Gur et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2022).
While structured and task-specific representations may be useful, they are not always available –
some examples are web applications that use extensive scripting, sandboxed environments where
access to DOM is limited, and mobile applications which often do not expose the underlying structure
to external modules. Even when structured application source data is available, it may be hard to
interpret due to obfuscation and misalignment with what actually appears on the GUIs. Finally,
aligning human demonstrations with task-dependent actions is often challenging.
In contrast, people interact with GUIs by perceiving the visual input and using generic mouse and
keyboard actions, without needing to inspect the application’s source code for cues on its functionality.
They can quickly learn to interact with new applications that offer familiar visual interfaces, regardless
of differences in implementation technologies. In this paper we ask: Can we build an agent that can
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

