Energy Transformer

Benjamin Hoover∗
IBM Research
Georgia Tech
benjamin.hoover@ibm.com
Rameswar Panda
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
rpanda@ibm.com

Yuchen Liang∗
Department of CS
RPI
liangy7@rpi.edu

Hendrik Strobelt
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
hendrik.strobelt@ibm.com

Mohammed J. Zaki
Department of CS
RPI
zaki@cs.rpi.edu

Bao Pham∗
Department of CS
RPI
phamb@rpi.edu
Duen Horng Chau
College of Computing
Georgia Tech
polo@gatech.edu

Dmitry Krotov
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
krotov@ibm.com

Abstract
Our work combines aspects of three promising paradigms in machine learning,
namely, attention mechanism, energy-based models, and associative memory. Attention is the power-house driving modern deep learning successes, but it lacks
clear theoretical foundations. Energy-based models allow a principled approach to
discriminative and generative tasks, but the design of the energy functional is not
straightforward. At the same time, Dense Associative Memory models or Modern
Hopfield Networks have a well-established theoretical foundation, and allow an
intuitive design of the energy function. We propose a novel architecture, called
the Energy Transformer (or ET for short), that uses a sequence of attention layers
that are purposely designed to minimize a specifically engineered energy function,
which is responsible for representing the relationships between the tokens. In
this work, we introduce the theoretical foundations of ET, explore its empirical
capabilities using the image completion task, and obtain strong quantitative results
on the graph anomaly detection and graph classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Transformers have become pervasive models in various domains of machine learning, including
language, vision, and audio processing. Every transformer block uses four fundamental operations:
attention, feed-forward multi-layer perceptron (MLP), residual connection, and layer normalization.
Different variations of transformers result from combining these four operations in various ways.
For instance, [1] proposes to frontload additional attention operations and backload additional MLP
layers in a sandwich-like manner instead of interleaving them, [2] prepends an MLP layer before
the attention in each transformer block, [3] uses neural architecture search methods to evolve even
more sophisticated transformer blocks, and so on. Various methods exist to approximate the attention
operation, multiple modifications of the norm operation, and connectivity of the block; see, for
example, [4] for a taxonomy of different models. At present, however, the search for new transformer
*

B.Hoover, Y.Liang, and B.Pham equally contributed to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

