Pre-Training Protein Encoder via Siamese
Sequence-Structure Diffusion Trajectory Prediction

Zuobai Zhang1,2 ∗ , Minghao Xu1,2 ∗ , Aurélie Lozano3 ,
Vijil Chenthamarakshan3 , Payel Das3 † , Jian Tang1,4,5 †
*
1

equal contribution

†

corresponding author

Mila - Québec AI Institute, 2 Université de Montréal, 3 IBM Research,
4
HEC Montréal, 5 CIFAR AI Chair
{zuobai.zhang, minghao.xu}@mila.quebec,
{ecvijil,aclozano,daspa}@us.ibm.com, jian.tang@hec.ca

Abstract
Self-supervised pre-training methods on proteins have recently gained attention,
with most approaches focusing on either protein sequences or structures, neglecting
the exploration of their joint distribution, which is crucial for a comprehensive
understanding of protein functions by integrating co-evolutionary information and
structural characteristics. In this work, inspired by the success of denoising diffusion models in generative tasks, we propose the DiffPreT approach to pre-train a
protein encoder by sequence-structure joint diffusion modeling. DiffPreT guides
the encoder to recover the native protein sequences and structures from the perturbed ones along the joint diffusion trajectory, which acquires the joint distribution
of sequences and structures. Considering the essential protein conformational
variations, we enhance DiffPreT by a method called Siamese Diffusion Trajectory
Prediction (SiamDiff) to capture the correlation between different conformers of a
protein. SiamDiff attains this goal by maximizing the mutual information between
representations of diffusion trajectories of structurally-correlated conformers. We
study the effectiveness of DiffPreT and SiamDiff on both atom- and residue-level
structure-based protein understanding tasks. Experimental results show that the
performance of DiffPreT is consistently competitive on all tasks, and SiamDiff
achieves new state-of-the-art performance, considering the mean ranks on all tasks.
Code will be released upon acceptance.

1

Introduction

Machine learning-based methods have made remarkable strides in predicting protein structures [44, 5, 50] and functionality [55, 24]. Among them, self-supervised (unsupervised) pre-training
approaches [20, 61, 87] have been successful in learning effective protein representations from
available protein sequences or from their experimental/predicted structures. These pre-training approaches are based on the rationale that modeling the input distribution of proteins provides favorable
initialization of model parameters and serves as effective regularization for downstream tasks [25].
Previous methods have primarily focused on modeling the marginal distribution of either protein
sequences to acquire co-evolutionary information [20, 61], or protein structures to capture essential
characteristics for tasks such as function prediction and fold classification [87, 33]. Nevertheless,
both these forms of information hold significance in revealing the underlying functions of proteins
and offer complementary perspectives that are still not extensively explored. To address this gap, a
more promising approach for pre-training could involve modeling the joint distribution of protein
sequences and structures, surpassing the limitations of unimodal pre-training methods.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

