PDF: Point Diffusion Implicit Function
for Large-scale Scene Neural Representation

Yuhan Ding1∗

Fukun Yin1∗

Jiayuan Fan2†

dingyh22@m.fudan.edu.cn

fkyin21@m.fudan.edu.cn

yfan@fudan.edu.cn

Hui Li2

Xin Chen3

Wen Liu3

lihui21@m.fudan.edu.cn

chenxin2@shanghaitech.edu.cn

liuwen@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Chongshan Lu1

Gang Yu3

Tao Chen1

cslu17@fudan.edu.cn

iskicy@gmail.com

eetchen@fudan.edu.cn

1

School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University, China
2
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, China
3
Tencent PCG, Shanghai, China

Abstract
Recent advances in implicit neural representations have achieved impressive results
by sampling and fusing individual points along sampling rays in the sampling
space. However, accurately representing and synthesizing fine-grained textures in
unbounded, large-scale outdoor scenes presents a significant challenge, attributable
to the exponentially expanding sampling space. To alleviate the dilemma of using
individual sampling points to perceive vast expanses, we explore learning the
surface distribution of the scene to provide structural priors, thereby reducing
the samplable space, and propose a Point Diffusion implicit Function, PDF, for
large-scale scene neural representation. The core of our method is a large-scale
point cloud super-resolution diffusion module that enhances the sparse point cloud
reconstructed from several training images into a dense point cloud as the explicit
prior. Then in the rendering stage, only sampling points with prior points within
the sampling radius are retained. That is, the sampling space is reduced from the
unbounded space to the scene surface. Meanwhile, to fill in the background details
not captured by point clouds, we employ region sampling based on Mip-NeRF 360
for modeling comprehensive background representations. Extensive experiments
have demonstrated the effectiveness of our method for large-scale scene novel view
synthesis, which outperforms relevant state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Implicit neural representations have demonstrated proficiency in handling single objects or small
scenes and have found extensive applications in the fields of virtual reality [5], 3D reconstruction [21,
31, 36], video generation [7] and computer animation [19, 1, 41] on tasks such as scene representation
and new perspective synthesis. Nevertheless, as the scale of the target scene increases, particularly in
urban-scale outdoor scenes, traditional implicit neural representation methods encounter significant
∗
†

Joint first authors.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

