A Unified Solution for Privacy and Communication
Efficiency in Vertical Federated Learning

Ganyu Wang
Western University
gwang382@uwo.ca
Qingsong Zhang
Xidian University
qszhang1995@gmail.com

Bin Gu ∗
Jilin University and MBZUAI
jsgubin@gmail.com
Xiang Li
Western University
lixiang41@126.com

Boyu Wang
Western University
bwang@csd.uwo.ca

Charles X. Ling ∗
Western University
charles.ling@uwo.ca

Abstract
Vertical Federated Learning (VFL) is a collaborative machine learning paradigm
that enables multiple participants to jointly train a model on their private data
without sharing it. To make VFL practical, privacy security and communication
efficiency should both be satisfied. Recent research has shown that Zero-Order
Optimization (ZOO) in VFL can effectively conceal the internal information of
the model without adding costly privacy protective add-ons, making it a promising
approach for privacy and efficiency. However, there are still two key problems that
have yet to be resolved. First, the convergence rate of ZOO-based VFL is significantly slower compared to gradient-based VFL, resulting in low efficiency in model
training and more communication round, which hinders its application on large
neural networks. Second, although ZOO-based VFL has demonstrated resistance
to state-of-the-art (SOTA) attacks, its privacy guarantee lacks a theoretical explanation. To address these challenges, we propose a novel cascaded hybrid optimization
approach that employs a zeroth-order (ZO) gradient on the most critical output
layer of the clients, with other parts utilizing the first-order (FO) gradient. This
approach preserves the privacy protection of ZOO while significantly enhancing
convergence. Moreover, we theoretically prove that applying ZOO to the VFL is
equivalent to adding Gaussian Mechanism to the gradient information, which offers
an implicit differential privacy guarantee. Experimental results demonstrate that
our proposed framework achieves similar utility as the Gaussian mechanism under
the same privacy budget, while also having significantly lower communication
costs compared with SOTA communication-efficient VFL frameworks.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning [30, 22, 23, 18, 31] is an emerging technique that has raised wide attention
recently. It has become one of the most important distributed learning frameworks for enabling
multiple data holders to train a model collaboratively without sharing their local privacy data explicitly.
∗

Co-corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

