Slot-guided Volumetric Object Radiance Fields

Di Qi
MEGVII Technology Inc.
qidi@megvii.com

Tong Yang
MEGVII Technology Inc.
yangtong@megvii.com

Xiangyu Zhang∗
MEGVII Technology Inc.
zhangxiangyu@megvii.com

Abstract
We present a novel framework for 3D object-centric representation learning. Our
approach effectively decomposes complex scenes into individual objects from a single image in an unsupervised fashion. This method, called slot-guided Volumetric
Object Radiance Fields (sVORF), composes volumetric object radiance fields with
object slots as a guidance to implement unsupervised 3D scene decomposition.
Specifically, sVORF obtains object slots from a single image via a transformer
module, maps these slots to volumetric object radiance fields with a hypernetwork
and composes object radiance fields with the guidance of object slots at a 3D
location. Moreover, sVORF significantly reduces memory requirement due to
small-sized pixel rendering during training. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach by showing top results in scene decomposition and generation tasks
of complex synthetic datasets (e.g., Room-Diverse). Furthermore, we also confirm
the potential of sVORF to segment objects in real-world scenes (e.g., the LLFF
dataset). We hope our approach can provide preliminary understanding of the
physical world and help ease future research in 3D object-centric representation
learning.

1

Introduction

As humans, we can understand scenes, perceive discrete objects within it, and interact with these
objects in a 3D environment. This object-centric, geometric understanding of the 3D world is a
fundamental ability in human vision [1]. In computer vision, researchers attempt to replicate this
fundamental ability in machine learning models with a high interest, due to its wide application
ranging from robotics [2] to autonomous navigation. To this end, machine learning models should
bear two characteristics: unsupervised representation learning manner and 3D-aware generative
mode [3].
Recently, with the advances of neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [4] and representation learning [5, 6, 7],
there are some works [8, 9, 3] to achieve these two characteristics. These works learn to decompose
objects and understand 3D scene geometry from RGB supervision via novel view synthesis in an
unsupervised manner. To this end, volumetric-based methods [8] utilize volume rendering mechanism
to implement a 3D-aware differentiable generative process without supervision. To avoid high
computational cost of volumetric-based methods, light-field based methods [9, 3] use light field
formulation [10] to scale its application to large numbers of objects in a scene. However, existing
works suffer from some limitations. Light-field based methods lack strict multi-view consistency [10]
and fall into mask bleeding issues [3], which are harmful for object-centric representation learning.
Besides, volumetric-based methods fail to decompose scenes caused by attention rank collapse [8]
and do not perform well in complex multi-object scenes.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for 3D object-centric representation learning, alleviating the issues of existing works. Our method, called slot-guided Volumetric Object Radiance
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

