Kissing to Find a Match:
Efficient Low-Rank Permutation Representation

Hannah Dröge
University of Siegen
57076 Siegen, Germany
hannah.droege@uni-siegen.de
Yuval Bahat
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544, United States
yuval.bahat@gmail.com

Zorah Lähner
University of Siegen
57076 Siegen, Germany
zorah.laehner@uni-siegen.de

Onofre Martorell
University of Balearic Islands
Investigador ForInDoc del Govern de les Illes Balears
07122 Palma, Illes Balears, Spain
o.martorell@uib.cat

Felix Heide
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544, United States
fheide@cs.princeton.edu

Michael Möller
University of Siegen
57076 Siegen, Germany
michael.moeller@uni-siegen.de

Abstract
Permutation matrices play a key role in matching and assignment problems across
the fields, especially in computer vision and robotics. However, memory for
explicitly representing permutation matrices grows quadratically with the size of
the problem, prohibiting large problem instances. In this work, we propose to tackle
the curse of dimensionality of large permutation matrices by approximating them
using low-rank matrix factorization, followed by a nonlinearity. To this end, we rely
on the Kissing number theory to infer the minimal rank required for representing a
permutation matrix of a given size, which is significantly smaller than the problem
size. This leads to a drastic reduction in computation and memory costs, e.g., up to
3 orders of magnitude less memory for a problem of size n = 20000, represented
using 8.4 × 105 elements in two small matrices instead of using a single huge
matrix with 4 × 108 elements. The proposed representation allows for accurate
representations of large permutation matrices, which in turn enables handling
large problems that would have been infeasible otherwise. We demonstrate the
applicability and merits of the proposed approach through a series of experiments
on a range of problems that involve predicting permutation matrices, from linear
and quadratic assignment to shape matching problems.

1

Introduction

Permutation matrices, which encode the reordering of elements, arise naturally in any problem that
can be phrased as a bijection between two equally sized sets. As such, they are fundamental to many
important computer vision applications, including matching semantically identical key points in
images [50, 47, 48, 49], matching 3D shapes or point clouds [18, 46, 27], estimating scene flow on
point clouds [35] and solving jigsaw puzzles [28], as well as to various sorting tasks [1, 16].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

