Hierarchical Adaptive Value Estimation for
Multi-modal Visual Reinforcement Learning
Yangru Huang1 , Peixi Peng2,3 ∗ , Yifan Zhao1 , Haoran Xu3,4 ,
Mengyue Geng1 , Yonghong Tian1,2,3 ∗
1

2

School of Computer Science, Peking University
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
yrhuang@stu.pku.edu.cn,
{pxpeng, zhaoyf, mygeng, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn,xuhr9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Integrating RGB frames with alternative modality inputs is gaining increasing
traction in many vision-based reinforcement learning (RL) applications. Existing
multi-modal vision-based RL methods usually follow a Global Value Estimation
(GVE) pipeline, which uses a fused modality feature to obtain a uniﬁed global
environmental description. However, such a feature-level fusion paradigm with a
single critic may fall short in policy learning as it tends to overlook the distinct
values of each modality. To remedy this, this paper proposes a Local modalitycustomized Value Estimation (LVE) paradigm, which dynamically estimates the
contribution and adjusts the importance weight of each modality from a valuelevel perspective. Furthermore, a task-contextual re-fusion process is developed
to achieve a task-level re-balance of estimations from both feature and value levels. To this end, a Hierarchical Adaptive Value Estimation (HAVE) framework
is formed, which adaptively coordinates the contributions of individual modalities
as well as their collective efﬁcacy. Agents trained by HAVE are able to exploit the
unique characteristics of various modalities while capturing their intricate interactions, achieving substantially improved performance. We speciﬁcally highlight
the potency of our approach within the challenging landscape of autonomous driving, utilizing the CARLA benchmark with neuromorphic event and depth data to
demonstrate HAVE’s capability and the effectiveness of its distinct components.
The code of our paper can be found at https://github.com/Yara-HYR/HAVE.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a renewed interest in multi-modal perception in the computer vision
research community [10, 36, 20, 26, 37]. For many visual tasks such as semantic segmentation
and object detection, the inclusion of multi-modal data (e.g., depth, infrared) is proven to be indisputably beneﬁcial [41, 29, 49, 25]. This trend equally applies to the intelligent agents in visionbased Reinforcement Learning (RL), in which multi-modal inputs can also promote decision robustness [39, 19, 1, 11, 31]. For instance, an autonomous-driving agent taking RGB frames solely
as input may frequently suffer from extreme light conditions, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Nevertheless, combining additional sensory inputs such as event signals coming from a neuromorphic event
camera [27] can effectively alleviate these problems, enabling a more comprehensive realization of
trafﬁc status [5, 32, 12].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

