Robustifying Generalizable Implicit Shape Networks
with a Tunable Non-Parametric Model
Amine Ouasfi
Adnane Boukhayma
Inria, Univ. Rennes, CNRS, IRISA, M2S, France

Abstract
Feedforward generalizable models for implicit shape reconstruction from unoriented point cloud present multiple advantages, including high performance and
inference speed. However, they still suffer from generalization issues, ranging
from underfitting the input point cloud, to misrepresenting samples outside of
the training data distribution, or with toplogies unseen at training. We propose
here an efficient mechanism to remedy some of these limitations at test time. We
combine the inter-shape data prior of the network with an intra-shape regularization
prior of a Nyström Kernel Ridge Regression, that we further adapt by fitting its
hyperprameters to the current shape. The resulting shape function defined in a
shape specific Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space benefits from desirable stability
and efficiency properties and grants a shape adaptive expressiveness-robustness
trade-off. We demonstrate the improvement obtained through our method with
respect to baselines and the state-of-the-art using synthetic and real data.

1

Introduction

Enabling machines to understand and navigate 3D is a major challenge. Instances of this ability
include downstream tasks in computer vision and graphics, such as shape reconstruction from noisy,
incomplete and relatively sparse point clouds. Building full shapes from point clouds is all the more an
important problem in account of the ubiquity of this light, albeit incomplete, 3D shape representation,
whether it is acquired from the increasingly democratized consumer grade and industrial depth
sensors or e.g. as obtained from photogrammetry (e.g. Structure From Motion, Multi-View Stereo
[62, 63]). Whilst Classical optimization based approaches such as Poisson Reconstruction [33] and
Moving least squares [27] can deliver mostly good reconstructions for all intents and purposes, they
require still dense clean point sets with reliable normal estimations. More recently, deep learning
based alternatives have been shown to offer faster and more robust predictions especially for noisy
and sparse inputs, without requiring normal information.
Within this class of methods, state-of-the-art feed forward (test time optimization-free) generalizable
models are based on implicit neural shape representations, where explicit meshes can be extracted at
test time using Marching Cubes [43]. While they offer many desirable properties, such as all-round
good performance and fast inference (within tens of milliseconds on a standard GPU), they still suffer
from limitations, some of which we come across upon examining the state-of-the-art method [7] for
instance:
Limited OOD generalization As these models are typically trained with full 3D supervision,
training commonly uses synthetic data such as the ShapeNet [12] dataset, large real 3D supervision
being famously hard to come by. This results in a performance drop for real test data outside the
training distribution. Comparing Tables 2 and 6, the performance of [7] drops by roughly fourfold
going from testing on synthetic data to real scans.
Limited input size generalization As illustrated in table 7, when presented with testing point
clouds that are larger (e.g. 10k) than the training size (3k), the performance does not scale and even
deteriorates compared to testing on the training size.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

