Provable convergence guarantees for black-box
variational inference
Justin Domke
University of Massachusetts Amherst
domke@cs.umass.edu

Guillaume Garrigos
Université Paris Cité and Sorbonne Université, CNRS
Laboratoire de Probabilités, Statistique et Modélisation
F-75013 Paris, France
garrigos@lpsm.paris

Robert Gower
Center for Computational Mathematics
Flatiron Institute, New York
rgower@flatironinstitute.org

Abstract
Black-box variational inference is widely used in situations where there is no proof
that its stochastic optimization succeeds. We suggest this is due to a theoretical
gap in existing stochastic optimization proofs—namely the challenge of gradient
estimators with unusual noise bounds, and a composite non-smooth objective. For
dense Gaussian variational families, we observe that existing gradient estimators
based on reparameterization satisfy a quadratic noise bound and give novel convergence guarantees for proximal and projected stochastic gradient descent using
this bound. This provides rigorous guarantees that methods similar to those used in
practice converge on realistic inference problems.

1

Introduction

Variational inference tries to approximate a complex target distribution with a distribution from a
simpler family [1, 2, 3, 4]. If p(z, x) is a target distribution with latent variables z ∈ Rd and observed
data x ∈ Rn , and qw is a variational family with parameters w ∈ W, the goal is to minimize the
negative evidence lower bound (ELBO)
f (w) := − E log p(z, x) + E log qw (z) .
z∼qw
z∼qw
|
{z
} |
{z
}
l(w)

(1)

h(w)

For subsequent discussion, we have decomposed the objective into the free energy l and the negative
entropy h. Minimizing f is equivalent to minimizing the KL-divergence between qw to p(·|x),
because KL(qw ∥p(·|x)) = f (w) + log p(x). Recent research has focused on "black box" variational
inference, where the target distribution p is sufficiently complex that one can only access it through
evaluating probabilities (or gradients) at chosen points [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Crucially, one can still
get stochastic estimates of the variational objective f and of its gradient, and use these to optimize.
Still, variational inference can sometimes be unreliable [12, 13, 14, 15], and some basic questions
remain unanswered. Most notably: does stochastic optimization of f converge to a minimum of the
objective? There has been various progress towards answering this question. One line of research
seeks to determine if the variational objective f has favorable structural properties, such as smoothness
or (strong) convexity [13, 16, 17] (Sec. 2.1). Another line seeks to control the "noise" (variance or
expected squared norm) of different gradient estimators [18, 19, 20, 21] (Sec. 2.2). However, few
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

