On Imitation in Mean-field Games
Giorgia Ramponi1
Pavel Kolev2
Mathieu Laurière3,5

Olivier Pietquin3
Matthieu Geist3

Niao He4

ETH AI Center, Zurich 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
Google DeepMind 4 ETH Zurich, Department of Computer Science
5
Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Artificial Intelligence and Deep Learning, NYU Shanghai
1

Abstract
We explore the problem of imitation learning (IL) in the context of mean-field
games (MFGs), where the goal is to imitate the behavior of a population of agents
following a Nash equilibrium policy according to some unknown payoff function.
IL in MFGs presents new challenges compared to single-agent IL, particularly
when both the reward function and the transition kernel depend on the population
distribution. In this paper, departing from the existing literature on IL for MFGs, we
introduce a new solution concept called the Nash imitation gap. Then we show that
when only the reward depends on the population distribution, IL in MFGs can be
reduced to single-agent IL with similar guarantees. However, when the dynamics is
population-dependent, we provide a novel upper-bound that suggests IL is harder in
this setting. To address this issue, we propose a new adversarial formulation where
the reinforcement learning problem is replaced by a mean-field control (MFC)
problem, suggesting progress in IL within MFGs may have to build upon MFC.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) is a popular framework involving an apprentice agent who learns to imitate the
behavior of an expert agent by observing its actions and transitions. In the context of mean-field games
(MFGs), IL is used to learn a policy that imitates the behavior of a population of infinitely-many expert
agents that are following a Nash equilibrium policy, according to some unknown payoff function.
Mean-field games are an approximation introduced to simplify the analysis of games with a large
(but finite) number of identical players, where we can look at the interaction between a representative
infinitesimal player and a term capturing the population’s behavior. The MFG framework enables
to scale to an infinite number of agents, where both the reward and the transition are populationdependent. The aim is to learn effective policies that can effectively learn and imitate the behavior
of a large population of agents, which is a crucial problem in many real-world applications, such as
traffic management [12, 30, 31], crowd control [11, 1], and financial markets [6, 5].
IL in MFGs presents new challenges compared to single-agent IL, as both the (unknown) reward
function and the transition kernel can depend on the population distribution. Furthermore, algorithms
will depend on whether we can only observe the trajectories drawn from the Nash Equilibrium (NE)
or if we can access the MFG itself, either driven by the expert population or the imitating one.
The main question we address is whether IL in MFGs is actually harder than IL in single-agent
settings and if we can use single-agent techniques to solve IL in the MFGs framework.
Although there exist IL algorithms for MFGs in the literature, none comes with a characterization
of the quality of the learnt imitation policy. We will also explain that they essentially amount to a
reduction to classic IL, and explain the underlying possible issues. So as to compare algorithms on a
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

