Masked Space-Time Hash Encoding for Efficient
Dynamic Scene Reconstruction

Feng Wang∗1
1

Zilong Chen∗1

Guokang Wang1

Huaping Liu†1

Yafei Song2

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology(BNRist),
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Alibaba Group
wang-f20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hpliu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose the Masked Space-Time Hash encoding (MSTH), a novel
method for efficiently reconstructing dynamic 3D scenes from multi-view or monocular videos. Based on the observation that dynamic scenes often contain substantial
static areas that result in redundancy in storage and computations, MSTH represents a dynamic scene as a weighted combination of a 3D hash encoding and a 4D
hash encoding. The weights for the two components are represented by a learnable
mask which is guided by an uncertainty-based objective to reflect the spatial and
temporal importance of each 3D position. With this design, our method can reduce
the hash collision rate by avoiding redundant queries and modifications on static
areas, making it feasible to represent a large number of space-time voxels by hash
tables with small size. Besides, without the requirements to fit the large numbers of
temporally redundant features independently, our method is easier to optimize and
converge rapidly with only twenty minutes of training for a 300-frame dynamic
scene. As a result, MSTH obtains consistently better results than previous methods
with only 20 minutes of training time and 130 MB of memory storage. Code is
available at https://github.com/masked-spacetime-hashing/msth.

Introduction
Ours†

Plenoptic Dataset

30

PSNR on Google Immersive

1

PSNR on Plenoptic Video

33
Immersive Dataset
Neural radiance fields [57, 96, 79, 58, 14]
Ours
Ours
have achieved great success in reconstructing
HyperReel [1]
29
32
static 3D scenes. The learned volumetric repreK-Planes [72]
†
HexPlane [10]
HexPlane [10]
sentations can produce photo-realistic render28
MixVoxels [83]
31
ing for novel views. However, for dynamic
HyperReel [1]
NeRFPlayer [75]
scenes, the advancements lag behind that of
27
30
static scenes due to the inherent complexities
NeRFPlayer [75]
caused by the additional time dimension.
Specifically, reconstructing dynamic scenes re0.3 1
2
3
6
9
12
quires more time, memory footprint, and addiTraining time (hour)
tional temporal consistency compared to static Figure 1: Performance comparison. We compare the
scenes. These factors have resulted in unsat- PSNR and training time on two public benchmarks. Our
isfactory rendering qualities. Recently, many method surpasses other methods by a non-trivial margin
works [40, 38, 75, 83, 1, 10, 72] have made great with only 20m of training. † denotes the HexPlane [10]
progress in dynamic scene reconstruction, im- setting which removes the coffee-martini scene.
proving the efficiency and effectiveness of reconstructions. However, there is still considerable room
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

