Norm-guided latent space exploration for
text-to-image generation

Dvir Samuel1,2 , Rami Ben-Ari2 , Nir Darshan2 , Haggai Maron3,4 , Gal Chechik1,4
1
Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel
2
OriginAI, Tel-Aviv, Israel
3
Technion, Haifa, Israel
4
NVIDIA Research, Tel-Aviv, Israel

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models show great potential in synthesizing a large variety
of concepts in new compositions and scenarios. However, the latent space of
initial seeds is still not well understood and its structure was shown to impact the
generation of various concepts. Specifically, simple operations like interpolation
and finding the centroid of a set of seeds perform poorly when using standard
Euclidean or spherical metrics in the latent space. This paper makes the observation
that, in current training procedures, diffusion models observed inputs with a narrow
range of norm values. This has strong implications for methods that rely on seed
manipulation for image generation, with applications to few-shot and long-tail
learning tasks. To address this issue, we propose a novel method for interpolating
between two seeds and demonstrate that it defines a new non-Euclidean metric that
takes into account a norm-based prior on seeds. We describe a simple yet efficient
algorithm for approximating this interpolation procedure and use it to further define
centroids in the latent seed space. We show that our new interpolation and centroid
techniques significantly enhance the generation of rare concept images. This
further leads to state-of-the-art performance on few-shot and long-tail benchmarks,
improving prior approaches in terms of generation speed, image quality, and
semantic content.

1

Introduction

Text-to-image diffusion models demonstrate an exceptional ability to generate new and unique
images. They map random samples (seeds) from a high-dimensional space, conditioned on a userprovided text prompt, to a corresponding image. Unfortunately, the seed space, and the way diffusion
models map it into the space of natural images are still poorly understood. This may have a direct
effect on generation quality. For example, diffusion models have difficulty generating images of
rare concepts, and specialized methods have been proposed to resolve this issue, for example, by
performing optimization in the seed space [43]. Our limited understanding of the seed space is
further demonstrated by the fact that standard operations on seeds, such as interpolating between two
seeds or finding the centroid of a given set of seeds, often result in low-quality images with poor
semantic content (Figure 1 left, first two rows). As a result, methods based on the exploration and
manipulation of seed spaces face a considerable challenge.
The aim of this paper is to propose simple and efficient tools for exploring the seed space and to
demonstrate how these tools can be used to generate rare concepts. Our main observation is that a
specific property, the norm of the seed vector, plays a key role in how a seed is processed by the
∗

Correspondence to: Dvir Samuel <dvirsamuel@gmail.com>

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

