The Surprising Effectiveness of Diffusion Models for
Optical Flow and Monocular Depth Estimation

Saurabh Saxena, Charles Herrmann, Junhwa Hur, Abhishek Kar,
Mohammad Norouzi, Deqing Sun, David J. Fleet∗
{srbs,irwinherrmann,junhwahur,abhiskar,deqingsun,davidfleet}@google.com
Google DeepMind and Google Research

Abstract
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models have transformed image generation with
their impressive fidelity and diversity. We show that they also excel in estimating
optical flow and monocular depth, surprisingly, without task-specific architectures
and loss functions that are predominant for these tasks. Compared to the point
estimates of conventional regression-based methods, diffusion models also enable
Monte Carlo inference, e.g., capturing uncertainty and ambiguity in flow and depth.
With self-supervised pre-training, the combined use of synthetic and real data for
supervised training, and technical innovations (infilling and step-unrolled denoising
diffusion training) to handle noisy-incomplete training data, and a simple form
of coarse-to-fine refinement, one can train state-of-the-art diffusion models for
depth and optical flow estimation. Extensive experiments focus on quantitative
performance against benchmarks, ablations, and the model’s ability to capture
uncertainty and multimodality, and impute missing values. Our model, DDVM
(Denoising Diffusion Vision Model), obtains a state-of-the-art relative depth error
of 0.074 on the indoor NYU benchmark and an Fl-all outlier rate of 3.26% on the
KITTI optical flow benchmark, about 25% better than the best published method.
For an overview see diffusion-vision.github.io

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have emerged as powerful generative models for high fidelity image synthesis,
capturing rich knowledge about the visual world [21, 48, 55, 62]. However, at first glance, it is
unclear whether these models can be as effective on many classical computer vision tasks. For
example, consider two dense vision estimation tasks, namely, optical flow, which estimates frame-toframe correspondences, and monocular depth perception, which makes depth predictions based on a
single image. Both tasks are usually treated as regression problems and addressed with specialized
architectures and task-specific loss functions, e.g., cost volumes, feature warps, or suitable losses
for depth. Without these specialized components or the regression framework, general generative
techniques may be ill-equipped and vulnerable to both generalization and performance issues.
In this paper, we show that these concerns, while valid, can be addressed and that, surprisingly, a
generic, conventional diffusion model for image to image translation works impressively well on both
tasks, often outperforming the state of the art. In addition, diffusion models provide valuable benefits
over networks trained with regression; in particular, diffusion allows for approximate inference with
multi-modal distributions, capturing uncertainty and ambiguity (e.g. see Figure 1).
One key barrier to training useful diffusion models for monocular depth and optical flow inference
concerns the amount and quality of available training data. Given the limited availability of labelled
∗

DF is also affiliated with the University of Toronto and the Vector Institute.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

