A Fractional Graph Laplacian Approach
to Oversmoothing

Sohir Maskey∗
Department of Mathematics,
LMU Munich
maskey@math.lmu.de

Raffaele Paolino∗
Department of Mathematics & MCML,
LMU Munich
paolino@math.lmu.de

Aras Bacho
Department of Mathematics,
LMU Munich

Gitta Kutyniok
Department of Mathematics & MCML,
LMU Munich

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown state-of-the-art performances in various
applications. However, GNNs often struggle to capture long-range dependencies
in graphs due to oversmoothing. In this paper, we generalize the concept of
oversmoothing from undirected to directed graphs. To this aim, we extend the
notion of Dirichlet energy by considering a directed symmetrically normalized
Laplacian. As vanilla graph convolutional networks are prone to oversmooth, we
adopt a neural graph ODE framework. Specifically, we propose fractional graph
Laplacian neural ODEs, which describe non-local dynamics. We prove that our
approach allows propagating information between distant nodes while maintaining
a low probability of long-distance jumps. Moreover, we show that our method
is more flexible with respect to the convergence of the graph’s Dirichlet energy,
thereby mitigating oversmoothing. We conduct extensive experiments on synthetic
and real-world graphs, both directed and undirected, demonstrating our method’s
versatility across diverse graph homophily levels. Our code is available on GitHub.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli et al., 2009; Bronstein et al., 2017)
have emerged as a powerful class of machine learning models capable of effectively learning representations of structured data. GNNs have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in a wide
range of applications, including social network analysis (Monti et al., 2019), molecular property
prediction (Gilmer et al., 2017), and recommendation systems (J. Wang et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2019).
The majority of existing work on GNNs has focused on undirected graphs (Defferrard et al., 2016;
Kipf et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017), where edges have no inherent direction. However, many
real-world systems, such as citation networks, transportation systems, and biological pathways, are
inherently directed, necessitating the development of methods explicitly tailored to directed graphs.
Despite their success, most existing GNN models struggle to capture long-range dependencies, which
can be critical for specific tasks, such as node classification and link prediction, and for specific
graphs, such as heterophilic graphs. This shortcoming also arises from the problem of oversmoothing,
where increasing the depth of GNNs results in the node features converging to similar values that
only convey information about the node’s degree (Oono et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2020). Consequently,
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

