Egocentric Planning for Scalable Embodied Task
Achievement
Xiaotian Liu∗
ServiceNow Research
Montreal, QC, Canada
xiaotian.liu
@mail.utoronto.ca

Hector Palacios†
ServiceNow Research
Montreal, QC, Canada
hectorpal
@gmail.com

Christian Muise
Queen’s University
Kingston, ON, Canada
christian.muise
@queensu.ca

Abstract
Embodied agents face significant challenges when tasked with performing actions
in diverse environments, particularly in generalizing across object types and executing suitable actions to accomplish tasks. Furthermore, agents should exhibit
robustness, minimizing the execution of illegal actions. In this work, we present
Egocentric Planning, an innovative approach that combines symbolic planning and
Object-oriented POMDPs to solve tasks in complex environments, harnessing existing models for visual perception and natural language processing. We evaluated
our approach in ALFRED, a simulated environment designed for domestic tasks,
and demonstrated its high scalability, achieving an impressive 36.07% unseen
success rate in the ALFRED benchmark and winning the ALFRED challenge at
CVPR Embodied AI workshop. Our method requires reliable perception and the
specification or learning of a symbolic description of the preconditions and effects
of the agent’s actions, as well as what object types reveal information about others.
It can naturally scale to solve new tasks beyond ALFRED, as long as they can be
solved using the available skills. This work offers a solid baseline for studying
end-to-end and hybrid methods that aim to generalize to new tasks, including
recent approaches relying on LLMs, but often struggle to scale to long sequences
of actions or produce robust plans for novel tasks.

1

Introduction

Embodied task accomplishment requires an agent to process multi-modal information and plan
over long task horizons. Recent advancements in deep learning (DL) models have made grounding
visual and natural language information faster and more reliable (MBP+ 21). As a result, embodied
task-oriented agents have been the subject of growing interest (STG+ 20, YRT+ 22, WDKM21).
Benchmarks such as the Action Learning From Realistic Environments and Directives (ALFRED)
were proposed to test embodied agents’ ability to act in an unknown environment and follow language
instructions or task descriptions (STG+ 20). The success of DL has led researchers to attempt end-toend neural methods (ZC21, SGT+ 21). In an environment like ALFRED, these methods are mostly
framed as imitation learning, where neural networks are trained via expert trajectories. However,
end-to-end optimization leads to entangled latent state representation where compositional and
long-horizon tasks are challenging to solve. Other approaches use neural networks to ground visual
information into persistent memory structures to store information (MCR+ 22, BPF+ 21). These
approaches rely on templates of existing tasks, making them difficult to generalize to new problems
or unexpected action outcomes. ALFRED agents must navigate long horizons and skill assembly,
operating within a deterministic environment that only changes due to the agent’s actions.
∗
†

Work done when Xiaotian Liu was an intern at ServiceNow Research.
Work done when Hector Palacios was a research scientist at ServiceNow Research.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

