DiffTraj: Generating GPS Trajectory with Diffusion
Probabilistic Model
∗

∗

Yuanshao Zhu1,2 , Yongchao Ye1 , Shiyao Zhang1 , Xiangyu Zhao2, , James J.Q. Yu3,
1
Southern University of Science and Technology
2
City University of Hong Kong
3
University of York
{zhuys2019, 12032868}@mail.sustech.edu.cn
zhangsy@sustech.edu.cn
xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk
james.yu@york.ac.uk

Abstract
Pervasive integration of GPS-enabled devices and data acquisition technologies has
led to an exponential increase in GPS trajectory data, fostering advancements in
spatial-temporal data mining research. Nonetheless, GPS trajectories contain
personal geolocation information, rendering serious privacy concerns when
working with raw data. A promising approach to address this issue is trajectory
generation, which involves replacing original data with generated, privacy-free
alternatives. Despite the potential of trajectory generation, the complex nature
of human behavior and its inherent stochastic characteristics pose challenges in
generating high-quality trajectories. In this work, we propose a spatial-temporal
diffusion probabilistic model for trajectory generation (DiffTraj). This model
effectively combines the generative abilities of diffusion models with the
spatial-temporal features derived from real trajectories. The core idea is to
reconstruct and synthesize geographic trajectories from white noise through a
reverse trajectory denoising process. Furthermore, we propose a Trajectory
UNet (Traj-UNet) deep neural network to embed conditional information and
accurately estimate noise levels during the reverse process. Experiments on
two real-world datasets show that DiffTraj can be intuitively applied to generate
high-fidelity trajectories while retaining the original distributions. Moreover, the
generated results can support downstream trajectory analysis tasks and significantly
outperform other methods in terms of geo-distribution evaluations.

1

Introduction

GPS trajectory data play a crucial role in numerous spatial-temporal data mining applications,
including urban traffic planning, business location selection, and travel time estimation [43, 42].
Despite the substantial progress in urban applications through GPS trajectory analysis, few attention
was paid to data accessibility and privacy concerns [41]. For example, real-world trajectory data,
which contain sensitive personal geolocation information, raise significant privacy issues when using
directly [38, 44]. Additionally, the time-consuming and labor-intensive nature of trajectory data
collection leads to challenges in obtaining accessible, publicly available datasets that preserve privacy.
Therefore, it is essential to develop methods that facilitate the efficient use of trajectory data in
urban applications while safeguarding personal privacy. One promising approach involves generating
synthetic trajectories by learning from real trajectory distributions and replacing privacy-sensitive
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

