GUST: Combinatorial Generalization by Unsupervised
Grouping with Neuronal Coherence

Hao Zheng† Hui Lin† Rong Zhao∗
Center for Brain-Inspired Computing Research,
Optical Memory National Engineering Research Center,
Tsinghua University - China Electronics Technology HIK Group
Co. Joint Research Center for Brain-Inspired Computing,
IDG / McGovern Institute for Brain Research at Tsinghua University,
Department of Precision Instrument,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
{zheng-h17, linhui21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
r_zhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Dynamically grouping sensory information into structured entities is essential for
understanding the world of combinatorial nature. However, the grouping ability
and therefore combinatorial generalization are still challenging artificial neural networks. Inspired by the evidence that successful grouping is indicated by neuronal
coherence in the human brain, we introduce GUST (Grouping Unsupervisely by
Spike Timing network), an iterative network architecture with biological constraints
to bias the network towards a dynamical state of neuronal coherence that softly reflects the grouping information in the temporal structure of its spiking activity. We
evaluate and analyze the model on synthetic datasets. Interestingly, the segregation
ability is directly learned from superimposed stimuli with a succinct unsupervised
objective. Two learning stages are present, from coarsely perceiving global features
to additionally capturing local features. Further, the learned building blocks are
systematically composed to represent novel scenes in a bio-plausible manner.

1

Introduction

Humans are able to effortlessly group the world in terms of abstract and reusable ‘building blocks’,
and leverage those learned blocks to understand novel contexts. For example, there is a list of
evidences that infants as young as 3-month old are able to group information from individual visual
elements into wholistic perceptual units [1, 2, 3, 4]. This phenomenon is referred as perceptual
grouping [5] or binding in neuroscience and psychology literature [6] and such ability is believed to
be fundamental for the compositional generalization of neural network models [7].
However, grouping ability challenges artificial neural networks (ANNs) for several reasons. Firstly,
grouping from raw sensory input is in principle an unsupervised task with multiple possible solutions.
For example, how to segment a scene[8] or how to chunk a sensory stream into episodic memories[9]
do not have a golden criterion. This excludes the solution through massive labeling and supervised
learning[10]. Secondly, the representation of symbol-like content (the pattern of a single object)
should be able to retain itself and be reused in front of various situations with a common format.
Without proper constraints, simple network models can fall into ambiguities when trying to compose
†

Equal contribution.

* Corresponding author.

The code is publicly available at: https://github.com/monstersecond/gust.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

