FETV: A Benchmark for Fine-Grained Evaluation of
Open-Domain Text-to-Video Generation

Yuanxin Liu§ , Lei Li§ , Shuhuai Ren§ , Rundong Gao¶ , Shicheng Li§ ,
Sishuo Chen¶ , Xu Sun§ , Lu Hou‡
§
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
¶
Center for Data Science, Peking University ‡ Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{liuyuanxin, shuhuai_ren, gaord20}@stu.pku.edu.cn nlp.lilei@gmail.com
{lisc99, chensishuo, xusun}@pku.edu.cn houlu3@huawei.com

Abstract
Recently, open-domain text-to-video (T2V) generation models have made remarkable progress. However, the promising results are mainly shown by the qualitative
cases of generated videos, while the quantitative evaluation of T2V models still
faces two critical problems. Firstly, existing studies lack fine-grained evaluation
of T2V models on different categories of text prompts. Although some benchmarks have categorized the prompts, their categorization either only focuses on
a single aspect or fails to consider the temporal information in video generation.
Secondly, it is unclear whether the automatic evaluation metrics are consistent with
human standards. To address these problems, we propose FETV, a benchmark
for Fine-grained Evaluation of Text-to-Video generation. FETV is multi-aspect,
categorizing the prompts based on three orthogonal aspects: the major content,
the attributes to control and the prompt complexity. FETV is also temporal-aware,
which introduces several temporal categories tailored for video generation. Based
on FETV, we conduct comprehensive manual evaluations of four representative
T2V models, revealing their pros and cons on different categories of prompts
from different aspects. We also extend FETV as a testbed to evaluate the reliability of automatic T2V metrics. The multi-aspect categorization of FETV
enables fine-grained analysis of the metrics’ reliability in different scenarios. We
find that existing automatic metrics (e.g., CLIPScore and FVD) correlate poorly
with human evaluation. To address this problem, we explore several solutions
to improve CLIPScore and FVD, and develop two automatic metrics that exhibit
significant higher correlation with humans than existing metrics. Benchmark page:
https://github.com/llyx97/FETV.

1

Introduction

Open-domain text-to-video (T2V) generation, which involves synthesizing videos in response to
free-form textual prompts, has experienced significant advancements in recent years. Contemporary
T2V models have demonstrated impressive visual quality and alignment with prompts. However, this
progress is mainly supported by the qualitative cases of generated videos. To accurately assess the
current state of T2V generation, enable model comparisons, and guide future research, it is essential
to develop robust quantitative evaluation systems
However, existing quantitative evaluations for T2V models present two major challenges: (1) Limited
scope of performance measurements. Current studies typically report overall results on entire test
sets, providing only a coarse view of model performance. A more nuanced, fine-grained evaluation is
necessary to gain a comprehensive understanding of model capabilities. While some benchmarks
categorize text prompts based on content or challenge type [31, 50], they often neglect the temporal
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

