Tracking Most Significant Shifts
in Nonparametric Contextual Bandits

Joe Suk
Columbia University
joe.suk@columbia.edu

Samory Kpotufe
Columbia University
samory@columbia.edu

Abstract
We study nonparametric contextual bandits where Lipschitz mean reward functions
may change over time. We first establish the minimax dynamic regret rate in
this less understood setting in terms of number of changes L and total-variation
V , both capturing all changes in distribution over context space, and argue that
state-of-the-art procedures are suboptimal in this setting.
Next, we tend to the question of an adaptivity for this setting, i.e. achieving
the minimax rate without knowledge of L or V . Quite importantly, we posit
that the bandit problem, viewed locally at a given context Xt , should not be
affected by reward changes in other parts of context space X . We therefore
propose a notion of change, which we term experienced significant shifts, that
better accounts for locality, and thus counts considerably less changes than L and
V . Furthermore, similar to recent work on non-stationary MAB [Suk and Kpotufe,
2022], experienced significant shifts only count the most significant changes in
mean rewards, e.g., severe best-arm changes relevant to observed contexts.
Our main result is to show that this more tolerant notion of change can in fact be
adapted to.

1

Introduction

Contextual bandits model sequential decision making problems where the reward of a chosen action
depends on an observed context Xt at time t, e.g., a consumer’s profile, a medical patient’s history.
The goal is to maximize the total rewards over time of chosen actions, as informed by seen contexts.
As such, one suitable measure of performance is that of dynamic regret, which compares earned
rewards to a time-varying oracle maximizing mean rewards at Xt . While it is often assumed in the
bulk of works in this setting that rewards distributions remain stationary over time, it is understood
that in practice, environmental changes induce nontrivial changes in rewards.
In fact, the problem of non-stationary environments has received a surge of attention in the simpler
non-contextual Multi-Arm-Bandits (MAB) setting, while the more challenging contextual case
remains ill-understood. In particular in the contextual case, some recent works [Wu et al., 2018, Luo
et al., 2018, Chen et al., 2019, Wei and Luo, 2021] consider parametric settings, i.e. where reward
functions belong to fixed parametric family, and show that one may achieve rates adaptive to an
unknown number of L of shifts in rewards or to a notion of total-variation V , both acccounting for
all changes over time and context space. Instead here, we consider a much larger class of reward
functions, namely Lipschitz rewards, corresponding to the natural assumption that closeby contexts
have similar rewards even as reward distributions change.
As a first result for this nonparametric setting, we establish some minimax lower-bounds as a baseline
in terms of either L or V , and argue that state-of-the-art procedures for the parametric case—extended
to the class of Lipschitz functions—do not achieve these baselines.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

