Large Language Models
Can Implement Policy Iteration

Ethan Brooks1 , Logan Walls2 , Richard L. Lewis2 , Satinder Singh1
1
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan
2
Department of Psychology, University of Michigan
{ethanbro,logwalls,rickl,baveja}@umich.edu

Abstract
In this work, we demonstrate a method for implementing policy iteration using a
large language model. While the application of foundation models to Reinforcement Learning (RL) has received considerable attention, most approaches rely
on either (1) the curation of expert demonstrations (through manual design or
task-specific pretraining) or (2) adaptation to the task of interest using gradient
methods (fine-tuning or training of adapter layers). Both of these techniques have
drawbacks. Collecting demonstrations is labor-intensive, and algorithms that rely
on them do not outperform the experts from which the demonstrations were derived. Gradient techniques are inherently slow, sacrificing the “few-shot” quality
that makes in-context learning attractive to begin with. Our method demonstrates
that a large language model can be used to implement policy iteration using the
machinery of in-context learning, enabling it to learn to perform RL tasks without
expert demonstrations or gradients. Our approach iteratively updates the contents
of the prompt from which it derives its policy through trial-and-error interaction
with an RL environment. In order to eliminate the role of in-weights learning (on
which approaches like Decision Transformer (L. Chen et al. 2021) rely heavily),
we demonstrate our method using Codex (M. Chen et al. 2021b), a language model
that was not trained to perform the tasks which we are evaluating.

1

Introduction

In many settings, models implemented using a transformer or recurrent architecture will improve their
performance as information accumulates in their context or memory. We refer to this phenomenon as
“in-context learning.” Brown et al. 2020b demonstrated a technique for inducing form of learning by
prompting a large language model with a small number of input/output exemplars. An interesting
property of in-context learning in the case of large pre-trained models (or “foundation models”) is
that the models are not directly trained to optimize a meta-learning objective, but demonstrate an
emergent capacity to generalize (or at least specialize) to diverse downstream task-distributions (Wei
et al. 2022b).
This remarkable capability has been studied in a variety of settings, including Reinforcement Learning
(RL). However, most work in this area either (1) assumes access to expert demonstrations — collected
either from human experts (Huang et al. 2022b; Baker et al. 2022), or domain-specific pre-trained RL
agents (L. Chen et al. 2021; Lee et al. 2022; Janner et al. 2021; Reed et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2022). —
or (2) relies on gradient-based methods — e.g. fine-tuning of the foundation models parameters as
a whole (Lee et al. 2022; Reed et al. 2022; Baker et al. 2022) or newly training an adapter layer or
prefix vectors while keeping the original foundation models frozen (X. L. Li et al. 2021; A. K. Singh
et al. 2022; Karimi Mahabadi et al. 2022).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

