TART: A plug-and-play Transformer module for
task-agnostic reasoning

Kush Bhatia∗

Avanika Narayan∗

Christopher De Sa

Christopher Ré

{kushb, avanika, chrismre}@cs.stanford.edu, cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) exhibit in-context learning abilities which enable
the same model to perform several tasks without any task-specific training. In
contrast, traditional adaptation approaches, such as fine-tuning, modify the underlying models for each specific task. In-context learning, however, consistently
underperforms task-specific tuning approaches even when presented with the same
examples. While most existing approaches (e.g., prompt engineering) focus on the
LLM’s learned representations to patch this performance gap, our experiments actually reveal that LLM representations contain sufficient information to make good
predictions. As such, we focus on the LLM’s reasoning abilities and demonstrate
that this performance gap exists due to their inability to perform simple probabilistic reasoning tasks. This raises an intriguing question: Are LLMs actually
capable of learning how to reason in a task-agnostic manner? We answer this in the
affirmative and, as a proof of concept, propose TART which generically improves
an LLM’s reasoning abilities using a synthetically trained reasoning module. TART
trains this Transformer-based reasoning module in a task-agnostic manner using
only synthetic logistic regression tasks and composes it with an arbitrary real-world
pre-trained model without any additional training. With a single inference module,
TART improves performance across different model families (GPT-N EO, P YTHIA,
B LOOM), model sizes (100M - 6B), tasks (14 NLP classification tasks), and even
across different modalities (audio and vision). On the RAFT Benchmark, TART
improves GPT-N EO (125M)’s performance such that it outperforms B LOOM
(176B), and is within 4% of GPT-3 (175B). 2

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) show in-context learning capabilities which enable them to perform
a task given only a few examples, without updating the model parameters [9, 7]. This task-agnostic
capability allows for a single model to be applied to a wide range of tasks [1, 41, 28]. In contrast,
traditional task adaptation approaches, such as fine-tuning, update the model parameters for each
specific task.
Despite being task-agnostic, in-context learning is seldom the practitioner’s method of choice since it
consistently underperforms task-specific adaptation approaches [20, 9]. Most existing works attribute
this performance gap to the limited context window of LLMs which can only accommodate a few
task examples [15, 14, 23]. However, we show that this gap between in-context learning and finetuning approaches exists even when presented with the same task examples; in-context learning can
underperform fine-tuning by up to 30 points across binary classification benchmarks (see Figure 5a).
We first investigate why this quality gap exists. We decompose an LLM’s in-context learning capability
into two abilities: learning good representations for the task and performing probabilistic inference,
∗
2

Equal Contribution
Our code and model is available at https://github.com/HazyResearch/TART

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

