ClimateLearn: Benchmarking Machine Learning for
Weather and Climate Modeling
Tung Nguyen⇤
UCLA
tungnd@cs.ucla.edu

Jason Jewik⇤
UCLA
jason.jewik@ucla.edu

Prakhar Sharma
UCLA
prakhar6sharma@gmail.com

Hritik Bansal
UCLA
hbansal@ucla.edu

Aditya Grover
UCLA
adityag@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Modeling weather and climate is an essential endeavor to understand the near- and
long-term impacts of climate change, as well as inform technology and policymaking for adaptation and mitigation efforts. In recent years, there has been a surging
interest in applying data-driven methods based on machine learning for solving core
problems such as weather forecasting and climate downscaling. Despite promising
results, much of this progress has been impaired due to the lack of large-scale, opensource efforts for reproducibility, resulting in the use of inconsistent or underspecified datasets, training setups, and evaluations by both domain scientists and artificial
intelligence researchers. We introduce ClimateLearn, an open-source PyTorch
library that vastly simplifies the training and evaluation of machine learning models for data-driven climate science. ClimateLearn consists of holistic pipelines
for dataset processing (e.g., ERA5, CMIP6, PRISM), implementation of state-ofthe-art deep learning models (e.g., Transformers, ResNets), and quantitative and
qualitative evaluation for standard weather and climate modeling tasks. We supplement these functionalities with extensive documentation, contribution guides, and
quickstart tutorials to expand access and promote community growth. We have also
performed comprehensive forecasting and downscaling experiments to showcase
the capabilities and key features of our library. To our knowledge, ClimateLearn
is the first large-scale, open-source effort for bridging research in weather and
climate modeling with modern machine learning systems. Our library is available
publicly at https://github.com/aditya-grover/climate-learn.

1

Introduction

The escalating extent, duration, and severity of extreme weather events such as droughts, floods, and
heatwaves in recent decades are some of the most devastating outcomes of climate change. Moreover,
as average surface temperature is anticipated to continue rising through the end of the century,
such extreme weather events are likely to occur with even greater intensity and frequency in the
future [12, 33, 43, 46, 67, 74]. The key devices used by scientists to understand historical trends and
make such predictions about future weather and climate are the numerical weather prediction (NWP)
models. These models represent Earth system components including the atmosphere, land surface,
ocean, and sea ice as intricate dynamical systems, and they are the prevailing paradigm for weather
and climate modeling today due to their established reliability, well-founded design, and extensive
⇤

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

