Transformer as a hippocampal memory consolidation
model based on NMDAR-inspired nonlinearity

Dong-Kyum Kim1∗ Jea Kwon2∗ Meeyoung Cha1,3† C. Justin Lee2†
1
IBS Data Science Group
2
IBS Center for Cognition and Sociality
3
KAIST School of Computing
{kdkyum,jeakwon,mcha,cjl}@ibs.re.kr

Abstract
The hippocampus plays a critical role in learning, memory, and spatial representation, processes that depend on the NMDA receptor (NMDAR). Inspired by recent
findings that compare deep learning models to the hippocampus, we propose a
new nonlinear activation function that mimics NMDAR dynamics. NMDAR-like
nonlinearity shifts short-term working memory into long-term reference memory
in transformers, thus enhancing a process that is similar to memory consolidation in the mammalian brain. We design a navigation task assessing these two
memory functions and show that manipulating the activation function (i.e., mimicking the Mg2+ -gating of NMDAR) disrupts long-term memory processes. Our
experiments suggest that place cell-like functions and reference memory reside in
the feed-forward network layer of transformers and that nonlinearity drives these
processes. We discuss the role of NMDAR-like nonlinearity in establishing this
striking resemblance between transformer architecture and hippocampal spatial
representation.

1

Introduction

Synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus is crucial for converting short-term memories into long-term
memories during memory consolidation [1–3]. The N-methyl-D-aspartic acid receptor (NMDAR) is
essential for mediating this memory formation as well as spatial representation. NMDAR serves as a
switch for such plasticity and long-term memory formation [4–6]. Hippocampal place cells [7] and
entorhinal cortex grid cells [8] are known to be central for spatial navigation in animals. NMDAR has
been highlighted for its importance in place cell representations through hippocampal CA1 neurons [9,
3]. These discoveries have led to a deeper understanding of hippocampal function, inspiring recent
efforts to replicate such spatial representation mechanisms in deep neural networks [10–12]. However,
whether non-linear dynamics resembling hippocampal functions can be developed and used to support
spatial representation in deep learning models remains unclear.
NMDAR is a post-synaptic ion channel that is characterized by nonlinear dynamics that distinguish it
from other ion channels in the brain. These nonlinear dynamics are evident in the whole-cell current
voltage (I-V) relationship (Fig. 1a) and are modulated by Mg2+ ion blockade at the pore region of the
channel. Previous research indicates that the Mg2+ -dependent nonlinear dynamics of NMDAR play a
key role in synaptic plasticity and memory formation [5, 6].
Recently, transformer-based deep learning models have been reported to have functions that resemble
hippocampal formations [13]. Transformers comprise two consecutive modules: a self-attention
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

