Don’t Stop Pretraining? Make Prompt-based
Fine-tuning Powerful Learner

Zhengxiang Shi
University College London
London, United Kingdom
zhengxiang.shi.19@ucl.ac.uk

Aldo Lipani
University College London
London, United Kingdom
aldo.lipani@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Language models (LMs) trained on vast quantities of unlabelled data have greatly
advanced the field of natural language processing (NLP). In this study, we re-visit
the widely accepted notion in NLP that continued pre-training LMs on task-related
texts improves the performance of fine-tuning (FT) in downstream tasks. Through
experiments on eight single-sentence tasks and eight sentence-pair tasks in both
semi-supervised and fully-supervised settings, we find that conventional continued
pre-training does not consistently provide benefits and can even be detrimental
for sentence-pair tasks or when prompt-based FT is used. To tackle these issues,
we propose Prompt-based Continued Pre-training (PCP), which combines the
idea of instruction tuning with conventional continued pre-training. Our approach
aims to improve the performance of prompt-based FT by presenting both taskrelated texts and prompt templates to LMs through unsupervised pre-training
objectives before fine-tuning for the target task. Our empirical evaluations on 21
benchmarks demonstrate that the PCP consistently improves the performance of
state-of-the-art prompt-based FT approaches (up to 20.1% absolute) in both semisupervised and fully-supervised settings, even with only hundreds of unlabelled
examples. Additionally, prompt-based FT with the PCP outperforms state-of-theart semi-supervised approaches with greater simplicity, eliminating the need for
an iterative process and extra data augmentation. Our further analysis explores
the performance lower bound of the PCP and reveals that the advantages of
PCP persist across different sizes of models and datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/ZhengxiangShi/PowerfulPromptFT.

1

Introduction

Pre-training language models (LMs) [25, 53,
69] over massive unlabelled data and then finetuning on task-specific labelled data for the
specific downstream task offer large performance gains across NLP tasks. In this study,
we re-visit the commonly held belief in NLP
[39, 82, 35] that continued pre-training LMs on
either task-specific data [1, 56] or in-domain Figure 1: Mean performance of CLS- and promptdata [54, 97] is generally beneficial for im- based FT across 16 NLP tasks when trained by
proving the performance of fine-tuning (FT) themselves or in combination with either TAPT or
on downstream tasks. As shown in Figure 1, our proposed PCP in the semi-supervised setting.
our experiments on eight single-sentence tasks Please refer to Table 1 for details.
and eight sentence-pair tasks in both semi- and fully-supervised settings reveal that conventional
continued pre-training on task-specific data [35], known as task adaptive pre-training (TAPT) (see
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

