AttrSeg: Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation via
Attribute Decomposition-Aggregation

Chaofan Ma1 , Yuhuan Yang1 , Chen Ju1 , Fei Zhang1 , Ya Zhang1,2 , Yanfeng Wang1,2B
1
Coop. Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
{chaofanma, yangyuhuan, ju_chen, ferenas, ya_zhang, wangyanfeng622}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation is a challenging task that requires segmenting novel object categories at inference time. Recent works explore vision-language
pre-training to handle this task, but suffer from unrealistic assumptions in practical
scenarios, i.e., low-quality textual category names. For example, this paradigm
assumes that new textual categories will be accurately and completely provided,
and exist in lexicons during pre-training. However, exceptions often happen when
meet with ambiguity for brief or incomplete names, new words that are not present
in the pre-trained lexicons, and difficult-to-describe categories for users. To address these issues, this work proposes a novel attribute decomposition-aggregation
framework, AttrSeg, inspired by human cognition in understanding new concepts.
Specifically, in the decomposition stage, we decouple class names into diverse
attribute descriptions to complement semantic contexts from multiple perspectives.
Two attribute construction strategies are designed: using large language models
for common categories, and involving manually labelling for human-invented categories. In the aggregation stage, we group diverse attributes into an integrated
global description, to form a discriminative classifier that distinguishes the target
object from others. One hierarchical aggregation architecture is further proposed
to achieve multi-level aggregations, leveraging the meticulously designed clustering module. The final results are obtained by computing the similarity between
aggregated attributes and images embeddings. To evaluate the effectiveness, we
annotate three types of datasets with attribute descriptions, and conduct extensive
experiments and ablation studies. The results show the superior performance of
attribute decomposition-aggregation. We refer readers to the latest arXiv version at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.00096.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision that involves partitioning
an image into some semantically meaningful regions. Despite great progress has been made, existing
research has mainly focuses on closed-set scenarios, where object categories remain constant during
training and inference stages [50, 24]. This assumption is an oversimplification of real-life and limits
its practical application. Another line of research considers a more challenging problem, that requires
the vision system to handle a broader range of categories, including novel (unseen) categories during
inference. This problem is referred as open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVSS).
To handle OVSS, vision-language pre-training (VLP) paradigm [42, 17, 49] provides a preliminary
but popular idea. By leveraging language as an internal representation for visual recognition,
segmentation is formulated as a similarity between a category’s textual representation and pixel-level
visual representation. Following on this paradigm, recent works focus on minor improvements, e.g.,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

