VisionLLM: Large Language Model is also
an Open-Ended Decoder for Vision-Centric Tasks

Wenhai Wang∗2 Zhe Chen∗1,3 Xiaokang Chen∗1,4 Jiannan Wu∗1,5 Xizhou Zhu1,6
Gang Zeng4 Ping Luo5 Tong Lu3 Jie Zhou6 Yu Qiao1 Jifeng Dai†1,6
1
OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Nanjing University 4 Peking University 5 The University of HongKong 6 Tsinghua University
Code: https://github.com/OpenGVLab/VisionLLM

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have notably accelerated progress towards artificial
general intelligence (AGI), with their impressive zero-shot capacity for user-tailored
tasks, endowing them with immense potential across a range of applications.
However, in the field of computer vision, despite the availability of numerous
powerful vision foundation models (VFMs), they are still restricted to tasks in a
pre-defined form, struggling to match the open-ended task capabilities of LLMs.
In this work, we present an LLM-based framework for vision-centric tasks, termed
VisionLLM. This framework provides a unified perspective for vision and language
tasks by treating images as a foreign language and aligning vision-centric tasks
with language tasks that can be flexibly defined and managed using language
instructions. An LLM-based decoder can then make appropriate predictions based
on these instructions for open-ended tasks. Extensive experiments show that the
proposed VisionLLM can achieve different levels of task customization through
language instructions, from fine-grained object-level to coarse-grained task-level
customization, all with good results. It’s noteworthy that, with a generalist LLMbased framework, our model can achieve over 60% mAP on COCO, on par with
detection-specific models. We hope this model can set a new baseline for generalist
vision and language models. The code shall be released.

1

Introduction

The emergence of large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT [35] has revolutionized the landscape
of artificial general intelligence (AGI), showcasing their impressive zero-shot capabilities in addressing various natural language processing (NLP) tasks through user-tailored prompts or language
instructions. Despite these advancements, it’s essential to note that the triumph of LLMs does not
effortlessly extend to pure vision and vision-language tasks, due to the inherent disparities between
modalities and task formats.
The field of computer vision presents a unique set of challenges and paradigms that differ from
those of NLP. The traditional paradigm of vision foundation models is pre-training followed by
fine-tuning [51, 11, 43, 53, 17, 44], which is effective but comes with significant marginal costs
when adapting to diverse downstream scenarios. As shown in Figure 1a, while approaches such as
multi-task unification [38, 50, 1, 49, 72] have been used to achieve generalist capability, they often
struggle to overcome the limitations imposed by pre-defined tasks, resulting in a gap in open-ended
task capabilities compared to LLMs. Recently, visual prompt tuning [24, 66, 70, 67, 54] has emerged
as a way to flexibly outline some pure vision tasks (see Figure 1b), such as object detection, instance
* equal contribution, † corresponding author (daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn)
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

