Deep Fractional Fourier Transform

Hu Yu∗,†,1 Jie Huang∗,1 Lingzhi Li2 Man Zhou1 Feng Zhao ‡,1,
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Alibaba Group
{yuhu520, hj0117, manman}@mail.ustc.edu.cn fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing deep learning-based computer vision methods usually operate in the spatial and frequency domains, which are two orthogonal individual perspectives for
image processing. In this paper, we introduce a new spatial-frequency analysis
tool, Fractional Fourier Transform (FRFT), to provide comprehensive unified
spatial-frequency perspectives. The FRFT is a unified continuous spatial-frequency
transform that simultaneously reflects an image’s spatial and frequency representations, making it optimal for processing non-stationary image signals. We explore
the properties of the FRFT for image processing and present a fast implementation
of the 2D FRFT, which facilitates its widespread use. Based on these explorations,
we introduce a simple yet effective operator, Multi-order FRactional Fourier Convolution (MFRFC), which exhibits the remarkable merits of processing images from
more perspectives in the spatial-frequency plane. Our proposed MFRFC is a general
and basic operator that can be easily integrated into various tasks for performance
improvement. We experimentally evaluate the MFRFC on various computer vision
tasks, including object detection, image classification, guided super-resolution,
denoising, dehazing, deraining, and low-light enhancement. Our proposed MFRFC
consistently outperforms baseline methods by significant margins across all tasks.
Our code is released publicly at https://github.com/yuhuUSTC/FRFT.

1

Introduction

Vanilla convolution in the spatial domain has been the dominant approach in Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) due to its advantages of fewer parameters with parameter sharing and translation
invariance. However, CNNs suffer from a limited receptive field, especially in early layers. To
address this issue, several methods have attempted to convert signals from the spatial domain into the
frequency domain using the Fourier Transform (FT), which offers a global receptive field according to
the spectral convolution theorem [1] and is physically meaningful. However, FT has limitations due to
its reliance on stationary signals and lack of spatial-frequency properties. As a global transformation,
it captures the overall spectrum of an image but cannot express the local spatial characteristics of the
image. This makes FT optimal for stationary signals but not for non-stationary ones, such as images.
Additionally, the spatial and frequency domains are only two special and orthogonal perspectives of
signals. Then, we wonder if there is an optimal tool for processing non-stationary image signals
and providing an intermediate and unified perspective of an image.
To address the aforementioned question, we introduce a unified spatial-frequency 1 analysis tool
called the Fractional Fourier Transform (FRFT), which offers several advantages. First, the basis
function of the FRFT is the linear frequency modulation function, making it well-suited for processing
non-stationary image signals. As shown in Figure 1(a), non-stationary image signals are not separable
∗
Equal Contribution.
†Work partially performed during internship at Alibaba DAMO Academy.
‡Corresponding Author.
1
Also, a time-frequency analysis tool for time-varying signals such as video, speech, and radar signals.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

