Fair Canonical Correlation Analysis

Zhuoping Zhouπ , Davoud Ataee Tarzanaghπ , Bojian Houπ
Boning Tong, Jia Xu, Yanbo Feng, Qi Longσ , Li Shenσ
University of Pennsylvania
{zhuopinz@sas.,tarzanaq@,boningt@seas.,jiaxu7@,yanbof@seas.}upenn.edu
{bojian.hou,qlong,li.shen}@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Abstract
This paper investigates fairness and bias in Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA),
a widely used statistical technique for examining the relationship between two sets
of variables. We present a framework that alleviates unfairness by minimizing
the correlation disparity error associated with protected attributes. Our approach
enables CCA to learn global projection matrices from all data points while ensuring
that these matrices yield comparable correlation levels to group-specific projection matrices. Experimental evaluation on both synthetic and real-world datasets
demonstrates the efficacy of our method in reducing correlation disparity error
without compromising CCA accuracy.

1

Introduction

Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) is a multivariate statistical technique that explores the relationship between two sets of variables [30]. Given two datasets X ∈ RN ×Dx and Y ∈ RN ×Dy on
the same set of N observations,1 CCA seeks the R–dimensional subspaces where the projections of
X and Y are maximally correlated, i.e. finds U ∈ RDx ×R and V ∈ RDy ×R such that

maximize trace U⊤ X⊤ YV
subject to U⊤ X⊤ XU = V⊤ Y⊤ YV = IR .
(CCA)
CCA finds applications in various fields, including biology [51], neuroscience [2], medicine [79],
and engineering [14], for unsupervised or semi-supervised learning. It improves tasks like clustering,
classification, and manifold learning by creating meaningful dimensionality-reduced representations
[70]. However, CCA can exhibit unfair behavior when analyzing data with protected attributes, like
sex or race. For instance, in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) analysis, CCA can establish correlations
between brain imaging and cognitive decline. Yet, if it does not consider the influence of sex, it
may result in disparate correlations among different groups because AD affects males and females
differently, particularly in cognitive decline [36, 81].
The influence of machine learning on individuals and society has sparked a growing interest in the
topic of fairness [42]. While fairness techniques are well-studied in supervised learning [5, 18, 20],
attention is shifting to equitable methods in unsupervised learning [11, 12, 15, 34, 49, 55, 64]. Despite
extensive work on fairness in machine learning, fair CCA (F-CCA) remains unexplored. This paper
investigates F-CCA and introduces new approaches to mitigate bias in (CCA).
For further discussion, we compare CCA with our proposed F-CCA in sample projection, as illustrated
in Figure 1. In Figure 1(a), we have samples x1 and x2 from matrix X, and in Figure 1(b), their
corresponding samples y1 and y2 are from matrix Y. CCA learns U and V to maximize correlation,
π
1

Equal contribution σ Corresponding authors
The columns of X and Y have been standardized.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

