Frequency Domain-based Dataset Distillation

Donghyeok Shin∗
KAIST
tlsehdgur0@kaist.ac.kr

Seungjae Shin∗
KAIST
tmdwo0910@kaist.ac.kr

Il-Chul Moon
KAIST, Summary.AI
icmoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper presents FreD, a novel parameterization method for dataset distillation,
which utilizes the frequency domain to distill a small-sized synthetic dataset from
a large-sized original dataset. Unlike conventional approaches that focus on the
spatial domain, FreD employs frequency-based transforms to optimize the frequency representations of each data instance. By leveraging the concentration of
spatial domain information on specific frequency components, FreD intelligently
selects a subset of frequency dimensions for optimization, leading to a significant
reduction in the required budget for synthesizing an instance. Through the selection of frequency dimensions based on the explained variance, FreD demonstrates
both theoretical and empirical evidence of its ability to operate efficiently within
a limited budget, while better preserving the information of the original dataset
compared to conventional parameterization methods. Furthermore, based on the
orthogonal compatibility of FreD with existing methods, we confirm that FreD
consistently improves the performances of existing distillation methods over the
evaluation scenarios with different benchmark datasets. We release the code at
https://github.com/sdh0818/FreD.

1

Introduction

The era of big data presents challenges in data processing, analysis, and storage; and researchers have
studied the concept of dataset distillation [20, 26, 14] to resolve these challenges. Specifically, the
objective of dataset distillation is to synthesize a dataset with a smaller cardinality that can preserve
the performance of original large-sized datasets in machine learning tasks. By distilling the key
features from the original dataset into a condensed dataset, less computational resources and storage
space are required while maintaining the performances from the original dataset. Dataset distillation
optimizes a small-sized variable to represent the input, not the model parameters. This optimization
leads the variable to store a synthetic dataset, and the variable is defined in the memory space with the
constraint of limited capacity. Since dataset distillation involves the optimization of data variables
with limited capacity, distillation parameter designs, which we refer to as parameterization, could
significantly improve corresponding optimization while minimizing memory usage.
Some of the existing distillation methods, i.e. 2D image dataset distillations [24, 14, 3, 25, 27],
naively optimize data variables embedded on the input space without any transformation or encoding.
We will refer to distillation on the provided input space as spatial domain distillation, as an opposite
concept of frequency domain distillation that is the focus of this paper. The main drawback of spatial
domain distillation would be the difficulty in specifying the importance of each pixel dimension on the
spatial domain, so it is necessary to utilize the same budget as the original dimension for representing
a single instance. From the perspective of a data variable, which needs to capture the key information
of the original dataset with a limited budget, the variable modeling with whole dimensions becomes a
significant bottleneck that limits the number of distilled data instances. Various spatial domain-based
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

