Automatic Integration for Spatiotemporal
Neural Point Processes
Zihao Zhou
Department of Computer Science
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92092
ziz244@ucsd.edu

Rose Yu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92092
roseyu@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Learning continuous-time point processes is essential to many discrete event forecasting tasks. However, integration poses a major challenge, particularly for
spatiotemporal point processes (STPPs), as it involves calculating the likelihood
through triple integrals over space and time. Existing methods for integrating
STPP either assume a parametric form of the intensity function, which lacks
flexibility; or approximating the intensity with Monte Carlo sampling, which introduces numerical errors. Recent work by Omi et al. [2019] proposes a dual
network approach for efficient integration of flexible intensity function. However,
their method only focuses on the 1D temporal point process. In this paper, we
introduce a novel paradigm: AutoSTPP (Automatic Integration for Spatiotemporal Neural Point Processes) that extends the dual network approach to 3D STPP.
While previous work provides a foundation, its direct extension overly restricts
the intensity function and leads to computational challenges. In response, we
introduce a decomposable parametrization for the integral network using ProdNet.
This approach, leveraging the product of simplified univariate graphs, effectively
sidesteps the computational complexities inherent in multivariate computational
graphs. We prove the consistency of AutoSTPP and validate it on synthetic data
and benchmark real-world datasets. AutoSTPP shows a significant advantage
in recovering complex intensity functions from irregular spatiotemporal events,
particularly when the intensity is sharply localized. Our code is open-source at
https://github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/AutoSTPP.

1

Introduction

Spatiotemporal point process (STPP) [Daley and Vere-Jones, 2007, Reinhart, 2018] is a continuous
time stochastic process for modeling irregularly sampled events over space and time. STPPs are particularly well-suited for modeling epidemic outbreaks, ride-sharing trips, and earthquake occurrences.
A central concept in STPP is the intensity function, which captures the expected rates of events occurrence. Specifically, given the event sequence over space and time Ht = {(s1 , t1 ), . . . , (sn , tn )}tn ≤t ,
the joint log-likelihood of the observed events is:
ˆ ˆ t
n
X
log p(Ht ) =
log λ∗ (si , ti ) −
λ∗ (u, τ )dudτ
(1)
i=1

S

0

∗

λ is the optimal intensity, S the spatial domain, u and τ the space and time, and t the time range.
Learning STPP requires multivariate integrals of the intensity function, which is numerically challenging. Traditional methods often assume a parametric form of the intensity function, such as the integral
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

