Understanding How Consistency Works in Federated
Learning via Stage-wise Relaxed Initialization

Yan Sun
The University of Sydney
ysun9899@uni.sydney.edu.au

Li Shen∗
JD Explore Academy
mathshenli@gmail.com

Dacheng Tao
The University of Sydney
dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed paradigm that coordinates massive local
clients to collaboratively train a global model via stage-wise local training processes
on the heterogeneous dataset. Previous works have implicitly studied that FL suffers
from the “client-drift” problem, which is caused by the inconsistent optimum across
local clients. However, till now it still lacks solid theoretical analysis to explain the
impact of this local inconsistency. To alleviate the negative impact of the “client
drift” and explore its substance in FL, in this paper, we first design an efficient FL
algorithm FedInit, which allows employing the personalized relaxed initialization
state at the beginning of each local training stage. Specifically, FedInit initializes
the local state by moving away from the current global state towards the reverse
direction of the latest local state. This relaxed initialization helps to revise the
local divergence and enhance the local consistency level. Moreover, to further
understand how inconsistency disrupts performance in FL, we introduce the excess
risk analysis and study the divergence term to investigate the test error of the
proposed FedInit method. Our studies show that optimization error is not sensitive
to this local inconsistency, while it mainly affects the generalization error bound
in FedInit. Extensive experiments are conducted to validate this conclusion. Our
proposed FedInit could achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) results compared to several
advanced benchmarks without any additional costs. Meanwhile, stage-wise relaxed
initialization could also be incorporated into the current advanced algorithms to
achieve higher performance in the FL paradigm.

1

Introduction

Since McMahan et al. [26] developed federated learning, it becomes a promising paradigm to
effectively make full use of the computational ability of massive edge devices. Kairouz et al. [17]
further classify the modes based on the specific tasks and different environmental setups. Different
from centralized training, FL utilizes a central server to coordinate the clients to perform several local
training stages and aggregate local models as one global model. However, due to the heterogeneous
dataset, it still suffers from significant performance degradation in practical scenarios.
Several previous studies explore the essence of performance limitations in FL and summarize it
as the “client-drift” problem [1, 19, 22, 38, 44, 46, 48]. From the perspective of the global target,
Karimireddy et al. [19] claim that the aggregated local optimum is far away from the global optimum
due to the heterogeneity of the local dataset, which introduces the “client-drift” in FL. However,
under limited local training steps, local clients can not genuinely approach the local optimum. To
describe this negative impact more accurately, Acar et al. [1] and Wang et al. [44] point out that each
locally optimized objective should be regularized to be aligned with the global objective. Moreover,
beyond the guarantees of local consistent objective, Xu et al. [46] indicate that the performance
∗

Li Shen is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

