AbDiffuser: Full-Atom Generation of in vitro
Functioning Antibodies
Karolis Martinkus1 , Jan Ludwiczak1 , Kyunghyun Cho1,4 , Wei-Ching Liang2 ,
Julien Lafrance-Vanasse2 , Isidro Hotzel2 , Arvind Rajpal2 , Yan Wu2 , Richard Bonneau1 ,
Vladimir Gligorijevic1 , Andreas Loukas1
1
Prescient Design, Genentech, Roche 2 Antibody Engineering, Genentech, Roche 4 NYU

Abstract
We introduce AbDiffuser, an equivariant and physics-informed diffusion model
for the joint generation of antibody 3D structures and sequences. AbDiffuser
is built on top of a new representation of protein structure, relies on a novel
architecture for aligned proteins, and utilizes strong diffusion priors to improve the
denoising process. Our approach improves protein diffusion by taking advantage
of domain knowledge and physics-based constraints; handles sequence-length
changes; and reduces memory complexity by an order of magnitude, enabling
backbone and side chain generation. We validate AbDiffuser in silico and in
vitro. Numerical experiments showcase the ability of AbDiffuser to generate
antibodies that closely track the sequence and structural properties of a reference
set. Laboratory experiments confirm that all 16 HER2 antibodies discovered were
expressed at high levels and that 57.1% of the selected designs were tight binders.

1

Introduction

We focus on the generation of immunoglobulin proteins, also known as antibodies, that help the
immune system recognize and neutralize pathogens. Due to their potency and versatility, antibodies
constitute one of the most popular drug modalities, with 10 out of 37 newly FDA-approved drugs
in 2022 being immunoglobulins [58]. The ability to generate new antibodies with pre-defined
biochemical properties in silico carries the promise of speeding up the drug design process.
Several works have attempted to generate antibodies by learning to form new sequences that resemble
those found in nature [21; 19; 82]. An issue with sequence-based approaches is that it is hard to
determine the properties that render a protein a functional molecule (and an antibody a potent drug)
without inspecting a 3D model of the functional state such as an interface or active site. So far, almost
all of the first design methods that have enabled novel protein design used carefully curated structurefunction information to score the designs [45; 48; 30]. The determinant role of structure on function
has motivated numerous works to co-design sequence and structure [4; 24; 89; 34; 43; 3; 51] or to
first design the protein backbone and then fill in the amino acid identities [90; 32; 15; 87; 50; 92; 47].
An emerging paradigm for protein generation is that of equivariant diffusion [90; 89; 51]. Protein
diffusion models combine ideas from equivariant and physics-informed protein structure representations [37] with advances in denoising diffusion probabilistic models [28] to gradually transform noise
to a partial structure. The generated structure is then refined by adding side chains and optimizing
atom positions to form a full-atom 3D model of a protein.
A pertinent challenge when generating protein structure is satisfying the appropriate equivariance
and physics constraints while also balancing modeling complexity and fidelity. Most current protein
models rely on equivariant transformers [37; 73] or graph neural networks [11; 43] to satisfy SE(3)
Correspondence to Andreas Loukas <andreas.loukas@roche.com>.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

