Contrastive Modules with Temporal Attention for
Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning

Siming Lan1,2,3 Rui Zhang2 Qi Yi1,2,3 Jiaming Guo2 Shaohui Peng5
Yunkai Gao1,2,3 Fan Wu2,3,4,5 Ruizhi Chen5 Zidong Du2,6 Xing Hu2,6
Xishan Zhang2,3 Ling Li4,5 Yunji Chen2,4 †
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Cambricon Technologies
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, UCAS, Beijing, China
5
Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing, China
6
Shanghai Innovation Center for Processor Technologies, SHIC, Shanghai, China
{lansm,gyk314,yiqi}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{zhangrui,guojiaming,duzidong,huxing,zhangxishan,cyj}@ict.ac.cn
{pengshaohui,wufan2020,ruizhi,liling}@iscas.ac.cn

Abstract
In the field of multi-task reinforcement learning, the modular principle, which
involves specializing functionalities into different modules and combining them
appropriately, has been widely adopted as a promising approach to prevent the
negative transfer problem that performance degradation due to conflicts between
tasks. However, most of the existing multi-task RL methods only combine shared
modules at the task level, ignoring that there may be conflicts within the task. In
addition, these methods do not take into account that without constraints, some
modules may learn similar functions, resulting in restricting the model’s expressiveness and generalization capability of modular methods. In this paper, we propose
the Contrastive Modules with Temporal Attention(CMTA) method to address these
limitations. CMTA constrains the modules to be different from each other by
contrastive learning and combining shared modules at a finer granularity than
the task level with temporal attention, alleviating the negative transfer within the
task and improving the generalization ability and the performance for multi-task
RL. We conducted the experiment on Meta-World, a multi-task RL benchmark
containing various robotics manipulation tasks. Experimental results show that
CMTA outperforms learning each task individually for the first time and achieves
substantial performance improvements over the baselines. Our code can be found
at https://github.com/niiceMing/CMTA.

1

Introduction

Though deep reinforcement learning (RL) has made significant progress in multiple domains such
as playing Atari games [22] and robotic control[16], most of these methods tackle different tasks
in isolation, making it difficult to leverage the previously learned skills for a new task. Multi-task
RL aims to train multiple tasks simultaneously in a sample efficient manner [6] by using shared
† Corresponding author.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

