Learning from Both Structural and Textual
Knowledge for Inductive Knowledge Graph
Completion

1

Kunxun Qi1 Jianfeng Du2,3,∗ Hai Wan1,∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Multilingual Intelligent Processing,
Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou, China
3
Bigmath Technology, Shenzhen, China
qikx@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, jfdu@gdufs.edu.cn, wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning rule-based systems plays a pivotal role in knowledge graph completion
(KGC). Existing rule-based systems restrict the input of the system to structural
knowledge only, which may omit some useful knowledge for reasoning, e.g., textual
knowledge. In this paper, we propose a two-stage framework that imposes both
structural and textual knowledge to learn rule-based systems. In the first stage,
we compute a set of triples with confidence scores (called soft triples) from a
text corpus by distant supervision, where a textual entailment model with multiinstance learning is exploited to estimate whether a given triple is entailed by a
set of sentences. In the second stage, these soft triples are used to learn a rulebased model for KGC. To mitigate the negative impact of noise from soft triples,
we propose a new formalism for rules to be learnt, named text enhanced rules
or TE-rules for short. To effectively learn TE-rules, we propose a neural model
that simulates the inference of TE-rules. We theoretically show that any set of
TE-rules can always be interpreted by a certain parameter assignment of the neural
model. We introduce three new datasets to evaluate the effectiveness of our method.
Experimental results demonstrate that the introduction of soft triples and TE-rules
results in significant performance improvements in inductive link prediction.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graph (KG) consists of real-world facts and has been widely used in many applications,
including question answering [27], recommendation [22] and information retrieval [42]. A fact in
KGs is usually represented by a triple of the form (head, relation, tail), where head and tail are
entities. In general, KGs are highly incomplete since the complete set of facts is hard to collect.
Therefore, knowledge graph completion (KGC), which aims to infer missing facts from observed
ones, has become a vital ingredient for practically completing KGs.
In recent years, there are mainly two categories for prevalent approaches to KGC. One is the
embedding-based category [3, 45, 33]. Methods in this category usually learn knowledge graph
embeddings (KGE) by encoding entities and relations as low-dimensional real-value vectors. They
have been shown to be effective for large-scale KGC, but are hard to generalize to the inductive
scenario where missing facts involve previously unseen entities [20]. Besides, they can hardly be
interpreted by human due to their black-box nature. The other category tackles KGC by learning
rule-based systems, based on search algorithms with pruning heuristics [13, 24] or neural models for
∗

Corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

