Multimodal C4:
An Open, Billion-scale Corpus of Images
Interleaved with Text
Wanrong Zhu♣˚ Jack Hessel♡˚
Anas Awadalla
Samir Yitzhak Gadre♢ Jesse Dodge♡ Alex Fang♠
:
Youngjae Yu
Ludwig Schmidt♠♡; William Yang Wang♣ Yejin Choi♠♡
♣
University of California, Santa Barbara ♡ Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
♠
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington
♢
Columbia University : Yonsei University ; LAION
https://github.com/allenai/mmc4
♠

Abstract
In-context vision and language models like Flamingo [2] support arbitrarily interleaved sequences of images and text as input. This format not only enables
few-shot learning via interleaving independent supervised (image, text) examples,
but also, more complex prompts involving interaction between images, e.g., “What
do image A and image B have in common?” To support this interface, pretraining
occurs over web corpora that similarly contain interleaved images+text. To date,
however, large-scale data of this form have not been publicly available.
We release Multimodal C4 (mmc4), an augmentation of the popular text-only c4
corpus2 with images interleaved. We use a linear assignment algorithm to place
images into longer bodies of text using CLIP features [24], a process that we
show outperforms alternatives. mmc4 spans everyday topics like cooking, travel,
technology, etc. A manual inspection of a random sample of documents shows that
a vast majority (88%) of images are topically relevant, and that linear assignment
frequently selects individual sentences specifically well-aligned with each image
(80%). After filtering NSFW images, ads, etc., the resulting mmc4 corpus consists
of 101.2M documents with 571M images interleaved in 43B English tokens.

1

Introduction

In-context learning [7] enables sequence models to adapt to new tasks without any parameter updates.
By interleaving a few supervised examples in a prompt, few-shot learning can be formatted as a
next-token prediction task, i.e., x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 , . . . , xn is input to predict ŷn . Some image+text models
also support in-context learning via interleaving of images/text jointly. Prior experiments [2] suggest
that performant multimodal in-context learning is dependent upon pretraining on similarly interleaved
sequences of images and text (rather than single image/caption pairs). However, such a large-scale
corpus has not been made publicly available.
To address this, we introduce Multimodal C4 (mmc4), a public, billion-scale image-text dataset
consisting of interleaved image/text sequences.3 mmc4 is constructed from public webpages contained
in the cleaned English c4 corpus. In addition to standard preprocessing steps like deduplication,
˚

equal contribution; work partly conducted while Wanrong Zhu was an intern at AI2.
https://www.tensorflow.org/datasets/catalog/c4
3
mmc4’s datasheet [15] is available here.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

