Provable Adversarial Robustness
for Group Equivariant Tasks:
Graphs, Point Clouds, Molecules, and More

Jan Schuchardt, Yan Scholten, Stephan Günnemann
{j.schuchardt, y.scholten, s.guennemann}@tum.de
Department of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute
Technical University of Munich

Abstract
A machine learning model is traditionally considered robust if its prediction remains
(almost) constant under input perturbations with small norm. However, real-world
tasks like molecular property prediction or point cloud segmentation have inherent
equivariances, such as rotation or permutation equivariance. In such tasks, even
perturbations with large norm do not necessarily change an input’s semantic content.
Furthermore, there are perturbations for which a model’s prediction explicitly needs
to change. For the first time, we propose a sound notion of adversarial robustness
that accounts for task equivariance. We then demonstrate that provable robustness
can be achieved by (1) choosing a model that matches the task’s equivariances (2)
certifying traditional adversarial robustness. Certification methods are, however,
unavailable for many models, such as those with continuous equivariances. We
close this gap by developing the framework of equivariance-preserving randomized
smoothing, which enables architecture-agnostic certification. We additionally
derive the first architecture-specific graph edit distance certificates, i.e. sound
robustness guarantees for isomorphism equivariant tasks like node classification.
Overall, a sound notion of robustness is an important prerequisite for future work
at the intersection of robust and geometric machine learning.

1

Introduction

Group equivariance and adversarial robustness are two important model properties when applying
machine learning to real-world tasks involving images, graphs, point clouds and other data types:
Group equivariance is an ubiquitous form of task symmetry [1]. For instance, we do not know how to
optimally classify point clouds, but know that the label is not affected by permutation. We cannot
calculate molecular forces in closed form, but know that the force vectors rotate as the molecule
rotates. Directly enforcing such equivariances in models is an effective inductive bias, as demonstrated
by the success of convolutional layers [2], transformers [3] and graph neural networks [4].
Adversarial robustness [5–7] is a generalized notion of model Lipschitzness: A small change to a
model’s input x should only cause a small change to its prediction f (x). If a model is adversarially
robust, then its accuracy will not be negatively affected by sensor noise, measurement errors or other
small perturbations that are unavoidable when working with real-world data.
For the first time, we address the following question: What is adversarial robustness in tasks that are
group equivariant? This is necessary because the notions of input and output similarity used in prior
work on adversarial robustness (e.g. ℓp distances) are not suitable for group equivariant tasks.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

