Unsupervised Protein-Ligand Binding Energy
Prediction via Neural Euler’s Rotation Equation

Wengong Jin, Siranush Sarzikova, Xun Chen, Nir Hacohen, Caroline Uhler
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
{wjin,sarkizov,xun,nhacohen,cuhler}@broadinstitute.org

Abstract
Protein-ligand binding prediction is a fundamental problem in AI-driven drug discovery. Previous work focused on supervised learning methods for small molecules
where binding affinity data is abundant, but it is hard to apply the same strategy
to other ligand classes like antibodies where labelled data is limited. In this paper,
we explore unsupervised approaches and reformulate binding energy prediction
as a generative modeling task. Specifically, we train an energy-based model on a
set of unlabelled protein-ligand complexes using SE(3) denoising score matching
(DSM) and interpret its log-likelihood as binding affinity. Our key contribution is a
new equivariant rotation prediction network for SE(3) DSM called Neural Euler’s
Rotation Equations (NERE). It predicts a rotation by modeling the force and torque
between protein and ligand atoms, where the force is defined as the gradient of an
energy function with respect to atom coordinates. Using two protein-ligand and
antibody-antigen binding affinity prediction benchmarks, we show that NERE outperforms all unsupervised baselines (physics-based potentials and protein language
models) in both cases and surpasses supervised baselines in the antibody case.

1

Introduction

One of the challenges in drug discovery is to design ligands (small molecules or antibodies) with high
binding affinity to a target protein. In recent years, many protein-ligand binding prediction models
have been developed for small molecules [13, 19, 43]. These models are typically trained on a large
set of crystal structures labeled with experimental binding data. However, it is difficult to apply this
supervised learning approach to other ligand classes like antibodies where binding affinity data is
limited. For example, the largest binding affinity dataset for antibodies [31] has only 566 data points.
Transfer learning from small molecules to antibodies is also hard as their structures are very different.
Given this data scarcity challenge, we aim to develop a general unsupervised binding energy prediction
framework for small molecules and antibodies. The basic idea is to learn an energy-based model
(EBM) [16] of protein-ligand complexes by maximizing the log-likelihood of crystal structures in the
Protein Data Bank (PDB). This generative modeling approach is motivated by recent advances of
protein language models (PLMs) which show that the likelihood of protein sequences is correlated
with protein mutation effects [20, 11]. However, PLMs are not applicable to small molecules and
they model the likelihood of protein sequences rather than structures. We suppose the likelihood of
protein complex structures is a better predictor of binding affinity, which is determined by the relative
orientation between a protein and a ligand. Indeed, our method shares the same spirit as traditional
physics-based energy functions [1] designed by experts so that crystal structures have low binding
energy (i.e., high likelihood). Our key departure is to use neural networks to learn a more expressive
energy function in a data-driven manner. Importantly, our model is applicable to large-scale virtual
screening because it does not require expensive molecular dynamic simulations [21].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

