Degraded Polygons Raise Fundamental Questions of
Neural Network Perception

Leonard Tang
Department of Mathematics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
leonardtang@college.harvard.edu

Dan Ley
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02134
dley@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
It is well-known that modern computer vision systems often exhibit behaviors misaligned with those of humans: from adversarial attacks to image corruptions, deep
learning vision models suffer in a variety of settings that humans capably handle. In
light of these phenomena, here we introduce another, orthogonal perspective studying the human-machine vision gap. We revisit the task of recovering images under
degradation, first introduced over 30 years ago in the Recognition-by-Components
theory of human vision. Specifically, we study the performance and behavior of
neural networks on the seemingly simple task of classifying regular polygons at
varying orders of degradation along their perimeters. To this end, we implement the
Automated Shape Recoverability Test1 for rapidly generating large-scale datasets
of perimeter-degraded regular polygons, modernizing the historically manual creation of image recoverability experiments. We then investigate the capacity of
neural networks to recognize and recover such degraded shapes when initialized
with different priors. Ultimately, we find that neural networks’ behavior on this
simple task conflicts with human behavior, raising a fundamental question of the
robustness and learning capabilities of modern computer vision models.

1

Introduction

Since the advent of adversarial attacks (Goodfellow et al., 2015), researchers have grown increasingly
wary of machine learning models’ susceptibility to learning irrelevant patterns (Yuan et al., 2019).
Oftentimes, neural networks rely on spurious features that humans know to avoid (Khani and Liang,
2021). A poignant example of such unorthodox behavior comes in the form of machine vision’s
over-dependency on object textures rather than object shapes (Geirhos et al., 2019). This often leads
to dangerous consequences in practice (Hendrycks et al., 2021a). Similarly, the fragility of vision
models in response to minor image transformations such as shifts or rotations (Azulay and Weiss,
2019), raises concerns over how well these models truly learn, especially when considering these
small geometric transformations are commonplace in natural vision scenarios. The specifics of when
or how vision models might be expected to generalize well remains a mystery (Zhang et al., 2017).
Beyond being unreliable in real-world settings, current vision models are decidely unhuman in nature.
They tend to learn undesirable features that are fundamentally misaligned with how humans perceive
the world. Given the unexpected nature of such models, we study if models are also capable of
correctly identifying recoverable images, a concept first presented in the Recognition-by-Components
theory of human vision (Biederman, 1987). Similarly, we investigate whether or not these models’
performance is marred by non-recoverable images.
1

https://github.com/leonardtang/Degraded-Polygons-RBC

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

