Weighted ROC Curve in Cost Space:
Extending AUC to Cost-Sensitive Learning
Huiyang Shao1,2
Qianqian Xu1∗
Zhiyong Yang2
1,2
2
Peisong Wen
Peifeng Gao
Qingming Huang2,1,3∗

1
2

Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Tech., CAS
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
shaohuiyang21@mails.ucas.ac.cn xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn
wenpeisong20z@ict.ac.cn gaopeifeng21@mails.ucas.ac.cn
yangzhiyong21@ucas.ac.cn qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to tackle flexible cost requirements for long-tail datasets,
where we need to construct a (1) cost-sensitive and (2) class-distribution robust
learning framework. The misclassification cost and the area under the ROC curve
(AUC) are popular metrics for (1) and (2), respectively. However, limited by
their formulations, models trained with AUC are not well-suited for cost-sensitive
decision problems, and models trained with fixed costs are sensitive to the class
distribution shift. To address this issue, we present a new setting where costs are
treated like a dataset to deal with arbitrarily unknown cost distributions. Moreover,
we propose a novel weighted version of AUC where the cost distribution can be
integrated into its calculation through decision thresholds. To formulate this setting,
we propose a novel bilevel paradigm to bridge weighted AUC (WAUC) and cost.
The inner-level problem approximates the optimal threshold from sampling costs,
and the outer-level problem minimizes the WAUC loss over the optimal threshold
distribution. To optimize this bilevel paradigm, we employ a stochastic optimization
algorithm (SACCL) which enjoys the same convergence rate (O(ϵ−4 )) with the
SGD. Finally, experiment results show that our algorithm performs better than
existing cost-sensitive learning methods and two-stage AUC decisions approach.

1

Introduction

Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) is a popular tool to describe the trade-off between the
True Positive Rate (TPR) and False Positive Rate (FPR) of a scoring function. AUC is defined by
the area under the ROC curve [17, 18]. This metric naturally measures the average classification
performance under different thresholds and is widely used (e.g., disease prediction [19], and anomaly
detection [29]). Compared with accuracy, AUC is insensitive to the threshold and cost [7], making it
be a popular metric for long-tail learning [32] and achieve remarkable success [24, 44, 26].
Similar to AUC optimization, cost-sensitive learning is a common data mining method [10, 2, 4].
The main goal is to incorporate the misclassification costs in the model, which is more compatible
with realistic scenarios (e.g., the cost of misdiagnosing a disease as healthy is greater than the
counterexample). Over the past two decades, researchers have pointed out that the ROC curve can be
transferred to cost space by utilizing a threshold choice method, this is equivalent to computing the
area under the convex hull of the ROC curve [21]. In this way, AUC can be seen as the performance
of the model with a uniform cost distribution [16]. However, AUC considers all situations, which
can not focus more on hard samples, Partial AUC (PAUC) is proposed as an extension of AUC with
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

