Large Language Models as Commonsense Knowledge
for Large-Scale Task Planning

Zirui Zhao Wee Sun Lee David Hsu
National University of Singapore
{ziruiz, leews, dyhsu}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Large-scale task planning is a major challenge. Recent work exploits large language
models (LLMs) directly as a policy and shows surprisingly interesting results. This
paper shows that LLMs provide a commonsense model of the world in addition
to a policy that acts on it. The world model and the policy can be combined in
a search algorithm, such as Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), to scale up task
planning. In our new LLM-MCTS algorithm, the LLM-induced world model
provides a commonsense prior belief for MCTS to achieve effective reasoning; the
LLM-induced policy acts as a heuristic to guide the search, vastly improving search
efficiency. Experiments show that LLM-MCTS outperforms both MCTS alone
and policies induced by LLMs (GPT2 and GPT3.5) by a wide margin for complex,
novel tasks. Further experiments and analyses on multiple tasks—multiplication,
travel planning, object rearrangement—suggest minimum description length (MDL)
as a general guiding principle: if the description length of the world model is
substantially smaller than that of the policy, using LLM as a world model for
model-based planning is likely better than using LLM solely as a policy.1

1

Introduction

Consider, for example, an autonomous robot butler in a household environment. The human user
sits in the living room and asks the robot to "Put fruits into the fridge." The robot looks for fruits,
such as apples, peaches, etc., which may be on a table in the dining room, on the kitchen counter, but
unlikely in a wardrobe in the bedroom. To complete the task, the robot has to consider fruits’ likely
locations as well as their spatial relations, traverse these locations efficiently, and finally put them
into the fridge. A household environment typically contains hundreds of movable items and locations,
resulting in a huge search space that makes the task very challenging for the robot.
Recently, multiple attempts exploiting pre-trained large language models (LLMs) show surprisingly
interesting results for such tasks [22, 18, 2, 19, 5, 44]. Their underlying idea is simple: treat the LLM
as a policy and query it directly for the next actions, given the history of past actions and observations.
We call this strategy L-Policy, which exploits LLMs’ vast commonsense knowledge to circumvent
the challenge of searching a very large space. In our example task, L-Policy may simply instruct the
robot to move to the hallway and then to the kitchen. Even though LLMs are trained on internet-scale
data, this strategy shows limits in generalization [10, 4], especially when encountering uncommon,
complex tasks. Alternatively, we may use LLMs’ knowledge to build a world model and apply a
planning algorithm to the model. The world model may contain, e.g., a belief over the target object’s
location, which biases the search and drastically improves search efficiency. We call this strategy
L-Model. L-Model’s performance depends on two critical preconditions: the accuracy of the world
model and the efficiency of the planning algorithm. The former is a question of sample complexity
for learning, and the latter is that of computational complexity.
1

The code and supplementary materials are available at https://llm-mcts.github.io.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

