xTrimoGene: An Efficient and Scalable
Representation Learner for Single-Cell RNA-Seq Data

Jing Gong1∗ Minsheng Hao12∗ Xingyi Cheng1† Xin Zeng1
Chiming Liu1 Jianzhu Ma2
Xuegong Zhang2
Taifeng Wang1 Le Song13†
1
2
BioMap Research
Tsinghua University
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{gongjing, minsheng_2022, xingyi, zengxin, chiming, taifeng, songle}@biomap.com,
{zhangxg, majianzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Advances in high-throughput sequencing technology have led to significant
progress in measuring gene expressions at the single-cell level. The amount
of publicly available single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) data is already surpassing 50M records for humans with each record measuring 20,000 genes. This
highlights the need for unsupervised representation learning to fully ingest these
data, yet classical transformer architectures are prohibitive to train on such data
in terms of both computation and memory. To address this challenge, we propose a novel asymmetric encoder-decoder transformer for scRNA-seq data, called
xTrimoGeneα (or xTrimoGene for short)4 , which leverages the sparse characteristic of the data to scale up the pre-training. This scalable design of xTrimoGene
reduces FLOPs by one to two orders of magnitude compared to classical transformers while maintaining high accuracy, enabling us to train the largest transformer
models over the largest scRNA-seq dataset today. Our experiments also show that
the performance of xTrimoGene improves as we scale up the model sizes, and
it also leads to SOTA performance over various downstream tasks, such as cell
type annotation, perturb-seq effect prediction, and drug combination prediction.
xTrimoGene model is now available for use as a service via the following link:
https://api.biomap.com/xTrimoGene/apply.

1

Introduction

Recently, Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology has demonstrated promising results for addressing scientific problems. This AI4Science paradigm witnessed diverse successful biological and
pharmaceutical applications, including protein analysis [17, 20, 38, 35, 1], RNA modeling [4], and
genomics modulation [27]. However, most existing AI models have predominantly focused on
protein sequences, neglecting the growing volume of high-throughput experimental sequencing data
in the form of gene expression values. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) technology has
transformed the field of cell biology and enabled us to understand cell-cell, cell-gene and gene-gene
relations at the cellular level [16, 3]. This technique captures the expression levels of thousands of
genes in parallel, facilitating the study of cellular heterogeneity [5, 19]. This unveiled information is
crucial for understanding complex biological systems and disease progression [16, 3]. Integrating and
∗

Equal contribution. Mingsheng Hao conducted this work during his internship at BioMap.
Correspondence to: xingyi@biomap.com, songle@biomap.com.
4
xTrimoGene is a member of BioMap’s large-scale AI engine "xTrimo" series. "α" denotes the academic
version, to distinguish it from the commercial product xTrimoGene.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

