Emergent and Predictable Memorization in Large
Language Models
Stella Biderman1,2 , USVSN Sai Prashanth2 , Lintang Sutawika2 , Hailey Schoelkopf2,3 , Quentin
Anthony2,4 , Shivanshu Purohit5 , and Edward Raff1,6
1

Booz Allen Hamilton, 2 EleutherAI, 3 Yale University, 4 Ohio State University, 5 Stability AI,
6
University of Maryland, Baltimore County

Abstract
Memorization, or the tendency of large language models (LLMs) to output entire
sequences from their training data verbatim, is a key concern for deploying language
models. In particular, it is vital to minimize a model’s memorization of sensitive
datapoints such as those containing personal identifiable information (PII). The
prevalence of such undesirable memorization can pose issues for model trainers,
and may even require discarding an otherwise functional model. We therefore
seek to predict which sequences will be memorized before a large model’s full
train-time by extrapolating the memorization behavior of lower-compute trial runs.
We measure memorization in the Pythia model suite and plot scaling laws for
forecasting memorization, allowing us to provide equi-compute recommendations
to maximize the reliability (recall) of such predictions. We additionally provide
further novel discoveries on the distribution of memorization scores across models
and data. We release all code and data necessary to reproduce the results in this
paper at https://github.com/EleutherAI/pythia.

1

Introduction

Recent natural language processing (NLP) research in generative tasks has largely been driven by
two findings: (1) the transformer architecture performs well [Vaswani et al., 2017, Devlin et al., 2018,
Radford et al., 2019]; and (2) increasing the scale of transformer architectures leads to improved
performance [Brown et al., 2020, Chowdhery et al., 2022]. In addition to these benefits, transformers
are a general and multipurpose architecture that have achieved state-of-the-art results outside of
NLP on diverse tasks such as text-to-image synthesis [Ramesh et al., 2022, Crowson et al., 2022,
Rombach et al., 2022], code generation [Chen et al., 2021, Xu et al., 2022, Fried et al., 2022], and
protein modeling [Jumper et al., 2021, Ahdritz et al., 2022]. Despite their widespread success and
increasing use, the learning dynamics of transformer models are poorly understood and research
into how a given model learns and internally represents data has the potential to affect a broad range
of high-impact applications. As these models become increasingly adopted, it is essential that we
develop better and more reliable tools for measuring and controlling their behaviors.
1.1

Memorization in Large Language Models

In particular, the demonstrated capacity and ability of these large language models to memorize data
has become a significant concern [Carlini et al., 2019, 2021, Hu et al., 2022]. The most obvious
ramification is personal information or otherwise sensitive data being leaked to the public at large
and extracted by a bad actor. This has motivated extensive research into mitigating memorization
Correspondence to: stellabiderman@gmail.com
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

