AdANNS: A Framework for Adaptive Semantic Search

Aniket Rege∗ † Aditya Kusupati∗† Sharan Ranjit S† Alan Fan† Qingqing Cao† ,
Sham Kakade‡ Prateek Jain Ali Farhadi†
†
University of Washington,  Google Research, ‡ Harvard University
{kusupati,ali}@cs.washington.edu, prajain@google.com

Abstract
Web-scale search systems learn an encoder to embed a given query which is then
hooked into an approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) pipeline to retrieve
similar data points. To accurately capture tail queries and data points, learned
representations typically are rigid, high-dimensional vectors that are generally
used as-is in the entire ANNS pipeline and can lead to computationally expensive
retrieval. In this paper, we argue that instead of rigid representations, different
stages of ANNS can leverage adaptive representations of varying capacities to
achieve significantly better accuracy-compute trade-offs, i.e., stages of ANNS that
can get away with more approximate computation should use a lower-capacity
representation of the same data point. To this end, we introduce AdANNS
,
a novel ANNS design framework that explicitly leverages the flexibility of Matryoshka Representations [31]. We demonstrate state-of-the-art accuracy-compute
trade-offs using novel AdANNS-based key ANNS building blocks like search
data structures (AdANNS-IVF) and quantization (AdANNS-OPQ). For example on ImageNet retrieval, AdANNS-IVF is up to 1.5% more accurate than the
rigid representations-based IVF [48] at the same compute budget; and matches
accuracy while being up to 90× faster in wall-clock time. For Natural Questions,
32-byte AdANNS-OPQ matches the accuracy of the 64-byte OPQ baseline [13]
constructed using rigid representations – same accuracy at half the cost! We further
show that the gains from AdANNS translate to modern-day composite ANNS
indices that combine search structures and quantization. Finally, we demonstrate
that AdANNS can enable inference-time adaptivity for compute-aware search
on ANNS indices built non-adaptively on matryoshka representations. Code is
open-sourced at https://github.com/RAIVNLab/AdANNS.

1

Introduction

Semantic search [24] on learned representations [40, 41, 50] is a major component in retrieval
pipelines [4, 9]. In its simplest form, semantic search methods learn a neural network to embed
queries as well as a large number (N ) of data points in a d-dimensional vector space. For a given query,
the nearest (in embedding space) point is retrieved using either an exact search or using approximate
nearest neighbor search (ANNS) [21] which is now indispensable for real-time large-scale retrieval.
Existing semantic search methods learn fixed or rigid representations (RRs) which are used as is
in all the stages of ANNS (data structures for data pruning and quantization for cheaper distance
computation; see Section 2). That is, while ANNS indices allow a variety of parameters for searching
the design space to optimize the accuracy-compute trade-off, the provided data dimensionality is
typically assumed to be an immutable parameter. To make it concrete, let us consider inverted file
index (IVF) [48], a popular web-scale ANNS technique [16]. IVF has two stages (Section 3) during
inference: (a) cluster mapping: mapping the query to a cluster of data points [36], and (b) linear
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

