GenPose: Generative Category-level Object Pose
Estimation via Diffusion Models

1

Jiyao Zhang1,2,3 * , Mingdong Wu1,3 * , Hao Dong1,3 †
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
3
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
jiyaozhang@stu.pku.edu.cn, {wmingd, hao.dong}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Object pose estimation plays a vital role in embodied AI and computer vision,
enabling intelligent agents to comprehend and interact with their surroundings.
Despite the practicality of category-level pose estimation, current approaches
encounter challenges with partially observed point clouds, known as the multihypothesis issue. In this study, we propose a novel solution by reframing categorylevel object pose estimation as conditional generative modeling, departing from
traditional point-to-point regression. Leveraging score-based diffusion models,
we estimate object poses by sampling candidates from the diffusion model and
aggregating them through a two-step process: filtering out outliers via likelihood
estimation and subsequently mean-pooling the remaining candidates. To avoid
the costly integration process when estimating the likelihood, we introduce an
alternative method that trains an energy-based model from the original scorebased model, enabling end-to-end likelihood estimation. Our approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the REAL275 dataset and demonstrates promising
generalizability to novel categories sharing similar symmetric properties without
fine-tuning. Furthermore, it can readily adapt to object pose tracking tasks, yielding
comparable results to the current state-of-the-art baselines. Our checkpoints and
demonstrations can be found at https://sites.google.com/view/genpose.

1

Introduction

Object pose estimation is a fundamental problem
𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤#
𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤$
𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤!
in the domains of robotics and machine vision, pro…
viding a high-level representation of the surrounding world. It plays a crucial role in enabling intel- 𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤"
…
𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤"
ligent agents to understand and interact with their
environments, supporting tasks such as robotic
manipulation, augmented reality, and virtual real…
ity [1; 2; 3]. In the existing literature, category- 𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤
!
𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤
𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤#
level object pose estimation [4; 5; 6] has emerged
$
as a more practical approach compared to instance…
level pose estimation since the former eliminates
(b) Partial Observation
the need for a 3D CAD model for each individual (a) Symmetric
instance. The main challenge of this task is to capture the general properties while accommodating Figure 1: Multi-hypothesis issue in categorythe intra-class variations, i.e., variations among level object pose estimation comes from (a) symdifferent instances within a category [7; 5; 8].
metric objects and (b) partial observation.
*: equal contribution, †: corresponding author
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

