Incentivized Communication for Federated Bandits
Zhepei Wei1∗ Chuanhao Li1∗ Haifeng Xu2 Hongning Wang1
University of Virginia1
University of Chicago2
{tqf5qb, cl5ev, hw5x}@virginia.edu
haifengxu@chicago.edu

Abstract
Most existing works on federated bandits take it for granted that all clients are
altruistic about sharing their data with the server for the collective good whenever
needed. Despite their compelling theoretical guarantee on performance and communication efficiency, this assumption is overly idealistic and oftentimes violated
in practice, especially when the algorithm is operated over self-interested clients,
who are reluctant to share data without explicit benefits. Negligence of such selfinterested behaviors can significantly affect the learning efficiency and even the
practical operability of federated bandit learning. In light of this, we aim to spark
new insights into this under-explored research area by formally introducing an
incentivized communication problem for federated bandits, where the server shall
motivate clients to share data by providing incentives. Without loss of generality,
we instantiate this bandit problem with the contextual linear setting and propose the
first incentivized communication protocol, namely, I NC -F ED UCB, that achieves
near-optimal regret with provable communication and incentive cost guarantees.
Extensive empirical experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets further
validate the effectiveness of the proposed method across various environments.

1

Introduction

Federated bandit learning has recently emerged as a promising new direction to promote the application of bandit models while preserving privacy by enabling collaboration among multiple distributed
clients [10, 40, 22, 13, 23, 24, 25, 15, 37, 9]. The main focus in this line of research is on devising
communication-efficient protocols to achieve near-optimal regret in various settings. Most notably,
the direction on federated contextual bandits has been actively gaining momentum, since the debut
of several benchmark communication protocols for contextual linear bandits in the P2P [18] and
star-shaped [40] networks. Many subsequent studies have explored diverse configurations of the
clients’ and environmental modeling factors and addressed new challenges arising in these contexts.
Notable recent advancements include extensions to asynchronous linear bandits [22, 13], generalized
liner bandits [23], and kernelized contextual bandits [24, 25].
Despite the extensive exploration of various settings, almost all existing federated bandit algorithms
rely on the assumption that every client in the system is willing to share their local data/model with the
server, regardless of the communication protocol design. For instance, synchronous protocols [40, 23]
require all clients to simultaneously engage in data exchange with the server in every communication
round. Similarly, asynchronous protocols [22, 25, 13] also assume clients must participate in
communication as long as the individualized upload or download event is triggered, albeit allowing
interruptions by external factors (e.g., network failure).
In contrast, our work is motivated by the practical observation that many clients in a federated system
are inherently self-interested and thus reluctant to share data without receiving explicit benefits
from the server [16]. For instance, consider the following scenario: a recommendation platform
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

