Privacy Auditing with One (1) Training Run

Thomas Steinke∗
Google DeepMind
steinke@google.com

Milad Nasr∗
Google DeepMind
srxzr@google.com

Matthew Jagielski∗
Google DeepMind
jagielski@google.com

Abstract
We propose a scheme for auditing differentially private machine learning systems
with a single training run. This exploits the parallelism of being able to add or
remove multiple training examples independently. We analyze this using the connection between differential privacy and statistical generalization, which avoids
the cost of group privacy. Our auditing scheme requires minimal assumptions
about the algorithm and can be applied in the black-box or white-box setting. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework by applying it to DP-SGD, where
we can achieve meaningful empirical privacy lower bounds by training only one
model. In contrast, standard methods would require training hundreds of models.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) [DMNS06] provides a quantifiable privacy guarantee by ensuring that no
person’s data significantly affects the probability of any outcome. Formally, a randomized algorithm
M satisfies (ε, δ)-DP if, for any pair of inputs x, x0 differing only by the addition or removal of one
person’s data and any measurable S, we have
P [M (x) ∈ S] ≤ eε · P [M (x0 ) ∈ S] + δ.

(1)

A DP algorithm is accompanied by a mathematical proof giving an upper bound on the privacy
parameters ε and δ. In contrast, a privacy audit provides an empirical lower bound on the privacy
parameters. Privacy audits allow us to assess the tightness of the mathematical analysis [JUO20;
NHSBTJCT23] or, if the lower and upper bounds are contradictory, to detect errors in the analysis
or in the algorithm’s implementation [DWWZK18; BGDCTV18; TTSSJC22].
Typically, privacy audits obtain a lower bound on the privacy parameters directly from the DP definition (1). That is, we construct a pair of inputs x, x0 and a set of outcomes S and we estimate the
probabilities P [M (x) ∈ S] and P [M (x0 ) ∈ S]. However, estimating these probabilities requires
running M hundreds of times. This approach to privacy auditing is computationally expensive,
which raises the question Can we perform privacy auditing using a single run of the algorithm M?
1.1

Our Contributions

Our approach: The DP definition (1) considers adding or removing a single person’s data to or from
the dataset. We consider multiple people’s data and the dataset independently includes or excludes
each person’s data point. Our analysis exploits the parallelism of multiple independent data points
in a single run of the algorithm in lieu of multiple independent runs. This approach is commonly
used as an unproven heuristic in prior work [MEMPST21; ZBWTSRPNK22].
Our auditing procedure operates as follows. We identify m data points (i.e., training examples or
“canaries”) to either include or exclude and we flip m independent unbiased coins to decide which
of them to include or exclude. We then run the algorithm on the randomly selected dataset. Based
∗

Reverse alphabetical author order. Full version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.08846

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

