Decorate3D: Text-Driven High-Quality Texture
Generation for Mesh Decoration in the Wild
Yanhui Guo1 Xinxin Zuo2 Peng Dai2 Juwei Lu2 Xiaolin Wu1
Li Cheng3 Youliang Yan2 Songcen Xu2 Xiaofei Wu2
1
McMaster University, Canada 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Canada 3 University of Alberta, Canada
{guoy143,xwu}@mcmaster.ca, lcheng5@ualberta.ca
{xinxin.zuo1,peng.dai,juwei.lu}@huawei.com
{yanyouliang,xusongcen,wuxiaofei2}@huawei.com

Abstract
This paper presents Decorate3D, a versatile and user-friendly method for the creation and editing of 3D objects using images. Decorate3D models a real-world
object of interest by neural radiance field (NeRF) and decomposes the NeRF representation into an explicit mesh representation, a view-dependent texture, and
a diffuse UV texture. Subsequently, users can either manually edit the UV or
provide a prompt for the automatic generation of a new 3D-consistent texture. To
achieve high-quality 3D texture generation, we propose a structure-aware score
distillation sampling method to optimize a neural UV texture based on user-defined
text and empower an image diffusion model with 3D-consistent generation capability. Furthermore, we introduce a few-view resampling training method and
utilize a super-resolution model to obtain refined high-resolution UV textures
(2048×2048) for 3D texturing. Extensive experiments collectively validate the
superior performance of Decorate3D in retexturing real-world 3D objects. Project
page: https://decorate3d.github.io/Decorate3D/.

1

Introduction

The recent development of effective neural 3D reconstruction techniques such as neural radiance field
(NeRF) [12] has facilitated the creation of realistic digital replicas for real-world 3D scenes. While
significant progress has been made in realistic 3D reconstruction, one remaining challenge is how
to allow users to edit or retexture the acquired 3D objects or assets in the digital scene. To address
this issue, this paper introduces Decorate 3D, a user-friendly approach to editing 3D objects through
either easy-to-use manual editing or text prompt guided texture generation, as showcased in Fig. 1.
Since the implicit representations of the NeRF model are tightly coupled, it is not trivial to achieve
the aforementioned operations for the 3D scene’s decoration. To facilitate the modifiability of the 3D
representations, we bake the NeRF model into a triangle mesh representation with a view-dependent
texture in UV space, which is called a Decomposition phase in this paper. The decoupled geometry
and UV texture representation make the subsequent Decoration phase more manageable. In the
decoration phase, Decorate3D allows flexible texture editing and controllable generation of UV
textures with the instruction of prompts.
The success of the decoration phase demands a solution to the text-to-3D synthesis problem, which
has been so far restricted by the lack of paired text and 3D assets. Recent advancements in textto-image models [23, 19, 15] greatly facilitate text-driven 3D editing or generation [32, 1, 16, 11].
Researchers have proposed approaches using pre-trained text-to-2D diffusion models to optimize
NeRF in the zero-shot setting via the Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [16] strategy. Although
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

