Differentiable Sampling of Categorical Distributions
Using the CatLog-Derivative Trick

Lennert De Smet
KU Leuven

Emanuele Sansone
KU Leuven

Pedro Zuidberg Dos Martires
Örebro University

Abstract
Categorical random variables can faithfully represent the discrete and uncertain
aspects of data as part of a discrete latent variable model. Learning in such models necessitates taking gradients with respect to the parameters of the categorical
probability distributions, which is often intractable due to their combinatorial nature. A popular technique to estimate these otherwise intractable gradients is the
Log-Derivative trick. This trick forms the basis of the well-known REINFORCE
gradient estimator and its many extensions. While the Log-Derivative trick allows
us to differentiate through samples drawn from categorical distributions, it does
not take into account the discrete nature of the distribution itself. Our first contribution addresses this shortcoming by introducing the CatLog-Derivative trick–
a variation of the Log-Derivative trick tailored towards categorical distributions.
Secondly, we use the CatLog-Derivative trick to introduce IndeCateR, a novel
and unbiased gradient estimator for the important case of products of independent
categorical distributions with provably lower variance than REINFORCE. Thirdly,
we empirically show that IndeCateR can be efficiently implemented and that its
gradient estimates have significantly lower bias and variance for the same number
of samples compared to the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Categorical random variables naturally emerge in many domains in AI, such as language modelling,
reinforcement learning and neural-symbolic AI [10]. They are compelling because they can faithfully
represent the discrete concepts present in data in a sound probabilistic fashion. Unfortunately, inference in probabilistic models with categorical latent variables is usually computationally intractable
due to its combinatorial nature. This intractability often leads to the use of sampling-based, approximate inference techniques, which in turn poses problems to gradient-based learning as sampling is an
inherently non-differentiable process.
In order to bypass this non-differentiability, two main classes of gradient estimators have been
developed. On the one hand, there is a range of unbiased estimators based on the Log-Derivative
trick and the subsequent REINFORCE gradient estimator [40]. On the other hand, we have biased
estimators that use continuous relaxations to which the reparametrisation trick [33] can be applied,
such as the Gumbel-Softmax trick [16, 22].
A clear advantage of the REINFORCE estimator over relaxation-based estimators is its unbiased
nature. However, REINFORCE tends to be sample-inefficient and its gradient estimates exhibit high
variance in practice. To resolve these issues, methods have been proposed that modify REINFORCE
by, for instance, adding control variates [31, 37]. These modified estimators have been shown to
deliver more robust gradient estimates than standard REINFORCE.
Instead of modifying REINFORCE, we take a different approach and modify the Log-Derivative
trick by explicitly taking into account that we are working with multivariate categorical distributions.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

