RH-BrainFS: Regional Heterogeneous Multimodal
Brain Networks Fusion Strategy

Hongting Ye 1 , Yalu Zheng 1 , Yueying Li 1 , Ke Zhang 1 , Youyong Kong 1,2∗, Yonggui Yuan 3
1
Jiangsu Provincial Joint International Research Laboratory of Medical Information Processing
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its
Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Department of Psychosomatics and Psychiatry, Zhongda Hospital
School of Medicine, Southeast University
{yehongting, 220212084, 230228504, kylenz, kongyouyong}@seu.edu.cn
yygylh2000@sina.com

Abstract
Multimodal fusion has become an important research technique in neuroscience
that completes downstream tasks by extracting complementary information from
multiple modalities. Existing multimodal research on brain networks mainly
focuses on two modalities, structural connectivity (SC) and functional connectivity
(FC). Recently, extensive literature has shown that the relationship between SC and
FC is complex and not a simple one-to-one mapping. The coupling of structure and
function at the regional level is heterogeneous. However, all previous studies have
neglected the modal regional heterogeneity between SC and FC and fused their
representations via "simple patterns", which are inefficient ways of multimodal
fusion and affect the overall performance of the model. In this paper, to alleviate
the issue of regional heterogeneity of multimodal brain networks, we propose a
novel Regional Heterogeneous multimodal Brain networks Fusion Strategy (RHBrainFS).2 Briefly, we introduce a brain subgraph networks module to extract
regional characteristics of brain networks, and further use a new transformer-based
fusion bottleneck module to alleviate the issue of regional heterogeneity between
SC and FC. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to explicitly state
the issue of structural-functional modal regional heterogeneity and to propose a
solution. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms
several state-of-the-art methods in a variety of neuroscience tasks.

1

Introduction

Currently, a large number of neuroscience studies are based on unimodal imaging [2, 30, 47, 56,
61]. However, different brain imaging techniques, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) [54] and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (dMRI) [44], reflect different aspects of the
brain’s internal characteristics. Therefore, it is often insufficient to use a single modality of data
for neuroscience research and it is necessary to integrate multiple modalities of imaging data to
achieve good performance in neuroscience tasks such as depression classification [3, 33] and gender
classification [15, 53].
In multimodal brain networks fusion, existing researchs are mainly focused on fusing structural
and functional modalities (structural modality is constructed from dMRI and functional modality is
∗
2

Corresponding author
The codes are available at https://github.com/Yedaxia1/RH-BrainFS.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

