Timewarp: Transferable Acceleration of Molecular
Dynamics by Learning Time-Coarsened Dynamics

Leon Klein∗†
Freie Universität Berlin
leon.klein@fu-berlin.de
Bruno Mlodozeniec∗†
University of Cambridge
bkm28@cam.ac.uk

Andrew Y. K. Foong∗
Microsoft Research AI4Science
andrewfoong@microsoft.com
Marc Brockschmidt†

Tor Erlend Fjelde∗†
University of Cambridge
tef30@cam.ac.uk
Sebastian Nowozin†

Ryota Tomioka
Microsoft Research AI4Science
ryoto@microsoft.com

Frank Noé
Microsoft Research AI4Science
Freie Universität Berlin
Rice University
franknoe@microsoft.com

Abstract
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is a widely used technique to simulate
molecular systems, most commonly at the all-atom resolution where equations of
motion are integrated with timesteps on the order of femtoseconds (1fs = 10−15 s).
MD is often used to compute equilibrium properties, which requires sampling
from an equilibrium distribution such as the Boltzmann distribution. However,
many important processes, such as binding and folding, occur over timescales
of milliseconds or beyond, and cannot be efficiently sampled with conventional
MD. Furthermore, new MD simulations need to be performed for each molecular
system studied. We present Timewarp, an enhanced sampling method which uses a
normalising flow as a proposal distribution in a Markov chain Monte Carlo method
targeting the Boltzmann distribution. The flow is trained offline on MD trajectories
and learns to make large steps in time, simulating the molecular dynamics of
105 − 106 fs. Crucially, Timewarp is transferable between molecular systems: once
trained, we show that it generalises to unseen small peptides (2-4 amino acids)
at all-atom resolution, exploring their metastable states and providing wall-clock
acceleration of sampling compared to standard MD. Our method constitutes an
important step towards general, transferable algorithms for accelerating MD.

1

Introduction

Molecular dynamics (MD) is a well-established technique for simulating physical systems at the
atomic level. When performed accurately, it provides unrivalled insight into the detailed mechanics
of molecular motion, without the need for wet lab experiments. MD simulations have been used to
understand processes of central interest in molecular biophysics, such as protein folding [29, 22],
protein-ligand binding [1], and protein-protein association [31]. Many crucial applications of MD
boil down to efficiently sampling from the Boltzmann distribution, i.e., the equilibrium distribution
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while at Microsoft Research.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

