Tame a Wild Camera:
In-the-Wild Monocular Camera Calibration
Shengjie Zhu, Abhinav Kumar, Masa Hu, and Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 48824
{zhusheng, kumarab6, huynshen}@msu.edu, liuxm@cse.msu.edu

Abstract
3D sensing for monocular in-the-wild images, e.g., depth estimation and 3D object
detection, has become increasingly important. However, the unknown intrinsic
parameter hinders their development and deployment. Previous methods for the
monocular camera calibration rely on specific 3D objects or strong geometry prior,
such as using a checkerboard or imposing a Manhattan World assumption. This
work instead calibrates intrinsic via exploiting the monocular 3D prior. Given
an undistorted image as input, our method calibrates the complete 4 Degree-ofFreedom (DoF) intrinsic parameters. First, we show intrinsic is determined by the
two well-studied monocular priors: monocular depthmap and surface normal map.
However, this solution necessitates a low-bias and low-variance depth estimation.
Alternatively, we introduce the incidence field, defined as the incidence rays between points in 3D space and pixels in the 2D imaging plane. We show that: 1) The
incidence field is a pixel-wise parametrization of the intrinsic invariant to image
cropping and resizing. 2) The incidence field is a learnable monocular 3D prior,
determined pixel-wisely by up-to-sacle monocular depthmap and surface normal.
With the estimated incidence field, a robust RANSAC algorithm recovers intrinsic.
We show the effectiveness of our method through superior performance on synthetic
and zero-shot testing datasets. Beyond calibration, we demonstrate downstream
applications in image manipulation detection & restoration, uncalibrated two-view
pose estimation, and 3D sensing. Codes/models are held here.

1

Introduction

Camera calibration is typically the first step in numerous vision and robotics applications [27, 46]
that involve 3D sensing. Classic methods enable accurate calibration by imaging a specific 3D
structure such as a checkerboard [49]. With the rapid growth of monocular 3D vision, there is
an increasing focus on 3D sensing from in-the-wild images, such as monocular depth estimation,
3D object detection [35, 36], and 3D reconstruction [42, 43]. While 3D sensing techniques over
in-the-wild images are developed, camera calibration for such in-the-wild images continues to pose
significant challenges.
Classic methods for monocular calibration use strong geometry prior, such as using a checkerboard.
However, such 3D structures are not always available in in-the-wild images. As a solution, alternative
methods relax the assumptions. For example, [29] and [23] calibrate using common objects such as
human faces and objects’ 3D bounding boxes. Another significant line of research [7, 19, 34, 37, 51,
62, 66] is based on the Manhattan World assumption [15], which posits that all planes within a scene
are either parallel or perpendicular to each other. This assumption is further relaxed [28, 30, 64] to
estimate the lines that are either parallel or perpendicular to the direction of gravity. The intrinsic
parameters are recovered by determining the intersected vanishing points of detected lines, assuming
a central focal point and an identical focal length.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

