Should I Stop or Should I Go:
Early Stopping with Heterogeneous Populations

Hammaad Adam∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Neil Tenenholtz
Microsoft Research

Fan Yin†
Microsoft Corporation

Lorin Crawford
Microsoft Research

Lester Mackey
Microsoft Research

Huibin (Mary) Hu
Microsoft Corporation
Allison Koenecke
Cornell University

Abstract
Randomized experiments often need to be stopped prematurely due to the treatment
having an unintended harmful effect. Existing methods that determine when to
stop an experiment early are typically applied to the data in aggregate and do
not account for treatment effect heterogeneity. In this paper, we study the early
stopping of experiments for harm on heterogeneous populations. We first establish
that current methods often fail to stop experiments when the treatment harms a
minority group of participants. We then use causal machine learning to develop
CLASH, the first broadly-applicable method for heterogeneous early stopping. We
demonstrate CLASH’s performance on simulated and real data and show that it
yields effective early stopping for both clinical trials and A/B tests.

1

Introduction

Randomized experiments are the gold-standard method of determining causal effects, whether in
clinical trials to evaluate medical treatments or in A/B tests to evaluate online product offerings. The
sample size and duration of such experiments are typically specified in advance. However, there are
often strong ethical and financial reasons to stop an experiment before its scheduled end, especially
if the treatment shows early evidence of harm [7]. For example, if early data from a clinical trial
demonstrates that the treatment increases the rate of serious side effects, it may be necessary to stop
the trial to protect experimental participants [9].
A variety of statistical methods can be used to determine when to stop an experiment for harm
[22, 39, 14, 13]. Investigators in both clinical trials and A/B tests will often choose to use a subset of
these methods—collectively referred to as “stopping tests”—based on the specifics of their domain.
Stopping tests not only identify harmful effects from early data, but also limit the probability of
stopping early when the treatment is not harmful. However, stopping tests are typically applied to the
data in aggregate (i.e., “homogeneously”) and do not account for heterogeneous populations. For
example, a drug may be safe for younger patients but harm patients over the age of 65. While a
growing body of literature has studied how to infer such heterogeneous effects [see, e.g., 41], little
prior research has described how to adapt stopping tests to respond to heterogeneity.
We continue the above example to illustrate why stopping tests should account for heterogeneity.
Consider a clinical trial for a drug such as warfarin, which has no harmful effect on the majority of the
population but increases the rate of adverse effects in elderly patients [32]. Using a simple simulation,
we demonstrate that if elderly patients comprise 10% of the trial population, then applying a stopping
∗
†

Corresponding author (hadam@mit.edu).
Current affiliation: Amazon. Work performed while at Microsoft (prior to joining Amazon).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

