Fantastic Robustness Measures:
The Secrets of Robust Generalization
Hoki Kim
Seoul National University
ghrl9613@snu.ac.kr
Jinseong Park
Seoul National University
jinseong@snu.ac.kr

Yujin Choi
Seoul National University
uznhigh@snu.ac.kr

Jaewook Lee
Seoul National University
jaewook@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Adversarial training has become the de-facto standard method for improving the
robustness of models against adversarial examples. However, robust overfitting
remains a significant challenge, leading to a large gap between the robustness on the
training and test datasets. To understand and improve robust generalization, various
measures have been developed, including margin, smoothness, and flatness-based
measures. In this study, we present a large-scale analysis of robust generalization
to empirically verify whether the relationship between these measures and robust
generalization remains valid in diverse settings. We demonstrate when and how
these measures effectively capture the robust generalization gap by comparing over
1,300 models trained on CIFAR-10 under the L∞ norm and further validate our
findings through an evaluation of more than 100 models from RobustBench [12]
across CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet. We hope this work can help the
community better understand adversarial robustness and motivate the development
of more robust defense methods against adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved tremendous success in various domains, but their vulnerability
to subtle perturbations has been revealed through the existence of adversarial examples, which are
not generally perceptible to human beings [57, 20]. To obtain robustness against these adversarial
examples, numerous defense methods have been proposed, and among them, adversarial training has
become a common algorithm because of its effectiveness and ease of implementation [42, 71, 61].
However, researchers have recently found that adversarial training methods also suffer from the
problem of overfitting [63, 52], where an adversarially trained model shows high robustness on
training examples, yet significantly reduced robustness on test examples. As this robust overfitting
progresses, the robust generalization gap increases, resulting in poor robustness for unseen examples.
To prevent robust overfitting and achieve high robust generalization, researchers have analyzed the
properties of adversarial training and demonstrated the usefulness of some measures, such as marginbased measures, flatness-based measures, and gradient-based measures [53, 67, 66, 56]. Researchers
have used them to estimate the robust generalization gap of given models and further developed new
training schemes for improving its robustness [44, 66]. While these measures offer significant insights
into robust generalization, we find that the evaluation of some measures is often limited due to the
lack of models or training setups. These limitations can potentially lead to misleading conclusions,
which may include inaccurate estimations of the robust generalization gap and misguided directions
for the further development of adversarial training methods.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

