Guiding Large Language Models via
Directional Stimulus Prompting

Zekun Li1∗, Baolin Peng2 , Pengcheng He2 , Michel Galley2 , Jianfeng Gao2†, Xifeng Yan1†
University of California, Santa Barbara1
Microsoft2
{zekunli, xyan}@cs.ucsb.edu
{bapeng,penhe,mgalley,jfgao}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We introduce Directional Stimulus Prompting, a novel framework for guiding
black-box large language models (LLMs) towards specific desired outputs. Instead
of directly adjusting LLMs, our method employs a small tunable policy model (e.g.,
T5) to generate an auxiliary directional stimulus prompt for each input instance.
These directional stimulus prompts act as nuanced, instance-specific hints and clues
to guide LLMs in generating desired outcomes, such as including specific keywords
in the generated summary. Our approach sidesteps the challenges of direct LLM
tuning by optimizing the policy model to explore directional stimulus prompts that
align LLMs with desired behaviors. The policy model can be optimized through
1) supervised fine-tuning using labeled data and 2) reinforcement learning from
offline or online rewards based on the LLM’s output. We evaluate our method
across various tasks, including summarization, dialogue response generation, and
chain-of-thought reasoning. Our experiments indicate a consistent improvement
in the performance of LLMs such as ChatGPT, Codex, and InstructGPT on these
supervised tasks with minimal labeled data. Remarkably, by utilizing merely 80 dialogues from the MultiWOZ dataset, our approach boosts ChatGPT’s performance
by a relative 41.4%, achieving or exceeding the performance of some fully supervised state-of-the-art models. Moreover, the instance-specific chain-of-thought
prompt generated through our method enhances InstructGPT’s reasoning accuracy, outperforming both generalized human-crafted prompts and those generated
through automatic prompt engineering. The code and data are publicly available.3

1

Introduction

In recent years, a new paradigm has emerged in natural language processing (NLP) with the rise of
large language models (LLMs) such as InstructGPT, ChatGPT [46], GPT-4 [45], PaLM [10], and
others. These models exhibit emergent abilities [68] such as strong in-context learning and few-shot
prompting capabilities, which were not present in previous “smaller” language models (LMs) like
BERT [14], RoBERTa [37], GPT-2 [52], and T5 [53]. This shift in paradigm has led to remarkable
advancements in NLP, with LLMs demonstrating impressive general-purpose power. However, due to
commercial considerations and the risk of misuse, most LLMs do not publicly release their parameters
and only allow users to access them through black-box APIs. While there also exist open-sourced
LLMs, fine-tuning them for specific tasks or use cases can be computationally inefficient. In this
scenario, the standard approach for utilizing LLMs to perform diverse tasks is crafting generalized
∗

Part of the work was done when Zekun Li was interning at Microsoft Research.
Co-advise on this work.
3
https://github.com/Leezekun/Directional-Stimulus-Prompting

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

