Stable Vectorization of Multiparameter Persistent
Homology using Signed Barcodes as Measures

David Loiseaux1∗ , Luis Scoccola2∗ , Mathieu Carrière1 , Magnus B. Botnan3 , Steve Oudot4
1

3

DataShape, Centre Inria d’Université Côte d’Azur 2 Mathematics, University of Oxford
Mathematics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam 4 GeomeriX, Inria Saclay and École polytechnique

Abstract
Persistent homology (PH) provides topological descriptors for geometric data, such
as weighted graphs, which are interpretable, stable to perturbations, and invariant
under, e.g., relabeling. Most applications of PH focus on the one-parameter case—
where the descriptors summarize the changes in topology of data as it is filtered by
a single quantity of interest—and there is now a wide array of methods enabling
the use of one-parameter PH descriptors in data science, which rely on the stable
vectorization of these descriptors as elements of a Hilbert space. Although the
multiparameter PH (MPH) of data that is filtered by several quantities of interest
encodes much richer information than its one-parameter counterpart, the scarceness
of stability results for MPH descriptors has so far limited the available options for
the stable vectorization of MPH. In this paper, we aim to bring together the best
of both worlds by showing how the interpretation of signed barcodes—a recent
family of MPH descriptors—as signed measures leads to natural extensions of
vectorization strategies from one parameter to multiple parameters. The resulting
feature vectors are easy to define and to compute, and provably stable. While, as a
proof of concept, we focus on simple choices of signed barcodes and vectorizations,
we already see notable performance improvements when comparing our feature
vectors to state-of-the-art topology-based methods on various types of data.

1

Introduction

1.1

Context

Topological Data Analysis (TDA) [26] is a field of data science that provides descriptors for geometric data. These descriptors encode topological structures hidden in the data, as such they are
complementary to more common descriptors. And since TDA methods usually require the sole
knowledge of a metric or dissimilarity measure on the data, they are widely applicable. For these
reasons, TDA has found successful applications in a wide range of domains, including, e.g., computer
graphics [58], computational biology [62], or material sciences [63], to name a few.
The mathematical definition of TDA’s topological descriptors relies on persistent homology, whose
input is a simplicial complex (a special kind of hypergraph) filtered by an Rn -valued function. The
choice of simplicial complex and function is application-dependent, a common choice being the
complete hypergraph on the data (or some sparse approximation) filtered by scale and/or by some
density estimator. The sublevel-sets of the filter function form what is called a filtration, i.e., a family
{Sx }x∈Rn of simplicial complexes with the property that Sx ⊆ Sx′ whenever x ≤ x′ ∈ Rn (where
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

