Direct Preference-based Policy Optimization without
Reward Modeling

Gaon An∗
Seoul National University
white0234@mllab.snu.ac.kr

Junhyeok Lee∗
Seoul National University
riman314@mllab.snu.ac.kr

Xingdong Zuo
NAVER
xingdong.zuo@navercorp.com

Norio Kosaka
NAVER
Line Corporation
kosaka.norio@linecorp.com

Kyung-Min Kim
NAVER
kyungmin.kim.ml@navercorp.com

Hyun Oh Song†
Seoul National University
hyunoh@mllab.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Preference-based reinforcement learning (PbRL) is an approach that enables RL
agents to learn from preference, which is particularly useful when formulating
a reward function is challenging. Existing PbRL methods generally involve a
two-step procedure: they first learn a reward model based on given preference
data and then employ off-the-shelf reinforcement learning algorithms using the
learned reward model. However, obtaining an accurate reward model solely from
preference information, especially when the preference is from human teachers,
can be difficult. Instead, we propose a PbRL algorithm that directly learns from
preference without requiring any reward modeling. To achieve this, we adopt
a contrastive learning framework to design a novel policy scoring metric that
assigns a high score to policies that align with the given preferences. We apply our
algorithm to offline RL tasks with actual human preference labels and show that
our algorithm outperforms or is on par with the existing PbRL methods. Notably,
on high-dimensional control tasks, our algorithm surpasses offline RL methods that
learn with ground-truth reward information. Finally, we show that our algorithm
can be successfully applied to fine-tune large language models.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has been successful in solving various decision-making tasks where
a well-defined reward function is available [34, 35, 50, 5, 54]. However, in many real-world tasks,
it can be challenging to design a quantitative reward function that accurately reflects the desired
behavior, particularly when the task involves human evaluation. Preference-based RL (PbRL) seeks
to provide an alternative solution by enabling agents to learn from preference information between
pairs of trajectory segments [1, 10]. PbRL has gained considerable interest in recent years as making
a relative judgment is much easier than providing a real-valued score, which makes human feedback
much more viable [39, 38, 52, 45, 56].
∗
†

First two authors have equal contributions
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

