Find What You Want: Learning Demand-conditioned
Object Attribute Space for Demand-driven Navigation

Hongcheng Wang
CFCS, School of CS, Peking University
whc.1999@pku.edu.cn

Andy Guan Hong Chen
School of EECS, Peking University
cghandy@pku.edu.cn

Xiaoqi Li
CFCS, School of CS, Peking University
clorisli@stu.pku.edu.cn

Mingdong Wu
CFCS, School of CS, Peking University
wmingd@pku.edu.cn

Hao Dong∗
CFCS, School of CS, Peking University
hao.dong@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The task of Visual Object Navigation (VON) involves an agent’s ability to locate
a particular object within a given scene. To successfully accomplish the VON
task, two essential conditions must be fulfiled: 1) the user knows the name of
the desired object; and 2) the user-specified object actually is present within the
scene. To meet these conditions, a simulator can incorporate predefined object
names and positions into the metadata of the scene. However, in real-world
scenarios, it is often challenging to ensure that these conditions are always met.
Humans in an unfamiliar environment may not know which objects are present in
the scene, or they may mistakenly specify an object that is not actually present.
Nevertheless, despite these challenges, humans may still have a demand for an
object, which could potentially be fulfilled by other objects present within the scene
in an equivalent manner. Hence, this paper proposes Demand-driven Navigation
(DDN), which leverages the user’s demand as the task instruction and prompts
the agent to find an object which matches the specified demand. DDN aims to
relax the stringent conditions of VON by focusing on fulfilling the user’s demand
rather than relying solely on specified object names. This paper proposes a method
of acquiring textual attribute features of objects by extracting common sense
knowledge from a large language model (LLM). These textual attribute features
are subsequently aligned with visual attribute features using Contrastive LanguageImage Pre-training (CLIP). Incorporating the visual attribute features as prior
knowledge, enhances the navigation process. Experiments on AI2Thor with the
ProcThor dataset demonstrate that the visual attribute features improve the agent’s
navigation performance and outperform the baseline methods commonly used in
the VON and VLN task and methods with LLMs. The codes and demonstrations
can be viewed at https://sites.google.com/view/demand-driven-navigation.

∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

