CARE: Modeling Interacting Dynamics Under
Temporal Environmental Variation

Xiao Luo1 , Haixin Wang2 , Zijie Huang1 , Huiyu Jiang3 ,
Abhijeet Sadashiv Gangan1 , Song Jiang1 , Yizhou Sun1
1
University of California, Los Angeles, 2 Peking University,
3
University of California, Santa Barbara
{xiaoluo,yzsun}@cs.ucla.edu, wang.hx@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Modeling interacting dynamical systems, such as fluid dynamics and intermolecular
interactions, is a fundamental research problem for understanding and simulating
complex real-world systems. Many of these systems can be naturally represented by
dynamic graphs, and graph neural network-based approaches have been proposed
and shown promising performance. However, most of these approaches assume the
underlying dynamics does not change over time, which is unfortunately untrue. For
example, a molecular dynamics can be affected by the environment temperature
over the time. In this paper, we take an attempt to provide a probabilistic view for
time-varying dynamics and propose a model Context-attended Graph ODE (CARE)
for modeling time-varying interacting dynamical systems. In our CARE, we explicitly use a context variable to model time-varying environment and construct an
encoder to initialize the context variable from historical trajectories. Furthermore,
we employ a neural ODE model to depict the dynamic evolution of the context
variable inferred from system states. This context variable is incorporated into a
coupled ODE to simultaneously drive the evolution of systems. Comprehensive
experiments on four datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed CARE
compared with several state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Modeling interacting dynamical systems is a fundamental machine learning problem [66, 65, 23, 59,
37] with a wide range of applications, including social network analysis [12, 17, 36] and particlebased physical simulations [46, 43, 35]. Geometric graphs [27] are utilized to formalize these
interactions between objects. For example, in particle-based physical systems, edges are constructed
based on the geographical distance between particles, which represents the transfer of energy.
In the literature, numerous data-driven approaches have been proposed for understanding interacting
dynamical systems [2, 25, 49]. Among them, graph neural networks [26, 62, 72, 33, 13] (GNNs)
are widely utilized to predict trajectories at the next timestamp due to their strong capacity to
capture interactions in graph-structured data. In particular, each object is considered as a graph
node, and edges represent interactions between neighboring objects. Given the observations and their
corresponding graph structure, these methods forecast states in the next timestamp using the message
passing mechanism. This process involves aggregating information from the neighbors of each node
to update its representation in an iterative fashion, effectively capturing the dynamics of the system.
Although impressive progress has been achieved on GNN-based approaches, capturing long-term
dependency in interacting dynamical systems is still a practical but underexplored problem. Existing
next-step predictors [42, 46, 45] can send the predictions back to generate rollout trajectories, which
could suffer from serious error accumulation for long-term predictions. More importantly, system
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

