Deductive Verification of Chain-of-Thought Reasoning

Zhan Ling1∗ Yunhao Fang1∗ Xuanlin Li1 Zhiao Huang1
Roland Memisevic2 Hao Su1
1
UC San Diego, 2 Qualcomm AI Research†

Mingu Lee2

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) significantly benefit from Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) prompting in performing various reasoning tasks. While CoT allows models
to produce more comprehensive reasoning processes, its emphasis on intermediate
reasoning steps can inadvertently introduce hallucinations and accumulated errors,
thereby limiting models’ ability to solve complex reasoning tasks. Inspired by how
humans engage in careful and meticulous deductive logical reasoning processes
to solve tasks, we seek to enable language models to perform explicit and rigorous deductive reasoning, and also ensure the trustworthiness of their reasoning
process through self-verification. However, directly verifying the validity of an
entire deductive reasoning process is challenging, even with advanced models
like ChatGPT. In light of this, we propose to decompose a reasoning verification
process into a series of step-by-step subprocesses, each only receiving their necessary context and premises. To facilitate this procedure, we propose Natural
Program, a natural language-based deductive reasoning format. Our approach
enables models to generate precise reasoning steps where subsequent steps are
more rigorously grounded on prior steps. It also empowers language models to
carry out reasoning self-verification in a step-by-step manner. By integrating this
verification process into each deductive reasoning stage, we significantly enhance
the rigor and trustfulness of generated reasoning steps. Along this process, we also
improve the answer correctness on complex reasoning tasks. Code will be released
at https://github.com/lz1oceani/verify_cot.

1

Introduction

The transformative power of large language models, enhanced by Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
prompting [50, 21, 59, 42], has significantly reshaped the landscape of information processing [14, 26, 49, 56, 13, 55, 23, 29], fostering enhanced abilities across a myriad of disciplines
and sectors. While CoT allows models to produce more comprehensive reasoning processes, its
emphasis on intermediate reasoning steps can inadvertently introduce hallucinations [4, 30, 16, 20]
and accumulated errors [4, 51, 1], thereby limiting models’ ability to produce cogent reasoning
processes.
In fact, the pursuit of reliable reasoning is not a contemporary novelty; indeed, it is an intellectual
endeavor that traces its roots back to the time of Aristotle’s ancient Greece. Motivated by the desire
to establish a rigorous reasoning process, in his “Organon,” Aristotle introduced principles of logic,
in particular, syllogism, a form of logical argument that applies deductive reasoning to arrive at
a conclusion based on two or more propositions assumed to be true. In disciplines that rigorous
reasoning is critical, such as judical reasoning and mathematical problem solving, documents must be
written in a formal language with a logical structure to ensure the validity of the reasoning process.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc
All datasets and models were solely downloaded and evaluated by the University of California San Diego.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

