LuminAIRe: Illumination-Aware Conditional Image
Repainting for Lighting-Realistic Generation

Jiajun Tang1,2 Haofeng Zhong1,2 Shuchen Weng1,2 Boxin Shi1,2∗
1
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing
2
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology
School of Computer Science, Peking University
{jiajun.tang, hfzhong, shuchenweng, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We present the ilLumination-Aware conditional Image Repainting (LuminAIRe)
task to address the unrealistic lighting effects in recent conditional image repainting
(CIR) methods. The environment lighting and 3D geometry conditions are explicitly estimated from given background images and parsing masks using a parametric
lighting representation and learning-based priors. These 3D conditions are then
converted into illumination images through the proposed physically-based illumination rendering and illumination attention module. With the injection of illumination
images, physically-correct lighting information is fed into the lighting-realistic
generation process and repainted images with harmonized lighting effects in both
foreground and background regions can be acquired, whose superiority over the
results of state-of-the-art methods is confirmed through extensive experiments. For
facilitating and validating the LuminAIRe task, a new dataset C AR -L UMINAIR E
with lighting annotations and rich appearance variants is collected.

1

Introduction

Advanced image editing is in high demand across a multitude of applications, e.g., old photo
colorization [78, 32, 68], damaged image restoration [48, 73, 72], and artistic style transfer [22, 35,
70]. Recently, conditional image repainting (CIR) [67, 66, 58] has emerged as an innovative research
topic, proven effective in controllable image editing while “freeing” users from the necessity of expert
proficiency and retaining the “freedom” to actualize their creative visions for image modification.
By utilizing provided attributes or textual descriptions, fine-grained strokes, and Gaussian noise to
separately represent colors, contours, and texture conditions, users could insert generative objects
with desired appearances in specified image positions, as shown in the blue line of Fig. 1.
Although CIR methods have made great progress in synthesizing photo-realistic and visually-pleasing
conditional images by avoiding gradient vanishing pitfall [67], adopting flexible condition representation [66], and designing condition fusion modules [58], there is still a crucial element missing from
the CIR task: making the synthesized results harmonized with the illumination of the scene, e.g.,
spatially-varying dark and bright regions in accordance to the lighting condition in the background,
physically-accurate highlight effects for highly-specular surfaces (shining objects), and perceptuallyrealistic shadow avoiding “floating objects” artifacts, as shown in the lower right example of Fig. 1.
Specifically, existing CIR methods handle image harmonization purely in 2D image space by estimating a pixel-wise color tone transformation of the repainted regions from the background regions.
Current approaches use semantic parsing maps as “geometry” representations and do not exploit
the lighting information contained in given background images, which prevents them from having
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

