Conformalized matrix completion

Yu Gui

Rina Foygel Barber

Cong Ma

Department of Statistics, University of Chicago
{yugui,rina,congm}@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Matrix completion aims to estimate missing entries in a data matrix, using the
assumption of a low-complexity structure (e.g., low rank) so that imputation is possible. While many effective estimation algorithms exist in the literature, uncertainty
quantification for this problem has proved to be challenging, and existing methods
are extremely sensitive to model misspecification. In this work, we propose a
distribution-free method for predictive inference in the matrix completion problem.
Our method adapts the framework of conformal prediction, which provides confidence intervals with guaranteed distribution-free validity in the setting of regression,
to the problem of matrix completion. Our resulting method, conformalized matrix
completion (cmc), offers provable predictive coverage regardless of the accuracy
of the low-rank model. Empirical results on simulated and real data demonstrate
that cmc is robust to model misspecification while matching the performance of
existing model-based methods when the model is correct.

1

Introduction

Matrix completion, the task of filling in missing entries in a large data matrix, has a wide range
of applications such as gene-disease association analysis in bioinformatics (Natarajan and Dhillon,
2014), collaborative filtering in recommender systems (Rennie and Srebro, 2005), and panel data
prediction and inference in econometrics (Amjad et al., 2018; Bai and Ng, 2021; Athey et al., 2021).
If the underlying signal is assumed to be low-rank, a range of estimation algorithms have been
proposed in the literature, including approaches based on convex relaxations of rank (Candes and
Plan, 2010; Candès and Tao, 2010; Koltchinskii et al., 2011; Foygel and Srebro, 2011; Negahban
and Wainwright, 2012; Yang and Ma, 2022) and nonconvex optimization over the space of low-rank
matrices (Keshavan et al., 2010; Jain et al., 2013; Sun and Luo, 2016; Ma et al., 2020).
While the problem of estimation has been explored through many different approaches in the literature,
the question of uncertainty quantity for matrix completion remains challenging and under-explored.
Cai et al. (2016) and Carpentier et al. (2018) construct confidence intervals for the missing entries
using order-wise concentration inequalities, which could be extremely loose. Chen et al. (2019)
proposes a de-biased estimator for matrix completion and characterizes its asymptotic distribution,
which then yields entrywise confidence intervals are then derived for the underlying incoherent matrix
with i.i.d. Gaussian noise. See also Xia and Yuan (2021); Farias et al. (2022) for related approaches.
The effectiveness of the aforementioned uncertainty quantification methods rely heavily on the
exact low-rank structure as well as assumptions on the tail of the noise. In practice, the low-rank
assumption can only be met approximately, and heavy-tailed noise is quite common in areas such as
macroeconomics and genomics (Nair et al., 2022). Without exact model specifications, the solution
to the matrix completion algorithm is hard to interpret and the asymptotic distribution of the obtained
estimator is no longer valid. The dependence of model-based approaches on exact model assumptions
motivates us to answer the question: can we construct valid and short confidence intervals for the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

