An information-theoretic quantification of the content
of communication between brain regions

Marco Celotto
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University of Bologna
marco.celotto@iit.it
Vito De Feo
University of Essex

Jan Bím
Datamole,
Prague

Alessandro Toso
University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf

Daniel Chicharro
City, University of London

Hamed Nili
University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf

Tobias H. Donner
University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf

Ileana L. Hanganu-Opatz
University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf

Alejandro Tlaie
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia

Stefan M. Lemke
University of North Carolina

Malte Bieler
University College Kristiania

Andrea Brovelli
Aix Marseille Université
CNRS

Stefano Panzeri
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
s.panzeri@uke.de

Abstract
Quantifying the amount, content and direction of communication between brain
regions is key to understanding brain function. Traditional methods to analyze
brain activity based on the Wiener-Granger causality principle quantify the overall
information propagated by neural activity between simultaneously recorded brain
regions, but do not reveal the information flow about specific features of interest
(such as sensory stimuli). Here, we develop a new information theoretic measure termed Feature-specific Information Transfer (FIT), quantifying how much
information about a specific feature flows between two regions. FIT merges the
Wiener-Granger causality principle with information-content specificity. We first
derive FIT and prove analytically its key properties. We then illustrate and test
them with simulations of neural activity, demonstrating that FIT identifies, within
the total information propagated between regions, the information that is transmitted about specific features. We then analyze three neural datasets obtained with
different recording methods, magneto- and electro-encephalography, and spiking
activity, to demonstrate the ability of FIT to uncover the content and direction of
information flow between brain regions beyond what can be discerned with traditional analytical methods. FIT can improve our understanding of how brain regions
communicate by uncovering previously unaddressed feature-specific information
flow.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

