Efficient Learning of Linear Graph Neural Networks
via Node Subsampling

Seiyun Shin1 , Ilan Shomorony1 , and Han Zhao2
1
Department of ECE and 2 Department of CS
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL
{seiyuns2, ilans, hanzhao}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a powerful class of machine learning models
with applications in recommender systems, drug discovery, social network analysis,
and computer vision. One challenge with their implementation is that GNNs often
take large-scale graphs as inputs, which imposes significant computational/storage
costs in the training and testing phases. In particular, the message passing operations of a GNN require multiplication of the graph adjacency matrix A ∈ Rn×n
and the data matrix X ∈ Rn×d , and the O(n2 d) time complexity can be prohibitive
for large n. Thus, a natural question is whether it is possible to perform the GNN
operations in (quasi-)linear time by avoiding the full computation of AX. To study
this question, we consider the setting of a regression task on a two-layer Linear
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN). We develop an efficient training algorithm
based on (1) performing node subsampling, (2) estimating the leverage scores of
AX based on the subsampled graph, and (3) performing leverage score sampling
on AX. We show that our proposed scheme learns the regression model observing
only O(ndε−2 log n) entries of A in time O(nd2 ε−2 log n), with the guarantee
that the learned weights deviate by at most ε under the ℓ2 norm from the model
learned using the entire adjacency matrix A. We present empirical results for
regression problems on real-world graphs and show that our algorithm significantly
outperforms other baseline sampling strategies that exploit the same number of
observations.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have gained popularity as a powerful machine learning method for
graph-structured data. By learning rich representations of graph data, GNNs can solve a variety of
prediction tasks on graphs [1–7]. GNNs have delivered impressive results across many different areas,
including social network analysis [8], bioinformatics [9–11], and recommendation systems [12].
Given their remarkable performance, being able to train GNNs efficiently is an important task.
However, training GNNs can be quite challenging in the context of large-scale graphs, which impose
significant computational costs. In particular, the message passing scheme in GNNs requires, for
each node, summing up the feature vectors of all neighboring nodes into one feature vector. For a
multi-layer Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) [3], the layer-wise propagation rule is
H (ℓ+1) = σ(AH (ℓ) W (ℓ) ),

(1)

where H (ℓ) denotes the feature representation at the ℓth layer, with H (0) = X (i.e., the data matrix
consisting of nodes’ features of an input graph G); W (ℓ) denotes the weight matrix; σ(·) is a
non-linear activation function like the ReLU; and A denotes the adjacency matrix of G.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

