Disentangled Wasserstein Autoencoder for T-Cell
Receptor Engineering

Tianxiao Li1,2∗ , Hongyu Guo3 , Filippo Grazioli4 , Mark Gerstein2† , Martin Renqiang Min1†∗
1
NEC Laboratories America, 2 Yale University
3
National Research Council Canada, 4 NEC Laboratories Europe
tianxiao.li@yale.edu, hongyu.guo@uottawa.ca, flpgrz@outlook.com
mark.gerstein@yale.edu, renqiang@nec-labs.com

Abstract
In protein biophysics, the separation between the functionally important residues
(forming the active site or binding surface) and those that create the overall structure
(the fold) is a well-established and fundamental concept. Identifying and modifying
those functional sites is critical for protein engineering but computationally nontrivial, and requires significant domain knowledge. To automate this process from
a data-driven perspective, we propose a disentangled Wasserstein autoencoder
with an auxiliary classifier, which isolates the function-related patterns from the
rest with theoretical guarantees. This enables one-pass protein sequence editing
and improves the understanding of the resulting sequences and editing actions
involved. To demonstrate its effectiveness, we apply it to T-cell receptors (TCRs), a
well-studied structure-function case. We show that our method can be used to alter
the function of TCRs without changing the structural backbone, outperforming
several competing methods in generation quality and efficiency, and requiring only
10% of the running time needed by baseline models. To our knowledge, this is the
first approach that utilizes disentangled representations for TCR engineering.

1

Introduction

Decades of work in protein biology have shown the separation of the overall structure and the
smaller “functional” site, such as the generic structure versus the active site in enzymes [1], and the
characteristic immunoglobulin fold versus the antigen-binding complementarity-determining region
(CDR) in immunoproteins [2, 3]. The latter usually defines the protein’s key function, but cannot
work on its own without the stabilizing effect of the former. This dichotomy is similar to the contentstyle separation in computer vision [4] and natural language processing [5]. For efficient protein
engineering, it is often desired that the overall structure is preserved while only the functionally
relevant sites are modified. Traditional methods for this task require significant domain knowledge
and are usually limited to specific scenarios. Several recent studies make use of deep generative
models [6] or reinforcement learning [7] to learn from large-scale data the implicit generation and
editing policies to alter proteins. Here, we tackle the problem by utilizing explicit functional features
through the disentangled representation learning (DRL), where the protein sequence is separately
embedded into a “functional” embedding and a “structural” embedding. This approach results in
a more interpretable latent space and enables more efficient conditional generation and property
manipulation for protein engineering.
DRL has been applied to the separation of “style” and “content” of images [8], or static and dynamic
parts of videos [9, 10] for tasks such as style transfer [11, 8] and conditional generation [12, 13].
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

