Fast Conditional Mixing of MCMC Algorithms for
Non-log-concave Distributions

Xiang Cheng∗
MIT
x.cheng@berkeley.edu

Bohan Wang∗
USTC
bhwangfy@gmail.com

Jingzhao Zhang∗
IIIS, Tsinghua; Shanghai Qizhi Institute
jingzhaoz@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yusong Zhu∗
Tsinghua University
zhuys19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
MCMC algorithms offer empirically efficient tools for sampling from a target
distribution π(x) ∝ exp(−V (x)). However, on the theory side, MCMC algorithms
suffer from slow mixing rate when π(x) is non-log-concave. Our work examines
this gap and shows that when Poincaré-style inequality holds on a subset X of
the state space, the conditional distribution of MCMC iterates over X mixes
fast to the true conditional distribution. This fast mixing guarantee can hold in
cases when global mixing is provably slow. We formalize the statement and
quantify the conditional mixing rate. We further show that conditional mixing can
have interesting implications for sampling from mixtures of Gaussians, parameter
estimation for Gaussian mixture models and Gibbs-sampling with well-connected
local minima.

1

Introduction

Sampling from a given target distribution of the form π(x) ∝ e−V (x) plays a central role in many
machine learning problems, such as Bayesian inference, optimization, and generative modeling
[9, 14, 15]. The Langevin MCMC algorithm in particular has received a lot of recent attention; it
makes use of the first-order gradient information ∇V (x), and can be viewed as the sampling analog
of gradient descent.
Langevin MCMC has been shown to converge quickly when π(x) is log-concave [6, 10]. More
recently, similar guarantees have been established for p(x) satisfying weaker conditions such as
log-Sobolev inequality (LSI) [23], for instance, π(x) ∝ e−V (x) can have a good LSI constant when
V (x) is a small perturbation of a convex function. However, few guarantees exist for general nonlog-concave distributions. One simple example is when p(x) is a well-separated mixture of two
Gaussian distributions; in this case, one verifies that Langevin MCMC mixes at a rate proportional to
the inverse of the exponential of the separation distance.
Many important modern machine-learning problems are highly non-convex, one prominent class
being functions arising from neural networks. Though finding the global minimum of a non-convex
function can be difficult, gradient descent can often be shown to converge rather quickly to a local
optimum [3]. This raises the important question:
What is the sampling analog of a local minimum? And how can we sample
efficiently from such a minimum?
∗

Alphabetical author order

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

