LightZero: A Unified Benchmark for Monte Carlo
Tree Search in General Sequential Decision Scenarios

Yazhe Niu1,3
Yuan Pu2
Zhenjie Yang1
Xueyan Li2
Tong Zhou1
2
1
3,4 ∗
Jiyuan Ren
Shuai Hu
Hongsheng Li
Yu Liu1,2
1
SenseTime Group LTD
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
2

Abstract
Building agents based on tree-search planning capabilities with learned models has
achieved remarkable success in classic decision-making problems, such as Go and
Atari. However, it has been deemed challenging or even infeasible to extend Monte
Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) based algorithms to diverse real-world applications,
especially when these environments involve complex action spaces and significant
simulation costs, or inherent stochasticity. In this work, we introduce LightZero, the
first unified benchmark for deploying MCTS/MuZero in general sequential decision
scenarios. Specificially, we summarize the most critical challenges in designing a
general MCTS-style decision-making solver, then decompose the tightly-coupled
algorithm and system design of tree-search RL methods into distinct sub-modules.
By incorporating more appropriate exploration and optimization strategies, we can
significantly enhance these sub-modules and construct powerful LightZero agents
to tackle tasks across a wide range of domains, such as board games, Atari, MuJoCo,
MiniGrid and GoBigger. Detailed benchmark results reveal the significant potential
of such methods in building scalable and efficient decision intelligence. The code
is available as part of OpenDILab at https://github.com/opendilab/LightZero.

1

Introduction

General decision intelligence needs to solve tasks in many distinct domains. Recent advances
in reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have addressed several challenging decision-making
problems [1, 2] and even surpassed top-level human experts in performance [3]. However, these stateof-the-art RL agents often exhibits poor data efficiency and face significant challenges when handling
a wide range of diverse problems. Different environments present specific learning requirements
and difficulties that prompted currently various algorithms (e.g. DQN [4], PPO [5], R2D2 [6], SAC
[7]) and system architectures such as IMPALA [8] and others [9, 10, 11]. Designing a general and
data-efficient decision solver needs to tackle various challenges, while ensuring that the proposed
algorithm can be universally deployed anywhere without domain-specific knowledge requirements.
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is a powerful approach that utilizes a search tree with simulation
and backpropogation mechanisms to train agents with a small data budget [12]. To model highdimensional observation spaces and complex policy behaviour, AlphaGo [13] enhances MCTS with
deep neural networks and designs the policy and value network that identify optimal actions and
winning rates respectively, which was the first to defeat the strongest professional human player in Go.
Despite the impressive results, MCTS-style algorithms rely on a series of necessary conditions, such
as knowledge of game rules and simulators, discrete action space and deterministic state transition,
which severely restrict the application scope of these methods. In recent years, several successors
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

