Uncoupled and Convergent Learning in Two-Player
Zero-Sum Markov Games with Bandit Feedback
Yang Cai
Yale University
yang.cai@yale.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Chen-Yu Wei
University of Virginia
chenyu.wei@virginia.edu

Weiqiang Zheng
Yale University
weiqiang.zheng@yale.edu

Abstract
We revisit the problem of learning in two-player zero-sum Markov games, focusing
on developing an algorithm that is uncoupled, convergent, and rational, with nonasymptotic convergence rates to Nash equilibrium. We start from the case of
1
stateless matrix game with bandit feedback as a warm-up, showing an O(t− 8 )
last-iterate convergence rate. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first result
that obtains finite last-iterate convergence rate given access to only bandit feedback.
We extend our result to the case of irreducible Markov games, providing a last1
iterate convergence rate of O(t− 9+ε ) for any ε > 0. Finally, we study Markov
games without any assumptions on the dynamics, and show a path convergence
1
rate, a new notion of convergence we define, of O(t− 10 ). Our algorithm removes
the coordination and prior knowledge requirement of [WLZL21a], which pursued
the same goals as us for irreducible Markov games. Our algorithm is related
to [CMZ21, CWC21] and also builds on the entropy regularization technique.
However, we remove their requirement of communications on the entropy values,
making our algorithm entirely uncoupled.

1

Introduction

In multi-agent learning, a central question is how to design algorithms so that agents can independently
learn (i.e., with little coordination overhead) how to interact with each other. Additionally, it is
desirable to maximally reuse existing single-agent learning algorithms, so that the multi-agent system
can be built in a modular way. Motivated by this question, decentralized multi-agent learning emerges
with the goal to design decentralized systems, in which no central controller governs the policies of
the agents, and each agent learns based on only their local information – just like in a single-agent
algorithm. In recent years, we have witnessed significant success of this new decentralized learning
paradigm. For example, self-play, where each agent independently deploys the same single-agent
algorithm to play against each other without further direct supervision, plays a crucial role in the
training of AlphaGo [SSS+ 17] and AI for Stratego [PDVH+ 22].
Despite the recent success, many important questions remain open in decentralized multi-agent
learning. Indeed, unless the decentralized algorithm is carefully designed, self-play often falls short
of attaining certain sought-after global characteristics, such as convergence to the global optimum or
stability as seen in, for example, [MPP18, BP18].
In this work, we revisit the problem of learning in two-player zero-sum Markov games, which has
received extensive attention recently. Our goal is to design a decentralized algorithm that resembles
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

