Structure-free Graph Condensation: From
Large-scale Graphs to Condensed Graph-free Data

Xin Zheng1 , Miao Zhang2 , Chunyang Chen1 , Quoc Viet Hung Nguyen3 , Xingquan Zhu4 , Shirui Pan3†
1
Monash University, Australia, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China
3
Griffith University, Australia, 4 Florida Atlantic University, USA
xin.zheng@monash.edu, zhangmiao@hit.edu.cn, chunyang.chen@monash.edu
henry.nguyen@griffith.edu.au, xzhu3@fau.edu, s.pan@griffith.edu.au

Abstract
Graph condensation, which reduces the size of a large-scale graph by synthesizing a
small-scale condensed graph as its substitution, has immediate benefits for various
graph learning tasks. However, existing graph condensation methods rely on the
joint optimization of nodes and structures in the condensed graph, and overlook
critical issues in effectiveness and generalization ability. In this paper, we advocate
a new Structure-Free Graph Condensation paradigm, named SFGC, to distill a largescale graph into a small-scale graph node set without explicit graph structures, i.e.,
graph-free data. Our idea is to implicitly encode topology structure information into
the node attributes in the synthesized graph-free data, whose topology is reduced
to an identity matrix. Specifically, SFGC contains two collaborative components:
(1) a training trajectory meta-matching scheme for effectively synthesizing smallscale graph-free data; (2) a graph neural feature score metric for dynamically
evaluating the quality of the condensed data. Through training trajectory metamatching, SFGC aligns the long-term GNN learning behaviors between the largescale graph and the condensed small-scale graph-free data, ensuring comprehensive
and compact transfer of informative knowledge to the graph-free data. Afterward,
the underlying condensed graph-free data would be dynamically evaluated with the
graph neural feature score, which is a closed-form metric for ensuring the excellent
expressiveness of the condensed graph-free data. Extensive experiments verify the
superiority of SFGC across different condensation ratios.‡

1

Introduction

As prevalent graph data learning models, graph neural networks (GNNs) have attracted much
attention and achieved great success [68, 36, 22, 82, 25, 24, 23]. Various graph data in the real
world comprises millions of nodes and edges[37, 38, 43], reflecting diverse node attributes and
complex structural connections [33, 34, 32, 54]. Modeling such large-scale graphs brings serious
challenges in both data storage and GNN model designs, hindering the applications of GNNs in many
industrial scenarios [74, 2, 64, 73, 80, 71, 72]. For instance, designing GNN models usually requires
repeatedly training GNNs for adjusting proper hyper-parameters and constructing optimal model
architectures. When taking large-scale graphs as training data, repeated training through message
passing along complex graph structures, makes it highly computation-intensive and time-consuming
through try-and-error.
To address these challenges brought by the scale of graph data, a natural data-centric solution
[78] is graph size reduction, which transforms the real-world large-scale graph to a small-scale
†
‡

Corresponding author
Code is available at https://github.com/Amanda-Zheng/SFGC

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

