Zero-Regret Performative Prediction Under
Inequality Constraints

Wenjing Yan Xuanyu Cao ∗
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
wj.yan@connect.ust.hk, eexcao@ust.hk

Abstract
Performative prediction is a recently proposed framework where predictions guide
decision-making and hence influence future data distributions. Such performative
phenomena are ubiquitous in various areas, such as transportation, finance, public
policy, and recommendation systems. To date, work on performative prediction
has only focused on unconstrained scenarios, neglecting the fact that many realworld learning problems are subject to constraints. This paper bridges this gap
by studying performative prediction under inequality constraints. Unlike most
existing work that provides only performative stable points, we aim to find the
optimal solutions. Anticipating performative gradients is a challenging task, due
to the agnostic performative effect on data distributions. To address this issue,
we first develop a robust primal-dual framework that requires only approximate
gradients up to a certain accuracy, yet delivers the same order of performance
as the stochastic primal-dual algorithm without performativity. Based on this
framework, we then propose an adaptive primal-dual algorithm for location family.
Our√analysis demonstrates that the proposed adaptive √
primal-dual algorithm attains
O( T ) regret and constraint violations, using only T + 2T samples, where T
is the time horizon. To our best knowledge, this is the first study and analysis on
the optimality of the performative prediction problem under inequality constraints.
Finally, we validate the effectiveness of our algorithm and theoretical results
through numerical simulations.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimization plays a critical role in statistical sciences and data-driven computing, where
the goal is to learn decision rules (e.g., classifiers) based on limited samples that generalize well
to the entire population. Most prior studies on stochastic optimization [Heyman and Sobel, 2004;
Karimi et al., 2019; Powell, 2019] rely on the assumption that the data of the entire population
follows a static distribution. This assumption, however, does not hold in applications where the
data distributions change dynamically in response to decision-makers’ actions [Hardt et al., 2016;
Dong et al., 2018]. For instance, in transportation, travel time estimates [Mori et al., 2015] influence
routing decisions, resulting in realized travel times; in banking, credit evaluation criteria [Abdou and
Pointon, 2011] guide borrowers’ behaviors and subsequently their credit scores; and in advertising,
recommendations [García-Sánchez et al., 2020] shape customer preferences, leading to consumption
patterns. Such interplay between decision-making and data distribution arises widely in various areas,
such as transportation, finance, public policy, and recommendation systems.
The seminal work [Perdomo et al., 2020] formalized the phenomenon as performative prediction,
which represents the strategic responses of data distributions to the taken decisions via decision∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

