Optimization of Inter-group Criteria for Clustering
with Minimum Size Constraints
Eduardo S. Laber
Department of Computer Science
PUC-Rio
Rio de Janeiro, RJ - Brazil
laber@inf.puc-rio.br

Lucas Murtinho
Department of Computer Science
PUC-Rio
Rio de Janeiro, RJ - Brazil
lmurtinho@aluno.puc-rio.br

Abstract
Internal measures that are used to assess the quality of a clustering usually take
into account intra-group and/or inter-group criteria. There are many papers in
the literature that propose algorithms with provable approximation guarantees for
optimizing the former. However, the optimization of inter-group criteria is much
less understood.
Here, we contribute to the state-of-the-art of this literature by devising algorithms
with provable guarantees for the maximization of two natural inter-group criteria,
namely the minimum spacing and the minimum spanning tree spacing. The former
is the minimum distance between points in different groups while the latter captures
separability through the cost of the minimum spanning tree that connects all groups.
We obtain results for both the unrestricted case, in which no constraint on the
clusters is imposed, and for the constrained case where each group is required to
have a minimum number of points. Our constraint is motivated by the fact that the
popular single-linkage, which optimizes both criteria in the unrestricted case,
produces clusterings with many tiny groups.
To complement our work, we present an empirical study with 10 real datasets,
providing evidence that our methods work very well in practical settings.

1

Introduction

Data clustering is a fundamental tool in machine learning that is commonly used in exploratory analysis and to reduce the computational resources required to handle large datasets. For comprehensive
descriptions of different clustering methods and their applications, we refer to Jain et al. (1999);
Hennig et al. (2015). In general, clustering is the problem of partitioning a set of items so that similar
items are grouped together and dissimilar items are separated. Internal measures that are used to
assess the quality of a clustering (e.g. Silhouette coefficient Rousseeuw (1987) and Davies-Bouldin
index Davies & Bouldin (1979)) usually take into account intra-group and inter-group criteria. The
former considers the cohesion of a group while the latter measures how separated the groups are.
There are many papers in the literature that propose algorithms with provable approximation guarantees for optimizing intra-group criteria. Algorithms for k-center, k-medians and k-means cost
functions Gonzalez (1985); Charikar et al. (2002); Ahmadian et al. (2020) are some examples.
However, optimizing inter-group criteria is much less understood. Here, we contribute to the stateof-the-art by considering the maximization of two natural inter-group criteria, namely the minimum
spacing and the minimum spanning tree spacing.
Our Results. The spacing between two groups of points, formalized in Section 2, is the minimum
distance between a point in the first and a point in the second group. We consider two criteria for
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

