Provably Fast Finite Particle Variants of SVGD via
Virtual Particle Stochastic Approximation

Aniket Das
Google Research
Bangalore, India
ketd@google.com

Dheeraj Nagaraj
Google Research
Bangalore, India
dheerajnagaraj@google.com

Abstract
Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD) is a popular particle-based variational
inference algorithm with impressive empirical performance across various domains.
Although the population (i.e, infinite-particle) limit dynamics of SVGD is well
characterized, its behavior in the finite-particle regime is far less understood. To
this end, our work introduces the notion of virtual particles to develop novel
stochastic approximations of population-limit SVGD dynamics in the space of
probability measures, that are exactly realizable using finite particles. As a result,
we design two computationally efficient variants of SVGD, namely VP-SVGD and
GB-SVGD, with provably fast finite-particle convergence rates. Our algorithms
can be viewed as specific random-batch approximations of SVGD, which are
computationally more efficient than ordinary SVGD. We show that the n particles
output by VP-SVGD and GB-SVGD, run for T steps with batch-size K, are atleast as good as i.i.d samples from a distribution whose Kernel Stein Discrepancy
1/3
to the target is at most O(d /(KT )1/6 ) under standard assumptions. Our results
also hold under a mild growth condition on the potential function, which is much
weaker than the isoperimetric (e.g. Poincare Inequality) or information-transport
conditions (e.g. Talagrand’s Inequality T1 ) generally considered in prior works. As
a corollary, we analyze the convergence of the empirical measure (of the particles
output by VP-SVGD and GB-SVGD) to the target distribution and demonstrate
a double exponential improvement over the best known finite-particle analysis of
SVGD. Beyond this, our results present the first known oracle complexities for this
setting with polynomial dimension dependence, thereby completely eliminating the
curse of dimensionality exhibited by previously known finite-particle rates.

1

Introduction

Sampling from a distribution over Rd whose density π ⋆ (x) ∝ exp(−F (x)) is known only upto a
normalizing constant, is a fundamental problem in machine learning [52, 20], statistics [41, 36],
theoretical computer science [28, 17] and statistical physics [39, 15]. A popular approach to this is
the Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD) algorithm introduced by Liu and Wang [31], which
(i)
uses a positive definite kernel k to evolve a set of n interacting particles (xt )i∈[n],t∈N as follows:
(i)

(i)

xt+1 ← xt −

n
i
γ Xh
(i)
(j)
(j)
(i)
(j)
k(xt , xt )∇F (xt ) − ∇2 k(xt , xt )
n j=1

(1)

SVGD exhibits remarkable empirical performance in a variety of Bayesian inference, generative
modeling and reinforcement learning tasks [31, 51, 54, 22, 50, 34, 45, 19] and usually converges
rapidly to the target density while using only a few particles, often outperforming Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. However, in contrast to its wide practical applicability, theoretical
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

