RegBN: Batch Normalization of Multimodal Data with
Regularization

1

Morteza Ghahremani1,2 Christian Wachinger1,2
Lab for AI in Medical Imaging (AI-Med), Department of Radiology,
Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany
2
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Germany
{morteza.ghahremani, christian.wachinger}@tum.de

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed a surge of interest in integrating high-dimensional
data captured by multisource sensors, driven by the impressive success of neural
networks in integrating multimodal data. However, the integration of heterogeneous multimodal data poses a significant challenge, as confounding effects
and dependencies among such heterogeneous data sources introduce unwanted
variability and bias, leading to suboptimal performance of multimodal models.
Therefore, it becomes crucial to normalize the low- or high-level features extracted from data modalities before their fusion takes place. This paper introduces
RegBN, a novel approach for multimodal Batch Normalization with REGularization. RegBN uses the Frobenius norm as a regularizer term to address the
side effects of confounders and underlying dependencies among different data
sources. The proposed method generalizes well across multiple modalities and
eliminates the need for learnable parameters, simplifying training and inference.
We validate the effectiveness of RegBN on eight databases from five research
areas, encompassing diverse modalities such as language, audio, image, video,
depth, tabular, and 3D MRI. The proposed method demonstrates broad applicability
across different architectures such as multilayer perceptrons, convolutional neural
networks, and vision transformers, enabling effective normalization of both lowand high-level features in multimodal neural networks. RegBN is available at
https://mogvision.github.io/RegBN.

1

Introduction

Multimodal models, which adeptly fuse information from a diverse range of sources, have yielded
promising results and found many applications such as language and vision [27, 29, 44, 17, 51],
multimedia [2, 35, 12], affective computing [63, 41, 64, 48, 56], robotics [23, 49, 24], humancomputer interaction [43, 41], and healthcare diagnosis [40, 60, 36, 14, 61]. Multimodal machine
learning presents distinctive computational and theoretical research challenges due to the diversity of
data sources involved [25, 26]. The impressive versatility and efficacy of multimodal neural network
models can be attributed to their ability to effectively integrate and leverage heterogeneous data.
Multimodal models process heterogeneous information obtained from multisource sensors by extracting their features. Subsequently, the extracted features are fused at different levels (including
early, middle, or late fusion [58, 35, 36]) to address specific tasks, such as classification, recognition,
description, and segmentation [25, 26, 12, 1, 10]. Heterogeneous information from multisource
sensors, however, is susceptible to confounding effects caused by extraneous variables or multiple
distributions [30, 7, 5, 11, 57, 32, 6]. Confounding variables pertain to external factors that introduce
bias (either positive or negative) in the relationship between the variables being studied [42, 50]. The
complexity of confounders emerges from their potential pervasiveness across diverse data modal37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

