MARBLE: Music Audio Representation Benchmark
for Universal Evaluation
Ruibin Yuan ,1,2∗ Yinghao Ma ,3∗ Yizhi Li ,4,5∗ Ge Zhang ,1,6∗ Xingran Chen7 Hanzhi Yin2
Le Zhuo8 Yiqi Liu4,5 Jiawen Huang3 Zeyue Tian9 Binyue Deng10 Ningzhi Wang3
Chenghua Lin4,5† Emmanouil Benetos3 Anton Ragni5 Norbert Gyenge5 Roger Dannenberg2
Wenhu Chen6 Gus Xia11,12 Wei Xue9 Si Liu8 Shi Wang13 Ruibo Liu14 Yike Guo9 Jie Fu1†
Multimodal Art Projection Research Community 1 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
2
Carnegie Mellon University 3 Queen Mary University of London 4 University of Manchester
5
University of Sheffield 6 University of Waterloo 7 University of Michigan Ann Arbor
8
Beihang University 9 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 10 Peking University
11
New York University 12 MBZUAI 13 ICT, Chinese Academy of Sciences 14 Dartmouth College
ruibiny@alumni.cmu.edu yinghao.ma@qmul.ac.uk yizhi.li@hotmail.com
gezhang@umich.edu chenghua.lin@manchester.ac.uk fujie@baai.ac.cn

Abstract
In the era of extensive intersection between art and Artificial Intelligence (AI),
such as image generation and fiction co-creation, AI for music remains relatively
nascent, particularly in music understanding. This is evident in the limited work on
deep music representations, the scarcity of large-scale datasets, and the absence of
a universal and community-driven benchmark. To address this issue, we introduce
the Music Audio Representation Benchmark for universaL Evaluation, termed
MARBLE. It aims to provide a benchmark for various Music Information Retrieval
(MIR) tasks by defining a comprehensive taxonomy with four hierarchy levels,
including acoustic, performance, score, and high-level description. We establish a
unified protocol based on 18 tasks on 12 public-available datasets, providing a fair
and standard assessment of representations of all open-sourced pre-trained models
developed on music recordings as baselines. MARBLE offers an easy-to-use,
extendable, and reproducible suite for the community, with clear statements on
dataset copyright. Results suggest that recently proposed large-scale pre-trained
musical language models perform the best in most tasks, with room for further
improvement. The leaderboard and toolkit repository are published34 to promote
future music AI research.

1

Introduction

Despite Artificial Intelligence (AI) rapid advancement in the field of art, it has not yet made significant
progress in music, particularly in music understanding. To address this, researchers are studying the
interdisciplinary field of Music Information Retrieval (MIR) to develop a general music understanding
model. MIR focuses on automatically extracting information from raw music audio [40], which
enables a variety of tasks such as music classification, emotion recognition, pitch estimation, and the
analysis of musical features such as rhythm, melody, and harmony. Due to issues such as copyright
and annotation costs, labelled music datasets are usually small, which limits the performances of
∗

The authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding authors.
3
https://marble-bm.shef.ac.uk
4
https://github.com/a43992899/MARBLE-Benchmark

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

