Active Observing in Continuous-time Control

Samuel Holt
University of Cambridge
sih31@cam.ac.uk

Alihan Hüyük
University of Cambridge
ah2075@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
The control of continuous-time environments while actively deciding when to
take costly observations in time is a crucial yet unexplored problem, particularly
relevant to real-world scenarios such as medicine, low-power systems, and resource
management. Existing approaches either rely on continuous-time control methods
that take regular, expensive observations in time or discrete-time control with costly
observation methods, which are inapplicable to continuous-time settings due to
the compounding discretization errors introduced by time discretization. In this
work, we are the first to formalize the continuous-time control problem with costly
observations. Our key theoretical contribution shows that observing at regular time
intervals is not optimal in certain environments, while irregular observation policies
yield higher expected utility. This perspective paves the way for the development of
novel methods that can take irregular observations in continuous-time control with
costly observations. We empirically validate our theoretical findings in various
continuous-time environments, including a cancer simulation, by constructing a
simple initial method to solve this new problem, with a heuristic threshold on
the variance of reward rollouts in an offline continuous-time model-based model
predictive control (MPC) planner. Although determining the optimal method
remains an open problem, our work offers valuable insights and understanding of
this unique problem, laying the foundation for future research in this area.

1

Introduction

The problem of continuous control with costly observations is ubiquitous with applications in
medicine, biological systems, low power systems, robotics, resource management and surveillance
[Yoshioka and Tsujimura, 2020, Brunereau et al., 2012, Mastronarde and van der Schaar, 2012]. A
setting that is shared across all these domains is that a decision-maker needs to continually control
(e.g., chemotherapy dosing, quantities of food, data to transmit, etc.) whilst deciding when to take
a costly observation (e.g., a medical computed tomography (CT) scan, measuring the population
of a species, measuring bandwidth, etc.). The decision-maker’s observing policy must be timely
to determine whether the action plan is effective (e.g., errors in treating stage 4 cancer can be fatal
[Reinhardt et al., 2019], with further application examples in Appendix B).
In many of these real-world systems (e.g., medicine, low-power systems, resource management), an
offline setup is beneficial as it enables decision-makers to learn control policies without incurring
excessive costs or risking adverse effects. Where an offline setup refers to learning a policy from
a previously collected dataset of state-action trajectories, without interacting with the environment
[Argenson and Dulac-Arnold, 2020]. The development of novel methods that can take irregular
observations in continuous-time control with costly observations, within an offline setup, provides a
safe and cost-effective way to improve real-world decision-making processes.
Recent work falls into three main categories. First, sensing approaches determine when to informatively observe to identify an underlying state, but are unable to continually control. Second, planning
approaches only continually control and have the restrictive assumption that the observing schedule is
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

