Data-Centric Learning from Unlabeled Graphs
with Diffusion Model
Gang Liu
University of Notre Dame
gliu7@nd.edu
Jiaxin Xu
University of Notre Dame
jxu24@nd.edu

Eric Inae
University of Notre Dame
einae@nd.edu
Tengfei Luo
University of Notre Dame
tluo@nd.edu

Tong Zhao
Snap Inc.
tzhao@snap.com
Meng Jiang
University of Notre Dame
mjiang2@nd.edu

Abstract
Graph property prediction tasks are important and numerous. While each task offers
a small size of labeled examples, unlabeled graphs have been collected from various
sources and at a large scale. A conventional approach is training a model with the
unlabeled graphs on self-supervised tasks and then fine-tuning the model on the
prediction tasks. However, the self-supervised task knowledge could not be aligned
or sometimes conflicted with what the predictions needed. In this paper, we propose
to extract the knowledge underlying the large set of unlabeled graphs as a specific
set of useful data points to augment each property prediction model. We use a
diffusion model to fully utilize the unlabeled graphs and design two new objectives
to guide the model’s denoising process with each task’s labeled data to generate
task-specific graph examples and their labels. Experiments demonstrate that our
data-centric approach performs significantly better than fifteen existing various
methods on fifteen tasks. The performance improvement brought by unlabeled data
is visible as the generated labeled examples unlike the self-supervised learning.

1

Introduction

Graph data such as molecules and polymers are found to have attractive properties in drug and
material discovery (Böhm et al., 2004; Huang et al., 2021), but annotating them requires specialized
knowledge, as well as lengthy and costly experiments in wet labs (Cormack and Elorza, 2004). So, it
is important for graph property predictors to learn useful knowledge from unlabeled graphs.
Self-supervised learning (Hu et al., 2019; Rong et al., 2020; You et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022) utilizes
unlabeled graphs to learn through predictive tasks or contrastive tasks to represent and transfer the
knowledge as model parameters. Despite the empirical success in language and vision (Brown et al.,
2020; He et al., 2022), their performance on graph data applications remains unsatisfactory because
of the significant gap between the graph self-supervised task and the graph label prediction task.
Models trained on node attribute prediction (Hu et al., 2019) as a simple predictive self-supervised
task extract too limited knowledge from the graph structure, which has been observed after too fast
convergence (Sun et al., 2022). More complex tasks like graph context prediction (Hu et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2021) may transfer knowledge that conflicts with downstream tasks. Aromatic rings, for
instance, are a prevalent structure in molecules (Maziarka et al., 2020) and are considered valuable in
context prediction tasks (Zhang et al., 2021). However, graph properties such as oxygen permeability
can be more related to non-aromatic rings in some cases (Liu et al., 2022a), which is overlooked if
not using tailored predictive tasks specifically for downstream tasks. As predictive tasks strive for
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

