Episodic Multi-Task Learning with
Heterogeneous Neural Processes

Jiayi Shen1 , Xiantong Zhen1,2 ∗, Qi (Cheems) Wang3 , Marcel Worring1
1
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands, {j.shen, m.worring}@uva.nl
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE, zhenxt@gmail.com
3
Kaiyuan Mathematical Sciences Institute, Changsha, China, hhq123go@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper focuses on the data-insufficiency problem in multi-task learning within
an episodic training setup. Specifically, we explore the potential of heterogeneous
information across tasks and meta-knowledge among episodes to effectively tackle
each task with limited data. Existing meta-learning methods often fail to take advantage of crucial heterogeneous information in a single episode, while multi-task
learning models neglect reusing experience from earlier episodes. To address the
problem of insufficient data, we develop Heterogeneous Neural Processes (HNPs)
for the episodic multi-task setup. Within the framework of hierarchical Bayes,
HNPs effectively capitalize on prior experiences as meta-knowledge and capture
task-relatedness among heterogeneous tasks, mitigating data-insufficiency. Meanwhile, transformer-structured inference modules are designed to enable efficient
inferences toward meta-knowledge and task-relatedness. In this way, HNPs can
learn more powerful functional priors for adapting to novel heterogeneous tasks in
each meta-test episode. Experimental results show the superior performance of the
proposed HNPs over typical baselines, and ablation studies verify the effectiveness
of the designed inference modules.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have made remarkable progress with the help of the exponential increase in
the amount of available training data [1]. However, many practical scenarios only have access to
limited labeled data [2]. Such data-insufficiency sharply degrades the model’s performance [2, 3].
Both meta-learning and multi-task learning have the potential to alleviate the data-insufficiency issue.
Meta-learning can extract meta-knowledge from past episodes and thus enables rapid adaptation
to new episodes with a few examples only [4–7]. Meanwhile, multi-task learning exploits the
correlation among several tasks and results in more accurate learners for all tasks simultaneously [8–
11]. However, the integration of meta-learning and multi-task learning in overcoming the datainsufficiency problem is rarely investigated.
In episodic training [4], existing meta-learning methods [4–7, 12, 13] in every meta-training or
meta-test episode learn a single-task. In this paper, we refer to this conventional setting as episodic
single-task learning. This setting restricts the potential for these models to explore task-relatedness
within each episode, leaving the learning of multiple heterogeneous tasks in a single episode underexplored. We consider multiple tasks in each episode as episodic multi-task learning. The crux
of episodic multi-task learning is to generalize the ability of exploring task-relatedness from metatraining to meta-test episodes. The differences between episodic single-task learning and episodic
multi-task learning are illustrated in Figure 1. To be specific, we restrict the scope of the problem
∗

Currently with United Imaging Healthcare, Co., Ltd., China.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

