Adversarial Examples Are Not Real Features

1

Ang Li1∗ Yifei Wang2∗ Yiwen Guo3 Yisen Wang4,5†
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Independent Researcher
4
National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
The existence of adversarial examples has been a mystery for years and attracted
much interest. A well-known theory by Ilyas et al. [19] explains adversarial vulnerability from a data perspective by showing that one can extract non-robust features
from adversarial examples and these features alone are useful for classification.
However, the explanation remains quite counter-intuitive since non-robust features
are mostly noise features to humans. In this paper, we re-examine the theory from a
larger context by incorporating multiple learning paradigms. Notably, we find that
contrary to their good usefulness under supervised learning, non-robust features
attain poor usefulness when transferred to other self-supervised learning paradigms,
such as contrastive learning, masked image modeling, and diffusion models. It
reveals that non-robust features are not really as useful as robust or natural features
that enjoy good transferability between these paradigms. Meanwhile, for robustness, we also show that naturally trained encoders from robust features are largely
non-robust under AutoAttack. Our cross-paradigm examination suggests that the
non-robust features are not really useful but more like paradigm-wise shortcuts,
and robust features alone might be insufficient to attain reliable model robustness.
Code is available at https://github.com/PKU-ML/AdvNotRealFeatures.

1

Introduction

Alongside the human-level or even superior performance of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) in various
tasks [22, 14, 10], concerns on the existence of adversarial examples constantly rise, regarding them
as main threats that fool DNN classifiers with invisible perturbations [34, 12, 24, 26]. Among
many explanations of adversarial examples [11, 36, 31, 30, 44, 45, 48, 28, 2, 3], the robust and
non-robust feature perspective developed by Ilyas et al. [19] has received wide attention. Compared
to previous explanations that regard adversarial examples as “bugs” of neural networks (i.e., the
model), they claim that adversarial examples stem from non-robust “features” in the inputs (i.e., the
data). Specifically, they argue that each example is composed of human-perceptible robust features
(invariant to attack) and human-imperceptible non-robust features (sensitive to attack) that are both
useful for classification. Under adversarial attacks, non-robust features from other classes are injected
into the adversarial examples and lead to misclassification. To verify this point, they show that
datasets containing only non-robust features can attain good classification performance; and similarly,
datasets containing robust features can attain good robustness even with natural training. Supported
by these observations, the perspective has been widely accepted ever since and many subsequential
works are built upon their framework [5, 20, 37].
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

