H-nobs: Achieving Certified Fairness and Robustness
in Distributed Learning on Heterogeneous Datasets

Guanqiang Zhou
George Mason University
gzhou4@gmu.edu

Ping Xu
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
ping.t.xu@utrgv.edu

Yue Wang
Georgia State University
ywang182@gsu.edu

Zhi Tian
George Mason University
ztian1@gmu.edu

Abstract
Fairness and robustness are two important goals in the design of modern distributed learning systems. Despite a few prior works attempting to achieve both
fairness and robustness, some key aspects of this direction remain underexplored.
In this paper, we try to answer three largely unnoticed and unaddressed questions
that are of paramount significance to this topic: (i) What makes jointly satisfying
fairness and robustness difficult? (ii) Is it possible to establish theoretical guarantee for the dual property of fairness and robustness? (iii) How much does fairness
have to sacrifice at the expense of robustness being incorporated into the system?
To address these questions, we first identify data heterogeneity as the key difficulty of combining fairness and robustness. Accordingly, we propose a fair and
robust framework called H-nobs which can offer certified fairness and robustness
through the adoption of two key components, a fairness-promoting objective function and a simple robust aggregation scheme called norm-based screening (NBS).
We explain in detail why NBS is the suitable scheme in our algorithm in contrast
to other robust aggregation measures. In addition, we derive three convergence
theorems for H-nobs in cases of the learning model being nonconvex, convex, and
strongly convex, respectively, which provide theoretical guarantees for both fairness and robustness. Further, we empirically investigate the influence of the robust
mechanism (NBS) on the fairness performance of H-nobs, the very first attempt
of such exploration.

1 Introduction
Distributed learning has been widely applied to solve large-scale machine learning (ML) problems,
where a number of computing nodes (users) collectively carry out the task of training a model under
the coordination of a central node (server). Federated learning is a typical example of distributed
learning where each device collects its own local data and keeps them private [1]. In this paper we
use distributed learning and federated learning interchangeably.
Aside from the basic expectation of high model accuracy, it is increasingly emphasized in the latest ML research to design distributed learning algorithms that can jointly satisfy several pragmatic
constraints such as fairness and robustness [2]. Here we consider the most common definitions
where fairness specifically refers to egalitarian fairness and robustness refers to Byzantine robustness, which respectively stipulate that the trained model exhibits somewhat uniform performances
on the local users (see Section 2.1), and that the system is resilient to Byzantine attacks where a
portion of users defect or malfunction (see Section 2.2). In this paper, we strive for simultaneously
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

