SpecTr: Fast Speculative Decoding via Optimal
Transport

Ziteng Sun∗
Google Research, New York
zitengsun@google.com

Ananda Theertha Suresh∗
Google Research, New York
theertha@google.com

Jae Hun Ro
Google Research, New York
jaero@google.com

Ahmad Beirami
Google Research, New York
beirami@google.com

Himanshu Jain
Google Research, New York
himj@google.com

Felix Yu
Google Research, New York
felixyu@google.com

Abstract
Autoregressive sampling from large language models has led to state-of-the-art
results in several natural language tasks. However, autoregressive sampling generates tokens one at a time making it slow, and even prohibitive in certain tasks. One
way to speed up sampling is speculative decoding: use a small model to sample a
draft (block or sequence of tokens), and then score all tokens in the draft by the
large language model in parallel. A subset of the tokens in the draft are accepted
(and the rest rejected) based on a statistical method to guarantee that the final
output follows the distribution of the large model. In this work, we provide a principled understanding of speculative decoding through the lens of optimal transport
(OT) with membership cost. This framework can be viewed as an extension of
the well-known maximal-coupling problem. This new formulation enables us to
generalize the speculative decoding method to allow for a set of k candidates at the
token-level, which leads to an improved optimal membership cost. We show that
the optimal draft selection algorithm (transport plan) can be computed via linear
programming, whose best-known runtime is exponential in k. We then propose a
valid draft selection algorithm whose acceptance probability is (1 − 1/e)-optimal
multiplicatively. Moreover, it can be computed in time almost linear with size of
domain of a single token. Using this new draft selection algorithm, we develop a
new autoregressive sampling algorithm called SpecTr, which provides speedup in
decoding while ensuring that there is no quality degradation in the decoded output.
We experimentally demonstrate that for state-of-the-art large language models,
the proposed approach achieves a wall clock speedup of 2.13X, a further 1.37X
speedup over speculative decoding on standard benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Autoregressive language models have shown to achieve state-of-the-art results in several natural
language tasks [2, 5, 25, 26]. During inference, given a context xt :=x(1), x(2) . . . , x(t), an autoregressive model Mb generates successive tokens x(t+1), x(t+2), . . . via temperature sampling [1, 10],
where the next token x(t + 1) is drawn from the temperature-scaled distribution Mb (·|xt ). If the
temperature is zero, i.e., greedy decoding, the next token is determined by the maximum likelihood
method i.e., x(t + 1) = arg maxx∈Ω Mb (x|xt ), where Ω is the domain of a single token also referred
to as the vocabulary. The sampling approach can be further combined with other sampling primitives
such as nucleus sampling [16] and top-k sampling [9, 22].
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

