Training Fully Connected Neural Networks is
∃R-Complete

Daniel Bertschinger
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
daniel.bertschinger@inf.ethz.ch
Paul Jungeblut
Institute of Theoretical Informatics
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe, Germany
paul.jungeblut@kit.edu

Christoph Hertrich∗
Department of Mathematics
London School of Economics and Political Science
London, United Kingdom
c.hertrich@lse.ac.uk
Tillmann Miltzow
Department of Information and Computing Sciences
Utrecht University
Utrecht, The Netherlands
t.miltzow@uu.nl

Simon Weber
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
simon.weber@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We consider the algorithmic problem of finding the optimal weights and biases for
a two-layer fully connected neural network to fit a given set of data points, also
known as empirical risk minimization. We show that the problem is ∃R-complete.
This complexity class can be defined as the set of algorithmic problems that are
polynomial-time equivalent to finding real roots of a multivariate polynomial with
integer coefficients. Furthermore, we show that arbitrary algebraic numbers are
required as weights to be able to train some instances to optimality, even if all
data points are rational. Our result already applies to fully connected instances
with two inputs, two outputs, and one hidden layer of ReLU neurons. Thereby,
we strengthen a result by Abrahamsen, Kleist and Miltzow [NeurIPS 2021]. A
consequence of this is that a combinatorial search algorithm like the one by Arora,
Basu, Mianjy and Mukherjee [ICLR 2018] is impossible for networks with more
than one output dimension, unless NP = ∃R.

1

Introduction

The usage of neural networks in modern computer science is ubiquitous. They are arguably the
most powerful tool at our hands in machine learning [42]. One of the most fundamental algorithmic
questions asks for the algorithmic complexity to actually train a neural network. For arbitrary network
architectures, Abrahamsen, Kleist and Miltzow [3] showed that the problem is ∃R-complete already
for two-layer neural networks and linear activation functions. The complexity class ∃R is defined
as the family of algorithmic problems that are polynomial-time equivalent to finding real roots of
∗
Moved to Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium, and Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Germany, after
submission of this article.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

