Temporal Robustness against Data Poisoning

Soheil Feizi
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
sfeizi@umd.edu

Wenxiao Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
wwx@umd.edu

Abstract
Data poisoning considers cases when an adversary manipulates the behavior of
machine learning algorithms through malicious training data. Existing threat
models of data poisoning center around a single metric, the number of poisoned
samples. In consequence, if attackers can poison more samples than expected with
affordable overhead, as in many practical scenarios, they may be able to render
existing defenses ineffective in a short time. To address this issue, we leverage
timestamps denoting the birth dates of data, which are often available but neglected
in the past. Benefiting from these timestamps, we propose a temporal threat
model of data poisoning with two novel metrics, earliness and duration, which
respectively measure how long an attack started in advance and how long an attack
lasted. Using these metrics, we define the notions of temporal robustness against
data poisoning, providing a meaningful sense of protection even with unbounded
amounts of poisoned samples when the attacks are temporally bounded. We present
a benchmark with an evaluation protocol simulating continuous data collection
and periodic deployments of updated models, thus enabling empirical evaluation
of temporal robustness. Lastly, we develop and also empirically verify a baseline
defense, namely temporal aggregation, offering provable temporal robustness and
highlighting the potential of our temporal threat model for data poisoning.

1

Introduction

Many applications of machine learning rely on training data collected from potentially malicious
sources, which motivates the study of data poisoning. Data poisoning postulates an adversary who
manipulates the behavior of machine learning algorithms [11] through malicious training data.
A great variety of poisoning attacks have been proposed to challenge the reliability of machine learning
with unreliable data sources, including triggerless attacks [2, 22, 15, 30, 46, 1, 10] and backdoor
attacks [8, 35, 29, 43, 32, 45], depending on whether input modifications are required at inference
time. At the same time, diverse defenses are proposed, some of which aim at detecting/filtering
poisoned samples [33, 9, 25, 34, 37, 23, 44], some of which aim at robustifying models trained with
poisoned samples [41, 36, 27, 19, 12, 16, 13, 14, 6, 42, 7, 39, 26, 38, 40].
The number of poisoned samples is absolutely a key metric among existing threat models of data
poisoning, and defenses are typically designed for robustness against bounded numbers of poisoned
samples. However, the number of poisoned samples defenses may tolerate can be quite limited (e.g.
≤ 0.1% of the dataset size), as supported empirically by [3, 4, 32, 10, 5] and theoretically by [40].
Furthermore, an explicit bound on the number of poisoned samples is not available in many practical
scenarios and therefore it can be possible for attacks to render existing defenses ineffective in a
short time. For example, when data are scraped from the internet, an attacker can always post more
poisoned samples online; when data are contributed by users, a single attacker may pose itself as
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

