Align Your Prompts: Test-Time Prompting with
Distribution Alignment for Zero-Shot Generalization

Jameel Hassan1∗ Hanan Gani1∗ Noor Hussein1 Muhammad Uzair Khattak1
Muzammal Naseer1 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,2 Salman Khan1,3
1
Mohamed Bin Zayed University of AI 2 Linköping University 3 Australian National University
{jameel.hassan, hanan.ghani, noor.hussein, uzair.khattak
muzammal.naseer, fahad.khan, salman.khan} @mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
The promising zero-shot generalization of vision-language models such as CLIP
has led to their adoption using prompt learning for numerous downstream tasks.
Previous works have shown test-time prompt tuning using entropy minimization
to adapt text prompts for unseen domains. While effective, this overlooks the
key cause for performance degradation to unseen domains – distribution shift. In
this work, we explicitly handle this problem by aligning the out-of-distribution
(OOD) test sample statistics to those of the source data using prompt tuning. We
use a single test sample to adapt multi-modal prompts at test time by minimizing
the feature distribution shift to bridge the gap in the test domain. Evaluating
against the domain generalization benchmark, our method improves zero-shot top1 accuracy beyond existing prompt-learning techniques, with a 3.08% improvement
over the baseline MaPLe. In cross-dataset generalization with unseen categories
across 10 datasets, our method improves consistently across all datasets compared
to the existing state-of-the-art. Our source code and models are available at
https://jameelhassan.github.io/promptalign/.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have outperformed humans in numerous visual recognition tasks
[12, 8]. However, their impressive performance generally holds in the case when test data originate
from the same distribution as the training data. In most real-world applications, the train and test data
distributions can significantly differ due to factors such as natural variations or changes in sensing
equipment. The sensitivity of models to such unseen distributional shifts during inference results in
their performance degradation [14, 31, 29]. A plethora of previous works [36, 39, 37] have explored
test-time adaptation as a mechanism to overcome the crucial problem of distribution shift in test data.
However, test-time adaptation has been minimally explored for the increasingly popular foundation
models, which are large DNNs trained on massive vision-language datasets [30, 17, 44, 40, 41].
Foundation models emerging at the intersection of various modalities such as vision, language, and
audio, are proving to be effective in numerous downstream applications. Among these models, VisionLanguage (V-L) model CLIP (Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining) [30] has been pre-trained
on large-scale image-text pairs from the web, and can generalize well to zero-shot recognition tasks.
The CLIP model has parallel vision and language encoding branches and the similarities between
the embeddings obtained from both the branches are used to classify an input image. At inference, a
handcrafted prompt such as ‘a photo of a <CLS>’ is used as a query for the text encoder. However,
adapting CLIP efficiently to specific downstream tasks is still a challenging problem. Naively finetuning such models poses the risk of losing their inherent generalization abilities [21]. Instead, recent
*

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

