Visual Programming for
Text-to-Image Generation and Evaluation

Jaemin Cho

Abhay Zala
Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill
{jmincho, aszala, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu
https://vp-t2i.github.io

Abstract
As large language models have demonstrated impressive performance in many domains, recent works have adopted language models (LMs) as controllers of visual
modules for vision-and-language tasks. While existing work focuses on equipping
LMs with visual understanding, we propose two novel interpretable/explainable
visual programming frameworks for text-to-image (T2I) generation and evaluation.
First, we introduce VPG EN, an interpretable step-by-step T2I generation framework that decomposes T2I generation into three steps: object/count generation,
layout generation, and image generation. We employ an LM to handle the first
two steps (object/count generation and layout generation), by finetuning it on textlayout pairs. Our step-by-step T2I generation framework provides stronger spatial
control than end-to-end models, the dominant approach for this task. Furthermore,
we leverage the world knowledge of pretrained LMs, overcoming the limitation of
previous layout-guided T2I works that can only handle predefined object classes.
We demonstrate that our VPG EN has improved control in counts/spatial relations/scales of objects than state-of-the-art T2I generation models. Second, we
introduce VPE VAL, an interpretable and explainable evaluation framework for
T2I generation based on visual programming. Unlike previous T2I evaluations
with a single scoring model that is accurate in some skills but unreliable in others,
VPE VAL produces evaluation programs that invoke a set of visual modules that
are experts in different skills, and also provides visual+textual explanations of
the evaluation results. Our analysis shows that VPE VAL provides a more humancorrelated evaluation for skill-specific and open-ended prompts than widely used
single model-based evaluation. We hope that our work encourages future progress
on interpretable/explainable generation and evaluation for T2I models.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable performance on many natural language processing tasks, such as question answering, summarization, and story generation [1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 8].
Recent works have shown that LLMs can also tackle certain vision-and-language tasks such as visual
question answering and visual grounding, by generating visual programs that can control external visual modules and combine their outputs to get the final response [9; 10; 11; 12; 13; 14; 15]. However,
no prior works have combined LLMs and different visual modules for the challenging text-to-image
(T2I) generation task. Our work proposes two novel interpretable/explainable visual programming
(VP) frameworks combining LLMs and visual modules for T2I generation and evaluation.
First, we introduce VPG EN (Sec. 3), a new step-by-step T2I generation framework that decomposes
the T2I task into three steps (object/count generation, layout generation, and image generation), where
each step is implemented as a module and executed in an interpretable generation program, as shown
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

