User-Level Differential Privacy
With Few Examples Per User

Badih Ghazi
Google Research
Mountain View, CA, US
badihghazi@gmail.com
Pasin Manurangsi
Google Research
Bangkok, Thailand
pasin@google.com

Pritish Kamath
Google Research
Mountain View, CA, US
pritish@alum.mit.edu
Raghu Meka
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA, US
raghum@cs.ucla.edu

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
Mountain View, CA, US
ravi.k53@gmail.com
Chiyuan Zhang
Google Research
Mountain View, CA, US
chiyuan@google.com

Abstract
Previous work on user-level differential privacy (DP) [GKM21, BGH+ 23] obtained
generic algorithms that work for various learning tasks. However, their focus was
on the example-rich regime, where the users have so many examples that each user
could themselves solve the problem. In this work we consider the example-scarce
regime, where each user has only a few examples, and obtain the following results:
• For approximate-DP, we give a generic transformation of any item-level DP
algorithm to a user-level DP algorithm.
Roughly speaking, the latter gives a
√
(multiplicative) savings of Oε,δ ( m) in terms of the number of users required
for achieving the same utility, where m is the number of examples per user. This
algorithm, while recovering most known bounds for specific problems, also gives
new bounds, e.g., for PAC learning.
• For pure-DP, we present a simple technique for adapting the exponential mechanism [MT07] to the user-level setting. This gives new bounds for a variety
of tasks, such as private PAC learning, hypothesis selection, and distribution
learning. For some of these problems, we show that our bounds are near-optimal.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) [DMNS06, DKM+ 06] has become a widely popular notion of privacy
quantifying a model’s leakage of personal user information. It has seen a variety of industrial
and governmental deployments including [Gre16, App17, DKY17, Abo18, RE19, TM20]. Many
fundamental private machine learning algorithms in literature have been devised under the (implicit)
assumption that each user only contributes a single example to the training dataset, which we will
refer to as item-level DP. In practice, each user often provides multiple examples to the training
data. In this user-level DP setting, the output of the algorithm is required to remain (approximately)
statistically indistinguishable even when all the items belonging to a single user are substituted
(formal definitions below). Given such a strong (and preferable) privacy requirement, it is highly
non-trivial for the algorithm to take advantage of the increased number of examples. Several recent
studies have explored this question and showed—for a wide variety of tasks—that, while challenging,
this is possible [LSY+ 20, LSA+ 21, GKM21, ILPS22, BGH+ 23].
To discuss further, let us define some notation. We use n to denote the number of users and m
to denote the number of examples per user. We use Z to denote the universe of possible samples.
We write x = (x1,1 , . . . , x1,m , x2,1 , . . . , xn,m ) ∈ Z nm to denote the input to our algorithm, and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

