IMPRESS: Evaluating the Resilience of Imperceptible
Perturbations Against Unauthorized Data Usage in
Diffusion-Based Generative AI
Bochuan Cao
The Pennsylvania State University
bccao@psu.edu
Ting Wang
Stony Brook University
inbox.ting@gmail.com

Changjiang Li
Stony Brook University
meet.cjli@gmail.com
Jinyuan Jia
The Pennsylvania State University
jinyuan@psu.edu

Bo Li
University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign
lbo@illinois.edu

Jinghui Chen
The Pennsylvania State University
jzc5917@psu.edu

Abstract
Diffusion-based image generation models, such as Stable Diffusion or DALL·E 2,
are able to learn from given images and generate high-quality samples following
the guidance from prompts. For instance, they can be used to create artistic images
that mimic the style of an artist based on his/her original artworks or to maliciously
edit the original images for fake content. However, such ability also brings serious
ethical issues without proper authorization from the owner of the original images. In
response, several attempts have been made to protect the original images from such
unauthorized data usage by adding imperceptible perturbations, which are designed
to mislead the diffusion model and make it unable to properly generate new samples.
In this work, we introduce a perturbation purification platform, named IMPRESS,
to evaluate the effectiveness of imperceptible perturbations as a protective measure.
IMPRESS is based on the key observation that imperceptible perturbations could
lead to a perceptible inconsistency between the original image and the diffusionreconstructed image, which can be used to devise a new optimization strategy for
purifying the image, which may weaken the protection of the original image from
unauthorized data usage (e.g., style mimicking, malicious editing). The proposed
IMPRESS platform offers a comprehensive evaluation of several contemporary
protection methods, and can be used as an evaluation platform for future protection
methods.

1

Introduction

Diffusion-based image generation models, e.g., Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022b) and DALLE 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), have gained increasing attention due to their exceptional performance in
synthesizing high-quality samples by leveraging given images. Despite their superior performance,
existing studies (Shan et al., 2023) showed that they could be abused to generate new images without
proper authorization from the original data owner. For instance, they could be used to learn from
the original artworks of a specific artist and generate artistic images that mimic his/her style without
authorization, which may lead to violation of intellectual property or copyrights (Dixit, 2023; Joseph
Saveri Law Firm LLP, 2023; Edwards, 2022). They can also be used to maliciously edit the images
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

