DiffuseBot: Breeding Soft Robots With
Physics-Augmented Generative Diffusion Models
Tsun-Hsuan Wang1,⇤, Juntian Zheng2,3 , Pingchuan Ma1 , Yilun Du1 , Byungchul Kim1 ,
Andrew Spielberg1,4 , Joshua B. Tenenbaum1 , Chuang Gan1,3,5,† , Daniela Rus1,†
1
MIT, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 4 Harvard, 5 UMass Amherst
https://diffusebot.github.io/

Abstract
Nature evolves creatures with a high complexity of morphological and behavioral
intelligence, meanwhile computational methods lag in approaching that diversity
and efficacy. Co-optimization of artificial creatures’ morphology and control in
silico shows promise for applications in physical soft robotics and virtual character
creation; such approaches, however, require developing new learning algorithms
that can reason about function atop pure structure. In this paper, we present DiffuseBot, a physics-augmented diffusion model that generates soft robot morphologies
capable of excelling in a wide spectrum of tasks. DiffuseBot bridges the gap
between virtually generated content and physical utility by (i) augmenting the
diffusion process with a physical dynamical simulation which provides a certificate
of performance, and ii) introducing a co-design procedure that jointly optimizes
physical design and control by leveraging information about physical sensitivities
from differentiable simulation. We showcase a range of simulated and fabricated
robots along with their capabilities.

1

Introduction

Designing dynamical virtual creatures or real-world cyberphysical systems requires reasoning about
complex trade-offs in system geometry, components, and behavior. But, what if designing such systems could be made simpler, or even automated wholesale from high-level functional specifications?
Freed to focus on higher-level tasks, engineers could explore, prototype, and iterate more quickly,
focusing more on understanding the problem, and find novel, more performant designs. We present
DiffuseBot , a first step toward efficient automatic robotic and virtual creature content creation, as
an attempt at closing the stubborn gap between the wide diversity and capability of Nature vis-a-vis
evolution, and the reiterative quality of modern soft robotics.
Specifically, we leverage diffusion-based algorithms as a means of efficiently and generatively
co-designing soft robot morphology and control for target tasks. Compared with with previous approaches, DiffuseBot ’s learning-based approach maintains evolutionary algorithms’ ability to search
over diverse forms while exploiting the efficient nature of gradient-based optimization. DiffuseBot is
made possible by the revolutionary progress of AI-driven content generation, which is now able to
synthesize convincing media such as images, audio, and animations, conditioned on human input.
However, other than raw statistical modeling, these methods are typically task- and physics-oblivious,
and tend to provide no fundamental reasoning about the performance of generated outputs. We
provide the first method for bridging the gap between diffusion processes and the morphological
design of cyberphysical systems, guided by physical simulation, enabling the computational creative
design of virtual and physical creatures.
⇤

This work was supported by the NSF EFRI Program (Grant No. 1830901), DSO grant DSOCO2107,
DARPA Fellowship Grant HR00112110007, and MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. † indicates equal advising.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

