Evaluating Post-hoc Explanations for Graph Neural
Networks via Robustness Analysis

Junfeng Fang1 , Wei Liu1† , Yuan Gao1 , Zemin Liu2 , An Zhang2 ,
Xiang Wang1* , Xiangnan He1*
1
University of Science and Technology of China,
2
National University of Singapore
{fjf,lw0118,yuangao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{zeminliu,an_zhang}@nus.edu.sg,
{xiangwang1223,xiangnanhe}@gmail.com

Abstract
This work studies the evaluation of explaining graph neural networks (GNNs),
which is crucial to the credibility of post-hoc explainability in practical usage.
Conventional evaluation metrics, and even explanation methods — which mainly
follow the paradigm of feeding the explanatory subgraph to the model and measuring output difference — mostly suffer from the notorious out-of-distribution
(OOD) issue. Hence, in this work, we endeavor to confront this issue by introducing a novel evaluation metric, termed OOD-resistant Adversarial Robustness
(OAR). Specifically, we draw inspiration from adversarial robustness and evaluate post-hoc explanation subgraphs by calculating their robustness under attack. On top of that, an elaborate OOD reweighting block is inserted into the
pipeline to confine the evaluation process to the original data distribution. For
applications involving large datasets, we further devise a Simplified version of
OAR (SimOAR), which achieves a significant improvement in computational
efficiency at the cost of a small amount of performance. Extensive empirical
studies validate the effectiveness of our OAR and SimOAR. Code is available at
https://github.com/MangoKiller/SimOAR_OAR.

1

Introduction

Post-hoc explainability has manifested its extraordinary power to explain graph neural networks
(GNNs) [1, 2, 3, 4]. Given a GNN-generated prediction for a graph, it aims to identify an explanatory
subgraph, which is expected to best support the prediction and make the decision-making process
more credible, fair, and understandable [5, 6, 7]. However, the reliable evaluation of explanation
quality remains a key challenge. As a primary solution, Human supervision seeks to justify whether
the explanations align with human knowledge [8, 9], but it is often too subjective, thus hardly
providing quantifiable assessments. Another straightforward solution is quantitatively measuring
the agreement between the generated and ground-truth explanations, such as Precision and Recall
[10, 11]. Unfortunately, access to the ground truth is usually unavailable and labor-extensive, thereby
limiting the scope of evaluations based on this method.
Recently, a compromised paradigm — Feature Removal [12, 13] — has been prevailing to quantitatively evaluate the explanation’s predictive power as compared to the full graph, without exploiting
the human supervision and ground truth. The basic idea is to first remove the unimportant features
and feed the remaining part (i.e., explanatory subgraph) into the GNN, and then observe how the
prediction changes. The prediction discrepancy instantiates Accuracy [8] and Fidelity [9] of the
†

Liu Wei is equal contribution to this paper.
Xiang Wang and Xiangnan He are also affiliated with Institute of Artificial
Intelligence, Institute of Dataspace, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center.
* Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

