Adversarially Robust Learning with Uncertain
Perturbation Sets
Tosca Lechner
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, tlechner@uwaterloo.ca
Vinayak Pathak
Layer 6 AI, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, vinayak@layer6.ai
Ruth Urner
York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, uruth@eecs.yorku.ca

Abstract
In many real-world settings exact perturbation sets to be used by an adversary
are not plausibly available to a learner. While prior literature has studied both
scenarios with completely known and completely unknown perturbation sets, we
propose an in-between setting of learning with respect to a class of perturbation sets.
We show that in this setting we can improve on previous results with completely
unknown perturbation sets, while still addressing the concerns of not having perfect
knowledge of these sets in real life. In particular, we give the first positive results for
the learnability of infinite Littlestone classes when having access to a perfect-attack
oracle. We also consider a setting of learning with abstention, where predictions
are considered robustness violations, only when the wrong label prediction is made
within the perturbation set. We show there are classes for which perturbation-set
unaware learning without query access is possible, but abstention is required.

1

Introduction

Adversarial perturbations, imperceivably small manipulations to input instances that cause unexpected
failures of learned predictors, pose significant safety concerns for their employment. The phenomenon,
first exposed a decade ago in image classification tasks [Szegedy et al., 2014], has since received
substantial attention, both in the practical and theoretical machine learning research communities.
Studies in both lines of research often skip over the question of how to suitably model “imperceivable
perturbations” and rather investigate how to defend against various (fixed) types of attacks. In
theoretical studies, this is typically modeled by defining an adversarial loss that, in addition to
misclassification, penalizes the existence of a perturbed instance on which a classifier assigns a
different label. This type of loss definition then crucially depends on a given perturbation type, that is
some function u : X → 2X that assigns every domain instance a set of points that would be viewed
as an admissible perturbation (often balls of some radius with respect to some norm are considered).
However, in most realistic settings, exact perturbation sets to be used by an adversary are not plausibly
available to a learner. Moreover, it has been shown that encouraging robustness with respect to a
perturbation type that is not suitable for the task easily degrades classification accuracy [Tsipras et al.,
2019, Zhang et al., 2019, Yang et al., 2020]. In response, some work has then explored the question
of learnability when the perturbation type is not known at all in advance [Montasser et al., 2021],
but information about possible perturbations can be accessed through queries. It is not difficult to be
convinced though that without any restrictions or knowledge of the perturbations to be used, robust
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

