Effective Robustness against Natural Distribution
Shifts for Models with Different Training Data

Zhouxing Shi∗
UCLA
zshi@cs.ucla.edu

Nicholas Carlini
Google Research
ncarlini@google.com

Ludwig Schmidt
University of Washington
schmidt@cs.washington.edu
Alex Beutel∗
OpenAI
alexb@openai.com

Ananth Balashankar
Google Research
ananthbshankar@google.com
Cho-Jui Hsieh
Google, UCLA
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu
Yao Qin
UCSB, Google Research
yaoqin@ucsb.edu

Abstract
“Effective robustness” measures the extra out-of-distribution (OOD) robustness
beyond what can be predicted from the in-distribution (ID) performance. Existing
effective robustness evaluations typically use a single test set such as ImageNet
to evaluate the ID accuracy. This becomes problematic when evaluating models
trained on different data distributions, e.g., comparing models trained on ImageNet
vs. zero-shot language-image pre-trained models trained on LAION. In this paper,
we propose a new evaluation metric to evaluate and compare the effective robustness
of models trained on different data. To do this, we control for the accuracy on
multiple ID test sets that cover the training distributions for all the evaluated models.
Our new evaluation metric provides a better estimate of effective robustness when
there are models with different training data. It may also explain the surprising
effective robustness gains of zero-shot CLIP-like models exhibited in prior works
that used ImageNet as the only ID test set, while the gains diminish under our new
evaluation. Additional artifacts including interactive visualizations are provided at
https://shizhouxing.github.io/effective-robustness.

1

Introduction

Robustness against distribution shifts is important for machine learning models to work reliably
across various environments. For natural distribution shifts on image classification datasets, Taori
et al. (2020) proposed the notion of effective robustness to control for in-distribution (ID) accuracy
when evaluating out-of-distribution (OOD) accuracy. Following a long line of work that has found
a strong correlation between ID and OOD accuracy on many test sets (Recht et al., 2019; Yadav &
Bottou, 2019), effective robustness allows researchers to assess whether an apparently improved
OOD accuracy is a result of effectively improved robustness or is simply an expected outcome of
enhanced ID accuracy.
Unfortunately, the current definition of effective robustness has a subtle limitation: it requires a fixed
ID test set, which is typically ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) when using ImageNet-like OOD test sets
∗

Work done while at Google.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

