Diffusion Models and Semi-Supervised Learners
Benefit Mutually with Few Labels

Zebin You1,2∗, Yong Zhong1,2∗, Fan Bao3 , Jiacheng Sun4 , Chongxuan Li1,2†, Jun Zhu3
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
3
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, THU-Bosch ML Center, Tsinghua University
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
zebin@ruc.edu.cn; yongzhong@ruc.edu.cn; bf19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
sunjiacheng1@huawei.com; chongxuanli@ruc.edu.cn; dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In an effort to further advance semi-supervised generative and classification tasks,
we propose a simple yet effective training strategy called dual pseudo training
(DPT), built upon strong semi-supervised learners and diffusion models. DPT
operates in three stages: training a classifier on partially labeled data to predict
pseudo-labels; training a conditional generative model using these pseudo-labels
to generate pseudo images; and retraining the classifier with a mix of real and
pseudo images. Empirically, DPT consistently achieves SOTA performance of
semi-supervised generation and classification across various settings. In particular,
with one or two labels per class, DPT achieves a Fréchet Inception Distance
(FID) score of 3.08 or 2.52 on ImageNet 256 × 256. Besides, DPT outperforms
competitive semi-supervised baselines substantially on ImageNet classification
tasks, achieving top-1 accuracies of 59.0 (+2.8), 69.5 (+3.0), and 74.4 (+2.0) with
one, two, or five labels per class, respectively. Notably, our results demonstrate that
diffusion can generate realistic images with only a few labels (e.g., < 0.1%) and
generative augmentation remains viable for semi-supervised classification. Our
code is available at https://github.com/ML-GSAI/DPT.

1

Introduction

Diffusion probabilistic models [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] have achieved excellent performance in image
generation. However, empirical evidence has shown that labeled data is indispensable for training
such models [8, 4]. Indeed, lacking labeled data leads to much lower performance of the generative
model. For instance, the representative work (i.e., ADM) [4] achieves an FID of 10.94 on fully
labeled ImageNet 256 × 256, while an FID of 26.21 without labels.
To improve the performance of diffusion models without utilizing labeled data, prior work [8, 9]
initially conducts clustering and subsequently trains diffusion models conditioned on the cluster
indices. Although these methods can, in some instances, exhibit superior performance over supervised
models on low-resolution data, such phenomena have not yet been observed on high-resolution data
(e.g., on ImageNet 256 × 256, an FID of 5.19, compared to an FID of 3.31 achieved by supervised
models, see Appendix C). Besides, cluster indices may not always align with ground truth labels,
making it hard to control semantics in samples. Compared to unsupervised methods, semi-supervised
generative models [10, 11, 12] often perform much better and provide the same way to control the
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to Chongxuan Li.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

