Cross-Domain Policy Adaptation via Value-Guided
Data Filtering

Kang Xu1 2∗

Chenjia Bai2†
Zhen Wang4

1

Fudan University

2

Xiaoteng Ma3
Xuelong Li2 4

Dong Wang2

Bin Zhao2 4

Wei Li1†

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
4
Northwestern Polytechnical University

3

Tsinghua University

Abstract
Generalizing policies across different domains with dynamics mismatch poses a
significant challenge in reinforcement learning. For example, a robot learns the
policy in a simulator, but when it is deployed in the real world, the dynamics of the
environment may be different. Given the source and target domain with dynamics
mismatch, we consider the online dynamics adaptation problem, in which case the
agent can access sufficient source domain data while online interactions with the
target domain are limited. Existing research has attempted to solve the problem
from the dynamics discrepancy perspective. In this work, we reveal the limitations
of these methods and explore the problem from the value difference perspective
via a novel insight on the value consistency across domains. Specifically, we
present the Value-Guided Data Filtering (VGDF) algorithm, which selectively
shares transitions from the source domain based on the proximity of paired value
targets across the two domains. Empirical results on various environments with
kinematic and morphology shifts demonstrate that our method achieves superior
performance compared to prior approaches.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has demonstrated the ability to train highly effective policies with
complex behaviors through extensive interactions with the environment [62, 59, 2]. However, in
many situations, extensive interactions are infeasible due to the data collection costs and the potential
safety hazards associated with domains such as robotics [33] and medical treatments [54]. To address
the issue, one approach is to interact with a surrogate environment, such as a simulator, and then
transfer the learned policy to the original domain. However, an unbiased simulator may be unavailable
due to the complex system dynamics or unexpected disturbances in the target scenario, leading to a
dynamics mismatch. Such a mismatch is crucial for the sim-to-real problem in robotics [1, 38, 51]
and may cause performance degradation of the learned policy in the target domain. In this work, we
focus on the dynamics adaptation problem, where we aim to train a well-performing policy for the
target domain, given the source domain with the dynamics mismatch.
Recent research has tackled the adaptation over dynamics mismatch through various techniques, such
as domain randomization [56, 53, 45], system identification [77], or simulator calibration [8], that
require domain knowledge or privileged access to the physical system. Other methods have explored
∗
†

Part of this work was done during Kang Xu’s internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
Correspondence to Chenjia Bai <baichenjia@pjlab.org.cn>, Wei Li <fd_liwei@fudan.edu.cn>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

