Multi-task Representation Learning for Pure
Exploration in Bilinear Bandits

Subhojyoti Mukherjee
ECE Department
UW-Madison
Wisconsin, Madison
smukherjee27@wisc.edu

Qiaomin Xie
ISyE Department
UW-Madison
Wisconsin, Madison

Josiah P. Hanna
CS Department
UW-Madison
Wisconsin, Madison

Robert Nowak
ECE Department
UW-Madison
Wisconsin, Madison

Abstract
We study multi-task representation learning for the problem of pure exploration
in bilinear bandits. In bilinear bandits, an action takes the form of a pair of arms
from two different entity types and the reward is a bilinear function of the known
feature vectors of the arms. In the multi-task bilinear bandit problem, we aim
to find optimal actions for multiple tasks that share a common low-dimensional
linear representation. The objective is to leverage this characteristic to expedite the
process of identifying the best pair of arms for all tasks. We propose the algorithm
GOBLIN that uses an experimental design approach to optimize sample allocations
for learning the global representation as well as minimize the number of samples
needed to identify the optimal pair of arms in individual tasks. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first study to give sample complexity analysis for pure
exploration in bilinear bandits with shared representation. Our results demonstrate
that by learning the shared representation across tasks, we achieve significantly
improved sample complexity compared to the traditional approach of solving tasks
independently.

1

Introduction

Bilinear bandits (Jun et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2021; Kang et al., 2022) are an important class of
sequential decision-making problems. In bilinear bandits (as opposed to the standard linear bandit
setting) we are given a pair of arms xt ∈ Rd1 and zt ∈ Rd2 at every round t and the interaction
of this pair of arms with a low-rank hidden parameter, Θ∗ ∈ Rd1 ×d2 generates the noisy feedback
(reward) rt = x⊤
t Θ∗ zt + ηt . The ηt is random 1-subGaussian noise.
A lot of real-world applications exhibit the above bilinear feedback structure, particularly applications
that involve selecting pairs of items and evaluating their compatibility. For example, in a drug
discovery application, scientists may want to determine whether a particular (drug, protein) pair
interacts in the desired way (Luo et al., 2017). Likewise, an online dating service might match a pair
of people and gather feedback about their compatibility (Shen et al., 2023). A clothing website’s
recommendation system may suggest a pair of items (top, bottom) for a customer based on their
likelihood of matching (Reyes et al., 2021). In all of these scenarios, the two items are considered as
a single unit, and the system must utilize available feature vectors (xt , zt ) to learn which features of
the pairs are most indicative of positive feedback in order to make effective recommendations. All
the previous works in this setting (Jun et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2021; Kang et al., 2022) exclusively
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

