SUPA: A Lightweight Diagnostic Simulator for
Machine Learning in Particle Physics

Atul Kumar Sinha
University of Geneva
atul.sinha@unige.ch

Daniele Paliotta
University of Geneva
daniele.paliotta@unige.ch

John A. Raine
University of Geneva, CERN
johnny.raine@cern.ch

Bálint Máté
University of Geneva
balint.mate@unige.ch

Tobias Golling
University of Geneva, CERN
tobias.golling@cern.ch

François Fleuret
University of Geneva
francois.fleuret@unige.ch

Abstract
Deep learning methods have gained popularity in high energy physics for fast modeling of particle showers in detectors. Detailed simulation frameworks such as the
gold standard G EANT 4 are computationally intensive, and current deep generative
architectures work on discretized, lower resolution versions of the detailed simulation. The development of models that work at higher spatial resolutions is currently
hindered by the complexity of the full simulation data, and by the lack of simpler,
more interpretable benchmarks. Our contribution is SUPA, the SUrrogate PArticle
propagation simulator, an algorithm and software package for generating data by
simulating simplified particle propagation, scattering and shower development in
matter. The generation is extremely fast and easy to use compared to G EANT 4,
but still exhibits the key characteristics and challenges of the detailed simulation.
The proposed simulator generates thousands of particle showers per second on
a desktop machine, a speed up of up to 6 orders of magnitudes over G EANT 4,
and stores detailed geometric information about the shower propagation. SUPA
provides much greater flexibility for setting initial conditions and defining multiple benchmarks for the development of models. Moreover, interpreting particle
showers as point clouds creates a connection to geometric machine learning and
provides challenging and fundamentally new datasets for the field.

1

Introduction

In order to understand the fundamental building blocks of nature, High Energy Physics (HEP)
experiments involve highly energetic particle collisions. These collisions cause particles to decay,
and the identification of the resulting decay particles is of key importance to develop and confirm
new physics/theories. This is enabled through an electromagnetic or hadronic calorimeter. As
particles interact with the calorimeter, they split into multiple other particles, forming a particle
shower. The nature of the generated shower depends on the specific material and geometry of the
calorimeter, which are carefully selected and driven by physics theory and pratical considerations.
The generated shower deposits energy in active layers of the calorimeters, and provides energy and
location measurements from the particles produced in the cascade.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

