Neural Priming for Sample-Efficient Adaptation

Matthew Wallingford∗ † Vivek Ramanujan∗†
Alex Fang
Aditya Kusupati† Roozbeh Mottaghi† Aniruddha Kembhavi⋄
Ludwig Schmidt†⋄‡ Ali Farhadi†
†
University of Washington ⋄ PRIOR, Allen Institute for AI ‡ LAION
{mcw244,ramanv}@cs.washington.edu
†

Abstract
We propose Neural Priming, a technique for adapting large pretrained models
to distribution shifts and downstream tasks given few or no labeled examples.
Presented with class names or unlabeled test samples, Neural Priming enables
the model to recall and conditions its parameters on relevant data seen throughout pretraining, thereby priming it for the test distribution. Neural Priming can
be performed at inference, even for pretraining datasets as large as LAION-2B.
Performing lightweight updates on the recalled data significantly improves accuracy across a variety of distribution shift and transfer learning benchmarks.
Concretely, in the zero-shot setting, we see a 2.45% improvement in accuracy on
ImageNet and 3.81% accuracy improvement on average across standard transfer
learning benchmarks. Further, using Neural Priming at inference to adapt to distribution shift, we see a 1.41% accuracy improvement on ImageNetV2. These
results demonstrate the effectiveness of Neural Priming in addressing the challenge of limited labeled data and changing distributions. Code is available at
https://github.com/RAIVNLab/neural-priming.

1

Introduction

Humans have a vast store of prior experience which we draw on to flexibly perform a diverse range
of tasks [20, 5, 4, 12]. While engaging in an activity, we naturally retrieve relevant information
or schema in a cognitive phenomena known as Priming [34]. This process ensures that necessary
knowledge is readily accessible in memory, leading to enhanced performance for the task at hand
[43]. Pre-trained, general-purpose models such as CLIP [40] and ALIGN [23] have extensive prior
knowledge learned from large-scale, diverse datasets. These datasets seek to capture all natural
variation in real data within their distribution. Can these models also benefit from something like
priming? We observe that models trained even on the largest of such datasets often substantially
improve in performance when fine-tuned on task-specific data. This begs the question of what the
model learns from fine-tuning on the target dataset, if it already trained on many similar examples
during pre-training.
We speculate that the effect of fine-tuning a pre-trained model on task-specific data is similar to that of
priming. Given the sheer size and diversity of the pre-training dataset it becomes challenging for the
model to find a consistent solution that is optimal for all subsets of the data. This becomes particularly
evident for open-vocabulary models such as CLIP, where multiple natural language descriptions can
correspond to a single image, highlighting the challenge of accommodating diverse interpretations.
We hypothesize that training on the downstream dataset re-aligns the model to the specific objective.
With this in consideration, we propose Neural Priming. Specifically, Neural Priming recalls a
subset of the pre-training data similar to the target distribution, re-aligns the natural language
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

