Generating Behaviorally Diverse Policies with Latent
Diffusion Models
Shashank Hegde∗
University of Southern California
khegde@usc.edu

Sumeet Batra ∗
University of Southern California
ssbatra@usc.edu

K.R. Zentner
University of Southern California
kzentner@usc.edu

Gaurav S. Sukhatme†
University of Southern California
gaurav@usc.edu

Abstract
Recent progress in Quality Diversity Reinforcement Learning (QD-RL) has enabled
learning a collection of behaviorally diverse, high performing policies. However,
these methods typically involve storing thousands of policies, which results in
high space-complexity and poor scaling to additional behaviors. Condensing the
archive into a single model while retaining the performance and coverage of the
original collection of policies has proved challenging. In this work, we propose
using diffusion models to distill the archive into a single generative model over
policy parameters. We show that our method achieves a compression ratio of 13x
while recovering 98% of the original rewards and 89% of the original humanoid
archive coverage. Further, the conditioning mechanism of diffusion models allows
for flexibly selecting and sequencing behaviors, including using language.
Project website: https://sites.google.com/view/policydiffusion/home.

1

Introduction

Quality Diversity (QD) is an emerging field in which collections of high performing, behaviorally
diverse solutions are trained. QD methods perform what is often referred to as illumination or
divergent search, in that they attempt to illuminate the search space rather than optimizing towards a
single point. QD algorithms have shown success in learning robot controllers capable of adapting
to damage, solving hard exploration problems, and generating diverse scenarios in the procedural
content generation (PCG) domain [5] [7] [2]. The foundational method, Map Elites [21], maintains
an archive of solutions where each cell in the archive corresponds to a solution with a score given
by the task objective f , and behavior specified by measure functions m1 ...mk , which map to a
low dimensional behavior space. The measure functions m1 ...mk specify which cell each solution
belongs to in the k dimensional archive. New solutions are evolved using evolutionary methods and
inserted into the archive only if they outperform existing ones with the same behavior.
A promising subclass of methods (Quality Diversity Reinforcement Learning (QD-RL)) combines
the optimization capabilities of RL with the illumination capabilities of QD, to find high performing
and diverse solutions. In the robotics domain where the environment and the objective-measure
functions f and m are assumed to be non-differentiable, RL can be leveraged to estimate the gradients
of f and/or m and provide a powerful performance improvement operator on the solutions in the
*

Equal contribution
Sukhatme holds concurrent appointments as a Professor at USC and as an Amazon Scholar. This paper
describes work performed at USC and is not associated with Amazon.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

