Correlative Information Maximization: A Biologically
Plausible Approach to Supervised Deep Neural
Networks without Weight Symmetry

Bariscan Bozkurt1,2, 3 Cengiz Pehlevan4,5 Alper T. Erdogan2, 3
1
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, UCL, United Kingdom
2
KUIS AI Center, Koc University, Turkey 3 EEE Department, Koc University, Turkey
4
John A. Paulson School of Engineering & Applied Sciences and Center for
Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, 02138 MA, USA
5
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence
{bbozkurt15, alperdogan}@ku.edu.tr cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
The backpropagation algorithm has experienced remarkable success in training
large-scale artificial neural networks; however, its biological plausibility has been
strongly criticized, and it remains an open question whether the brain employs
supervised learning mechanisms akin to it. Here, we propose correlative information maximization between layer activations as an alternative normative approach
to describe the signal propagation in biological neural networks in both forward
and backward directions. This new framework addresses many concerns about the
biological-plausibility of conventional artificial neural networks and the backpropagation algorithm. The coordinate descent-based optimization of the corresponding
objective, combined with the mean square error loss function for fitting labeled
supervision data, gives rise to a neural network structure that emulates a more biologically realistic network of multi-compartment pyramidal neurons with dendritic
processing and lateral inhibitory neurons. Furthermore, our approach provides a
natural resolution to the weight symmetry problem between forward and backward
signal propagation paths, a significant critique against the plausibility of the conventional backpropagation algorithm. This is achieved by leveraging two alternative,
yet equivalent forms of the correlative mutual information objective. These alternatives intrinsically lead to forward and backward prediction networks without weight
symmetry issues, providing a compelling solution to this long-standing challenge.

1

Introduction

How biological neural networks learn in a supervised manner has long been an open problem.
The backpropagation algorithm [1], with its remarkable success in training large-scale artificial
neural networks and intuitive structure, has inspired proposals for how biologically plausible neural
networks can perform the necessary efficient credit-assignment for supervised learning in deep neural
architectures [2]. Nonetheless, certain aspects of the backpropagation algorithm, combined with
the oversimplified nature of artificial neurons, have been viewed as impediments to proposals rooted
in this inspiration [3].
One of the primary critiques regarding the biological plausibility of the backpropagation algorithm
is the existence of a parallel backward path for backpropagating error from the output towards the
input, which uses the same synaptic weights as the forward path [1, 2, 4]. Although such weight
transport, or weight symmetry, is deemed highly unlikely based on experimental evidence [3, 4],
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

