Divide, Evaluate, and Refine: Evaluating and
Improving Text-to-Image Alignment with
Iterative VQA Feedback

1

Jaskirat Singh1
Liang Zheng1,2
2
The Australian National University
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
https://1jsingh.github.io/divide-evaluate-and-refine

Abstract
The field of text-conditioned image generation has made unparalleled progress with
the recent advent of latent diffusion models. While remarkable, as the complexity
of given text input increases, the state-of-the-art diffusion models may still fail
in generating images which accurately convey the semantics of the given prompt.
Furthermore, it has been observed that such misalignments are often left undetected
by pretrained multi-modal models such as CLIP. To address these problems, in
this paper we explore a simple yet effective decompositional approach towards
both evaluation and improvement of text-to-image alignment. In particular, we
first introduce a Decompositional-Alignment-Score which given a complex prompt
decomposes it into a set of disjoint assertions. The alignment of each assertion with
generated images is then measured using a VQA model. Finally, alignment scores
for different assertions are combined aposteriori to give the final text-to-image
alignment score. Experimental analysis reveals that the proposed alignment metric
shows significantly higher correlation with human ratings as opposed to traditional
CLIP, BLIP scores. Furthermore, we also find that the assertion level alignment
scores provide a useful feedback which can then be used in a simple iterative
procedure to gradually increase the expression of different assertions in the final
image outputs. Human user studies indicate that the proposed approach surpasses
previous state-of-the-art by 8.7% in overall text-to-image alignment accuracy.

1

Introduction

The field of text-to-image generation has made significant advancements with the recent advent
of large-scale language-image (LLI) models [1–5]. In particular, text-conditioned latent diffusion
models have shown unparalleled success in generating creative imagery corresponding to a diverse
range of free-form textual descriptions. However, while remarkable, it has been observed [6–8] that
as the complexity of the input text increases, the generated images do not always accurately align
with the semantic meaning of the textual prompt.
To facilitate the reliable use of current text-to-image generation models for practical applications, it
is essential to answer two key questions: 1) Can we detect such fine-grain misalignments between
the input text and the generated output in a robust manner? and 2) Once detected, can we improve
the text-to-image alignment for failure cases? While several metrics for evaluating text-to-image
alignment (e.g., CLIP [9], BLIP [10], BLIP2 [11]) exist, it has been observed [7, 12] that a high score
with these metrics can be achieved even if the image does not fully correspond with input prompt.
For instance, in Fig. 1, an output image (containing only pink trees) shows high CLIP/BLIP scores
with the text “pink trees and yellow car” even if yellow car is not present. Evaluating text-to-image
matching using the image-text-matching (ITM) head of BLIP models has also been recently explored
[10, 11]. However, the generated scores also show a similar tendency to favor the main subject
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

