Incentivizing Honesty among Competitors in
Collaborative Learning and Optimization

Florian E. Dorner
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
ETH Zurich
florian.dorner@tuebingen.mpg.de

Nikola Konstantinov
INSAIT, Sofia University
nikola.konstantinov@insait.ai

Georgi Pashaliev
Sofia High School of Mathematics

Martin Vechev
ETH Zurich
martin.vechev@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Collaborative learning techniques have the potential to enable training machine
learning models that are superior to models trained on a single entity’s data. However, in many cases, potential participants in such collaborative schemes are competitors on a downstream task, such as firms that each aim to attract customers
by providing the best recommendations. This can incentivize dishonest updates
that damage other participants’ models, potentially undermining the benefits of
collaboration. In this work, we formulate a game that models such interactions
and study two learning tasks within this framework: single-round mean estimation
and multi-round SGD on strongly-convex objectives. For a natural class of player
actions, we show that rational clients are incentivized to strongly manipulate their
updates, preventing learning. We then propose mechanisms that incentivize honest
communication and ensure learning quality comparable to full cooperation. Lastly,
we empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our incentive scheme on a standard
non-convex federated learning benchmark. Our work shows that explicitly modeling the incentives and actions of dishonest clients, rather than assuming them
malicious, can enable strong robustness guarantees for collaborative learning.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen an increased interest in designing methods for collaborative learning, where
multiple participants contribute data and train a model jointly. The premise is that the participants
will then be able to obtain a better model than if they were learning in isolation. Most prominently,
federated learning (FL) (Kairouz et al., 2021) provides a method for training models in a distributed
manner, allowing data to stay with institutions, while still harvesting the benefits of collaboration.
An underlying premise for the success of collaborative learning schemes is that the participants
contribute data (or gradient updates) relevant to the learning task at hand. However, when participants
are in competition on some downstream task, they may have an incentive to sabotage other participants’
models. For instance, firms that are competing on the same market can often improve their machine
learning models by having access to their competitors’s data, but at the same time will likely benefit
from a gap between the quality of their models and those of other firms.
These conflicting incentives raise a concern that collaborative learning may be vulnerable to strategic
updates from participants. Previous work has empirically demonstrated that irrelevant or malicious
updates can negatively impact collaborative learning (Tolpegin et al., 2020; Kairouz et al., 2021). In
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

