Self-Adaptive Motion Tracking against On-body
Displacement of Flexible Sensors
Chengxu Zuo1
Jiawei Fang1
Shihui Guo1*
Yipeng Qin2
1
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
2
School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University, UK

Abstract
Flexible sensors are promising for ubiquitous sensing of human status due to their
flexibility and easy integration as wearable systems. However, on-body displacement of sensors is inevitable since the device cannot be firmly worn at a fixed
position across different sessions. This displacement issue causes complicated
patterns and significant challenges to subsequent machine learning algorithms. Our
work proposes a novel self-adaptive motion tracking network to address this challenge. Our network consists of three novel components: i) a light-weight learnable
Affine Transformation layer whose parameters can be tuned to efficiently adapt to
unknown displacements; ii) a Fourier-encoded LSTM network for better pattern
identification; iii) a novel sequence discrepancy loss equipped with auxiliary regressors for unsupervised tuning of Affine Transformation parameters. Experimental
results show that our method is robust across different on-body position configurations. Our dataset and code are available at: https://github.com/ZuoCX1996/SelfAdaptive-Motion-Tracking-against-On-body-Displacement-of-Flexible-Sensors.

1

Introduction

Following the philosophy of ubiquitous computing, wearable devices have emerged as a promising
solution for motion tracking that has various applications in entertainment [1], human-computer
interaction [2], healthcare [3, 4], etc. Among different types of such wearable devices, those using
flexible sensors stand out for their advantages in long-term use scenarios. Specifically, flexible sensors
can be easily integrated into wearable devices (e.g., sewn into ordinary clothing) while ensuring
wearing comfort. These flexible sensors bend in response to human body movements (represented by
joint angles), causing changes in their readings, which can be used for motion tracking [5].
In recent years, enabling wearable devices to be worn in non-fixed positions has become a crucial
objective in order to make these devices more suitable for daily use [6]. However, this flexibility poses
new challenges for deep-learning powered motion capture (mocap) systems. That is, the inevitable
on-body displacement across wearing sessions can cause significant data distribution shifts, which
degrades the performance of supervised learning models (Figure 1a).
A straightforward solution to the above problem is to collect a large dataset that covers a wide
spectrum of wearing positions for model training. However, this approach significantly amplifies data
collection costs, including equipment expenses, manpower, and time investments. Furthermore, any
alterations in device design (sensor position, quantity, etc.) necessitate a fresh round of data collection,
resulting in significant resource consumption and impeding swift product iteration. Another solution
is to fine-tune the model against “unseen” displacements with a small amount of labeled data under
new displacements, a.k.a., supervised domain adaptation. However, this is infeasible for our task as
*Corresponding author: Shihui Guo (guoshihui@xmu.edu.cn)
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

