On the Importance of Feature Separability
in Predicting Out-Of-Distribution Error
Renchunzi Xie1
2

Hongxin Wei2∗ Lei Feng1

Yuzhou Cao1

Bo An1

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Southern University of Science and Technology, China
{xier0002,yuzhou002}@e.ntu.edu.sg
weihx@sustech.edu.cn
lfengqaq@gmail.com
boan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Estimating the generalization performance is practically challenging on out-ofdistribution (OOD) data without ground-truth labels. While previous methods
emphasize the connection between distribution difference and OOD accuracy, we
show that a large domain gap not necessarily leads to a low test accuracy. In this
paper, we investigate this problem from the perspective of feature separability
empirically and theoretically. Specifically, we propose a dataset-level score based
upon feature dispersion to estimate the test accuracy under distribution shift. Our
method is inspired by desirable properties of features in representation learning:
high inter-class dispersion and high intra-class compactness. Our analysis shows
that inter-class dispersion is strongly correlated with the model accuracy, while
intra-class compactness does not reflect the generalization performance on OOD
data. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method in both
prediction performance and computational efficiency.

1

Introduction

Machine learning techniques deployed in the open world often struggle with distribution shifts, where
the test data are not drawn from the training distribution. Such issues can substantially degrade
the test accuracy, and the generalization performance of a trained model may vary significantly on
different shifted datasets [Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008, Koh et al., 2021]. This gives rise to the
importance of estimating out-of-distribution (OOD) errors for AI Safety [Deng and Zheng, 2021].
However, it is prohibitively expensive or unrealistic to collect large-scale labeled examples for each
shifted testing distribution encountered in the wild. Subsequently, predicting OOD error becomes a
challenging task without access to ground-truth labels.
In the literature, a popular direction in predicting OOD error is to utilize the model output on the
shifted dataset [Jiang et al., 2021, Guillory et al., 2021, Garg et al., 2022], which heavily relies
on the model calibration. Yet, machine learning models generally suffer from the overconfidence
issue even for OOD inputs [Wei et al., 2022], leading to suboptimal performance in estimating OOD
performance. Many prior works turned to measuring the distribution difference between training
and OOD test set, due to the conventional wisdom that a higher distribution shift normally leads to
lower OOD accuracy. AutoEval [Deng and Zheng, 2021] applies Fréchet Distance to calculate the
distribution distance for model evaluation under distribution shift. A recent work [Yu et al., 2022]
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

