OpenGSL: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Graph
Structure Learning

Zhiyao Zhou1 , Sheng Zhou2∗, Bochao Mao2 , Xuanyi Zhou1 , Jiawei Chen1
Qiaoyu Tan3 , Daochen Zha4 , Yan Feng1 , Chun Chen1 , Can Wang1
1
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China
3
New York University Shanghai 4 Rice University
{zjucszzy, zhousheng_zju, bcmao, zxy2004
sleepyhunt, fengyan, chenc, wcan}@zju.edu.cn
qiaoyu.tan@nyu.edu daochen.zha@rice.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as the de facto standard for representation learning on graphs, owing to their ability to effectively integrate graph
topology and node attributes. However, the inherent suboptimal nature of node connections, resulting from the complex and contingent formation process of graphs,
presents significant challenges in modeling them effectively. To tackle this issue,
Graph Structure Learning (GSL), a family of data-centric learning approaches,
has garnered substantial attention in recent years. The core concept behind GSL
is to jointly optimize the graph structure and the corresponding GNN models.
Despite the proposal of numerous GSL methods, the progress in this field remains
unclear due to inconsistent experimental protocols, including variations in datasets,
data processing techniques, and splitting strategies. In this paper, we introduce
OpenGSL, the first comprehensive benchmark for GSL, aimed at addressing this
gap. OpenGSL enables a fair comparison among state-of-the-art GSL methods by
evaluating them across various popular datasets using uniform data processing and
splitting strategies. Through extensive experiments, we observe that existing GSL
methods do not consistently outperform vanilla GNN counterparts. We also find
that there is no significant correlation between the homophily of the learned structure and task performance, challenging the common belief. Moreover, we observe
that the learned graph structure demonstrates a strong generalization ability across
different GNN models, despite the high computational and space consumption. We
hope that our open-sourced library will facilitate rapid and equitable evaluation
and inspire further innovative research in this field. The code of the benchmark can
be found in https://github.com/OpenGSL/OpenGSL.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [6, 18, 13, 41] have emerged as the dominant approach for learning
on graph-structured data, thanks to their exceptional ability to leverage both the graph topology
structure and node attributes [44]. Considerable endeavors have been recently made to enhance
the performance of GNNs by refining the architectures of GNN models, such as neural message
passing [41, 46, 45, 11, 3] and transformer based methods [19, 48, 35]. However, these model-centric
methods overlook the potential flaws of the underlying graph structure, which can result in suboptimal performance. Notably, extensive evidence from previous studies [5] confirms that real-world
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

