Anonymous Learning via Look-Alike Clustering: A
Precise Analysis of Model Generalization

Adel Javanmard
University of Southern California, Google Research
ajavanma@usc.edu

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Abstract
While personalized recommendations systems have become increasingly popular,
ensuring user data protection remains a top concern in the development of these
learning systems. A common approach to enhancing privacy involves training
models using anonymous data rather than individual data. In this paper, we explore
a natural technique called look-alike clustering, which involves replacing sensitive
features of individuals with the cluster’s average values. We provide a precise
analysis of how training models using anonymous cluster centers affects their
generalization capabilities. We focus on an asymptotic regime where the size of the
training set grows in proportion to the features dimension. Our analysis is based on
the Convex Gaussian Minimax Theorem (CGMT) and allows us to theoretically
understand the role of different model components on the generalization error. In
addition, we demonstrate that in certain high-dimensional regimes, training over
anonymous cluster centers acts as a regularization and improves generalization
error of the trained models. Finally, we corroborate our asymptotic theory with
finite-sample numerical experiments where we observe a perfect match when the
sample size is only of order of a few hundreds.

1

Introduction

Look-alike modeling in machine learning encompasses a range of techniques that focus on identifying
users who possess similar characteristics, behaviors, or preferences to a specific target individual.
This approach primarily relies on the principle that individuals with shared attributes are likely to
exhibit comparable interests and behaviors. By analyzing the behavior of these look-alike users,
look-alike modeling enables accurate predictions for the target user. This technique has been widely
used in various domains, including targeted marketing and personalized recommendations, where it
plays a crucial role in enhancing user experiences and driving tailored outcomes [26, 19, 18, 21].
In this paper, we use look-alike clustering for a different purpose, namely to anonymize sensitive
information of users. Consider a supervised regression setup where the training set contains n pairs
(xi , yi ), for i ∈ [n], with yi ∈ R denoting the response and xi ∈ Rd representing a high-dimensional
vector of features. We consider two groups of features: sensitive features, which contain some
personal information about users and should be protected from the leaner, and the non-sensitive
features. We assume that that the learner has access to a clustering structure on users, which is
non-private information (e.g. based on non-sensitive features or other non-sensitive data set on users).
We propose a look-alike clustering approach, where we anonymize the individuals’ sensitive features
by replacing them with the cluster’s average values. Only the anonymized dataset will be shared with
the learner who then uses it to train a model. We refer to Figure 1 for an illustration of this approach.
Note that the learner never gets access to the individuals’ sensitive features and so this approach
is safe from re-identification attacks where the learner is given access to the pool of individuals’
sensitive information (up to permutation) and may use the non-sensitive features to re-identify the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

