Zero-shot Visual Relation Detection via Composite
Visual Cues from Large Language Models

Lin Li1,2 , Jun Xiao1 , Guikun Chen1 , Jian Shao1 , Yueting Zhuang1 , Long Chen2∗
1

Zhejiang University 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{mukti, junx, guikun.chen, jshao, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn, longchen@ust.hk

https://github.com/HKUST-LongGroup/RECODE

(A) carrying

(B) carrying

Holding: a person having an object in their hands
Carrying: a person supporting an object in their
hands
Which of the pictures are “holding” and “carrying”?

a person having
an object in their
hands

holding

C

a person supporting
an object in their
hands

D

A

AC are “holding”, and BD are “carrying”

carrying

B

CLIP

(b)

(a)

(C) holding

(D) holding

holding

carrying

subject with hands
subject is standing
object with a handle or a grip that is
held by the subject's hand

GPT

➢ subject with hands
➢ subject is standing
➢ ……
holding

subject is standing
subject with hands, with arms
subject in a more engaged position,
subject with hand C
perhaps walking or running
subject with both hands and arms
supporting a heavy object

CD are “holding”, and AB are “carrying”

D

A

CLIP

(c)

carrying

subject with both hands
and arms supporting a
heavy object
B

subject in a more
engaged position,
perhaps walking
or running

(d)

Figure 1: Illustration of the challenges of VRD with similar relation categories holding and carrying.
Four images and their ground-truths are on the left. The subject and object for each triplet are
denoted by blue and pink boxes, respectively. (a) A child may incorrectly identify these two relations
only based on similar concepts alone. (b) Using class-based prompts, CLIP always maps these two
relations to adjacent locations in the semantic space. (c) We humans always utilize composite visual
cues to correctly distinguish between different relations. (d) Our proposed RECODE uses LLM (e.g.,
GPT) to generate composite descriptions that aid the CLIP model in distinguishing between them.

Abstract
Pretrained vision-language models, such as CLIP, have demonstrated strong generalization capabilities, making them promising tools in the realm of zero-shot
visual recognition. Visual relation detection (VRD) is a typical task that identifies
relationship (or interaction) types between object pairs within an image. However,
naively utilizing CLIP with prevalent class-based prompts for zero-shot VRD has
several weaknesses, e.g., it struggles to distinguish between different fine-grained
relation types and it neglects essential spatial information of two objects. To this
end, we propose a novel method for zero-shot VRD: RECODE, which solves RElation detection via COmposite DEscription prompts. Specifically, RECODE first
decomposes each predicate category into subject, object, and spatial components.
Then, it leverages large language models (LLMs) to generate description-based
prompts (or visual cues) for each component. Different visual cues enhance the
discriminability of similar relation categories from different perspectives, which
significantly boosts performance in VRD. To dynamically fuse different cues, we
further introduce a chain-of-thought method that prompts LLMs to generate rea∗

Long Chen is the corresponding author. Work was done when Lin Li visited HKUST.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

