Worst-case Performance of Popular Approximate
Nearest Neighbor Search Implementations:
Guarantees and Limitations
Piotr Indyk
MIT
indyk@mit.edu

Haike Xu
MIT
haikexu@mit.edu

Abstract
Graph-based approaches to nearest neighbor search are popular and powerful tools
for handling large datasets in practice, but they have limited theoretical guarantees.
We study the worst-case performance of recent graph-based approximate nearest
neighbor search algorithms, such as HNSW, NSG and DiskANN. For DiskANN, we
show that its “slow preprocessing” version provably supports approximate nearest
neighbor search query with constant approximation ratio and poly-logarithmic
query time, on data sets with bounded “intrinsic” dimension. For the other data
structure variants studied, including DiskANN with “fast preprocessing”, HNSW
and NSG, we present a family of instances on which the empirical query time
required to achieve a “reasonable” accuracy is linear in instance size. For example,
for DiskANN, we show that the query procedure can take at least 0.1n steps on
instances of size n before it encounters any of the 5 nearest neighbors of the query.

1

Introduction

The nearest neighbor search (NN) problem is defined as follows: given a set of n points P in a metric
space pX, Dq, build a data structure that, given any query point q P X, returns p P P closest to q.
More generally, given a parameter k, the data structure should report k points in P that are closest
to q. Often, though not always, the metric space is a d-dimensional vector space with the distance
function induced by the Euclidean norm. Since its introduction in the influential book by Minsky and
Papert in the 1960s [31], the problem has found a tremendous number of applications in machine
learning and computer vision [34]. In most of those applications, the underlying metric is induced by
a set of points in a high-dimensional space. Since in this setting worst-case efficient nearest neighbor
algorithms are unlikely to exist (see e.g., [2]), various approximate formulations of the problem
have been studied extensively. One popular formulation allows the algorithm to return any point
p1 P P whose distance to the query q is at most c times the distance between q and its true nearest
neighbor in P ; such point p1 is called a c-approximate nearest neighbor. In practice, the accuracy of
an approximate data structure is often evaluated by estimating the recall, i.e., the average fraction of
the true k nearest neighbors returned by the data structure.
Over the last few decades, many nearest neighbor data structures have been proposed, both exact
and approximate. The most popular classes of data structures are tree algorithms (e.g., kd-trees [4]);
locality sensitive hashing [1]; learning-to-hash and product quantization [35, 36] ; and metric data
structures. The last class includes algorithms that work for point-sets in arbitrary metrics, not
just those in d-dimensional vectors normed spaces. This category can be further subdivided into
algorithms based on metric trees [6, 32], divide and conquer algorithms [24, 5, 10], and methods
based on greedy search in proximity graphs [3, 28, 15, 21]. See the surveys [8, 27] for further
overview of these classes of algorithms.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

