Detecting Any Human-Object Interaction
Relationship: Universal HOI Detector with Spatial
Prompt Learning on Foundation Models

Yichao Cao
Southeast University
Chen Song
Nanjing Enbo Tech.

Qingfei Tang
Nanjing Enbo Tech.

Shan You
SenseTime

Xiu Su∗
University of Sydney

Xiaobo Lu
Southeast University

Chang Xu
University of Sydney

Abstract
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection aims to comprehend the intricate relationships between humans and objects, predicting < human, action, object > triplets,
and serving as the foundation for numerous computer vision tasks. The complexity
and diversity of human-object interactions in the real world, however, pose significant challenges for both annotation and recognition, particularly in recognizing
interactions within an open world context. This study explores the universal interaction recognition in an open-world setting through the use of Vision-Language
(VL) foundation models and large language models (LLMs). The proposed method
is dubbed as UniHOI. We conduct a deep analysis of the three hierarchical features
inherent in visual HOI detectors and propose a method for high-level relation extraction aimed at VL foundation models, which we call HO prompt-based learning.
Our design includes an HO Prompt-guided Decoder (HOPD), facilitates the association of high-level relation representations in the foundation model with various HO
pairs within the image. Furthermore, we utilize a LLM (i.e. GPT) for interaction
interpretation, generating a richer linguistic understanding for complex HOIs. For
open-category interaction recognition, our method supports either of two input
types: interaction phrase or interpretive sentence. Our efficient architecture design
and learning methods effectively unleash the potential of the VL foundation models
and LLMs, allowing UniHOI to surpass all existing methods with a substantial
margin, under both supervised and zero-shot settings. The code and pre-trained
weights are available at: https://github.com/Caoyichao/UniHOI.

1

Introduction

Human-object interaction (HOI) detection [15, 7] is a burgeoning field of research in recent years,
which stems from object detection and makes higher demands on high-level visual understanding. It
plays a crucial role in many vision tasks, e.g., visual question answering, human-centric understanding,
image generation, and activity recognition, to name a few representative ones. An excellent HOI
detector must accurately localize all the interacting Human-Object (HO) pairs and recognize their
interaction, typically represented as an HOI triplet in the format of < human, action, object >.
Despite the optimistic progress made by various HOI detectors [27, 12, 18, 49, 14, 29, 8] in recent
years, numerous challenges still persist [45]. Naively mapping diverse interactions to one-hot labels is
an exceedingly labor-intensive and costly process, which is prone to the loss of semantic information.
∗

Corresponding author (xisu5992@uni.sydney.edu.au). First author (caoyichao@seu.edu.cn).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

