Learning Sample Difficulty from Pre-trained Models
for Reliable Prediction
Peng Cui1 5 , Dan Zhang2 3 , Zhijie Deng4∗, Yinpeng Dong1 5 , Jun Zhu1 5∗
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084 China
2
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence 3 University of Tübingen
4
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 RealAI
xpeng.cui@gmail.com, dan.zhang2@de.bosch.com, zhijied@sjtu.edu.cn
dongyinpeng@tsinghua.edu.cn, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Large-scale pre-trained models have achieved remarkable success in many applications, but how to leverage them to improve the prediction reliability of downstream
models is undesirably under-explored. Moreover, modern neural networks have
been found to be poorly calibrated and make overconfident predictions regardless
of inherent sample difficulty and data uncertainty. To address this issue, we propose to utilize large-scale pre-trained models to guide downstream model training
with sample difficulty-aware entropy regularization. Pre-trained models that have
been exposed to large-scale datasets and do not overfit the downstream training
classes enable us to measure each training sample’s difficulty via feature-space
Gaussian modeling and relative Mahalanobis distance computation. Importantly,
by adaptively penalizing overconfident prediction based on the sample difficulty,
we simultaneously improve accuracy and uncertainty calibration across challenging
benchmarks (e.g., +0.55% ACC and −3.7% ECE on ImageNet1k using ResNet34),
consistently surpassing competitive baselines for reliable prediction. The improved
uncertainty estimate further improves selective classification (abstaining from
erroneous predictions) and out-of-distribution detection.

1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-training has witnessed pragmatic success in diverse scenarios and pre-trained models
are becoming increasingly accessible [9, 4, 3, 14, 44]. The community has reached a consensus that by
exploiting big data, pre-trained models can learn to encode rich data semantics that is promised to be
generally beneficial for a broad spectrum of applications, e.g., warming up the learning on downstream
tasks with limited data [45], improving domain generalization [24] or model robustness [19], and
enabling zero-shot transfer [54, 43].
This paper investigates on a new application – leveraging pre-trained models to improve the calibration
and the quality of uncertainty quantification of downstream models, both of which are crucial for
reliable model deployment in the wild [20, 13, 28, 32]. Model training on the task dataset often
encounters ambiguous or even distorted samples. These samples are difficult to learn from – directly
enforcing the model to fit them (i.e., matching the label with 100% confidence) may cause undesirable
memorization and overconfidence. This issue comes from loss formulation and data annotation, thus
using pre-trained models for finetuning or knowledge distillation with the cross-entropy loss will not
solve the problem. That said, it is necessary to subtly adapt the training objective for each sample
according to its sample difficulty for better generalization and uncertainty quantification. We exploit
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

