Adversarial Examples Exist in Two-Layer ReLU
Networks for Low Dimensional Linear Subspaces

Odelia Melamed ∗

Gilad Yehudai†

Gal Vardi ‡

Abstract
Despite a great deal of research, it is still not well-understood why trained neural
networks are highly vulnerable to adversarial examples. In this work we focus
on two-layer neural networks trained using data which lie on a low dimensional
linear subspace. We show that standard gradient methods lead to non-robust neural
networks, namely, networks which have large gradients in directions orthogonal
to the data subspace, and are susceptible to small adversarial L2 -perturbations in
these directions. Moreover, we show that decreasing the initialization scale of the
training algorithm, or adding L2 regularization, can make the trained network more
robust to adversarial perturbations orthogonal to the data.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are observed to be susceptible to adversarial perturbations [Szegedy et al., 2013],
often imperceptible by humans. Many works have shown attacks, where adding a very small
perturbation to the input may change the prediction of the network [Carlini and Wagner, 2017,
Papernot et al., 2017, Athalye et al., 2018]. Other works have shown defense mechanisms called
adversarial training [Papernot et al., 2016, Madry et al., 2017, Wong and Kolter, 2018]. Despite
a great deal of research, it is still not well-understood why neural-network training methods tend
towards such non-robust solutions.
Several recent works have given theoretical explanation for the existence of adversarial perturbations
under different settings. One line of work [Daniely and Shacham, 2020, Bubeck et al., 2021a, Bartlett
et al., 2021, Montanari and Wu, 2022] have shown that random networks are susceptible to adversarial
perturbations. These results might explain why neural networks are non-robust at initialization, but
they do not explain why trained neural networks are non-robust. Recently, Vardi et al. [2022] showed
that for data which is nearly orthogonal, after training for infinitely many iterations, the implicit bias
of neural networks towards margin maximization leads to non-robust solutions. Despite these works,
it is still unclear why trained neural networks tend to be non-robust to adversarial perturbations, and
specifically what are the assumptions on the input data which leads to non-robustness.
One common belief about “real-life” datasets, is that they approximately lie on a low dimensional
“data-manifold” in a high dimensional space. In this setting, the existence of perturbations orthogonal
to the data-manifold that change the network’s predictions is especially undesired, since such perturbations do not make the input closer to data points from other classes. Indeed, such a perturbation
only increases the distance between the input and all “real-life” examples. Shamir et al. [2021] have
demonstrated empirically that under such a data-manifold assumption, the decision boundary of a
trained classifier clings to the data-manifold in a way that even very small perturbations orthogonal to
the manifold can change the prediction.
∗

Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel, odelia.melamed@weizmann.ac.il
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel, gilad.yehudai@weizmann.ac.il
‡
TTI-Chicago and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, galvardi@ttic.edu.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

