An Inductive Bias for Tabular Deep Learning

Ege Beyazit∗
Amazon
beyazit@amazon.com
Bo Li
Amazon
booli@amazon.com

Jonathan Kozaczuk∗
Amazon
jonkozac@amazon.com
Vanessa Wallace
Amazon
vwall@amazon.com

Bilal Fadlallah
Amazon
bhf@amazon.com

Abstract
Deep learning methods have achieved state-of-the-art performance in most modeling tasks involving images, text and audio, however, they typically underperform
tree-based methods on tabular data. In this paper, we hypothesize that a significant contributor to this performance gap is the interaction between irregular target
functions resulting from the heterogeneous nature of tabular feature spaces, and the
well-known tendency of neural networks to learn smooth functions. Utilizing tools
from spectral analysis, we show that functions described by tabular datasets often
have high irregularity, and that they can be smoothed by transformations such as
scaling and ranking in order to improve performance. However, because these transformations tend to lose information or negatively impact the loss landscape during
optimization, they need to be rigorously fine-tuned for each feature to achieve
performance gains. To address these problems, we propose introducing frequency
reduction as an inductive bias. We realize this bias as a neural network layer that
promotes learning low-frequency representations of the input features, allowing
the network to operate in a space where the target function is more regular. Our
proposed method introduces less computational complexity than a fully connected
layer, while significantly improving neural network performance, and speeding up
its convergence on 14 tabular datasets.

1

Introduction

Despite being one of the simplest and most natural ways to describe data, tabular data with heterogeneous columns poses a significant challenge for deep learning models. Recently, [5, 13] benchmarked
various deep learning approaches against tree-based models and showed that tree-based models
tend to perform the best on tabular data. Nevertheless, novel neural network architectures provide
several advantages over classical machine learning methods. Specifically, neural networks operate on
differentiable loss functions, are able to learn meaningful and high-dimensional data representations,
and can scale to large datasets. In addition, the rapid advances of neural networks in generative image
and language modeling clearly indicate their capability to encode complex information [8, 18]. In
order to fully utilize these benefits on tasks that include tabular datasets, identifying and addressing
the reasons behind neural networks’ lack of performance on this form of data is essential.
Several influential research efforts on synthetic and image data point out that, despite being universal
approximators, neural networks have a spectral bias, i.e., they tend to learn the low frequency
components of a function much more easily than higher frequency components [22, 27]. In addition,
recent empirical studies on tabular deep learning provide insights on why neural networks typically
∗

These authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

