Goal-conditioned Offline Planning
from Curious Exploration

Marco Bagatella
ETH Zürich & Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
mbagatella@ethz.ch
Georg Martius
University of Tübingen & Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
georg.martius@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Curiosity has established itself as a powerful exploration strategy in deep reinforcement learning. Notably, leveraging expected future novelty as intrinsic motivation
has been shown to efficiently generate exploratory trajectories, as well as a robust
dynamics model. We consider the challenge of extracting goal-conditioned behavior from the products of such unsupervised exploration techniques, without any
additional environment interaction. We find that conventional goal-conditioned
reinforcement learning approaches for extracting a value function and policy fall
short in this difficult offline setting. By analyzing the geometry of optimal goalconditioned value functions, we relate this issue to a specific class of estimation
artifacts in learned values. In order to mitigate their occurrence, we propose to
combine model-based planning over learned value landscapes with a graph-based
value aggregation scheme. We show how this combination can correct both local
and global artifacts, obtaining significant improvements in zero-shot goal-reaching
performance across diverse simulated environments.

1

Introduction

While the standard paradigm in reinforcement learning (RL) is aimed at maximizing a specific reward
signal, the focus of the field has gradually shifted towards the pursuit of generally capable agents
[1, 20, 40]. This work focuses on a promising framework for learning diverse behaviors with minimal
supervision, by decomposing the problem into two consecutive phases. The first phase, referred to as
exploratory [28, 43] or intrinsic [38], consists of unsupervised exploration of an environment, aiming
to collect diverse experiences. These can be leveraged during the second phase, called exploitatory
or extrinsic, to distill a family of specific behaviors without further environment interaction. This
paradigm unifies several existing frameworks, including zero-shot deep reinforcement learning
[28, 43], Explore2Offline [23], ExORL [52] and model-based zero-shot planning [38].
An established technique for the intrinsic phase is curiosity-based exploration, which leverages some
formulation of surprise as a self-supervised reward signal. In practice, this is often done by estimating
the uncertainty of forward dynamic predictions of a learned model [49]. At the end of the exploratory
phase, this method produces a sequence of collected trajectories, as well as a trained dynamics model.
At its core, our work focuses on the subsequent extrinsic phase, and is concerned with extracting
strong goal-conditioned behavior from these two products, without further access to the environment.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

