Explain Any Concept: Segment Anything Meets
Concept-Based Explanation

Ao Sun, Pingchuan Ma, Yuanyuan Yuan, and Shuai Wang
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{asunac, pmaab, yyuanaq, shuaiw}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
EXplainable AI (XAI) is an essential topic to improve human understanding of
deep neural networks (DNNs) given their black-box internals. For computer vision
tasks, mainstream pixel-based XAI methods explain DNN decisions by identifying
important pixels, and emerging concept-based XAI explore forming explanations
with concepts (e.g., a head in an image). However, pixels are generally hard to
interpret and sensitive to the imprecision of XAI methods, whereas “concepts” in
prior works require human annotation or are limited to pre-defined concept sets. On
the other hand, driven by large-scale pre-training, Segment Anything Model (SAM)
has been demonstrated as a powerful and promotable framework for performing
precise and comprehensive instance segmentation, enabling automatic preparation
of concept sets from a given image. This paper for the first time explores using
SAM to augment concept-based XAI. We offer an effective and flexible conceptbased explanation method, namely Explain Any Concept (EAC), which explains
DNN decisions with any concept. While SAM is highly effective and offers an
“out-of-the-box” instance segmentation, it is costly when being integrated into de
facto XAI pipelines. We thus propose a lightweight per-input equivalent (PIE)
scheme, enabling efficient explanation with a surrogate model. Our evaluation
over two popular datasets (ImageNet and COCO) illustrate the highly encouraging
performance of EAC over commonly-used XAI methods.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have exhibited exceptional performance in a variety
of computer vision (CV) tasks such as image classification [1], object detection [2], and semantic
segmentation [3]. However, due to the “black-box” nature of these complex models, their use in
security-sensitive applications where interpretability is critical is still limited. As a result, there is a
growing demand for increased transparency and comprehensibility in the decision-making processes
of DNNs. To address this issue, Explainable AI (XAI) [4] has emerged with the purpose of providing
explanations for DNNs’ predictions.
For CV tasks, conventional XAI works primarily focus on proposing and enhancing pixel-level
interpretation, which explains the model prediction by identifying important pixels. Despite the
strides made in XAI, these techniques often involve trade-offs between three key desiderata among a
bunch of criteria: faithfulness, understandability, and efficiency [5, 6, 7, 8]. Faithfulness ensures that
the generated explanation aligns with the internal decision-making process of the DNN, understandability ensures that the explanations are human-comprehensible, and efficiency guarantees that the
explanations are generated with a reasonable computational cost.
From the perspective of explanation forms, existing methods often provide pixel or superpixel-level
explanations [9, 10, 11, 12, 13], which are constantly hard to interpret (i.e., low understandability)
and sensitive to the potential imprecision of XAI techniques (low faithfulness). Some recent works
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

