Unsupervised Polychromatic Neural Representation
for CT Metal Artifact Reduction
Qing Wu♣ Lixuan Chen♣ Ce Wang♢ Hongjiang Wei♡
S. Kevin Zhou♠ Jingyi Yu♣ Yuyao Zhang♣,∗
♣
ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
♠
University of Science and Technology of China
♢
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{wuqing, chenlx1, yujingyi, zhangyy8}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
wangce@ict.ac.cn hongjiang.wei@sjtu.edu.cn skevinzhou@ustc.edu.cn
♡

Abstract
Emerging neural reconstruction techniques based on tomography (e.g., NeRF,
NeAT, and NeRP) have started showing unique capabilities in medical imaging. In
this work, we present a novel Polychromatic neural representation (Polyner) to
tackle the challenging problem of CT imaging when metallic implants exist within
the human body. CT metal artifacts arise from the drastic variation of metal’s
attenuation coefficients at various energy levels of the X-ray spectrum, leading
to a nonlinear metal effect in CT measurements. Recovering CT images from
metal-affected measurements hence poses a complicated nonlinear inverse problem where empirical models adopted in previous metal artifact reduction (MAR)
approaches lead to signal loss and strongly aliased reconstructions. Polyner instead
models the MAR problem from a nonlinear inverse problem perspective. Specifically, we first derive a polychromatic forward model to accurately simulate the
nonlinear CT acquisition process. Then, we incorporate our forward model into
the implicit neural representation to accomplish reconstruction. Lastly, we adopt a
regularizer to preserve the physical properties of the CT images across different
energy levels while effectively constraining the solution space. Our Polyner is
an unsupervised method and does not require any external training data. Experimenting with multiple datasets shows that our Polyner achieves comparable or
better performance than supervised methods on in-domain datasets while demonstrating significant performance improvements on out-of-domain datasets. To the
best of our knowledge, our Polyner is the first unsupervised MAR method that
outperforms its supervised counterparts. The code for this work is available at:
https://github.com/iwuqing/Polyner.

1

Introduction

Computed tomography (CT) is a widely-used imaging technique for clinical diagnosis. CT measurements are produced by passing X-rays at different angles through the human body. Reconstruction of
CT images from these measurements is often approximately modeled as a linear inverse problem [1].
However, the attenuation coefficients of the metal materials dramatically vary with the X-ray spectral
energy, which largely differs from those of human body tissues. This results in a non-negligible
nonlinear metal effect in the CT measurements when the body carries metallic implants [2]. Hence,
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

