SAMoSSA: Multivariate Singular Spectrum Analysis
with Stochastic Autoregressive Noise

Abdullah Alomar
MIT
aalomar@mit.edu

Munther Dahleh
MIT
dahleh@mit.edu

Sean Mann
MIT
seanmann@mit.edu

Devavrat Shah
MIT
devavrat@mit.edu

Abstract
The well-established practice of time series analysis involves estimating deterministic, non-stationary trend and seasonality components followed by learning the
residual stochastic, stationary components. Recently, it has been shown that one
can learn the deterministic non-stationary components accurately using multivariate Singular Spectrum Analysis (mSSA) in the absence of a correlated stationary
component; meanwhile, in the absence of deterministic non-stationary components,
the Autoregressive (AR) stationary component can also be learnt readily, e.g. via
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS). However, a theoretical underpinning of multi-stage
learning algorithms involving both deterministic and stationary components has
been absent in the literature despite its pervasiveness. We resolve this open question
by establishing desirable theoretical guarantees for a natural two-stage algorithm,
where mSSA is first applied to estimate the non-stationary components despite the
presence of a correlated stationary AR component, which is subsequently learned
from the residual time series. We provide a finite-sample forecasting consistency
bound for the proposed algorithm, SAMoSSA, which is data-driven and thus requires minimal parameter tuning. To establish theoretical guarantees, we overcome
three hurdles: (i) we characterize the spectra of Page matrices of stable AR processes, thus extending the analysis of mSSA; (ii) we extend the analysis of AR
process identification in the presence of arbitrary bounded perturbations; (iii) we
characterize the out-of-sample or forecasting error, as opposed to solely considering model identification. Through representative empirical studies, we validate
the superior performance of SAMoSSA compared to existing baselines. Notably,
SAMoSSA’s ability to account for AR noise structure yields improvements ranging
from 5% to 37% across various benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Background. Multivariate time series have often been modeled as mixtures of stationary stochastic
processes (e.g. AR process) and deterministic non-stationary components (e.g. polynomial and
harmonics). To handle such mixtures, classical time series forecasting algorithms first attempt to
estimate and then remove the non-stationary components. For example, before fitting an Autoregressive Moving-average (ARMA) model, polynomial trend and seasonal components must be estimated
and then removed from the time series. Once the non-stationary components have been eliminated1 ,
the ARMA model is learned. This estimation procedure often relies on domain knowledge and/or
fine-tuning, and theoretical analysis for such multiple-stage algorithms is limited in the literature.
Prior work presented a solution for estimating non-stationary deterministic components without
domain knowledge or fine-tuning using mSSA [3]. This framework systematically models a wide
1

Note that Autoregressive Integrated Moving-average (ARIMA) and Seasonal ARIMA models use differencing in conjunction with unit root tests to remove stochastic non-stationary components, and are not suited for the
model we consider.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

