The Geometry of Neural Nets’ Parameter Spaces
Under Reparametrization

Agustinus Kristiadi
Felix Dangel
Vector Institute, University of Tübingen
akristiadi,fdangel@vectorinstitute.ai

Philipp Hennig
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center
philipp.hennig@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Model reparametrization, which follows the change-of-variable rule of calculus, is
a popular way to improve the training of neural nets. But it can also be problematic since it can induce inconsistencies in, e.g., Hessian-based flatness measures,
optimization trajectories, and modes of probability densities. This complicates
downstream analyses: e.g. one cannot definitively relate flatness with generalization since arbitrary reparametrization changes their relationship. In this work, we
study the invariance of neural nets under reparametrization from the perspective of
Riemannian geometry. From this point of view, invariance is an inherent property of
any neural net if one explicitly represents the metric and uses the correct associated
transformation rules. This is important since although the metric is always present,
it is often implicitly assumed as identity, and thus dropped from the notation, then
lost under reparametrization. We discuss implications for measuring the flatness
of minima, optimization, and for probability-density maximization. Finally, we
explore some interesting directions where invariance is useful.

1

Introduction

Neural networks (NNs) are parametrized functions. Since
L(θ)
L(T (θ, g))
it is often desirable to assign meaning or interpretability
to the parameters (weights) of a network, it is interesting
to ask whether certain transformations of the parameters
Θ
leave the network invariant—equivalent in some sense.
Various notions of invariance have been studied in NNs, in
particular under weight-space symmetry [5, 14, 20, 42, 53]
and reparametrization [20, 21, 30, 32, 71]. The former
L(θ)
L̃(ψ)
studies the behavior of a function L(θ) under some invertible T : Θ × G → Θ where G is a group; for any θ, the
function L is invariant under the symmetry T if and only
ϕ
Θ
Ψ
if L(θ) = L(T (θ, g)) for all g ∈ G. For example, normalized NNs are symmetric under scaling of the weights, i.e. Figure 1: The difference between the
L(θ) = L(cθ) for all c > 0 [7]—similar scale-symmetry symmetry (top) and reparametrization
also presents in ReLU NNs [61]. Meanwhile, invariance problems (bottom). Θ and Ψ are two
under reparametrization studies the behavior of the NN different parameter spaces.
when it is transformed under the change-of-variable rule
of calculus: Given a transformed parameter ψ = φ(θ) under a bijective differentiable φ : Θ → Ψ
that maps the original parameter space onto another parameter space, the function L(θ) becomes
L̂(ψ) := L(φ−1 (ψ)). Note their difference (see Fig. 1): In the former, one works on a single
parameter space Θ and a single function L—the map T acts as a symmetry of elements of Θ under
the group G. In contrast, the latter assumes two parameter spaces Θ and Ψ which are connected by φ
and hence two functions L and L̂.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

