Leveraging sparse and shared feature activations for
disentangled representation learning

Marco Fumero
Sapienza, University of Rome
Emanuele Rodolà
Sapienza, University of Rome

Florian Wenzel
Amazon AWS
Stefano Soatto
Amazon AWS

Luca Zancato
Amazon AWS

Alessandro Achille
Amazon AWS

Bernhard Schölkopf
Amazon AWS

Francesco Locatello
IST Austria

Abstract
Research on recovering the latent factors of variation of high dimensional data has
so far focused on simple synthetic settings. Mostly building on unsupervised and
weakly-supervised objectives, prior work missed out on the positive implications
for representation learning on real world data. In this work, we propose to leverage
knowledge extracted from a diversified set of supervised tasks to learn a common
disentangled representation. Assuming that each supervised task only depends on
an unknown subset of the factors of variation, we disentangle the feature space of
a supervised multi-task model, with features activating sparsely across different
tasks and information being shared as appropriate. Importantly, we never directly
observe the factors of variations, but establish that access to multiple tasks is
sufficient for identifiability under sufficiency and minimality assumptions. We
validate our approach on six real world distribution shift benchmarks, and different
data modalities (images, text), demonstrating how disentangled representations can
be transferred to real settings.

1

Introduction

A fundamental question in deep learning is how to learn meaningful and reusable representation from
high dimensional data observations [8, 75, 78, 77]. A core area of research pursuing is centered on
disentangled representation learning (DRL) [56, 8, 33] where the aim is to learn a representation
which recovers the factors of variations (FOVs) underlying the data distribution. Disentangled
representations are expected to contain all the information present in the data in a compact and
interpretable structure [46, 16] while being independent from a particular task [29]. It has been
argued that separating information into interventionally independent factors [78] can enable robust
downstream predictions, which was partially validated in synthetic settings [19, 58]. Unfortunately,
these benefits did not materialize in real world representations learning problems, largely limited by a
lack of scalability of existing approaches.
In this work we focus on leveraging knowledge from different task objectives to learn better representations of high dimensional data, and explore the link with disentanglement and out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization on real data distributions. Representations learned from a large diversity of
tasks are indeed expected to be richer and generalize better to new, possibly out-of-distribution, tasks.
However, this is not always the case, as different tasks can compete with each other and lead to
weaker models. This phenomenon, known as negative transfer [61, 91] in the context of transfer
learning or task competition [83] in multitask learning, happens when a limited capacity model is
used to learn two different tasks that require expressing high feature variability and/or coverage.
Aiming to use the same features for different objectives makes them noisy and often increases the
sensitivity to spurious correlations [35, 27, 7], as features can be both predictive and detrimental for
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

