CoDet: Co-Occurrence Guided Region-Word
Alignment for Open-Vocabulary Object Detection

Chuofan Ma1† Yi Jiang2∗ Xin Wen1∗
1

Zehuan Yuan2

The University of Hong Kong

2

Xiaojuan Qi1

ByteDance Inc.

Abstract
Deriving reliable region-word alignment from image-text pairs is critical to learn
object-level vision-language representations for open-vocabulary object detection.
Existing methods typically rely on pre-trained or self-trained vision-language
models for alignment, which are prone to limitations in localization accuracy or
generalization capabilities. In this paper, we propose CoDet, a novel approach
that overcomes the reliance on pre-aligned vision-language space by reformulating
region-word alignment as a co-occurring object discovery problem. Intuitively, by
grouping images that mention a shared concept in their captions, objects corresponding to the shared concept shall exhibit high co-occurrence among the group.
CoDet then leverages visual similarities to discover the co-occurring objects and
align them with the shared concept. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CoDet
has superior performances and compelling scalability in open-vocabulary detection,
m
e.g., by scaling up the visual backbone, CoDet achieves 37.0 APm
novel and 44.7 APall
m
m
on OV-LVIS, surpassing the previous SoTA by 4.2 APnovel and 9.8 APall . Code is
available at https://github.com/CVMI-Lab/CoDet.

1

Introduction

Object detection is a fundamental vision task that offers object-centric comprehension of visual
scenes for various downstream applications. While remarkable progress has been made in terms of
detection accuracy and speed, traditional detectors [39, 37, 21, 5, 43] are mostly constrained to a
fixed vocabulary defined by training data, e.g., 80 categories in COCO [29]. This accounts for a major
gap compared to human visual intelligence, which can perceive a diverse range of visual concepts in
the open world. To address such limitations, this paper focuses on the open-vocabulary setting of
object detection [57], where the detector is trained to recognize objects of arbitrary categories.
Recently, vision-language pretraining on web-scale image-text pairs has demonstrated impressive
open-vocabulary capability in image classification [35, 25]. It inspires the community to adapt this
paradigm to object detection [27, 51], specifically by training an open-vocabulary detector using
region-text pairs in detection or grounding annotations [27]. However, unlike free-form image-text
pairs, human-annotated region-text pairs are limited and difficult to scale. Consequently, a growing
body of research [59, 27, 53, 15, 28] aims to mine additional region-text pairs from image-text pairs,
which raises a new question: how to find the alignments between regions and words? (Figure 1a)
Recent studies typically rely on vision-language models (VLMs) to determine region-word alignments,
for example, by estimating region-word similarity [59, 27, 15, 28]. Despite its simplicity, the quality
of generated pseudo region-text pairs is subject to limitations of VLMs. As illustrated in Figure 1b,
VLMs pre-trained with image-level supervision, such as CLIP [35], are largely unaware of localization
quality of pseudo labels [59]. Although detector-based VLMs [27, 53] mitigate this issue to some
extent, they are initially pre-trained with a limited number of detection or grounding concepts,
†
∗

This work was performed when Chuofan Ma worked as an intern at ByteDance.
Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

