Saddle-to-Saddle Dynamics
in Diagonal Linear Networks

Scott Pesme
EPFL
scott.pesme@epfl.ch

Nicolas Flammarion
EPFL
nicolas.flammarion@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this paper we fully describe the trajectory of gradient flow over 2-layer diagonal
linear networks for the regression setting in the limit of vanishing initialisation. We
show that the limiting flow successively jumps from a saddle of the training loss to
another until reaching the minimum ℓ1 -norm solution. We explicitly characterise
the visited saddles as well as the jump times through a recursive algorithm reminiscent of the LARS algorithm used for computing the Lasso path. Starting from
the zero vector, coordinates are successively activated until the minimum ℓ1 -norm
solution is recovered, revealing an incremental learning. Our proof leverages a
convenient arc-length time-reparametrisation which enables to keep track of the
transitions between the jumps. Our analysis requires negligible assumptions on the
data, applies to both under and overparametrised settings and covers complex cases
where there is no monotonicity of the number of active coordinates. We provide
numerical experiments to support our findings.

1

Introduction

Strikingly simple algorithms such as gradient descent are driving forces for deep learning and have
led to remarkable empirical results. Nonetheless, understanding the performances of such methods
remains a challenging and exciting mystery: (i) their global convergence on highly non-convex losses
is far from being trivial and (ii) the fact that they lead to solutions which generalise well [53] is still
not fully understood.
To explain this second point, a major line of work has focused on the concept of implicit regularisation:
amongst the infinite space of zero-loss solutions, the optimisation process must be implicitly biased
towards solutions which have good generalisation properties for the considered real-world prediction
tasks. Many papers have therefore shown that gradient methods have the fortunate property of
asymptotically leading to solutions which have a well-behaving structure [38, 24, 16].
Aside from these results which mostly focus on characterising the asymptotic solution, a slightly
different point of view has been to try to describe the full trajectory. Indeed it has been experimentally
observed that gradient methods with small initialisations have the property of learning models of
increasing complexity across the training of neural networks [29]. This behaviour is usually referred
to as incremental learning or as a saddle-to-saddle process and describes learning curves which are
piecewise constant: the training process makes very little progress for some time, followed by a
sharp transition where a new “feature” is suddenly learned. In terms of optimisation trajectory, this
corresponds to the iterates "jumping" from a saddle of the training loss to another.
Several settings exhibiting such dynamics for small initialisation have been considered: matrix
and tensor factorisation [44, 27], simplified versions of diagonal linear networks [23, 7], linear
networks [22, 45, 26], 2-layer neural networks with orthogonal inputs [10], learning leap functions
with 2-layer neural networks [1] and matrix sensing [2, 33, 28]. However, all these results require
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

