ZipLM: Inference-Aware Structured Pruning
of Language Models

Eldar Kurtic
IST Austria
eldar.kurtic@ist.ac.at

Elias Frantar
IST Austria
elias.frantar@ist.ac.at

Dan Alistarh
IST Austria & Neural Magic
dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at

Abstract
The breakthrough performance of large language models (LLMs) comes with major
computational footprints and high deployment costs. In this paper, we progress towards resolving this problem by proposing a novel structured compression approach
for LLMs, called ZipLM. ZipLM achieves state-of-the-art accuracy-vs-speedup,
while matching a set of desired target runtime speedups in any given inference
environment. Specifically, given a model, a dataset, an inference environment, as
well as a set of speedup targets, ZipLM iteratively identifies and removes components with the worst loss-runtime trade-off. Unlike prior methods that specialize
in either the post-training/one-shot or the gradual compression setting, and only
for specific families of models such as BERT (encoder) or GPT (decoder), ZipLM
produces state-of-the-art compressed models across all these settings. Furthermore,
ZipLM achieves superior results for a fraction of the computational cost relative to
prior distillation and pruning techniques, making it a cost-effective approach for
generating an entire family of smaller, faster, and highly accurate models, guaranteed to meet the desired inference specifications. In particular, ZipLM outperforms
all prior BERTbase distillation and pruning techniques, such as CoFi, MiniLM,
and TinyBERT. Moreover, it matches the performance of the heavily optimized
MobileBERT model, obtained via extensive architecture search, by simply pruning the baseline BERTlarge model. When compressing GPT2, ZipLM outperforms
DistilGPT2 while being 60% smaller and 30% faster. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/IST-DASLab/ZipLM.

1

Introduction

The high accuracy of modern language models from the Transformer family [53] comes at the price
of massive computational cost, which hinders their practical adoption in resource-constrained settings.
This has motivated the development of model compression techniques, which can be categorized into
pruning [17], quantization [9], and distillation [11]. In this paper, we focus on structural compression,
whose goal is to reduce model size by removing entire sub-components, such as rows or columns
from the model’s weight matrices. The key advantage of structured pruning, relative to unstructured
pruning of individual weights, is that the model can be reshaped to new dimensions, and the resulting
computational savings can be leveraged on any hardware, without specialized computational support.
At the same time, structured pruning introduces significant challenges. First, models are usually
highly-sensitive to structured compression, and most methods require gradual compression, including
retraining cycles designed to allow the model to recover accuracy. In addition, structural compression
significantly complicates the use of knowledge distillation [16], which is usually done via manual
or dynamic layer mapping [21, 59]. On the practical side, another challenge is that most existing
techniques do not provide runtime speedup guarantees: the model is pruned to a fixed sparsity or
FLOPS target, and then must be evaluated in the target inference environment. If the pruned model
fails to meet the target inference specifications, the whole process must be repeated from scratch.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

