Efficient Low-rank Backpropagation for
Vision Transformer Adaptation

Yuedong Yang Hung-Yueh Chiang Guihong Li Diana Marculescu Radu Marculescu
Chandra Family Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
{albertyoung,hungyueh.chiang,lgh,dianam,radum}@utexas.edu

Abstract
The increasing scale of vision transformers (ViT) has made the efficient finetuning of these large models for specific needs a significant challenge in various
applications. This issue originates from the computationally demanding matrix
multiplications required during the backpropagation process through linear layers
in ViT. In this paper, we tackle this problem by proposing a new Low-rank BackPropagation via Walsh-Hadamard Transformation (LBP-WHT) method. Intuitively,
LBP-WHT projects the gradient into a low-rank space and carries out backpropagation. This approach substantially reduces the computation needed for adapting ViT,
as matrix multiplication in the low-rank space is far less resource-intensive. We
conduct extensive experiments with different models (ViT, hybrid convolution-ViT
model) on multiple datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. For
instance, when adapting an EfficientFormer-L1 model on CIFAR100, our LBPWHT achieves 10.4% higher accuracy than the state-of-the-art baseline, while
requiring 9 MFLOPs less computation. As the first work to accelerate ViT adaptation with low-rank backpropagation, our LBP-WHT method is complementary to
many prior efforts and can be combined with them for better performance. Code:
https://github.com/SLDGroup/LBP-WHT

1

Introduction

Vision transformers (ViT) have emerged as the latest state-of-the-art tool in numerous general
computer vision tasks [1–7]. However, tailoring these models to meet specific needs (e.g., new
dataset with different distribution) can be challenging. Indeed, adapting ViT models via finetuning
demands considerable computational resources and is often impractical for most edge applications.
For instance, to maintain privacy, in federated learning [8–10], model adaptation is limited to users’
personal edge devices (e.g., smartphones), where computational power is tightly restricted [11, 12].
The primary computational bottleneck arises from gradient propagation through the dense layers of
ViT. Specifically, calculating gradients for layer weights and inputs requires two computationallyintensive matrix multiplications, given the gradient for output [13]. To tackle this issue, [14] tries
to simplify matrix multiplications using low-rank reparametrization. However, this method only
reduces the gradient computation for weights and not for inputs, thus limiting the overall speedup.
This observation raises the following question:
How can we decrease the computational cost for all operations, including gradient computations for
weights and inputs, involved in backpropagation (BP) through any linear layer in the ViT model?
To answer this question, we introduce a new Low-rank BackPropagation via Walsh-Hadamard
Transformation (LBP-WHT) method. As shown in Figure 1, our method intuitively performs BP for
gradients w.r.t. inputs and weights in a low-rank space. To achieve this, we project the gradient w.r.t.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

