AQuA: A Benchmarking Tool for Label Quality
Assessment
Mononito Goswami⇤ , Vedant Sanil⇤, Arjun Choudhry† ,
Arvind Srinivasan†, Chalisa Udompanyawit, Artur Dubrawski
Auton Lab, School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
{mgoswami, vsanil, arjuncho, arvindsr, cudompan, awd}@cs.cmu.edu
www.github.com/autonlab/aqua

Abstract
Machine learning (ML) models are only as good as the data they are trained on. But
recent studies have found datasets widely used to train and evaluate ML models, e.g.
ImageNet, to have pervasive labeling errors. Erroneous labels on the train set hurt
ML models’ ability to generalize, and they impact evaluation and model selection
using the test set. Consequently, learning in the presence of labeling errors is an
active area of research, yet this field lacks a comprehensive benchmark to evaluate
these methods. Most of these methods are evaluated on a few computer vision
datasets with significant variance in the experimental protocols. With such a large
pool of methods and inconsistent evaluation, it is also unclear how ML practitioners
can choose the right models to assess label quality in their data. To this end, we
propose a benchmarking environment AQuA to rigorously evaluate methods that
enable machine learning in the presence of label noise. We also introduce a design
space to delineate concrete design choices of label error detection models. We hope
that our proposed design space and benchmark enable practitioners to choose the
right tools to improve their label quality and that our benchmark enables objective
and rigorous evaluation of machine learning tools facing mislabeled data.

1

Introduction

A lot of machine learning (ML) research is devoted to making efficient and effective use of available
data to learn accurate, high-fidelity, and interpretable models, with little to no focus on the quality of
the data they are trained and evaluated on. Nonetheless, it is widely recognized that ML models are
only as good as the data they rely on, i.e., the quality of data imposes practical limits to what ML
models can achieve. Not only are datasets used to train ML models; they also serve as benchmarks to
measure the state-of-the-art and validate theoretical findings. Thus, high quality large labeled datasets
are the cornerstone of progress in supervised machine learning. However, the data is rarely free of
noise, which can both manifest in the features of the data (feature noise) and in labels that categorize
them (label noise). Between feature and label noise, the former has been found to be much more
harmful to machine learning models [1, 2, 3]. To make matters worse, label noise is prevalent in
popular ML benchmarks. A recent study estimated an average of at least 3.3% label errors across 10
datasets commonly used for benchmarking computer vision, natural language, and audio classification
algorithms [4]. Consequently, a growing body of research is devoted to understanding the harms of
label noise and to developing techniques to identify and mitigate labeling errors.
⇤
†

MG and VS contributed equally. MG is the corresponding author.
AC and AS have equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

