TRIAGE: Characterizing and auditing training data
for improved regression

Nabeel Seedat
University of Cambridge
ns741@cam.ac.uk

Jonathan Crabbé
University of Cambridge
jc2133@cam.ac.uk

Zhaozhi Qian
University of Cambridge
zq224@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Data quality is crucial for robust machine learning algorithms, with the recent
interest in data-centric AI emphasizing the importance of training data characterization. However, current data characterization methods are largely focused on
classification settings, with regression settings largely understudied. To address
this, we introduce TRIAGE, a novel data characterization framework tailored to
regression tasks and compatible with a broad class of regressors. TRIAGE utilizes
conformal predictive distributions to provide a model-agnostic scoring method, the
TRIAGE score. We operationalize the score to analyze individual samples’ training
dynamics and characterize samples as under-, over-, or well-estimated by the model.
We show that TRIAGE’s characterization is consistent and highlight its utility to
improve performance via data sculpting/filtering, in multiple regression settings.
Additionally, beyond sample level, we show TRIAGE enables new approaches to
dataset selection and feature acquisition. Overall, TRIAGE highlights the value
unlocked by data characterization in real-world regression applications.

1

Introduction

Data characterization, an important problem. Over a decade ago, it was recognized that “more
data beats clever algorithms, but better data beats more data”[1], emphasizing the key role of training
data in the performance and robustness of ML algorithms [2–4]. In particular, training data from the
“wild” may have various errors or lack coverage, rendering it unsuitable for the ML task [5].
These observations motivate the need for data characterization, which aims to score each training
sample based on its impact on the performance of the ML task. The training data can then be
partitioned or rank ordered according to the score to give a high-level description of the sample and
its utility. Data characterization provides a natural way for data sculpting [6, 7], which filters training
samples that have a low or even detrimental effect on the ML task. The goal is that models built on
the sculpted/filtered (and smaller) training data have improved performance.
In this work, we address the understudied data characterization problem in regression settings. In
contrast, existing works on data characterization have primarily focused on the classification setting
[8–13]. These methods leverage the probability distribution over discrete labels (softmax or logits)
for scoring. However, in the equally important regression setting, the probability distribution over
the continuous labels are not typically given by standard regression models. In fact, the majority
of the regression models only output a point estimate, e.g. the predicted mean. Without access
to probabilistic estimates, one cannot simply apply the existing classification-tailored methods for
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

