Conditional Matrix Flows for
Gaussian Graphical Models

Marcello Massimo Negri
University of Basel
marcellomassimo.negri@unibas.ch

Fabricio Arend Torres
University of Basel
fabricio.arendtorres@unibas.ch

Volker Roth
University of Basel
volker.roth@unibas.ch

Abstract
Studying conditional independence among many variables with few observations
is a challenging task. Gaussian Graphical Models (GGMs) tackle this problem
by encouraging sparsity in the precision matrix through lq regularization with
q ≤ 1. However, most GMMs rely on the l1 norm because the objective is highly
non-convex for sub-l1 pseudo-norms. In the frequentist formulation, the l1 norm
relaxation provides the solution path as a function of the shrinkage parameter λ. In
the Bayesian formulation, sparsity is instead encouraged through a Laplace prior,
but posterior inference for different λ requires repeated runs of expensive Gibbs
samplers. Here we propose a general framework for variational inference with
matrix-variate Normalizing Flow in GGMs, which unifies the benefits of frequentist
and Bayesian frameworks. As a key improvement on previous work, we train with
one flow a continuum of sparse regression models jointly for all regularization
parameters λ and all lq norms, including non-convex sub-l1 pseudo-norms. Within
one model we thus have access to (i) the evolution of the posterior for any λ and
any lq (pseudo-) norm, (ii) the marginal log-likelihood for model selection, and
(iii) the frequentist solution paths through simulated annealing in the MAP limit.

1

Introduction

Estimating complex relationships between random variables is a central problem in science. When
only few observations are available, the problem becomes even more challenging. Examples include
functional connectivity in fMRI data [Smith et al., 2013], networks of interactions from microarray
data [Castelo and Roverato, 2006], or correlation patterns in longitudinal studies [Diggle, 2002].
In such cases, it is particularly challening to infer the conditional independence among random
variables. Graphical models are commonly used to represent such an independence structure in the
form of network graphs. In this work, we focus specifically on Gaussian Graphical Models (GGMs).
GGMs assume observations X ∈ Rn×d to be generated from a multivariate Gaussian distribution
X ∼ N (µ, Σ) with Xi,: being realizations of X for i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Here µ ∈ Rd denotes the mean
and Σ ∈ Rd×d the covariance matrix, which is symmetric positive definite Σ ≻ 0. GGMs provide a
simple interpretation of conditional independence through the precision matrix Ω = Σ−1 , whenever
Σ is non-singular. Specifically, Ωi,j = 0 implies that the pair of variables (i, j) is conditionally
independent given all remaining variables. That is to say, there is no edge between nodes i and j in
the underlying undirected graph.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

