Mixed-Initiative Multiagent Apprenticeship Learning
for Human Training of Robot Teams

Esmaeil Seraj
Georgia Institute of Technology
eseraj3@gatech.edu
Mariah Schrum
University of California Berkeley
mariahschrum@berkeley.edu

Jerry Xiong
Georgia Institute of Technology
jxiong60@gatech.edu
Matthew Gombolay
Georgia Institute of Technology
matthew.gombolay@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Extending recent advances in Learning from Demonstration (LfD) frameworks to
multi-robot settings poses critical challenges such as environment non-stationarity
due to partial observability which is detrimental to the applicability of existing
methods. Although prior work has shown that enabling communication among
agents of a robot team can alleviate such issues, creating inter-agent communication
under existing Multi-Agent LfD (MA-LfD) frameworks requires the human expert
to provide demonstrations for both environment actions and communication actions,
which necessitates an efficient communication strategy on a known message space.
To address this problem, we propose Mixed-Initiative Multi-Agent Apprenticeship
Learning (MixTURE). MixTURE enables robot teams to learn from a human
expert-generated data a preferred policy to accomplish a collaborative task, while
simultaneously learning emergent inter-agent communication to enhance team
coordination. The key ingredient to MixTURE’s success is automatically learning
a communication policy, enhanced by a mutual-information maximizing reverse
model that rationalizes the underlying expert demonstrations without the need for
human generated data or an auxiliary reward function. MixTURE outperforms
a variety of relevant baselines on diverse data generated by human experts in
complex heterogeneous domains. MixTURE is the first MA-LfD framework to
enable learning multi-robot collaborative policies directly from real human data,
resulting in 44% less human workload, and 46% higher usability score.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has been predominantly used by
researchers to optimize a reward signal and for learning multi-robot tasks. Nevertheless, RL generally
suffers from key limitations such as difficulty in designing an expressive and suitable reward function
for complex tasks [60, 2] which can lead to undesirable robot behavior [14, 60, 64], high sample
complexity [29], and safety concerns due to direct robot-environment interactions for optimizing
the policy [64]. These problems are further exacerbated in multi-robot scenarios where inter-robot
interactions and environment dynamics can be more complex and task descriptions and objectives
more ambiguous [60, 53, 52]. As such, accurate models of human strategies and behaviors achieved
via imitation methods are increasingly important for safely and effectively deploying autonomous
systems and aligning values motivating robot behaviors with human values [47, 22, 12].
Learning from Demonstration (LfD) attempts to learn the correct behavior (policy) from a set of
expert-generated demonstrations rather than a reward function, which can result in lower sample
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

