CoPriv: Network/Protocol Co-Optimization for
Communication-Efficient Private Inference
Wenxuan Zeng
Peking University
zwx.andy@stu.pku.edu.cn

Meng Li∗
Peking University
meng.li@pku.edu.cn

Haichuan Yang
Meta AI
haichuan@meta.com

Wen-jie Lu
Ant Group
juhou.lwj@antgroup.com

Runsheng Wang
Peking University
r.wang@pku.edu.cn

Ru Huang
Peking University
ruhuang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural network (DNN) inference based on secure 2-party computation (2PC)
can offer cryptographically-secure privacy protection but suffers from orders of
magnitude latency overhead due to enormous communication. Previous works
heavily rely on a proxy metric of ReLU counts to approximate the communication
overhead and focus on reducing the ReLUs to improve the communication efficiency. However, we observe these works achieve limited communication reduction
for state-of-the-art (SOTA) 2PC protocols due to the ignorance of other linear and
non-linear operations, which now contribute to the majority of communication. In
this work, we present CoPriv, a framework that jointly optimizes the 2PC inference
protocol and the DNN architecture. CoPriv features a new 2PC protocol for convolution based on Winograd transformation and develops DNN-aware optimization
to significantly reduce the inference communication. CoPriv further develops a
2PC-aware network optimization algorithm that is compatible with the proposed
protocol and simultaneously reduces the communication for all the linear and nonlinear operations. We compare CoPriv with the SOTA 2PC protocol, CrypTFlow2,
and demonstrate 2.1× communication reduction for both ResNet-18 and ResNet32 on CIFAR-100. We also compare CoPriv with SOTA network optimization
methods, including SNL, MetaPruning, etc. CoPriv achieves 9.98× and 3.88×
online and total communication reduction with a higher accuracy compared to
SNL, respectively. CoPriv also achieves 3.87× online communication reduction
with more than 3% higher accuracy compared to MetaPruning.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has been applied to increasingly sensitive and private data and tasks, for which privacy
emerges as one of the major concerns. To alleviate the privacy concerns when deploying the deep
neural network (DNN) models, secure two-party computation (2PC) based DNN inference is proposed
and enables cryptographically-strong privacy guarantee [39, 28, 48, 44, 25, 24, 47].
Secure 2PC helps solve the following dilemma [28, 48, 44]: the server owns a private model and the
client owns private data. The server is willing to provide the machine learning as a service (MLaaS)
but does not want to give it out directly. The client wants to apply the model on the private data
without revealing it as well. Secure 2PC frameworks can fulfill both parties’ requirements: two
parties can learn the inference results but nothing else beyond what can be derived from the results.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

