VAST: A Vision-Audio-Subtitle-Text Omni-Modality
Foundation Model and Dataset
Sihan Chen12∗, Handong Li12∗, Qunbo Wang2 ,
Zijia Zhao21 , Mingzhen Sun21 , Xinxin Zhu2 , Jing Liu12†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science
{sihan.chen, xinxin.zhu, jliu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,
{lihandong2023, qunbo.wang, zhaozijia2021, sunmingzhen2020}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Vision and text have been fully explored in contemporary video-text foundational
models, while other modalities such as audio and subtitles in videos have not
received sufficient attention. In this paper, we resort to establish connections
between multi-modality video tracks, including Vision, Audio, and Subtitle, and
Text by exploring an automatically generated large-scale omni-modality video
caption dataset called VAST-27M. Specifically, we first collect 27 million opendomain video clips and separately train a vision and an audio captioner to generate
vision and audio captions. Then, we employ an off-the-shelf Large Language Model
(LLM) to integrate the generated captions, together with subtitles and instructional
prompts into omni-modality captions. Based on the proposed VAST-27M dataset,
we train an omni-modality video-text foundational model named VAST, which
can perceive and process vision, audio, and subtitle modalities from video, and
better support various tasks including vision-text, audio-text, and multi-modal
video-text tasks (retrieval, captioning and QA). Extensive experiments have been
conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed VAST-27M corpus
and VAST foundation model. VAST achieves 22 new state-of-the-art results on
various cross-modality benchmarks. Code, model and dataset will be released at
https://github.com/TXH-mercury/VAST.

1

Introduction

A vast number of videos are recorded and uploaded to social media platforms every day, making
the understanding of video content become a critical area of research in artificial intelligence.
Simultaneously, the text serves as the most direct and efficient means of information propagation
in our daily lives. Consequently, video-text cross-modality learning is crucial for AI systems to
interact with humans, assisting them in understanding video content (video captioning), searching
for desired videos (text-to-video retrieval), or answering questions about videos (video QA). With
the advent of unsupervised pre-training techniques [1; 2] and large-scale video-text corpora [3; 4],
video-text pre-training models have made rapid advancements and achieved relatively impressive
performances on the aforementioned tasks. However, we contend that current pre-training models
are far from perfect, as most of them are restricted to establishing connections solely between
the text and visual content of videos, without incorporating other modality tracks such as audio
and subtitles. Specifically, environmental audio can provide additional contexts overlapping with
the visual information to reduce ambiguity and increase the prediction confidence of models, or
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

