Look Beneath the Surface: Exploiting Fundamental
Symmetry for Sample-Efficient Offline RL

Peng Cheng∗ 1,3 , Xianyuan Zhan∗ † 2,4 , Zhihao Wu† 1,3 , Wenjia Zhang2 ,
Shoucheng Song1,3 , Han Wang1,3 , Youfang Lin1,3 , Li Jiang2
1
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing, China
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
pcheng6@126.com, zhanxianyuan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn,
zhwu, yflin@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) offers an appealing approach to real-world
tasks by learning policies from pre-collected datasets without interacting with the
environment. However, the performance of existing offline RL algorithms heavily
depends on the scale and state-action space coverage of datasets. Real-world data
collection is often expensive and uncontrollable, leading to small and narrowly covered datasets and posing significant challenges for practical deployments of offline
RL. In this paper, we provide a new insight that leveraging the fundamental symmetry of system dynamics can substantially enhance offline RL performance under
small datasets. Specifically, we propose a Time-reversal symmetry (T-symmetry)
enforced Dynamics Model (TDM), which establishes consistency between a pair
of forward and reverse latent dynamics. TDM provides both well-behaved representations for small datasets and a new reliability measure for OOD samples
based on compliance with the T-symmetry. These can be readily used to construct
a new offline RL algorithm (TSRL) with less conservative policy constraints and a
reliable latent space data augmentation procedure. Based on extensive experiments,
we find TSRL achieves great performance on small benchmark datasets with as few
as 1% of the original samples, which significantly outperforms the recent offline
RL algorithms in terms of data efficiency and generalizability. Code is available at:
https://github.com/pcheng2/TSRL

1

Introduction

The recently emerged offline reinforcement learning (RL) provides a new paradigm to learn policies
from pre-collected datasets without the need to interact with the environments [1, 2, 3]. This is
particularly desirable for solving practical tasks, as interacting with real-world systems can be costly
or risky, and high-fidelity simulators are also hard to build [4]. However, existing offline RL methods
have high requirements on the size and quality of offline datasets in order to achieve reasonable
performance. When such requirements are not met, these algorithms may suffer from severe performance drop, as illustrated in Figure 1. Current offline RL algorithms are trained and validated on
benchmark datasets (e.g., D4RL [5]) that contain millions of transitions for simple tasks. Whereas
under realistic settings, it is often impractical or costly to collect such a large amount of data, and the
real datasets might only narrowly cover the state-action space. Clearly, learning reliable policies from
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

