Learning Transformer Programs

Dan Friedman Alexander Wettig Danqi Chen
Department of Computer Science & Princeton Language and Intelligence
Princeton University
{dfriedman,awettig,danqic}@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Recent research in mechanistic interpretability has attempted to reverse-engineer
Transformer models by carefully inspecting network weights and activations. However, these approaches require considerable manual effort and still fall short of
providing complete, faithful descriptions of the underlying algorithms. In this
work, we introduce a procedure for training Transformers that are mechanistically
interpretable by design. We build on RASP [Weiss et al., 2021], a programming
language that can be compiled into Transformer weights. Instead of compiling
human-written programs into Transformers, we design a modified Transformer that
can be trained using gradient-based optimization and then automatically converted
into a discrete, human-readable program. We refer to these models as Transformer
Programs. To validate our approach, we learn Transformer Programs for a variety
of problems, including an in-context learning task, a suite of algorithmic problems
(e.g. sorting, recognizing Dyck-languages), and NLP tasks including named entity
recognition and text classification. The Transformer Programs can automatically
find reasonable solutions, performing on par with standard Transformers of comparable size; and, more importantly, they are easy to interpret. To demonstrate these
advantages, we convert Transformers into Python programs and use off-the-shelf
code analysis tools to debug model errors and identify the “circuits” used to solve
different sub-problems. We hope that Transformer Programs open a new path
toward the goal of intrinsically interpretable machine learning.1

1

Introduction

Transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017] have become the predominant neural network architecture in machine learning, representing the state-of-the-art in natural language processing (NLP) and increasingly
in computer vision, molecular modeling and other domains. Prominently, large Transformer-based
language models [LLMs; Brown et al., 2020] have demonstrated impressive general-purpose capabilities and are now widely deployed as components in user-facing AI applications such as chatbots,
search engines, and code assistants. However, these systems are fundamentally limited by a lack of
interpretability, which makes them difficult to audit, debug, and maintain. This black-box quality
poses practical challenges and limits the usefulness of these models in high-stakes applications.
As a result, a considerable body of work has aimed at improving our understanding of Transformers. In NLP, much of this work has focused on pre-trained Transformer language models such
as BERT [Devlin et al., 2019], using a variety of post-hoc methods, including analyzing attention
patterns [Clark et al., 2019] and probing hidden representations [e.g., Tenney et al., 2019, Belinkov,
2022]. These post-hoc approaches can provide partial insight into model behavior but have also been
shown to be misleading [Jain and Wallace, 2019, Bolukbasi et al., 2021]; in any case, they do not
provide a complete or faithful description of the algorithm that the model implements. More recently,
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/princeton-nlp/TransformerPrograms, along with a
number of example Transformer Programs.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

