Unified Off-Policy Learning to Rank: a Reinforcement
Learning Perspective

Zeyu Zhang1 Yi Su2∗ Hui Yuan3 Yiran Wu4 Rishab Balasubramanian5
Qingyun Wu4 Huazheng Wang5∗ Mengdi Wang3
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Google Deepmind 3 Princeton University
4
Penn State University 5 Oregon State University
zgkd2019zzy@mail.ustc.edu.cn
yisumtv@google.com
{huiyuan, mengdiw}@princeton.edu {ykw5399, qingyun.wu}@psu.edu
{balasuri, huazheng.wang}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Off-policy Learning to Rank (LTR) aims to optimize a ranker from data collected by
a deployed logging policy. However, existing off-policy learning to rank methods
often make strong assumptions about how users generate the click data, i.e., the
click model, and hence need to tailor their methods specifically under different
click models. In this paper, we unified the ranking process under general stochastic click models as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), and the optimal ranking
could be learned with offline reinforcement learning (RL) directly. Building upon
this, we leverage offline RL techniques for off-policy LTR and propose the Click
Model-Agnostic Unified Off-policy Learning to Rank (CUOLR) method, which
could be easily applied to a wide range of click models. Through a dedicated
formulation of the MDP, we show that offline RL algorithms can adapt to various
click models without complex debiasing techniques and prior knowledge of the
model. Results on various large-scale datasets demonstrate that CUOLR consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art off-policy learning to rank algorithms while
maintaining consistency and robustness under different click models.

1

Introduction

Learning to Rank (LTR) is a core problem in Information Retrieval (IR) with wide applications
such as web search and recommender systems [33]. Traditional LTR methods require high-quality
annotated relevance judgments for model training, which is expensive, time-consuming, and may
not align with actual user preferences [41]. As a result, learning to rank with implicit user feedback,
such as logged click data, has received a huge amount of attention in both academia and industry
[23, 26, 53].
Despite its low cost, learning to rank directly from implicit user feedback could suffer from the
intrinsic noise and bias in user interactions, e.g., position bias, where an item displayed at a higher
position receives a higher click-through rate (CTR) than its relevance [12]. To mitigate the bias in the
click data, off-policy learning to rank methods have been proposed under different bias assumptions
such as position bias [53, 2], selection bias [52] and trust bias [36, 9]. A major branch of off-policy
learning to rank called counterfactual learning to rank achieves unbiasedness by re-weighting the
samples using the inverse propensity scoring (IPS) method [46, 2, 27]. To estimate the propensity
from logged click data, existing works require explicit assumptions about how users examine the
rank list and generate the click data, i.e., click models [12, 10]. For example, position-based model
∗

Correspondence to: Yi Su and Huazheng Wang

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

