Learning Curves for Noisy Heterogeneous
Feature-Subsampled Ridge Ensembles
Benjamin S. Ruben1 , Cengiz Pehlevan2,3,4
2

1
Biophysics Graduate Program
Center for Brain Science, 3 John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, 4 Kempner
Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence,
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
benruben@g.harvard.edu, cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Feature bagging is a well-established ensembling method which aims to reduce
prediction variance by combining predictions of many estimators trained on subsets
or projections of features. Here, we develop a theory of feature-bagging in noisy
least-squares ridge ensembles and simplify the resulting learning curves in the special case of equicorrelated data. Using analytical learning curves, we demonstrate
that subsampling shifts the double-descent peak of a linear predictor. This leads
us to introduce heterogeneous feature ensembling, with estimators built on varying
numbers of feature dimensions, as a computationally efficient method to mitigate
double-descent. Then, we compare the performance of a feature-subsampling
ensemble to a single linear predictor, describing a trade-off between noise amplification due to subsampling and noise reduction due to ensembling. Our qualitative
insights carry over to linear classifiers applied to image classification tasks with
realistic datasets constructed using a state-of-the-art deep learning feature map.

1

Introduction

Ensembling methods are ubiquitous in machine learning practice [1]. A class of ensembling methods
(known as attribute bagging [2] or the random subspace method [3]) is based on feature subsampling
[2–6], where predictors are independently trained on subsets of the features, and their predictions are
combined to achieve a stronger prediction. The random forest method is a popular example [3, 7].
While commonly used in practice, a theoretical understanding of ensembling via feature subsampling
is not well developed. Here, we provide an analysis of this technique in the linear ridge regression
setting. Using methods from statistical physics [8–12], we obtain analytical expressions for typicalcase generalization error in linear ridge ensembles (proposition 1), and simplify these expressions
in the special case of equicorrelated data with isotropic feature noise (proposition 2). The result
provides a powerful tool to quickly probe the generalization error of ensembled regression under a
rich set of conditions. In section 3, we study the behavior of a single feature-subsampling regression
model. We observe that subsampling shifts the location of a predictor’s sample-wise double-descent
peak [13–15]. This motivates section 4, where we study ensembles built on predictors which are
heterogeneous in the number of features they access, as a method to mitigate double-descent. We
demonstrate this method’s efficacy in a realistic image classification task. In section 5 we apply our
theory to the trade-off between ensembling and subsampling in resource-constrained settings. We
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

