Practical Equivariances via
Relational Conditional Neural Processes
Daolang Huang1
Grégoire Clarté3

Manuel Haussmann1
Kevin Sebastian Luck4,6

Ulpu Remes2
Samuel Kaski1,5

ST John1
Luigi Acerbi3

1

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Helsinki
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki
4
Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation (EEA), Aalto University, Finland
5
Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester
6
Department of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{daolang.huang, manuel.haussmann, ti.john, samuel.kaski}@aalto.fi
k.s.luck@vu.nl
{ulpu.remes, gregoire.clarte, luigi.acerbi}@helsinki.fi
2

Abstract
Conditional Neural Processes (CNPs) are a class of metalearning models popular for combining the runtime efficiency of amortized inference with reliable
uncertainty quantification. Many relevant machine learning tasks, such as in spatiotemporal modeling, Bayesian Optimization and continuous control, inherently
contain equivariances – for example to translation – which the model can exploit
for maximal performance. However, prior attempts to include equivariances in
CNPs do not scale effectively beyond two input dimensions. In this work, we
propose Relational Conditional Neural Processes (RCNPs), an effective approach
to incorporate equivariances into any neural process model. Our proposed method
extends the applicability and impact of equivariant neural processes to higher dimensions. We empirically demonstrate the competitive performance of RCNPs on
a large array of tasks naturally containing equivariances.

1

Introduction

Conditional Neural Processes (CNPs; [10]) have emerged as a powerful family of metalearning
models, offering the flexibility of deep learning along with well-calibrated uncertainty estimates and a
tractable training objective. CNPs can naturally handle irregular and missing data, making them suitable for a wide range of applications. Various advancements, such as attentive (ACNP; [20]) and Gaussian (GNP; [30]) variants, have further broadened the applicability of CNPs. In principle, CNPs can
be trained on other general-purpose stochastic processes, such as Gaussian Processes (GPs; [34]), and
be used as an amortized, drop-in replacement for those, with minimal computational cost at runtime.
However, despite their numerous advantages, CNPs face substantial challenges when attempting to
model equivariances, such as translation equivariance, which are essential for problems involving
spatio-temporal components or for emulating widely used GP kernels in tasks such as Bayesian
Optimization (BayesOpt; [12]). In the context of CNPs, kernel properties like stationarity and isotropy
would correspond to, respectively, translational equivariance and equivariance to rigid transformations.
Lacking such equivariances, CNPs struggle to scale effectively and emulate (equivariant) GPs even
in moderate higher-dimensional input spaces (i.e., above two). Follow-up work has introduced
Convolutional CNPs (ConvCNP; [15]), which leverage a convolutional deep sets construction to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

