Adversarial Counterfactual Environment Model
Learning

Xiong-Hui Chen1,2,4,∗, Yang Yu1,2,4,∗,†, Zheng-Mao Zhu1,2 , Zhihua Yu1,2,3 , Zhenjun Chen1,2,3 ,
Chenghe Wang1,2 , Yinan Wu3 , Hongqiu Wu1,2 , Rong-Jun Qin1,2,4 ,Ruijin Ding5 , Fangsheng Huang3
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, 3 Meituan, 4 Polixir.ai, 5 Tsinghua University
{chenxh, yuy, zhuzm}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {yuzh,chenzj}@smail.nju.edu.cn
wangch@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wuyinan02@meituan.com, {wuhq,qinrj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
drj17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, huangfangsheng@meituan.com

Abstract
An accurate environment dynamics model is crucial for various downstream tasks
in sequential decision-making, such as counterfactual prediction, off-policy evaluation, and offline reinforcement learning. Currently, these models were learned
through empirical risk minimization (ERM) by step-wise fitting of historical transition data. This way was previously believed unreliable over long-horizon rollouts
because of the compounding errors, which can lead to uncontrollable inaccuracies
in predictions. In this paper, we find that the challenge extends beyond just longterm prediction errors: we reveal that even when planning with one step, learned
dynamics models can also perform poorly due to the selection bias of behavior
policies during data collection. This issue will significantly mislead the policy
optimization process even in identifying single-step optimal actions, further leading
to a greater risk in sequential decision-making scenarios. To tackle this problem,
we introduce a novel model-learning objective called adversarial weighted empirical risk minimization (AWRM). AWRM incorporates an adversarial policy
that exploits the model to generate a data distribution that weakens the model’s
prediction accuracy, and subsequently, the model is learned under this adversarial
data distribution. We implement a practical algorithm, GALILEO, for AWRM and
evaluate it on two synthetic tasks, three continuous-control tasks, and a real-world
application. The experiments demonstrate that GALILEO can accurately predict
counterfactual actions and improve various downstream tasks, including offline
policy evaluation and improvement, as well as online decision-making.

1

Introduction

A good environment dynamics model for action-effect prediction is essential for many downstream
tasks. For example, humans or agents can leverage this model to conduct simulations to understand
future outcomes, evaluate other policies’ performance, and discover better policies. With environment
models, costly real-world trial-and-error processes can be avoided. These tasks are vital research
problems in counterfactual predictions [52, 1], off-policy evaluation (OPE) [32, 35], and offline
reinforcement learning (Offline RL) [31, 59, 12, 13, 10]. In these problems, the core role of the
models is to answer queries on counterfactual data unbiasedly, that is, given states, correctly answer
what might happen if we were to carry out actions unseen in the training data. However, addressing
counterfactual queries differentiates environment model learning from standard supervised learning
(SL), which directly fits the offline dataset for empirical risk minimization (ERM). In essence,
∗
†

The authors contribute equally
Yang Yu is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

