Strategic Distribution Shift of Interacting Agents
via Coupled Gradient Flows

Lauren Conger
California Institute of Technology
lconger@caltech.edu

Franca Hoffmann
California Institute of Technology
franca.hoffmann@caltech.edu

Eric Mazumdar
California Institute of Technology
mazumdar@caltech.edu

Lillian Ratliff
University of Washington
ratliffl@uw.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel framework for analyzing the dynamics of distribution shift in
real-world systems that captures the feedback loop between learning algorithms and
the distributions on which they are deployed. Prior work largely models feedbackinduced distribution shift as adversarial or via an overly simplistic distribution-shift
structure. In contrast, we propose a coupled partial differential equation model that
captures fine-grained changes in the distribution over time by accounting for complex dynamics that arise due to strategic responses to algorithmic decision-making,
non-local endogenous population interactions, and other exogenous sources of distribution shift. We consider two common settings in machine learning: cooperative
settings with information asymmetries, and competitive settings where a learner
faces strategic users. For both of these settings, when the algorithm retrains via
gradient descent, we prove asymptotic convergence of the retraining procedure to
a steady-state, both in finite and in infinite dimensions, obtaining explicit rates in
terms of the model parameters. To do so we derive new results on the convergence
of coupled PDEs that extends what is known on multi-species systems. Empirically,
we show that our approach captures well-documented forms of distribution shifts
like polarization and disparate impacts that simpler models cannot capture.

1

Introduction

In many machine learning tasks, there are commonly sources of exogenous and endogenous distribution shift, necessitating that the algorithm be retrained repeatedly over time. Some of these
shifts occur without the influence of an algorithm; for example, individuals influence each other to
become more or less similar in their attributes, or benign forms of distributional shift occur [Qui+].
Other shifts, however, are in response to algorithmic decision-making. Indeed, the very use of a
decision-making algorithm can incentivize individuals to change or mis-report their data to achieve
desired outcomes— a phenomenon known in economics as Goodhart’s law. Such phenomena have
been empirically observed, a well-known example being in [CC11], where researchers observed
a population in Columbia strategically mis-reporting data to game a poverty index score used for
distributing government assistance. Works such as [Mil+20; Wil+21], which investigate the effects of
distribution shift over time on a machine learning algorithm, point toward the need for evaluating the
robustness of algorithms to distribution shifts. Many existing approaches for modeling distribution
shift focus on simple metrics like optimizing over moments or covariates [DY10; LHL21; BBS09].
Other methods consider worst-case scenarios, as in distributionally robust optimization [AZ22;
LFG22; DN21; Kuh+19]. However, when humans respond to algorithms, these techniques may not
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

