Generalised f -Mean Aggregation
for Graph Neural Networks

Ryan Kortvelesy, Steven Morad and Amanda Prorok
University of Cambridge
{rk627, sm2558, asp45}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Graph Neural Network (GNN) architectures are defined by their implementations
of update and aggregation modules. While many works focus on new ways to
parametrise the update modules, the aggregation modules receive comparatively
little attention. Because it is difficult to parametrise aggregation functions, currently most methods select a “standard aggregator” such as mean, sum, or max.
While this selection is often made without any reasoning, it has been shown that
the choice in aggregator has a significant impact on performance, and the best
choice in aggregator is problem-dependent. Since aggregation is a lossy operation, it is crucial to select the most appropriate aggregator in order to minimise
information loss. In this paper, we present GenAgg, a generalised aggregation
operator, which parametrises a function space that includes all standard aggregators. In our experiments, we show that GenAgg is able to represent the standard
aggregators with much higher accuracy than baseline methods. We also show that
using GenAgg as a drop-in replacement for an existing aggregator in a GNN often
leads to a significant boost in performance across various tasks.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) provide a powerful
framework for operating over structured data. Taking advantage of relational inductive biases, they
use local filters to learn functions that generalise
over high-dimensional data. Given different graph
structures, GNNs can represent many special cases,
including CNNs (on grid graphs) [12], RNNs (on
line graphs) [4], and Transformers (on fully connected graphs) [19]. All of these architectures
can be subsumed under the Graph Networks framework, parametrised by update and aggregation modules [2]. Although the framework itself is general,
the representational capacity is often constrained in
practice through design choices, which create a human prior [21]. There are two primary reasons for
introducing this human prior. First, there are no standard methods to parametrise all of the modules—
MLPs can be used as universal approximators in the
update modules, but it is nontrivial to parametrise the
function space of aggregators. Consequently, most
GNNs simply make a design choice for the aggregation functions, selecting mean, sum, or max [21].

(a) θ = ⟨σ(x), 0, −1⟩

(b) θ = ⟨ex , 0, 0⟩

(c) θ = ⟨log(|x|), 0, 0⟩

(d) θ = ⟨tanh(x), 0, 0⟩

(e) θ = ⟨ex , 0, 1⟩

(f) θ = ⟨log(|x|), 0, 1⟩

Figure 1: A qualitative demonstration of the diversity of functions that can be represented by
GenAgg. In these visualisations, GenAgg is plotted as a function of inputs x0 and x1 for different
parametrisations θ = ⟨f, α, β⟩ (see Equation (1)).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

