A graphon-signal analysis of graph neural networks

Ron Levie
Faculty of Mathematics
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
levieron@technion.ac.il

Abstract
We present an approach for analyzing message passing graph neural networks
(MPNNs) based on an extension of graphon analysis to a so called graphon-signal
analysis. A MPNN is a function that takes a graph and a signal on the graph
(a graph-signal) and returns some value. Since the input space of MPNNs is
non-Euclidean, i.e., graphs can be of any size and topology, properties such as
generalization are less well understood for MPNNs than for Euclidean neural
networks. We claim that one important missing ingredient in past work is a
meaningful notion of graph-signal similarity measure, that endows the space of
inputs to MPNNs with a regular structure. We present such a similarity measure,
called the graphon-signal cut distance, which makes the space of all graph-signals a
dense subset of a compact metric space – the graphon-signal space. Informally, two
deterministic graph-signals are close in cut distance if they “look like” they were
sampled from the same random graph-signal model. Hence, our cut distance is a
natural notion of graph-signal similarity, which allows comparing any pair of graphsignals of any size and topology. We prove that MPNNs are Lipschitz continuous
functions over the graphon-signal metric space. We then give two applications of
this result: 1) a generalization bound for MPNNs, and, 2) the stability of MPNNs
to subsampling of graph-signals. Our results apply to any regular enough MPNN
on any distribution of graph-signals, making the analysis rather universal.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the need to accommodate non-regular structures in data science has brought a
boom in machine learning methods on graphs. Graph deep learning (GDL) has already made a
significant impact on the applied sciences and industry, with ground-breaking achievements in
computational biology [2, 10, 17, 28], and a wide adoption as a general-purpose tool in social
media, e-commerce, and online marketing platforms, among others. These achievements pose
exciting theoretical challenges: can the success of GDL models be grounded in solid mathematical
frameworks? Since the input space of a GDL model is non-Euclidean, i.e., graphs can be of any
size and any topology, less is known about GDL than standard neural networks. We claim that
contemporary theories of GDL are missing an important ingredient: meaningful notions of metric on
the input space, namely, graph similarity measures that are defined for all graphs of any size, which
respect and describe in some sense the behavior of GDL models. In this paper, we aim at providing
an analysis of GDL by introducing such appropriate metrics, using graphon theory.
A graphon is an extension of the notion of a graph, where the node set is parameterized by a probability
space instead of a finite set. Graphons can be seen as limit objects of graphs, as the number of nodes
increases to infinity, under an appropriate metric. One result from graphon theory (that reformulates
Szemerédi’s regularity lemma from discrete mathematics) states that any sufficiently large graph
behaves as if it was randomly sampled from a stochastic block model with a fixed number of classes.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

