Fast Model Debias with Machine Unlearning

Ruizhe Chen1 , Jianfei Yang2 , Huimin Xiong1 , Jianhong Bai1 , Tianxiang Hu1 , Jin Hao3 ,
Yang Feng4 , Joey Tianyi Zhou5 , Jian Wu1 , Zuozhu Liu1∗
1
Zhejiang University 2 Nanyang Technological University
3
Stanford University 4 Angelalign Technology Inc. 5 Centre for Frontier AI Research
ruizhec.21@intl.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent discoveries have revealed that deep neural networks might behave in a
biased manner in many real-world scenarios. For instance, deep networks trained on
a large-scale face recognition dataset CelebA tend to predict blonde hair for females
and black hair for males. Such biases not only jeopardize the robustness of models
but also perpetuate and amplify social biases, which is especially concerning for
automated decision-making processes in healthcare, recruitment, etc., as they could
exacerbate unfair economic and social inequalities among different groups. Existing
debiasing methods suffer from high costs in bias labeling or model re-training,
while also exhibiting a deficiency in terms of elucidating the origins of biases
within the model. To this respect, we propose a fast model debiasing framework
(FMD) which offers an efficient approach to identify, evaluate and remove biases
inherent in trained models. The FMD identifies biased attributes through an explicit
counterfactual concept and quantifies the influence of data samples with influence
functions. Moreover, we design a machine unlearning-based strategy to efficiently
and effectively remove the bias in a trained model with a small counterfactual
dataset. Experiments on the Colored MNIST, CelebA, and Adult Income datasets
along with experiments with large language models demonstrate that our method
achieves superior or competing accuracies compared with state-of-the-art methods
while attaining significantly fewer biases and requiring much less debiasing cost.
Notably, our method requires only a small external dataset and updating a minimal
amount of model parameters, without the requirement of access to training data
that may be too large or unavailable in practice.

1

Introduction

Biased predictions are not uncommon in well-trained deep neural networks [1–3]. Recent findings
indicate that many deep neural networks exhibit biased behaviors and fail to generalize to unseen
data [4, 5], e.g., convolutional neural networks (CNNs) might favor texture over shape for object
classification [6]. For instance, well-trained networks on a large-scale dataset (e.g. CelebA) tend to
predict a female person to be with blonde hair, and a male to be with black hair [7, 8]. This is because
the number of <blonder hair, female> and <black hair, male> image pairs is significantly higher than
others, although there is no causal relationship between hair color and gender [9]. In this case, the
model does not learn the correct classification strategy based on human appearance, but rather shows
a preference for specific individuals or groups based on irrelevant attributes (error correlations) [2].
Such error correlations not only affect the model’s ability to make robust predictions but also
perpetuate and exacerbate social bias, resulting in potential risks in many real-world scenarios, such
as racism, underestimating minorities, or social disparities among groups in crime prediction [10],
loan assessment [11], and recruitment [12] etc.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

