Moment Matching Denoising Gibbs Sampling

Mingtian Zhang∗
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London
m.zhang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Alex Hawkins-Hooker
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London
a.hawkins-hooker@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Brooks Paige
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London
b.paige@ucl.ac.uk

David Barber
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London
david.barber@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Energy-Based Models (EBMs) offer a versatile framework for modeling complex data distributions. However, training and sampling from EBMs continue to
pose significant challenges. The widely-used Denoising Score Matching (DSM)
method [41] for scalable EBM training suffers from inconsistency issues, causing
the energy model to learn a ‘noisy’ data distribution. In this work, we propose an
efficient sampling framework, (pseudo)-Gibbs sampling with moment matching,
which enables effective sampling from the underlying clean model when given a
‘noisy’ model that has been well-trained via DSM. We explore the benefits of our
approach compared to related methods and demonstrate how to scale the method
to high-dimensional datasets.

1

Energy-Based Models

Energy-Based Models (EBMs) have attracted a lot of attention in the generative model literature [25,
46, 7, 35]. EBMs are a type of non-normalized probabilistic model that determines the probability
density function without a known normalizing constant. For continuous data x, the density function
of an EBM is specified asRqθ (x) = exp(−fθ (x))/Z(θ) where the fθ (x) is a nonlinear function with
parameter θ and Z(θ) = exp(−fθ (x)) dx is the normalization constant that is independent of x.
The energy parameterization allows for greater flexibility in model parameterization and the ability to
model a wider range of probability distributions. However, the lack of a known normalizing constant
makes training these models challenging. We start by giving a brief introduction of how to estimate
θ in EBMs and refer the reader to [37] for a detailed overview of different training techniques for
continuous EBMs.
Likelihood-based training: A classic method to learn θ is to minimize the KL divergence between
the data distribution pd and the model density qθ , which is defined as
Z
Z
.
.
KL(pd ||qθ ) = − pd (x) log qθ (x) dx = − pd (x)fθ (x) dx − log Z(θ),
(1)
.
where we use = to denote the equivalence up to a constant that is independent of θ. The integration
of pd (x) can be approximated by Monte Carlo with the training dataset Xtrain = {x1 , · · · , xN } ∼
pd (x); in this case, it is equivalent to the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) [5]. However, for
EBMs, minimizing the KL divergence requires the estimation of Z(θ), which is intractable for
nonlinear fθ (x) defined by a neural network. Various methods have been proposed to alleviate the
∗

This work was partially done during an internship in Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

