DIFUSCO: Graph-based Diffusion Solvers
for Combinatorial Optimization

Zhiqing Sun∗
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
zhiqings@cs.cmu.edu

Yiming Yang
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
yiming@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Neural network-based Combinatorial Optimization (CO) methods have shown
promising results in solving various NP-complete (NPC) problems without relying
on hand-crafted domain knowledge. This paper broadens the current scope of
neural solvers for NPC problems by introducing a new graph-based diffusion
framework, namely DIFUSCO. Our framework casts NPC problems as discrete
{0, 1}-vector optimization problems and leverages graph-based denoising diffusion
models to generate high-quality solutions. We investigate two types of diffusion
models with Gaussian and Bernoulli noise, respectively, and devise an effective
inference schedule to enhance the solution quality. We evaluate our methods on
two well-studied NPC combinatorial optimization problems: Traveling Salesman
Problem (TSP) and Maximal Independent Set (MIS). Experimental results show
that DIFUSCO strongly outperforms the previous state-of-the-art neural solvers,
improving the performance gap between ground-truth and neural solvers from
1.76% to 0.46% on TSP-500, from 2.46% to 1.17% on TSP-1000, and from
3.19% to 2.58% on TSP-10000. For the MIS problem, DIFUSCO outperforms the
previous state-of-the-art neural solver on the challenging SATLIB benchmark.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial Optimization (CO) problems are mathematical problems that involve finding the
optimal solution in a discrete space. They are fundamental challenges in computer science, especially
the NP-Complete (NPC) class of problems, which are believed to be intractable in polynomial time.
Traditionally, NPC solvers rely on integer programming (IP) or hand-crafted heuristics, which demand
significant expert efforts to approximate near-optimal solutions [4, 31].
Recent development in deep learning has shown new promise in solving NPC problems. Existing
neural CO solvers for NPC problems can be roughly classified into three categories based on how
the solutions are generated, i.e., the autoregressive constructive solvers, the non-autoregressive
constructive solvers, and the improvement heuristics solvers. Methods in the first category use
autoregressive factorization to sequentially grow a valid partial solution [6, 64]. Those methods
typically suffer from the costly computation in their sequential decoding parts and hence are difficult
to scale up to large problems [27]. Methods in the second category rely on non-autoregressive
modeling for scaling up, with a conditional independence assumption among variables as typical
[53, 55, 92]. Such an assumption, however, unavoidably limits the capability of those methods
to capture the multimodal nature of the problems [57, 33], for example, when multiple optimal
solutions exists for the same graph. Methods in the third category (improvement heuristics solvers)
use a Markov decision process (MDP) to iteratively refines an existing feasible solution with neural
network-guided local operations such as 2-opt [71, 2] and node swap [17, 113]. These methods
∗

Our code is available at https://github.com/Edward-Sun/DIFUSCO.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

