ZoomTrack: Target-aware Non-uniform Resizing for
Efficient Visual Tracking

Yutong Kou1,2 , Jin Gao1,2∗, Bing Li1,5 , Gang Wang4∗ ,
Weiming Hu1,2,3 , Yizheng Wang4 , Liang Li4∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), CASIA
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
4
Beijing Institute of Basic Medical Sciences 5 People AI, Inc
kouyutong2021@ia.ac.cn, {jin.gao,bli,wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,
liang.li.brain@aliyun.com, g_wang@foxmail.com, yzwang57@sina.com

Abstract
Recently, the transformer has enabled the speed-oriented trackers to approach stateof-the-art (SOTA) performance with high-speed thanks to the smaller input size or
the lighter feature extraction backbone, though they still substantially lag behind
their corresponding performance-oriented versions. In this paper, we demonstrate
that it is possible to narrow or even close this gap while achieving high tracking
speed based on the smaller input size. To this end, we non-uniformly resize the
cropped image to have a smaller input size while the resolution of the area where
the target is more likely to appear is higher and vice versa. This enables us to
solve the dilemma of attending to a larger visual field while retaining more raw
information for the target despite a smaller input size. Our formulation for the nonuniform resizing can be efficiently solved through quadratic programming (QP)
and naturally integrated into most of the crop-based local trackers. Comprehensive
experiments on five challenging datasets based on two kinds of transformer trackers,
i.e., OSTrack and TransT, demonstrate consistent improvements over them. In
particular, applying our method to the speed-oriented version of OSTrack even
outperforms its performance-oriented counterpart by 0.6% AUC on TNL2K, while
running 50% faster and saving over 55% MACs. Codes and models are available
at https://github.com/Kou-99/ZoomTrack.

1

Introduction

In visual tracking, many efforts have
been made to improve the discrimination and localization ability of the
tracking models, including deeper networks [18, 34], transformer feature
fusion [8, 31, 21, 19], joint feature
extraction and interaction [33, 7, 9],
and so on. However, most of the recent tracking algorithms, including
the transformer-based [33, 7, 19, 9],
still follow the paradigm proposed
by Bertinetto et al. [3], in which a
small exemplar image cropped from Figure 1: Our method consistently improves the OSTrack
and TransT baselines with negligible computation.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

