Improving Adversarial Transferability via
Intermediate-level Perturbation Decay

Qizhang Li1,2 , Yiwen Guo3 ∗ , Wangmeng Zuo1∗, Hao Chen4
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 Tencent Security Big Data Lab, 3 Independent Researcher, 4 UC Davis
{liqizhang95,guoyiwen89}@gmail.com wmzuo@hit.edu.cn chen@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Intermediate-level attacks that attempt to perturb feature representations following
an adversarial direction drastically have shown favorable performance in crafting
transferable adversarial examples. Existing methods in this category are normally
formulated with two separate stages, where a directional guide is required to be
determined at first and the scalar projection of the intermediate-level perturbation
onto the directional guide is enlarged thereafter. The obtained perturbation deviates
from the guide inevitably in the feature space, and it is revealed in this paper that
such a deviation may lead to sub-optimal attack. To address this issue, we develop
a novel intermediate-level method that crafts adversarial examples within a single
stage of optimization. In particular, the proposed method, named intermediate-level
perturbation decay (ILPD), encourages the intermediate-level perturbation to be in
an effective adversarial direction and to possess a great magnitude simultaneously.
In-depth discussion verifies the effectiveness of our method. Experimental results
show that it outperforms state-of-the-arts by large margins in attacking various
victim models on ImageNet (+10.07% on average) and CIFAR-10 (+3.88% on
average). Our code is at https://github.com/qizhangli/ILPD-attack.

1

Introduction

Adversarial examples can be crafted without getting access to essential information (e.g., architecture
and parameters) of the victim models [34]. Due to their applicability of assessing AI safety in many
real-world deployment environments, recent years have witnessed a steady increase in the study of
black-box adversarial examples [29, 4, 11, 46, 8, 16]. A considerable proportion of black-box attacks
rely on transferability of adversarial examples, i.e., a phenomenon where adversarial examples crafted
targeting a white-box substitute model can also fool unknown victims with a moderate success rate.
Despite being crucial to many attacks, the adversarial transferability has not been fathomed out. Some
work attempts to regulate the intermediate-level perturbation (discrepancy between the intermediatelevel representation of adversarial examples and that of benign examples) to show a large magnitude
and align with an directional guided that can effectively maximize the prediction loss of a model [20,
26, 43, 52]. To achieve this, they choose to maximize the scalar projection of the intermediate-level
perturbation onto a directional guide. The determination of the directional guide of such methods
are various, and each was well-motivated. Though effective, such an objective inevitably deviates
the intermediate-level perturbation from the well-motivated directional guide (as will be discussed
in Section 3.1), and it may deteriorate the attack performance on the substitute model and lead to
sub-optimal transferability despite showing a large perturbation magnitude in the middle layer.
In this paper, we propose a method that encourages the intermediate-level perturbation to possess a
greater magnitude than a directional guide by its nature and to be in the same adversarial direction
as that of the guide. This is achieved by introducing intermediate-level perturbation decay (ILPD)
∗

Yiwen Guo and Wangmeng Zuo lead the project. Correspondence to: Wangmeng Zuo (wmzuo@hit.edu.cn).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

