Multiclass Boosting:
Simple and Intuitive Weak Learning Criteria

Nataly Brukhim
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University

Amit Daniely
Department of Computer Science
Hebrew University
Google Research

Yishay Mansour
Department of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
Google Research

Shay Moran
Faculty of Mathematics
Faculty of Computer Science
Faculty of Data and Decision Sciences
Technion
Google Research

Abstract
We study a generalization of boosting to the multiclass setting. We introduce
a weak learning condition for multiclass classification that captures the original
notion of weak learnability as being “slightly better than random guessing”. We
give a simple and efficient boosting algorithm, that does not require realizability
assumptions and its sample and oracle complexity bounds are independent of the
number of classes.
In addition, we utilize our new boosting technique in several theoretical applications
within the context of List PAC Learning. First, we establish an equivalence to weak
PAC learning. Furthermore, we present a new result on boosting for list learners,
as well as provide a novel proof for the characterization of multiclass PAC learning
and List PAC learning. Notably, our technique gives rise to a simplified analysis,
and also implies an improved error bound for large list sizes, compared to previous
results.

1

Introduction

Boosting is a powerful algorithmic approach used to boost the accuracy of weak learning models,
transforming them into strong learners. Boosting was first studied in the context of binary classification in a line of seminal works which include the celebrated Adaboost algorithm, as well an many
other algorithms with various applications (see e.g. [14, 22, 11, 12]).
The fundamental assumption underlying boosting is that a method already exists for finding poor,
yet not entirely trivial classifiers. Concretely, binary boosting assumes there exists a learning
algorithm that, when presented with training examples, can find a classifier h : X 7→ {0, 1} that
has classification error less than 1/2. That is, it performs slightly better than random guessing. The
intuition is that this is the most minimal assumption one can make about a learning algorithm, without
it being impractical. This assumption is called the weak learning assumption, and it is central to the
study of boosting.
While binary boosting theory has been extensively studied, extending it to the multiclass setting
has proven to be challenging. In particular, it turns out that the original notion of weak learnability
as being "slightly better than a random guess", does not easily extend to the multiclass case. For
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

