Fed-FA: Theoretically Modeling Client Data
Divergence for Federated Language Backdoor Defense

Zhiyuan Zhang1,2 , Deli Chen2 , Hao Zhou2 , Fandong Meng2 , Jie Zhou2 , Xu Sun1
1
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc., China
{zzy1210,xusun}@pku.edu.cn
{delichen,tuxzhou,fandongmeng,withtomzhou}@tencent.com

Abstract
Federated learning algorithms enable neural network models to be trained across
multiple decentralized edge devices without sharing private data. However, they
are susceptible to backdoor attacks launched by malicious clients. Existing robust
federated aggregation algorithms heuristically detect and exclude suspicious clients
based on their parameter distances, but they are ineffective on Natural Language
Processing (NLP) tasks. The main reason is that, although text backdoor patterns are obvious at the underlying dataset level, they are usually hidden at the
parameter level, since injecting backdoors into texts with discrete feature space
has less impact on the statistics of the model parameters. To settle this issue, we
propose to identify backdoor clients by explicitly modeling the data divergence
among clients in federated NLP systems. Through theoretical analysis, we derive
the f-divergence indicator to estimate the client data divergence with aggregation
updates and Hessians. Furthermore, we devise a dataset synthesization method
with a Hessian reassignment mechanism guided by the diffusion theory to address
the key challenge of inaccessible datasets in calculating clients’ data Hessians.
We then present the novel Federated F-Divergence-Based Aggregation (Fed-FA)
algorithm, which leverages the f-divergence indicator to detect and discard suspicious clients. Extensive empirical results show that Fed-FA outperforms all the
parameter distance-based methods in defending against backdoor attacks among
various natural language backdoor attack scenarios.

1

Introduction

Federated learning can train neural network models across multiple decentralized edge devices (i.e.
clients) in a privacy-protect manner. However, federated aggregation algorithms (e.g. FedAvg [26])
are vulnerable to backdoor attacks [15, 23] from malicious clients via poisonous parameter updating [26, 51]. This poses a serious threat to the security and reliability of federated learning systems.
Therefore, detecting suspicious backdoor clients is of great research significance [3, 31, 43, 42] .
Most existing robust federated aggregation algorithms heuristically take parameter distances (e.g.
Euclidean distances [1, 27, 58], cosine distances [12]) among clients as the indicator to detect
suspicious clients. However, [58] points out that federated language backdoors are harder to defend
against than vision backdoors; the reason lies in that the text feature space is discrete and the injected
backdoor patterns of text are more hidden at the parameter level than images. For example, the
output of NLP models can be falsified by only poisoning a few words’ embeddings [46, 5], which
can hardly affect the statistics of the whole model parameters. Thus, the parameter distance-based
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

