Cluster-aware Semi-supervised Learning: Relational
Knowledge Distillation Provably Learns Clustering

Yijun Dong∗
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY
yd1319@nyu.edu

Kevin Miller∗
Oden Institute for Computational
Engineering & Science
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX
ksmiller@utexas.edu

Qi Lei
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
& Center of Data Science
New York University
New York, NY
ql518@nyu.edu

Rachel Ward
Oden Institute for Computational
Engineering & Science
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX
rward@math.utexas.edu

Abstract
Despite the empirical success and practical significance of (relational) knowledge
distillation that matches (the relations of) features between teacher and student
models, the corresponding theoretical interpretations remain limited for various
knowledge distillation paradigms. In this work, we take an initial step toward a
theoretical understanding of relational knowledge distillation (RKD), with a focus
on semi-supervised classification problems. We start by casting RKD as spectral
clustering on a population-induced graph unveiled by a teacher model. Via a notion
of clustering error that quantifies the discrepancy between the predicted and ground
truth clusterings, we illustrate that RKD over the population provably leads to
low clustering error. Moreover, we provide a sample complexity bound for RKD
with limited unlabeled samples. For semi-supervised learning, we further demonstrate the label efficiency of RKD through a general framework of cluster-aware
semi-supervised learning that assumes low clustering errors. Finally, by unifying
data augmentation consistency regularization into this cluster-aware framework,
we show that despite the common effect of learning accurate clusterings, RKD
facilitates a “global” perspective through spectral clustering, whereas consistency
regularization focuses on a “local” perspective via expansion.

1

Introduction

The immense volume of training data is a vital driving force behind the unparalleled power of modern
deep neural networks. Nevertheless, data collection can be quite resource-intensive; in particular,
data labeling may be prohibitively costly. With an aim to lessen the workload associated with data
labeling, semi-supervised learning capitalizes on more easily accessible unlabeled data via diverse
approaches of pseudo-labeling. For instance, data augmentation consistency regularization [Sohn
et al., 2020, Berthelot et al., 2019] generates pseudo-labels from the current model predictions on
carefully designed data augmentations. Alternatively, knowledge distillation [Hinton et al., 2015] can
be leveraged to gauge representations of unlabeled samples via pretrained teacher models.
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

