Bounding Training Data Reconstruction in DP-SGD

Jamie Hayes∗
Google DeepMind
jamhay@google.com

Saeed Mahloujifar∗ †
Meta AI
saeedm@meta.com

Borja Balle
Google DeepMind
bballe@google.com

Abstract
Differentially private training offers a protection which is usually interpreted as a
guarantee against membership inference attacks. By proxy, this guarantee extends
to other threats like reconstruction attacks attempting to extract complete training
examples. Recent works provide evidence that if one does not need to protect
against membership attacks but instead only wants to protect against training data
reconstruction, then utility of private models can be improved because less noise
is required to protect against these more ambitious attacks. We investigate this
further in the context of DP-SGD, a standard algorithm for private deep learning,
and provide an upper bound on the success of any reconstruction attack against
DP-SGD together with an attack that empirically matches the predictions of our
bound. Together, these two results open the door to fine-grained investigations
on how to set the privacy parameters of DP-SGD in practice to protect against
reconstruction attacks. Finally, we use our methods to demonstrate that different
settings of the DP-SGD parameters leading to the same DP guarantees can result
in significantly different success rates for reconstruction, indicating that the DP
guarantee alone might not be a good proxy for controlling the protection against
reconstruction attacks.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models can and do leak training data (Ippolito et al., 2022; Kandpal et al., 2022;
Carlini et al., 2019; Yeom et al., 2018; Song & Shmatikov, 2019; Tirumala et al., 2022). If the training
data contains private or sensitive information, this can lead to information leakage via a variety of
different privacy attacks (Balle et al., 2022; Carlini et al., 2022; Fredrikson et al., 2015; Carlini et al.,
2021). Perhaps the most commonly studied privacy attack, membership inference (Homer et al.,
2008; Shokri et al., 2017), aims to infer if a sample was included in the training set, which can lead to
a privacy violation if inclusion in the training set is in and of itself sensitive. Membership inference
leaks a single bit of information about a sample – whether that sample was or was not in the training
set – and so any mitigation against this attack also defends against attacks that aim to reconstruct
more information about a sample, such as training data reconstruction attacks (Balle et al., 2022;
Carlini et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2019).
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) provides an effective mitigation that provably bounds
the success of any membership inference attack, and so consequently any training data reconstruction
attack. The strength of this mitigation is controlled by a privacy parameter ϵ which, informally,
represents the number of bits that can be leaked about a training data sample, and so ϵ must be small
to guarantee the failure of a membership inference attack (Sablayrolles et al., 2019; Nasr et al., 2021).
Unfortunately, training machine learning models with DP in the small ϵ regime usually produces
models that perform significantly worse than their non-private counterpart (Tramèr & Boneh, 2021;
De et al., 2022).
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done at Princeton University.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

