Refining Diffusion Planner for Reliable Behavior
Synthesis by Automatic Detection of Infeasible Plans

Kyowoon Lee∗
UNIST
leekwoon@unist.ac.kr

Seongun Kim∗
KAIST
seongun@kaist.ac.kr

Jaesik Choi
KAIST, INEEJI
jaesik.choi@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Diffusion-based planning has shown promising results in long-horizon, sparsereward tasks by training trajectory diffusion models and conditioning the sampled
trajectories using auxiliary guidance functions. However, due to their nature as
generative models, diffusion models are not guaranteed to generate feasible plans,
resulting in failed execution and precluding planners from being useful in safetycritical applications. In this work, we propose a novel approach to refine unreliable
plans generated by diffusion models by providing refining guidance to error-prone
plans. To this end, we suggest a new metric named restoration gap for evaluating
the quality of individual plans generated by the diffusion model. A restoration gap
is estimated by a gap predictor which produces restoration gap guidance to refine a
diffusion planner. We additionally present an attribution map regularizer to prevent
adversarial refining guidance that could be generated from the sub-optimal gap
predictor, which enables further refinement of infeasible plans. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach on three different benchmarks in offline control
settings that require long-horizon planning. We also illustrate that our approach
presents explainability by presenting the attribution maps of the gap predictor and
highlighting error-prone transitions, allowing for a deeper understanding of the
generated plans.

1

Introduction

Planning plays a crucial and efficient role in tackling decision-making problems when the dynamics
are known, including board games and simulated robot control (Tassa et al., 2012; Silver et al., 2016,
2017; Lee et al., 2018). To plan for more general tasks with unknown dynamics, the agent needs to
learn the dynamics model from experience. This approach is appealing since the dynamics model is
independent of rewards, enabling it to adapt to new tasks in the same environment, while also taking
advantage of the latest advancements from deep supervised learning to employ high-capacity models.
The most widely used techniques for learning dynamics models include autoregressive forward
models (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011; Hafner et al., 2019; Kaiser et al., 2020), which make
predictions based on future time progression. Although an ideal forward model would provide
significant benefits, there is a key challenge that the accuracy of the model directly affects the quality
of the plan. As model inaccuracies accumulate over time (Ross & Bagnell, 2012; Talvitie, 2014;
Luo et al., 2019; Janner et al., 2019; Voelcker et al., 2022), long-term planning using imprecise
models might yield sub-optimal performances compared to those achievable through model-free
techniques. Building upon the latest progress in generative models, recent studies have shown
promise in transforming reinforcement learning (RL) problems into conditional sequence modeling,
through the modeling of the joint distribution of sequences involving states, actions, and rewards
∗

Equal Contribution
Codes are available at https://github.com/leekwoon/rgg.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

