Pre-RMSNorm and Pre-CRMSNorm Transformers:
Equivalent and Efficient Pre-LN Transformers

Zixuan Jiang, Jiaqi Gu, Hanqing Zhu, David Z. Pan
Chandra Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering ∗
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas, 78712
{zixuan, jqgu, hqzhu}@utexas.edu, dpan@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
Transformers have achieved great success in machine learning applications. Normalization techniques, such as Layer Normalization (LayerNorm, LN) and Root
Mean Square Normalization (RMSNorm), play a critical role in accelerating and
stabilizing the training of Transformers. While LayerNorm recenters and rescales
input vectors, RMSNorm only rescales the vectors by their RMS value. Despite being more computationally efficient, RMSNorm may compromise the representation
ability of Transformers. There is currently no consensus regarding the preferred
normalization technique, as some models employ LayerNorm while others utilize
RMSNorm, especially in recent large language models. It is challenging to convert
Transformers with one normalization to the other type. While there is an ongoing
disagreement between the two normalization types, we propose a solution to unify
two mainstream Transformer architectures, Pre-LN and Pre-RMSNorm Transformers. By removing the inherent redundant mean information in the main branch of
Pre-LN Transformers, we can reduce LayerNorm to RMSNorm, achieving higher
efficiency. We further propose the Compressed RMSNorm (CRMSNorm) and
Pre-CRMSNorm Transformer based on a lossless compression of the zero-mean
vectors. We formally establish the equivalence of Pre-LN, Pre-RMSNorm, and
Pre-CRMSNorm Transformer variants in both training and inference. It implies
that Pre-LN Transformers can be substituted with Pre-(C)RMSNorm counterparts
at almost no cost, offering the same arithmetic functionality along with free efficiency improvement. Experiments demonstrate that we can reduce the training
and inference time of Pre-LN Transformers by 1% − 10%.

1

Introduction

Transformers have become a successful architecture for a wide range of machine learning applications,
including natural language [39], computer vision [13], and reinforcement learning [7]. It is one of
the foundation models [2], and pretrained Transformers [29] demonstrated impressive generalization
results. Among the components of Transformers, normalization plays a critical role in accelerating
and stabilizing the training process [21]. Layer Normalization (LayerNorm, LN) [1] and Root Mean
Square Normalization (RMSNorm) [44] are two common normalization layers in Transformers.
LayerNorm is in the original Transformer architecture [39], recentering and rescaling the input vector
in Rd to obtain a zero-mean and unit-variance output. RMSNorm only rescales the input vector with
its RMS value, offering greater computational efficiency than LayerNorm.
∗

This work was done when all the authors were at UT Austin. Currently, Zixuan Jiang is at Google, and Jiaqi
Gu is at Arizona State University.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

