Hidden Poison: Machine Unlearning Enables
Camouflaged Poisoning Attacks∗

Jimmy Z. Di
University of Waterloo
jimmy.di@uwaterloo.ca

Jack Douglas
University of Waterloo
jack.douglas@uwaterloo.ca

Gautam Kamath
University of Waterloo, Vector Institute
g@csail.mit.edu

Jayadev Acharya
Cornell University
acharya@cornell.edu

Ayush Sekhari
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
sekhari@mit.edu

Abstract
We introduce camouflaged data poisoning attacks, a new attack vector that arises
in the context of machine unlearning and other settings when model retraining may
be induced. An adversary first adds a few carefully crafted points to the training
dataset such that the impact on the model’s predictions is minimal. The adversary
subsequently triggers a request to remove a subset of the introduced points at
which point the attack is unleashed and the model’s predictions are negatively
affected. In particular, we consider clean-label targeted attacks (in which the goal
is to cause the model to misclassify a specific test point) on datasets including
CIFAR-10, Imagenette, and Imagewoof. This attack is realized by constructing
camouflage datapoints that mask the effect of a poisoned dataset. We demonstrate
the efficacy of our attack when unlearning is performed via retraining from scratch,
the idealized setting of machine unlearning which other efficient methods attempt
to emulate, as well as against the approximate unlearning approach of Graves et al.
[2021].

1

Introduction

Machine Learning (ML) research traditionally assumes a static pipeline: data is gathered, a model is
trained once and subsequently deployed. This paradigm has been challenged by practical deployments,
which are more dynamic in nature. After initial deployment more data may be collected, necessitating
additional training. Or, as in the machine unlearning setting [Cao and Yang, 2015], we may need to
produce a model as if certain points were never in the training set to begin with.1
While such dynamic settings clearly increase the applicability of ML models, they also make them
more vulnerable. Specifically, they open models up to new methods of attack by malicious actors
aiming to sabotage the model. In this work, we introduce a new type of data poisoning attack on
models that unlearn training datapoints. We call these camouflaged data poisoning attacks.
The attack takes place in two phases (Figure 1). In the first stage, before the model is trained, the
attacker adds a set of carefully designed points to the training data, consisting of a poison set and a
camouflage set. The model’s behaviour should be similar whether it is trained on either the training
data, or its augmentation with both the poison and camouflage sets. In the second phase, the attacker
triggers an unlearning request to delete the camouflage set after the model is trained. That is, the
∗
1

Authors JA, GK, AS are listed in alphabetical order. Full paper: https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10717
A naive solution is to remove said points from the training set and re-train the model from scratch.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

