Delegated Classification

Eden Saig, Inbal Talgam-Cohen, Nir Rosenfeld
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
{edens,italgam,nirr}@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
When machine learning is outsourced to a rational agent, conflicts of interest might
arise and severely impact predictive performance. In this work, we propose a
theoretical framework for incentive-aware delegation of machine learning tasks.
We model delegation as a principal-agent game, in which accurate learning can be
incentivized by the principal using performance-based contracts. Adapting the economic theory of contract design to this setting, we define budget-optimal contracts
and prove they take a simple threshold form under reasonable assumptions. In the
binary-action case, the optimality of such contracts is shown to be equivalent to the
classic Neyman-Pearson lemma, establishing a formal connection between contract
design and statistical hypothesis testing. Empirically, we demonstrate that budgetoptimal contracts can be constructed using small-scale data, leveraging recent
advances in the study of learning curves and scaling laws. Performance and economic outcomes are evaluated using synthetic and real-world classification tasks.

1

Introduction

The acclaimed success of machine learning at effectively solving difficult prediction tasks across
diverse problem domains has made it highly appealing for firms, institutions, and individual practitioners. But machine learning has also become increasingly complex, cumbersome, and difficult to
operate—and not all those who seek to learn have access to the necessary expertise, infrastructure,
and designated resources required for learning effectively. This gap has created a new market for
outsourced machine learning, in which a client interested in obtaining an accurate predictive model
can hire the services of a specialized provider which, for a price, trains the model on their behalf.
Consider for example a hospital purchasing a classifier for deciding between hospitalization and
outpatient treatment when triaging patients. The provider invests in curating, cleaning and annotating
training data, and delivers a trained model in return to payment from the hospital.
Having a budget to expend on outsourced learning [51], we model the client as aiming to obtain the
best possible predictive model. At first glance, it is tempting to assume that the optimal strategy
is simply to pay the provider the maximal feasible amount—and hope to get a high-end model in
return. After all, if the client were to spend the budget directly on learning, investing the maximal
available sum would yield the best possible results. But this neglects to account for the incentives of
the provider, who is interested in maximizing profit. Since the actions of the provider remain private,
it is in his best interest to (secretly) minimize efforts, which in turn can result in his delivering a
suboptimally-trained model. In our example, the provider can cut costs by annotating only a subset of
the data, obtaining cheaper low-quality annotations, or neglecting to meticulously remove all outliers.
Outsourced learning is hence susceptible to moral hazard, an economic situation which might occur
under information asymmetry, and to the detriment of the client. Motivated by this observation, in this
paper we initiate the study of delegated learning, and aim to explore the economic, algorithmic, and
statistical implications that occur when learning is delegated to a specialized provider. Our key novelty
is in instantiating delegated learning as a problem of optimal contract design [10, 42, 47, 48]. Broadly,
contracts are an important monetary device that allows the client to establish a payment scheme
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

