Towards a fuller understanding of neurons with
Clustered Compositional Explanations

Biagio La Rosa
Sapienza University of Rome
Rome, IT 00185
larosa@diag.uniroma1.it

Leilani H. Gilpin
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95060
lgilpin@ucsc.edu

Roberto Capobianco
Sony AI
Schlieren, CH 8952
roberto.capobianco@sony.com

Abstract
Compositional Explanations [30] is a method for identifying logical formulas of
concepts that approximate the neurons’ behavior. However, these explanations
are linked to the small spectrum of neuron activations (i.e., the highest ones) used
to check the alignment, thus lacking completeness. In this paper, we propose a
generalization, called Clustered Compositional Explanations, that combines Compositional Explanations with clustering and a novel search heuristic to approximate
a broader spectrum of the neuron behavior. We define and address the problems
connected to the application of these methods to multiple ranges of activations, analyze the insights retrievable by using our algorithm, and propose desiderata qualities
that can be used to study the explanations returned by different algorithms.

1

Introduction

EXplainable AI (XAI) promises to foster trust [40, 13] and understanding in AI systems. This is
particularly important for deep learning (DL) models, which are not understandable. By using XAI
methods, we may be able to interpret and better understand the underlying DL processes [24, 23].
Indeed, it is still unclear what kind of knowledge these models learn and how they are able to achieve
high performance across many different tasks.
This paper focuses on the methods that explain what neurons learn during the training process. Most
of these approaches adopt the idea of investigating what kind of information overstimulates a neuron.
For example, generative approaches iteratively change the input features to maximize the neuron’s
activation [37, 26, 11] or dataset-based approaches select samples where the neuron activates the
most [2, 3, 30]. Among them, we are interested in methods that use concepts to explain neurons’
behavior. The seminal work of the area is Network Dissection (NetDissect) [2]. NetDissect proposes
to use a dataset annotated with concepts to probe the neuron and select, as an explanation, the concept
whose annotations are aligned (i.e., overlap) the most with the highest activations. While initially
proposed for quantifying the latent space’s interpretability, NetDissect has been extensively used for
describing and understanding the concepts recognized by neurons [21, 32].
Compositional Explanations [30] (CoEx) generalize NetDissect by extracting logical formulas in
place of single concepts, using a beam search over the formulas space. While in principle, these
algorithms could be applied to any activation, the current literature [2, 30, 19, 28] focuses only on the
exceptionally high activations (i.e., activations above the 0.005 percentile). We argue that using an
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

