CS4ML: A general framework for active learning with
arbitrary data based on Christoffel functions

Ben Adcock
Department of Mathematics
Simon Fraser University
ben_adcock@sfu.ca

Juan M. Cardenas
Department of Mathematics
Simon Fraser University
juan_manuel_cardenas@sfu.ca

Nick Dexter
Department of Scientific Computing
Florida State University
nick.dexter@fsu.edu

Abstract
We introduce a general framework for active learning in regression problems. Our
framework extends the standard setup by allowing for general types of data, rather
than merely pointwise samples of the target function. This generalization covers
many cases of practical interest, such as data acquired in transform domains (e.g.,
Fourier data), vector-valued data (e.g., gradient-augmented data), data acquired
along continuous curves, and, multimodal data (i.e., combinations of different
types of measurements). Our framework considers random sampling according to
a finite number of sampling measures and arbitrary nonlinear approximation spaces
(model classes). We introduce the concept of generalized Christoffel functions
and show how these can be used to optimize the sampling measures. We prove
that this leads to near-optimal sample complexity in various important cases. This
paper focuses on applications in scientific computing, where active learning is often
desirable, since it is usually expensive to generate data. We demonstrate the efficacy
of our framework for gradient-augmented learning with polynomials, Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) using generative models and adaptive sampling for
solving PDEs using Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs).

1

Introduction

The standard regression problem in machine learning involves learning an approximation to a function
f ∗ : D ⊆ Rd → R from training data {(θi , f ∗ (θi ))}m
i=1 ⊂ D × R. The approximation is sought in
a set of functions F, typically termed a model class, hypothesis set or approximation space, and is
often computed by minimizing the empirical error (or risk) over the training set, i.e.,
m
1 X ∗
fˆ ∈ argmin
|f (θi ) − f (θi )|2 .
m
f ∈F
i=1

In this paper, we develop a generalization of this problem. This allows for general types of data (i.e.,
not just discrete function samples), including multimodal data, and random sampling from arbitrary
distributions. In particular, this framework facilitates active learning by allowing one to optimize the
sampling distributions to obtain near-best generalization from as few samples as possible.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

