Assessor360: Multi-sequence Network for
Blind Omnidirectional Image Quality Assessment

Tianhe Wu1∗ , Shuwei Shi1,2,∗ , Haoming Cai3 , Mingdeng Cao2 ,
Jing Xiao4 , Yinqiang Zheng2 , Yujiu Yang1†
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
The University of Tokyo 3 University of Maryland, College Park 4 Pingan Group
{wth22, ssw20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, cmd@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
hmcai@umd.edu, xiaojing661@pingan.com.cn, yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp
yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Blind Omnidirectional Image Quality Assessment (BOIQA) aims to objectively
assess the human perceptual quality of omnidirectional images (ODIs) without
relying on pristine-quality image information. It is becoming more significant with
the increasing advancement of virtual reality (VR) technology. However, the quality
assessment of ODIs is severely hampered by the fact that the existing BOIQA
pipeline lacks the modeling of the observer’s browsing process. To tackle this issue,
we propose a novel multi-sequence network for BOIQA called Assessor360, which
is derived from the realistic multi-assessor ODI quality assessment procedure.
Specifically, we propose a generalized Recursive Probability Sampling (RPS)
method for the BOIQA task, combining content and details information to generate
multiple pseudo viewport sequences from a given starting point. Additionally, we
design a Multi-scale Feature Aggregation (MFA) module with a Distortion-aware
Block (DAB) to fuse distorted and semantic features of each viewport. We also
devise Temporal Modeling Module (TMM) to learn the viewport transition in the
temporal domain. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that Assessor360
outperforms state-of-the-art methods on multiple OIQA datasets. The code and
models are available at https://github.com/TianheWu/Assessor360.

1

Introduction

With the development of VR-related techniques, viewers can enjoy a realistic and immersive experience with head-mounted displays (HMDs) [3, 20] by perceiving 360-degree omnidirectional
information. However, the acquired omnidirectional image, also named panorama, is not always of
high quality [12, 60]. Degradation may be introduced in any image processing [44, 58, 42], leading
to low-quality content that may be visually unpleasant for users. Consequently, developing suitable
quality metrics for panoramas holds considerable importance, as they can be utilized to guide research
in omnidirectional image processing and maintain high-quality visual content.
Generally, most ODIs are stored in the equirectangular projection (ERP) format, which exhibits
considerable geometric deformation at different latitudes. This distortion can have a negative impact
on quality assessment. Therefore, as shown in Figure 1 (a), many researchers [36, 17, 43, 58, 14, 60]
explore viewport-based methods by projecting the original ERP image into many undeformed
viewports (actual content observed by users) and aggregate their features with 2D IQA method as the
ODI quality score. However, this conventional viewport-based pipeline lacks the modeling of the
∗
†

Tianhe Wu and Shuwei Shi contribute equally to this work.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

