Idempotent Learned Image Compression with
Right-Inverse

Yanghao Li, Tongda Xu, Yan Wang∗, Jingjing Liu, Ya-Qin Zhang∗
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
liyangha18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
wangyan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We consider the problem of idempotent learned image compression (LIC). The
idempotence of codec refers to the stability of codec to re-compression. To achieve
idempotence, previous codecs adopt invertible transforms such as DCT [Wallace,
1991] and normalizing flow [Papamakarios et al., 2021]. In this paper, we first
identify that invertibility of transform is sufficient but not necessary for idempotence. Instead, it can be relaxed into right-invertibility. And such relaxation
allows wider family of transforms. Based on this identification, we then implement
an idempotent codec using our proposed blocked convolution and null-space enhancement. Empirical results show that we achieve state-of-the-art rate-distortion
performance among idempotent codecs. Furthermore, our idempotent codec can
be extended into near-idempotent codec by relaxing the right-invertibility. And
this near-idempotent codec has significantly less quality decay after 50 rounds of
re-compression compared with other near-idempotent codecs.

1

Introduction

Learned Image Compression (LIC) has been widely studied in recent years [Ballé et al., 2017, 2018,
Minnen et al., 2018, Cheng et al., 2020, Minnen et al., 2020, He et al., 2021, 2022] and has shown
promising rate-distortion (RD) performance. However, the loss caused by re-compression is much
more severe in LIC compared with traditional codec, which seriously limits the practical application
of LIC [Kim et al., 2020]. In this paper, we study the idempotence of LIC, which refers to the stability
of codec to re-compression. More specifically, denote the original image as x, the encode-then-decode
procedure as f (·), and the reconstructed image as f (x), we say a codec is idempotent if:
f (x) = f (f (x)).

(1)

For traditional codecs such as JPEG [Wallace, 1991] and JPEG2000 [Taubman et al., 2002], idempotence is easily achieved. This is because those codecs adopt invertible transforms such as Discrete
Cosine transform (DCT) and Discrete Wavelet transform (DWT). And the only non-invertible operation is the scalar quantization. As scalar quantization using rounding is naturally idempotent, the
idempotence of the whole codec can be easily assured. For LIC, however, neural-network-based
transform is introduced for expressiveness. And as most neural networks are non-invertible, the
idempotence of LIC is not trivial.
A natural solution to this problem is replacing the non-invertible encoding transform with invertible
ones. [Helminger et al., 2021] construct the encoding transform with only invertible normalizing flow
[Papamakarios et al., 2021]. However, due to the limited expressiveness of invertible operations, a
dramatic RD performance drop is observed. Another line of works are targeted at near-idempotence,
which means that they achieve a small |f (x) − f (f (x))|, but not f (x) = f (f (x)). These works
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

