AMAG: Additive, Multiplicative and Adaptive Graph
Neural Network For Forecasting Neural Activity

Jingyuan Li1 , Leo Scholl1 , Trung Le1 , Pavithra Rajeswaran2 , Amy Orsborn1,2 , Eli Shlizerman1,3
1. Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering,
2. Department of Bioengineering,
3. Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Washington, Seattle, WA
{jingyli6,lscholl,tle45,pavir,aorsborn,shlizee}@uw.edu

Abstract
Latent Variable Models (LVMs) propose to model the dynamics of neural populations by capturing low-dimensional structures that represent features involved
in neural activity. Recent LVMs are based on deep learning methodology where a
deep neural network is trained to reconstruct the same neural activity given as input
and as a result to build the latent representation. Without taking past or future activity into account such a task is non-causal. In contrast, the task of forecasting neural
activity based on given input extends the reconstruction task. LVMs that are trained
on such a task could potentially capture temporal causality constraints within its
latent representation. Forecasting has received less attention than reconstruction
due to recording challenges such as limited neural measurements and trials. In
this work, we address modeling neural population dynamics via the forecasting
task and improve forecasting performance by including a prior, which consists of
pairwise neural unit interaction as a multivariate dynamic system. Our proposed
model—Additive, Multiplicative, and Adaptive Graph Neural Network (AMAG)—
leverages additive and multiplicative message-passing operations analogous to the
interactions in neuronal systems and adaptively learns the interaction among neural
units to forecast their future activity. We demonstrate the advantage of AMAG
compared to non-GNN based methods on synthetic data and multiple modalities
of neural recordings (field potentials from penetrating electrodes or surface-level
micro-electrocorticography) from four rhesus macaques. Our results show the
ability of AMAG to recover ground truth spatial interactions and yield estimation
for future dynamics of the neural population.

1

Introduction

The ability to encode, decode, and interpret neural activity could facilitate novel applications targeted
toward neural activity, such as Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) [15, 50, 52, 28, 49]. A promising
methodology for neural activity encoding and decoding is the use of artificial Deep Neural Networks
(DNN) [53, 84, 78]. These approaches encode neural activity into latent neural representations,
facilitating decoding and interpretation of neural signals and correlating the activity with other
modalities, e.g., brain-to-text translation [72].
Most existing DNN architectures, such as Latent Factor Analysis via Dynamical Systems (LFADS)
and its variants, infer latent dynamics from single-trial population activities by encoding the neural
time series into a summarized representation from which the original time series could be regenerated,
a procedure known as reconstruction task [53, 65, 51]. While effective in capturing low-dimensional
latent neural manifolds, the task does not consider causal aspects of neural dynamics. In contrast,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

