Optimality in Mean Estimation:
Beyond Worst-Case, Beyond Sub-Gaussian,
and Beyond 1 + α Moments

Trung Dang
The University of Texas at Austin
dddtrung@cs.utexas.edu

Jasper C.H. Lee
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jasper.lee@wisc.edu

Maoyuan Song
Purdue University
maoyuanrs@gmail.com

Paul Valiant
Purdue University
pvaliant@gmail.com

Abstract
There is growing interest in improving our algorithmic understanding of fundamental statistical problems such as mean estimation, driven by the goal of understanding
the fundamental limits of what we can extract from limited and valuable data. The
state of the art results for mean estimation in R are 1) the optimal sub-Gaussian
mean estimator by [Lee and Valiant, 2022], attaining the optimal sub-Gaussian
error constant for all distributions with finite but unknown variance, and 2) the
analysis of the median-of-means algorithm by [Bubeck, Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi,
2013] and a matching lower bound by [Devroye, Lerasle, Lugosi, and Oliveira,
2016], characterizing the big-O optimal errors for distributions that have tails
heavy enough that only a 1 + α moment exists for some α ∈ (0, 1). Both of
these results, however, are optimal only in the worst case. Motivated by the recent
effort in the community to go “beyond the worst-case analysis” of algorithms, we
initiate the fine-grained study of the mean estimation problem: Is it possible for
algorithms to leverage beneficial features/quirks of their input distribution to beat
the sub-Gaussian rate, without explicit knowledge of these features?
We resolve this question, finding an unexpectedly nuanced answer: “Yes in limited
regimes, but in general no”. Given a distribution p, assuming only that it has a
finite mean and absent any additional assumptions, we show how to construct a
distribution qn,δ such that the means of p and q are well-separated, yet p and q
are impossible to distinguish with n samples with probability 1 − δ, and q further
preserves the finiteness of moments of p. Moreover, the variance of q is at most
twice the variance of p if it exists. The main consequence of our result is that,
no reasonable estimator can asymptotically achieve better than the sub-Gaussian
error rate for any distribution, up to constant factors, which matches the worst-case
result of [Lee and Valiant, 2022]. More generally, we introduce a new definitional
framework to analyze the fine-grained optimality of algorithms, which we call
“neighborhood optimality”, interpolating between the unattainably strong “instance
optimality” and the trivially weak admissibility/Pareto optimality definitions. As
an application of the new framework, we show that the median-of-means algorithm
is neighborhood optimal, up to constant factors. It is an open question to find a
neighborhood-optimal estimator without constant factor slackness.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

