Neural (Tangent Kernel) Collapse

Mariia Seleznova1∗ Dana Weitzner2 Raja Giryes2 Gitta Kutyniok1 Hung-Hsu Chou1
1
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München 2 Tel Aviv University

Abstract
This work bridges two important concepts: the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK),
which captures the evolution of deep neural networks (DNNs) during training, and
the Neural Collapse (NC) phenomenon, which refers to the emergence of symmetry
and structure in the last-layer features of well-trained classification DNNs. We
adopt the natural assumption that the empirical NTK develops a block structure
aligned with the class labels, i.e., samples within the same class have stronger
correlations than samples from different classes. Under this assumption, we derive
the dynamics of DNNs trained with mean squared (MSE) loss and break them
into interpretable phases. Moreover, we identify an invariant that captures the
essence of the dynamics, and use it to prove the emergence of NC in DNNs with
block-structured NTK. We provide large-scale numerical experiments on three
common DNN architectures and three benchmark datasets to support our theory.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are advancing the state of the art in many real-life applications,
ranging from image classification to machine translation. Yet, there is no comprehensive theory that
can explain a multitude of empirical phenomena observed in DNNs. In this work, we provide a
theoretical connection between two such empirical phenomena, prominent in modern DNNs: Neural
Collapse (NC) and Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) alignment.
Neural Collapse. NC [39] emerges while training modern classification DNNs past zero error
to further minimize the loss. During NC, the class means of the DNN’s last-layer features form a
symmetric structure with maximal separation angle, while the features of each individual sample
collapse to their class means. This simple structure of the feature vectors appears favourable for
generalization and robustness in the literature [12, 31, 40, 47]. Though NC is common in modern
DNNs, explaining the mechanisms behind its emergence is challenging, since the complex non-linear
training dynamics of DNNs evade analytical treatment.
Neural Tangent Kernel. The NTK [30] describes the gradient descent dynamics of DNNs in the
function space, which provides a dual perspective to DNNs’ evolution in the parameters space. This
perspective allows to study the dynamics of DNNs analytically in the infinite-width limit, where the
NTK is constant during training [30]. Hence, theoretical works often rely on the infinite-width NTK
to analyze generalization of DNNs [1, 20, 28, 49]. However, multiple authors have argued that the
infinite-width limit does not fully reflect the behaviour of realistic DNNs [2, 10, 22, 27, 36, 43], since
constant NTK implies that no feature learning occurs during DNNs training.
NTK Alignment. While the infinite-width NTK is label-agnostic and does not change during
training, the empirical NTK rapidly aligns with the target function in the early stages of training
[5, 7, 44, 45]. In the context of classification, this manifests itself as the emergence of a block structure
∗

Correspondence to: Mariia Seleznova (selez@math.lmu.de).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

