ToolkenGPT: Augmenting Frozen Language Models
with Massive Tools via Tool Embeddings

1

Shibo Hao1 , Tianyang Liu1 , Zhen Wang1, 2 , Zhiting Hu1
UC San Diego, 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{s5hao, til040, zhw085, zhh019}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Augmenting large language models (LLMs) with external tools has emerged as a
promising approach to solving complex problems. However, traditional methods,
which fine-tune LLMs with tool demonstration data, can be both costly and restricted to a predefined set of tools. Recent in-context learning paradigm alleviates
these issues, but the limited context length only allows for a few shots of demonstrations, leading to suboptimal understandings of the tools. Moreover, when there
are numerous tools to choose from, in-context learning could completely fail to
work. In this paper, we propose an alternative approach, ToolkenGPT, which
combines the benefits of both sides. Our approach represents each tool as a token
(“toolken”) and learns an embedding for it, enabling tool calls in the same way as
generating a regular word token. Once a toolken is triggered, the LLM is prompted
to complete arguments for the tool to execute. ToolkenGPT offers the flexibility
to plug in an arbitrary number of tools by expanding the set of toolkens on the
fly. In addition, it improves tool use by allowing extensive demonstration data
for learning the toolken embeddings. In diverse domains, including numerical
reasoning, knowledge-based question answering, and embodied plan generation,
our approach effectively augments LLMs with tools and substantially outperforms
various latest baselines. ToolkenGPT demonstrates the promising ability to use
relevant tools from a large tool set in complex scenarios.1

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [5, 9, 62, 47] have established themselves as powerful tools for
diverse real-world applications, ranging from writing assistance to automated customer support [2,
6, 14]. As these models continue to evolve, there is a growing interest in their potential to interact
with the real world and enhance their functionality through integration with other tools, such as the
calculator, databases, etc [50, 61, 56, 53]. The capability of these models to master and control a
wide array of tools not only serves as an indicator of their intelligence, but also signals a promising
path to overcome some of their fundamental weaknesses. These include updating the latest world
knowledge [46], reducing their hallucinations [55, 58], and executing symbolic operations [12, 17, 48],
etc. However, the rapid emergence of new tools, such as advanced software libraries, novel APIs, or
domain-specific utilities [39, 36, 29], introduces additional richness and complexity to the task of
tool learning for LLMs. This continuous evolution accentuates the importance of empowering LLMs
with the ability to adapt and master massive new tools swiftly.
Recent advancements in LLMs have witnessed two primary lines of research approaches for tool
integration with LLMs [45, 68, 53] (Table 1). The first paradigm involves fine-tuning LLMs to
learn specific tools [50]. For example, there are enormous efforts to integrate the retrieval tool into
1

Code is available at https://github.com/Ber666/ToolkenGPT

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

