Demystifying Oversmoothing in
Attention-Based Graph Neural Networks

Xinyi Wu1,2
Amir Ajorlou2
Zihui Wu3
Ali Jadbabaie1,2
1
Institute for Data, Systems and Society (IDSS), MIT
2
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems (LIDS), MIT
3
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences (CMS), Caltech
{xinyiwu,ajorlou,jadbabai}@mit.edu zwu2@caltech.edu

Abstract
Oversmoothing in Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) refers to the phenomenon
where increasing network depth leads to homogeneous node representations. While
previous work has established that Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) exponentially lose expressive power, it remains controversial whether the graph
attention mechanism can mitigate oversmoothing. In this work, we provide a
definitive answer to this question through a rigorous mathematical analysis, by
viewing attention-based GNNs as nonlinear time-varying dynamical systems and
incorporating tools and techniques from the theory of products of inhomogeneous
matrices and the joint spectral radius. We establish that, contrary to popular belief,
the graph attention mechanism cannot prevent oversmoothing and loses expressive
power exponentially. The proposed framework extends the existing results on oversmoothing for symmetric GCNs to a significantly broader class of GNN models,
including random walk GCNs, Graph Attention Networks (GATs) and (graph)
transformers. In particular, our analysis accounts for asymmetric, state-dependent
and time-varying aggregation operators and a wide range of common nonlinear
activation functions, such as ReLU, LeakyReLU, GELU and SiLU.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful framework for learning with graphstructured data [4, 8, 9, 13, 19, 32, 38] and have shown great promise in diverse domains such as
molecular biology [45], physics [1] and recommender systems [40]. Most GNN models follow the
message-passing paradigm [12], where the representation of each node is computed by recursively
aggregating and transforming the representations of its neighboring nodes.
One notable drawback of repeated message-passing is oversmoothing, which refers to the phenomenon
that stacking message-passing GNN layers makes node representations of the same connected
component converge to the same vector [5, 18, 19, 24, 26, 31, 41]. As a result, whereas depth has
been considered crucial for the success of deep learning in many fields such as computer vision [16],
most GNNs used in practice remain relatively shallow and often only have few layers [19, 38, 42]. On
the theory side, while previous works have shown that the symmetric Graph Convolution Networks
(GCNs) with ReLU and LeakyReLU nonlinearities exponentially lose expressive power, analyzing
the oversmoothing phenomenon in other types of GNNs is still an open question [5, 26]. In particular,
the question of whether the graph attention mechanism can prevent oversmoothing has not been
settled yet. Motivated by the capacity of graph attention to distinguish the importance of different
edges in the graph, some works claim that oversmoothing is alleviated in Graph Attention Networks
(GATs), heuristically crediting to GATs’ ability to learn adaptive node-wise aggregation operators via
the attention mechanism [25]. On the other hand, it has been empirically observed that similar to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

