A Measure-Theoretic Axiomatisation of Causality

Junhyung Park
Empirical Inference Department
MPI for Intelligent Systems
72076 Tübingen, Germany
junhyung.park@tuebingen.mpg.de
Bernhard Schölkopf
Empirical Inference Department
MPI for Intelligent Systems
72076 Tübingen, Germany
bs@tuebingen.mpg.de

Simon Buchholz
Empirical Inference Department
MPI for Intelligent Systems
72076 Tübingen, Germany
simon.buchholz@tuebingen.mpg.de
Krikamol Muandet
CISPA
Helmholtz Center for Information Security
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
muandet@cispa.de

Abstract
Causality is a central concept in a wide range of research areas, yet there is still
no universally agreed axiomatisation of causality. We view causality both as an
extension of probability theory and as a study of what happens when one intervenes on a system, and argue in favour of taking Kolmogorov’s measure-theoretic
axiomatisation of probability as the starting point towards an axiomatisation of
causality. To that end, we propose the notion of a causal space, consisting of a
probability space along with a collection of transition probability kernels, called
causal kernels, that encode the causal information of the space. Our proposed
framework is not only rigorously grounded in measure theory, but it also sheds
light on long-standing limitations of existing frameworks including, for example,
cycles, latent variables and stochastic processes.

1

Introduction

Causal reasoning has been recognised as a hallmark of human and machine intelligence, and in the
recent years, the machine learning community has taken up a rapidly growing interest in the subject
[46, 53, 54], in particular in representation learning [55, 41, 62, 57, 11, 40] and natural language
processing [35, 19]. Causality has also been extensively studied in a wide range of other research
domains, including, but not limited to, philosophy [39, 64, 16], psychology [60], statistics [45, 56]
including social, biological and medical sciences [51, 31, 29, 26], mechanics and law [6].
The field of causality was born from the observation that probability theory and statistics (Figure
1a) cannot encode the notion of causality, and so we need additional mathematical tools to support
the enhanced view of the world involving causality (Figure 1b). Our goal in this paper is to give
an axiomatic framework of the forwards direction of Figure 1b, which currently consists of many
competing models (see Related Works). As a starting point, we observe that the forwards direction of
Figure 1a, i.e. probability theory, has a set of axioms based on measure theory (Axioms 2.1) that
are widely accepted and used1 , and hence argue that it is natural to take the primitive objects of
this framework as the basic building blocks. Despite the fact that all of the existing mathematical
frameworks of causality recognise the crucial role that probability plays / should play in any causal
1

Kolmogorov’s axiomatisation is without doubt the standard in probability theory. However, we are aware of
other, less popular frameworks, for example, one that is more amenable to Bayesian probability [34], one based
on game theory [59] and imprecise probabilities [61].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

