Graph Neural Networks for Road Safety Modeling:
Datasets and Evaluations for Accident Analysis

Abhinav Nippani‡ , Dongyue Li‡ , Haotian Ju, Haris N. Koutsopoulos, Hongyang R. Zhang
Northeastern University, Boston
{nippani.a, li.dongyu, ju.h, h.koutsopoulos, ho.zhang}@northeastern.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of traffic accident analysis on a road network based
on road network connections and traffic volume. Previous works have designed
various deep-learning methods using historical records to predict traffic accident
occurrences. However, there is a lack of consensus on how accurate existing
methods are, and a fundamental issue is the lack of public accident datasets for
comprehensive evaluations. This paper constructs a large-scale, unified dataset of
traffic accident records from official reports of various states in the US, totaling 9
million records, accompanied by road networks and traffic volume reports. Using
this new dataset, we evaluate existing deep-learning methods for predicting the
occurrence of accidents on road networks. Our main finding is that graph neural
networks such as GraphSAGE can accurately predict the number of accidents on
roads with less than 22% mean absolute error (relative to the actual count) and
whether an accident will occur or not with over 87% AUROC, averaged over states.
We achieve these results by using multitask learning to account for cross-state
variabilities (e.g., availability of accident labels) and transfer learning to combine
traffic volume with accident prediction. Ablation studies highlight the importance
of road graph-structural features, amongst other features. Lastly, we discuss the
implications of the analysis and develop a package for easily using our new dataset.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks are widely used tools for extracting structural relationships from data. Examples include friendships and interactions on social networks [34, 10], 3D protein-protein interactions
[61, 45], and road connections on traffic networks [39]. Motivated by the widespread use of graph
neural networks, large-scale graph databases and benchmarks have received significant interest in
recent studies [26, 14, 25]. Existing architecture designs can be abstracted in the mathematical
framework of message-passing neural networks [63]. In practice, the empirical performance of
different network designs varies across domains [12]. To facilitate the discussion, this paper examines
graph neural networks for the important problem of traffic accident risk modeling: Given historical
accident accords as edge labels on a road network, how well can we learn to predict the number of
accident occurrences on roads (e.g., over the next month) using graph-structural and related features?
The importance of modeling traffic accident risks is well-recognized as many counties [46, 3, 5, 43]
propose vision zero plans to eliminate motor vehicle crashes. According to CDC [56], the economic
cost of crashes amounts to $430 Billion in 2020 [9]. Developing better modeling tools can identify
the underlying risk of accidents at a certain location [23], thus informing policy intervention [2].
Many studies have analyzed the effect of road features for predicting accident occurrences, such as
traffic flow, road network geometry, and rain [49, 15, 18]. Caliendo et al. [6] conduct a regression
‡

First two authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

