Statistical Limits of Adaptive Linear Models:
Low-Dimensional Estimation and Inference
Licong Lin
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
liconglin@berkeley.edu

Mufang Ying
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University - New Brunswick
my426@scarletmail.rutgers.edu

Suvrojit Ghosh
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University - New Brunswick
sg1565@scarletmail.rutgers.edu

Koulik Khamaru
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University - New Brunswick
kk1241@stat.rutgers.edu

Cun-Hui Zhang
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University - New Brunswick
czhang@stat.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Estimation and inference in statistics pose significant challenges when data are
collected adaptively. Even in linear models, the Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)
estimator may fail to exhibit asymptotic normality for single coordinate estimation
and have inflated error. This issue is highlighted by a recent minimax lower bound,
which shows
√that the error of estimating a single coordinate can be enlarged by a
multiple of d when data are allowed to be arbitrarily adaptive, compared with the
case when they are i.i.d. Our work explores this striking difference in estimation
performance between utilizing i.i.d. and adaptive data. We investigate how the
degree of adaptivity in data collection impacts the performance of estimating a
low-dimensional parameter component in high-dimensional linear models. We
identify conditions on the data collection mechanism under which the estimation
error for a low-dimensional parameter component matches its counterpart in the
i.i.d. setting, up to a factor that depends on the degree of adaptivity. We show that
OLS or OLS on centered data can achieve this matching error. In addition, we
propose a novel estimator for single coordinate inference via solving a Two-stage
Adaptive Linear Estimating equation (TALE). Under a weaker form of adaptivity
in data collection, we establish an asymptotic normality property of the proposed
estimator.

1

Introduction

Estimating a low-dimensional parameter component in a high-dimensional model is a fundamental
problem in statistics and machine learning that has been widely studied in e.g., semiparametric
statistics [35, 8], causal inference [16, 15] and bandit algorithms [1, 27]. When data are independently
and identically distributed (i.i.d.), it√
is often possible to derive estimators that are asymptotically
normal with a rate of convergence of n, and that achieve the semi-parametric variance lower bound
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

