Taming Local Effects in
Graph-based Spatiotemporal Forecasting

1

Andrea Cini ∗1 , Ivan Marisca ∗1 , Daniele Zambon 1 , Cesare Alippi 12
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA USI-SUPSI, Università della Svizzera italiana, 2 Politecnico di Milano
{andrea.cini, ivan.marisca, daniele.zambon, cesare.alippi}@usi.ch

Abstract
Spatiotemporal graph neural networks have shown to be effective in time series
forecasting applications, achieving better performance than standard univariate predictors in several settings. These architectures take advantage of a graph structure
and relational inductive biases to learn a single (global) inductive model to predict
any number of the input time series, each associated with a graph node. Despite
the gain achieved in computational and data efficiency w.r.t. fitting a set of local
models, relying on a single global model can be a limitation whenever some of
the time series are generated by a different spatiotemporal stochastic process. The
main objective of this paper is to understand the interplay between globality and
locality in graph-based spatiotemporal forecasting, while contextually proposing a
methodological framework to rationalize the practice of including trainable node
embeddings in such architectures. We ascribe to trainable node embeddings the
role of amortizing the learning of specialized components. Moreover, embeddings
allow for 1) effectively combining the advantages of shared message-passing layers
with node-specific parameters and 2) efficiently transferring the learned model to
new node sets. Supported by strong empirical evidence, we provide insights and
guidelines for specializing graph-based models to the dynamics of each time series
and show how this aspect plays a crucial role in obtaining accurate predictions.

1

Introduction

Neural forecasting methods [1] take advantage of large databases of related time series to learn
models for each individual process. If the time series in the database are not independent, functional
dependencies among them can be exploited to obtain more accurate predictions, e.g., when the
considered time series are observations collected from a network of sensors. In this setting, we
use the term spatiotemporal time series to indicate the existence of relationships among subsets of
time series (sensors) that span additional axes other than the temporal one, denoted here as spatial
in a broad sense. Graph representations effectively model such dependencies and graph neural
networks (GNNs) [2–4] can be included as modules in the forecasting architecture to propagate
information along the spatial dimension. The resulting neural architectures are known in the literature
as spatiotemporal graph neural networks (STGNNs) [5, 6] and have found widespread adoption in
relevant applications ranging from traffic forecasting [6, 7] to energy analytics [8, 9]. These models
embed inductive biases typical of graph deep learning and graph signal processing [10] and, thus,
have several advantages over standard multivariate models; in fact, a shared set of learnable weights
is used to obtain predictions for each time series by conditioning on observations at the neighboring
nodes. Nonetheless, it has become more and more common to see node-specific trainable parameters
being introduced as means to extract node(sensor)-level features then used as spatial identifiers within
the processing [11, 12]. By doing so, the designer accepts a compromise in transferability that often
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

