GraphMP: Graph Neural Network-based Motion
Planning with Efficient Graph Search

Xiao Zang1 Miao Yin2∗ Jinqi Xiao1 Saman Zonouz3 Bo Yuan1
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers University
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of Texas at Arlington
3
School of Cybersecurity and Privacy, Georgia Institute of Technology
1
{xz514, jx257, bo.yuan.ece}@rutgers.edu
2
miao.yin@uta.edu 3 szonouz6@gatech.edu

Abstract
Motion planning, which aims to find a high-quality collision-free path in the
configuration space, is a fundamental task in robotic systems. Recently, learningbased motion planners, especially the graph neural network-powered, have shown
promising planning performance. However, though the state-of-the-art GNN
planner can efficiently extract and learn graph information, its inherent mechanism
is not well suited for graph search process, hindering its further performance
improvement. To address this challenge and fully unleash the potential of GNN in
motion planning, this paper proposes GraphMP, a neural motion planner for both
low and high-dimensional planning tasks. With the customized model architecture
and training mechanism design, GraphMP can simultaneously perform efficient
graph pattern extraction and graph search processing, leading to strong planning
performance. Experiments on a variety of environments, ranging from 2D Maze
to 14D dual KUKA robotic arm, show that our proposed GraphMP achieves
significant improvement on path quality and planning speed over state-of-the-art
learning-based and classical planners; while preserving competitive success rate.

1

Introduction

Motion planning aims to find a high-quality collision-free path connecting the start and goal states
in the configuration space of a robot. As a fundamental cognitive task in robotic systems, motion
planning plays a critical role in many practical applications, such as autonomous driving, in-warehouse
package handling and assisted surgery, etc. A motion planning problem can be solved from different
perspectives. Sampling-based solutions, e.g., RRT and its variants [1, 2] randomly sample the
configuration space to build a space-filling tree, which grows towards connecting the start and goal
configurations. Search-based approaches, such as A* and Dijkstra [3, 4], interpret the planning as a
graph search problem, and they then find the feasible path via traversing the graph.
Recently, learning-based planners have obtained substantial attention because of their comparable
or superior performance to classical planners. In general, such data-driven strategy can efficiently
learn the patterns in the configuration space and/or the behaviors of the oracle planners, optimizing
the important operation (e.g., sampling mechanism) in the planning process, and thus reducing
the unnecessary collision check with the improved path quality. To date, various neural networkpowered motion planners, including multilayer perceptron (MLP)-based [5], convolutional neural
networks (CNN)-based [6], recurrent neural network (RNN)-based [7] and graph neural network
(GNN)-based [8, 9], have been proposed in the literature. Among these different choices, the GNNbased neural planner is the most promising approach because of its unique advantages in processing
∗

This work was done when the author was with Rutgers University.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

