No-Regret Learning with Unbounded Losses: The
Case of Logarithmic Pooling

Eric Neyman
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
eric.neyman@columbia.edu

Tim Roughgarden
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
tim.roughgarden@gmail.com

Abstract
For each of T time steps, m experts report probability distributions over n outcomes; we wish to learn to aggregate these forecasts in a way that attains a no-regret
guarantee. We focus on the fundamental and practical aggregation method known
as logarithmic pooling — a weighted average of log odds — which is in a certain
sense the optimal choice of pooling method if one is interested in minimizing log
loss (as we take to be our loss function). We consider the problem of learning
the best set of parameters (i.e. expert weights) in an online adversarial setting.
We assume (by necessity) that the adversarial choices of outcomes and forecasts
are consistent, in the sense that experts report calibrated forecasts. Imposing this
constraint creates a (to our knowledge) novel semi-adversarial setting in which the
adversary retains a large amount of flexibility. In this setting, we present an algorithm
√ based on online mirror descent that learns expert weights in a way that attains
O( T log T ) expected regret as compared with the best weights in hindsight.

1

Introduction

1.1

Logarithmic pooling

Suppose that m experts report probability distributions p1 , . . . , pm ∈ ∆n over n disjoint, exhaustive
outcomes. We are interested in aggregating these distributions into a single distribution p∗ , a task
known as probabilistic opinion pooling. Perhaps the most
way to do this is to take
Pstraightforward
m
1
i
the arithmetic mean, also called the linear pool: p∗ = m
i=1 p .
While commonly studied and frequently used, the linear pool is by no means the definitive opinion
pooling method. The choice of pooling method ought to depend on context, and in particular on the
loss function with respect to which forecasts are assessed. Neyman and Roughgarden (2023) showed
a correspondence between proper loss functions and opinion pooling methods, which they termed
quasi-arithmetic (QA) pooling with respect to a loss function. Specifically, the QA pool with respect
to a loss is the forecast that guarantees the largest possible overperformance (as judged by the loss
function) compared with the strategy of choosing a random expert to trust.1
In this work we will be using log loss function. The QA pooling technique with respect to the log
loss is known as logarithmic pooling. Instead of averaging the experts’ forecasts, logarithmic pooling
averages the experts’ log odds (i.e. logits). Put otherwise, the logarithmic pool is defined by
p∗j = c

m
Y

(pij )1/m

i=1
1

More formally, the QA pool maximizes the minimum (over possible outcomes) improvement in the loss.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

