Simplicity Bias in 1-Hidden Layer Neural Networks

Depen Morwani ∗
Department of Computer Science
Harvard University
dmorwani@g.harvard.edu

Jatin Batra
School of Technology and Computer Science
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR)
jatin.batra@tifr.res.in

Prateek Jain1
Google Research
prajain@google.com

Praneeth Netrapalli1
Google Research
pnetrapalli@google.com

Abstract
Recent works (Shah et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021) have demonstrated that neural
networks exhibit extreme simplicity bias (SB). That is, they learn only the simplest
features to solve a task at hand, even in the presence of other, more robust but more
complex features. Due to the lack of a general and rigorous definition of features,
these works showcase SB on semi-synthetic datasets such as Color-MNIST, MNISTCIFAR where defining features is relatively easier.
In this work, we rigorously define as well as thoroughly establish SB for one hidden
layer neural networks. More concretely, (i) we define SB as the network essentially
being a function of a low dimensional projection of the inputs (ii) theoretically,
in the infinite width regime, we show that when the data is linearly separable, the
network primarily depends on only the linearly separable (1-dimensional) subspace
even in the presence of an arbitrarily large number of other, more complex features
which could have led to a significantly more robust classifier, (iii) empirically,
we show that models trained on real datasets such as Imagenet and WaterbirdsLandbirds indeed depend on a low dimensional projection of the inputs, thereby
demonstrating SB on these datasets, iv) finally, we present a natural ensemble
approach that encourages diversity in models by training successive models on
features not used by earlier models, and demonstrate that it yields models that are
significantly more robust to Gaussian noise.

1

Introduction

It is well known that neural networks (NNs) are vulnerable to distribution shifts as well as to
adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014; Hendrycks et al., 2021). A recent line of work (Geirhos
et al., 2018; Shah et al., 2020; Geirhos et al., 2020) proposes that Simplicity Bias (SB) (or shortcut
learning) i.e., the tendency of neural networks (NNs) to learn only the simplest features over other
useful but more complex features, is a key reason behind non-robustness of the trained networks.
The argument is roughly as follows: for example, in the classification of swans vs bears, as illustrated
in Figure 1, there are many features such as background, color of the animal, shape of the animal etc.
that can be used for classification. However using only one or few of them can lead to models that are
not robust to specific distribution shifts, while using all the features can lead to more robust models.
Several recent works have demonstrated SB on a variety of semi-real constructed datasets (Geirhos
et al., 2018; Shah et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021), and have hypothesized SB to be the key reason
∗
2

part of the work done while at Google Research, India 1 Alphabetical Ordering
Image source: Wikipedia swa, bea.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

