Robust Data Pruning under Label Noise
via Maximizing Re-labeling Accuracy

Dongmin Park1 , Seola Choi1 , Doyoung Kim1 , Hwanjun Song2 , Jae-Gil Lee1∗
1
KAIST, 2 AWS AI Labs
{dongminpark, seola.choi, dodokim, jaegil}@kaist.ac.kr, hwanjun.song@amazon.com

Abstract
Data pruning, which aims to downsize a large training set into a small informative
subset, is crucial for reducing the enormous computational costs of modern deep
learning. Though large-scale data collections invariably contain annotation noise
and numerous robust learning methods have been developed, data pruning for
the noise-robust learning scenario has received little attention. With state-ofthe-art Re-labeling methods that self-correct erroneous labels while training, it
is challenging to identify which subset induces the most accurate re-labeling of
erroneous labels in the entire training set. In this paper, we formalize the problem
of data pruning with re-labeling. We first show that the likelihood of a training
example being correctly re-labeled is proportional to the prediction confidence of its
neighborhood in the subset. Therefore, we propose a novel data pruning algorithm,
Prune4ReL, that finds a subset maximizing the total neighborhood confidence of all
training examples, thereby maximizing the re-labeling accuracy and generalization
performance. Extensive experiments on four real and one synthetic noisy datasets
show that Prune4ReL outperforms the baselines with Re-labeling models by up to
9.1% as well as those with a standard model by up to 21.6%.

1

Introduction

By virtue of ever-growing datasets and the neural scaling law [1, 2], where the model accuracy often
increases as a power of the training set size, modern deep learning has achieved unprecedented
success in many domains, e.g., GPT [3], CLIP [4], and ViT [5]. With such massive datasets, however,
practitioners often suffer from enormous computational costs for training models, tuning their
hyper-parameters, and searching for the best architectures, which become the main bottleneck of
development cycles. One popular framework to reduce these costs is data pruning, which reduces a
huge training set into a small subset while preserving model accuracy. Notably, Sorscher et al. [6] have
shown that popular data pruning approaches can break down the neural scaling law from power-law
to exponential scaling, meaning that one can reach a desired model accuracy with much fewer data.
Despite their great success, the impact of label noise on data pruning has received little attention,
which is unavoidable in real-world data collection [7, 8, 9].
Noisy labels are widely known to severely degrade the generalization capability of deep learning, and
thus numerous robust learning strategies have been developed to overcome their negative effect in
deep learning [10]. Among them, Re-labeling [11], a family of methods that identify wrongly labeled
examples and correct their labels during training by a self-correction module such as self-consistency
regularization [12], has shown state-of-the-art performance. For example, the performance of DivideMix [13] trained on the CIFAR-10N [7] dataset containing real human annotation noise is nearly
identical to that of a standard model trained on the clean CIFAR-10 dataset. Consequently, it is
evident that this excellent performance of re-labeling must be carefully considered when designing a
framework for data pruning under label noise.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

