Expressive Sign Equivariant Networks
for Spectral Geometric Learning

Derek Lim
MIT CSAIL
dereklim@mit.edu

Joshua Robinson∗
Stanford University

Stefanie Jegelka
TU Munich, MIT CSAIL

Haggai Maron
Technion, NVIDIA

Abstract
Recent work has shown the utility of developing machine learning models that
respect the structure and symmetries of eigenvectors. These works promote sign
invariance, since for any eigenvector v the negation −v is also an eigenvector.
However, we show that sign invariance is theoretically limited for tasks such as
building orthogonally equivariant models and learning node positional encodings
for link prediction in graphs. In this work, we demonstrate the benefits of sign
equivariance for these tasks. To obtain these benefits, we develop novel sign
equivariant neural network architectures. Our models are based on a new analytic
characterization of sign equivariant polynomials and thus inherit provable expressiveness properties. Controlled synthetic experiments show that our networks can
achieve the theoretically predicted benefits of sign equivariant models.

1

Introduction

The need to process eigenvectors is ubiquitous in machine learning and the computational sciences.
For instance, there is often a need to process eigenvectors of operators associated with manifolds or
graphs [Belkin and Niyogi, 2003, Rustamov et al., 2007], principal components (PCA) of arbitrary
datasets [Pearson, 1901], and eigenvectors arising from implicit or explicit matrix factorization
methods [Levy and Goldberg, 2014, Qiu et al., 2018]. However, eigenvectors are not merely
unstructured data—they have rich structure in the form of symmetries [Ovsjanikov et al., 2008].
Specifically, eigenvectors have sign and basis symmetries. An
eigenvector v is sign symmetric in the sense that the sign-flipped
vector −v is also an eigenvector of the same eigenvalue. Basis
symmetries occur when there is a repeated eigenvalue, as then
there are infinitely many choices of eigenvector basis for the
same eigenspace. Prior work has developed neural networks
that are invariant to these symmetries, improving empirical
performance in several settings [Lim et al., 2023].

Sign
Equivariant

0

The goal of this paper is to demonstrate why sign equivariance can be useful and to characterize fundamental expressive Figure 1: Illustration of a sign
sign equivariant architectures. Our first contribution is to show equivariant function f . When colthat sign equivariant models are a natural choice for several umn 1 of the input is negated, colapplications, whereas sign invariant architectures are provably umn 1 of the output is also negated.
insufficient for these applications. First, we show that sign and
basis invariant networks are theoretically limited in expressive power for learning edge representations (and more generally multi-node representations) in graphs because they learn structural node
embeddings that are known to be limited for link prediction and multi-node tasks [Srinivasan and
∗

Work completed whilst at MIT.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

