Stochastic Collapse: How Gradient Noise Attracts
SGD Dynamics Towards Simpler Subnetworks

Feng Chen∗

Daniel Kunin∗

Atsushi Yamamura (山村篤志)∗
Stanford University
{fengc,kunin,atsushi3,sganguli}@stanford.edu

Surya Ganguli

Abstract
In this work, we reveal a strong implicit bias of stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
that drives overly expressive networks to much simpler subnetworks, thereby
dramatically reducing the number of independent parameters, and improving generalization. To reveal this bias, we identify invariant sets, or subsets of parameter
space that remain unmodified by SGD. We focus on two classes of invariant sets
that correspond to simpler (sparse or low-rank) subnetworks and commonly appear
in modern architectures. Our analysis uncovers that SGD exhibits a property of
stochastic attractivity towards these simpler invariant sets. We establish a sufficient condition for stochastic attractivity based on a competition between the
loss landscape’s curvature around the invariant set and the noise introduced by
stochastic gradients. Remarkably, we find that an increased level of noise strengthens attractivity, leading to the emergence of attractive invariant sets associated
with saddle-points or local maxima of the train loss. We observe empirically the
existence of attractive invariant sets in trained deep neural networks, implying
that SGD dynamics often collapses to simple subnetworks with either vanishing
or redundant neurons. We further demonstrate how this simplifying process of
stochastic collapse benefits generalization in a linear teacher-student framework.
Finally, through this analysis, we mechanistically explain why early training with
large learning rates for extended periods benefits subsequent generalization.

1

Introduction

The remarkable performance of modern deep learning systems relies on a complex interplay between
a training dataset, a network’s architecture, and an optimization strategy. Contrary to traditional
statistical learning theory, these highly expressive models exhibit impressive generalization capabilities on natural tasks, even without explicit regularization, despite having the capacity to memorize
random data [1]. This phenomenon is often attributed to implicit biases introduced in the training
process that drive the learning dynamics towards models with low-complexity, thereby improving
generalization. It is widely believed that a central source of this implicit bias is the randomness
introduced by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [2]. In this work we discuss SGD’s role in attracting
the dynamics, throughout training, towards subsets of parameter space that correspond to simpler
subnetworks. We reveal that the architecture of modern deep neural networks as well as the nonlinear
activation function plays a crucial role in forming these subsets, thus providing a novel perspective
on the source of SGD’s implicit bias. Our contributions are as follows:
1. We introduce invariant sets as subsets of parameter space that, once entered, trap SGD. We
characterize two such sets that correspond to simpler subnetworks and appear extensively in
modern architectures: one for vanishing neurons and the other for identical neurons (Sec. 3).
∗

Equal contribution. Ordered alphabetically.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

