Block Low-Rank Preconditioner with Shared Basis for
Stochastic Optimization
Jui-Nan Yen
UCLA
juinanyen@cs.ucla.edu

Sai Surya Duvvuri
UT Austin
saisurya@cs.utexas.edu

Inderjit S. Dhillon
Google and UT Austin
inderjit@cs.utexas.edu

Cho-Jui Hsieh
Google and UCLA
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Adaptive methods with non-diagonal preconditioning have shown state-of-the-art
results on various tasks. However, their computational complexity and memory
requirement make it challenging to scale these methods to modern neural network
architectures. To address this challenge, some previous works have adopted blockdiagonal preconditioners. However, the memory cost of storing the block-diagonal
matrix remains substantial, leading to the use of smaller block sizes that ultimately
leads to suboptimal performance. To reduce the time and memory complexity
without sacrificing performance, we propose approximating the diagonal blocks
of the second moment matrix by low-rank matrices and enforcing the same basis
for the blocks within each layer. We provide theoretical justification for such basis
sharing and design an algorithm to efficiently maintain this shared-basis block
low-rank approximation during training. Our results on a deep autoencoder and a
Transformer benchmark demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms firstorder methods with slightly more time and memory usage, while also achieving
competitive or superior performance compared to other second-order methods with
less time and memory usage.

1

Introduction

Diagonal adaptive methods such as Adagrad [10] incorporate an adaptive learning rate schedule
for each coordinate of the gradient, which
is typically estimated as inverse root mean square of the
pP
2
histories of the coordinate gradient 1/
t (gt )i , for a gradient vector gt . This is equivalent to
multiplying the gradient vector with a diagonal matrix, a preconditioner. This approach is adopted
in optimizers such as Adam [20], RMSProp [29], which became the preferred approach to training
deep neural networks due to their robustness to the learning rate parameter. Several methods later
developed preconditioners P
such as Shampoo [16, 4], GGT [1], which also estimate off-diagonal
gradient moments such as t (gt )i (gt )j for i 6= j and develop a positive definite preconditioner,
while outperforming the diagonal methods in both training and validation performance. However, this
approach can have high memory requirements due to additional off-diagonal moment information
the optimizer needs to store and the high computational requirement of the inverse operation in
computing the preconditioner.
P
The second-moment matrix t gt gtT constituting both diagonal and off-diagonal cross-moments is
infeasible to store, however, the gradients from deep-neural networks can reveal a structure in this
matrix. To simplify this problem we analyze a basic neural network block - linear transformation
X ! XW , where X 2 Rn⇥din and W 2 Rdin ⇥dout and make two important observations: a) the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

