Understanding Contrastive Learning via
Distributionally Robust Optimization

Junkang Wu1 Jiawei Chen2∗ Jiancan Wu1 Wentao Shi1 Xiang Wang1† Xiangnan He1∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Zhejiang University
{jkwu0909, wujcan, xiangwang1223, xiangnanhe}@gmail.com,
sleepyhunt@zju.edu.cn, shiwentao123@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
This study reveals the inherent tolerance of contrastive learning (CL) towards
sampling bias, wherein negative samples may encompass similar semantics (e.g.,
labels). However, existing theories fall short in providing explanations for this
phenomenon. We bridge this research gap by analyzing CL through the lens of
distributionally robust optimization (DRO), yielding several key insights: (1) CL
essentially conducts DRO over the negative sampling distribution, thus enabling
robust performance across a variety of potential distributions and demonstrating
robustness to sampling bias; (2) The design of the temperature τ is not merely
heuristic but acts as a Lagrange Coefficient, regulating the size of the potential distribution set; (3) A theoretical connection is established between DRO and mutual
information, thus presenting fresh evidence for “InfoNCE as an estimate of MI” and
a new estimation approach for ϕ-divergence-based generalized mutual information.
We also identify CL’s potential shortcomings, including over-conservatism and
sensitivity to outliers, and introduce a novel Adjusted InfoNCE loss (ADNCE) to
mitigate these issues. It refines potential distribution, improving performance and
accelerating convergence. Extensive experiments on various domains (image, sentence, and graphs) validate the effectiveness of the proposal. The code is available
at https://github.com/junkangwu/ADNCE.

1

Introduction

Recently, contrastive learning (CL) [1; 2; 3] has emerged as one of the most prominent self-supervised
methods, due to its empirical success in computer vision [4; 5; 6; 7; 8], natural language processing
[9; 10] and graph [11; 12]. The core idea is to learn representations that draw positive samples (e.g.,
augmented data from the same image) nearby and push away negative samples (e.g., augmented data
from different images). By leveraging this intuitive concept, unsupervised learning has even begun to
challenge supervised learning.
Despite its effectiveness, recent study [13] has expressed concerns about sampling bias in CL.
Negative samples are often drawn uniformly from the training data, potentially sharing similar
semantics (e.g., labels). Blindly separating these similar instances could result in a performance
decline. To address sampling bias, existing research has proposed innovative solutions that either
approximate the optimal distribution of negative instances [13; 14] or integrate an auxiliary detection
module to identify false negative samples [15]. Nevertheless, our empirical analyses challenge the
prevailing understanding of CL. Our findings indicate that CL inherently exhibits robustness towards
∗

Jiawei Chen and Xiangnan He are the corresponding authors.
Xiang Wang is also affiliated with Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Institute of Dataspace, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

