Model Shapley: Equitable Model Valuation with
Black-box Access
Xinyi Xu†§ , Thanh Lam† , Chuan-Sheng Foo§ , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low†
Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore†
Inst. for Infocomm Research; Centre for Frontier AI Research, A∗ STAR, Republic of Singapore§
xinyi.xu@u.nus.edu, lamchithanh1997@gmail.com
foo chuan sheng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Valuation methods of data and machine learning (ML) models are essential to the
establishment of AI marketplaces. Importantly, certain practical considerations
(e.g., operational constraints, legal restrictions) favor the use of model valuation
over data valuation. Also, existing marketplaces that involve trading of pre-trained
ML models call for an equitable model valuation method to price them. In particular, we investigate the black-box access setting which allows querying a model
(to observe predictions) without disclosing model-specific information (e.g., architecture and parameters). By exploiting a Dirichlet abstraction of a model’s
predictions, we propose a novel and equitable model valuation method called
model Shapley. We also leverage a Lipschitz continuity of model Shapley to design
a learning approach for predicting the model Shapley values (MSVs) of many
vendors’ models (e.g., 150) in a large-scale marketplace. We perform extensive
empirical validation on the effectiveness of model Shapley using various real-world
datasets and heterogeneous model types.

1

Introduction

Data valuation methods have important roles in extensive applications such as dataset pricing in a
data marketplace [1], evaluating the contributions of data from multiple collaborating parties [71],
and identifying valuable data (or filtering out less valuable data) for training higher-quality machine
learning (ML) models [20]. However, the following practical considerations favor the use of model
valuation over data valuation: (A) Data valuation can be operationally infeasible due to the characteristics of training data, such as being massively distributed over millions of sources [73], enormous in
size (e.g., 400 billion byte-pair-encoded tokens for a language model [7]), and/or transient (e.g., the
data for online learning are not stored persistently [14]). In contrast, a trained model is not distributed
by nature (and hence does not need to be aggregated from distributed sources), often much smaller
in size than the training data (e.g., less than 1%),1 and usually stored persistently for inference.
(B) Data privacy regulations (e.g., GDPR) can be a legal impediment to data valuation in designing
fair payments for ML-based collaborations (e.g., in medicine [16] or cyber-defense [25]) because the
centralization of (possibly) private data, which seems necessary for data valuation [39], is prohibited
by such regulations. In contrast, the ML models trained on private data without centralization [40]
can be available for valuation. (C) Existing marketplaces that involve trading of pre-trained ML
models (e.g., AWS marketplace, Modzy) call for an equitable model valuation to price them. These
practical considerations motivate the use of equitable model valuation over data valuation.
1

The GPT-3 language model contains 175 billion parameters trained on 45 TB of text data [7]. It is of size
1.75 × 1011 × (2 × 2) × 10−9 = 350 GB (at 16 bit float precision) which is less than 1% of training data size.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

