Top-Ambiguity Samples Matter:
Understanding Why Deep Ensemble Works in
Selective Classification
Qiang Ding1,2 , Yixuan Cao1,2 , Ping Luo1,2,3
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China
{dingqiang22z, caoyixuan, luop}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Selective classification allows a machine learning model to reject some hard inputs
and thus improve the reliability of its predictions. In this area, the ensemble method
is powerful in practice, but there has been no solid analysis on why the ensemble
method works. Inspired by an interesting empirical result that the improvement
of the ensemble largely comes from top-ambiguity samples where its member
models diverge, we prove that, based on some assumptions, the ensemble has a
lower selective risk than the member model for any coverage within a range. The
proof is nontrivial since the selective risk is a non-convex function of the model
prediction. The assumptions and the theoretical results are supported by systematic
experiments on both computer vision and natural language processing tasks.

1

Introduction

Although recent years have witnessed the broad applications of deep learning models, their reliability
has not been guaranteed, which gives rise to the study of selective classification. For any given deep
learning classifier, there might be inputs that the model is not able to classify correctly in practical
applications. One approach to overcoming this problem is accurately delimiting the deep learning
classifier’s application scope so that the classifier rejects to predict over those hard inputs.
To this end, selective classification aims to learn a pair of models consisting of a standard classifier
and a selective function that decides whether the system should reject the input. Since the classifier is
well studied, the study of selective classification focuses on the design of the selective function. A
selective function is usually a confidence estimator with a threshold [1], rejecting the input if and only
if the estimated confidence is below the threshold. There are four categories of confidence estimation
methods: post-hoc methods [2, 3], Bayesian methods [4, 5, 6], learning-based methods [7, 8, 9, 10],
and ensemble methods [11]. Details about these methods is provided in Section 3.
Previous work has shown that Deep Ensemble has a good performance in selective classification
[11]1 , but no solid analysis explains why the ensemble method works. This paper first proposes a
theoretical foundation of Deep Ensemble, i.e., with some assumptions, the ensemble has a lower
selective risk than the member model for any target coverage within a range. The proof is nontrivial
since the selective risk (with the 0/1 loss) are non-convex. We then verify our assumptions and
1
We conducted more comprehensive experiments, showing that Deep Ensemble is still one of the SOTA in
Appendix C.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

