Textually Pretrained Speech Language Models

Michael Hassid♡,♠,∗

Tal Remez♠,∗

Tu Anh Nguyen♠

Alexis Conneau♢

Felix Kreuk♠

Jade Copet♠

Gabriel Synnaeve♠

Emmanuel Dupoux♠

Itai Gat♠

Alexandre Defossez♠

Roy Schwartz♡,∗

Yossi Adi♡,♠,∗

♠

FAIR Team, Meta
♢
OpenAI
♡
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
michael.hassid@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Speech language models (SpeechLMs) process and generate acoustic data only,
without textual supervision. In this work, we propose TWIST, a method for
training SpeechLMs using a warm-start from a pretrained textual language models.
We show using both automatic and human evaluations that TWIST outperforms
a cold-start SpeechLM across the board. We empirically analyze the effect of
different model design choices such as the speech tokenizer, the pretrained textual
model, and the dataset size. We find that model and dataset scale both play
an important role in constructing better-performing SpeechLMs. Based on our
observations, we present the largest (to the best of our knowledge) SpeechLM both
in terms of number of parameters and training data. We additionally introduce two
spoken versions of the StoryCloze textual benchmark to further improve model
evaluation and advance future research in the field. We make speech samples, code
and models publicly available.2

1

Introduction

Speech is the earliest form of human language. Although it contains more than just textual content
(e.g., intonation, non-verbal vocalizations), most spoken language understanding systems are limited
to its textual form [Wen et al., 2015, Bastianelli et al., 2020, Gupta, 2022]; see Qin et al. [2021]
for a recent survey. Recent progress in speech language modeling [Touvron et al., 2023], speech
synthesis [Kong et al., 2020], and acoustic unit discovery [Hsu et al., 2021] provided the ability to
build purely speech-based language models, henceforth, SpeechLMs [Lakhotia et al., 2021]. However,
despite the fast-growing presence of speech and audio content,3 text is still by far the most dominant
language modality on the web. This limits the ability of constructing large SpeechLMs, in contrast to
the great success of textual Language Model (LM)s [Devlin et al., 2019, Raffel et al., 2020, Brown
et al., 2020, Chowdhery et al., 2022]. The development of large textual LMs trained on massive text
corpora allows such models to effectively perform various tasks based on either few examples or
textual instructions [Brown et al., 2020, Touvron et al., 2023]. Such LMs often serve as a foundational
∗

Core Contributor. ♢ Work done while working at Meta.
https://pages.cs.huji.ac.il/adiyoss-lab/twist/
3
E.g., podcasts, local radio, and video games. See https://www.insiderintelligence.com/content/
look-us-digital-audio-market-2022-how-big-who-s-listening-what-they-listening.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

