MarioGPT: Open-Ended Text2Level Generation
through Large Language Models

Shyam Sudhakaran1 , Miguel González-Duque∗1 , Matthias Freiberger∗1 ,
Claire Glanois1 , Elias Najarro1 , Sebastian Risi1,2
1
IT University of Copenhagen, 2 modl.ai, Copenhagen
shyamsnair@protonmail.com, sebr@itu.dk

(a) "many pipes, many enemies, little blocks, low (b) "no pipes, some enemies, many blocks, high
elevation"
elevation"

(c) "many pipes, many enemies"

(d) "no pipes, no enemies, many blocks"

(e) Prompt that does not exist in the dataset:
"many pipes, no enemies, many blocks"

(f) Failure case: "Many pipes, no enemies, some
blocks"

Figure 1: MarioGPT is able to successfully generate levels that follow the text prompt (a–e). Failure
cases rarely happen: for example in (f) the model manages to generate many pipes and some blocks,
but it still generates enemies even though it was prompted with "no enemies".

Abstract
Procedural Content Generation (PCG) is a technique to generate complex and
diverse environments in an automated way. However, while generating content
with PCG methods is often straightforward, generating meaningful content that
reflects specific intentions and constraints remains challenging. Furthermore, many
PCG algorithms lack the ability to generate content in an open-ended manner.
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown to be incredibly effective
in many diverse domains. These trained LLMs can be fine-tuned, re-using information and accelerating training for new tasks. Here, we introduce MarioGPT,
a fine-tuned GPT2 model trained to generate tile-based game levels, in our case
Super Mario Bros levels. MarioGPT can not only generate diverse levels, but
can be text-prompted for controllable level generation, addressing one of the key
challenges of current PCG techniques. As far as we know, MarioGPT is the first
text-to-level model and combined with novelty search it enables the generation of
diverse levels with varying play-style dynamics (i.e. player paths) and the openended discovery of an increasingly diverse range of content. Code available at
https://github.com/shyamsn97/mario-gpt.

1

Introduction

Procedural Content Generation (PCG) refers to techniques that can automatically create game
content, such as levels, maps, or characters [36]. Some of the benefits of PCG are an increase in the
replayability of a game and reduced production costs.
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

