MotionGPT: Human Motion as a Foreign Language
Biao Jiang1,2∗
Xin Chen2∗
1
Fudan University

Wen Liu2
2
Tencent

Jingyi Yu3
Gang Yu2
Tao Chen1†
3
ShanghaiTech University

https://github.com/OpenMotionLab/MotionGPT

Abstract
Though the advancement of pre-trained large language models unfolds, the exploration of building a unified model for language and other multimodal data, such
as motion, remains challenging and untouched so far. Fortunately, human motion
displays a semantic coupling akin to human language, often perceived as a form of
body language. By fusing language data with large-scale motion models,motionlanguage pre-training that can enhance the performance of motion-related tasks
becomes feasible. Driven by this insight, we propose MotionGPT, a unified, versatile, and user-friendly motion-language model to handle multiple motion-relevant
tasks. Specifically, we employ the discrete vector quantization for human motion
and transfer 3D motion into motion tokens, similar to the generation process of
word tokens. Building upon this “motion vocabulary”, we perform language modeling on both motion and text in a unified manner, treating human motion as a
specific language. Moreover, inspired by prompt learning, we pre-train MotionGPT
with a mixture of motion-language data and fine-tune it on prompt-based questionand-answer tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MotionGPT achieves
state-of-the-art performances on multiple motion tasks including text-driven motion
generation, motion captioning, motion prediction, and motion in-between.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a significant breakthrough in pre-trained large language models such as
GPT [34, 35, 3, 27], BERT [7], and T5 [36, 5], which lead to the convergence of language [59, 47],
image [33, 50, 20], mesh [55, 26] and mutlimodal [8] modeling. Nevertheless, a general pre-trained
model for human motion and language has yet to emerge. This pre-trained motion-language model,
capable of supporting numerous motion-relevant tasks through prompts, should benefit diverse fields
like gaming, robotics, virtual assistant, and human behavior analysis.
Previous research on human motion has explored various tasks, including motion generation [29, 10,
46, 52, 57], motion captioning [9, 11], and motion prediction [56, 61, 24]. Recent text-to-motion
works[46, 58, 30, 52] have attempted to employ pre-trained language-relevant models [7, 33]. For
instance, MDM [46] learns a motion diffusion model with conditional text tokens from CLIP [33],
while MLD [52] integrates motion latent space to improve the efficiency of motion diffusion process.
On the other hand, MotionCLIP [45] and TM2T [11] concentrate on modeling the coupled relationship
between motion and text description. However, the above approaches treat motion and language as
separate modalities, which often require strictly paired motion and text data. Moreover, since the
supervisions are task-specific, they can hardly generalize effectively to unseen tasks or data, as they
lack a comprehensive understanding of the relationship between motion and language. We thus focus
on building a pre-trained motion-language model, which can generalize to various tasks and learn
in-depth motion-language correlation knowledge from more feasible motion and language data.
Two challenges are crucial and need to be solved for pre-training a promising motion-language model.
The first is modeling the relation between language and motion, and the second is building a uniform
multi-task framework that can generalize to new tasks. Fortunately, human motion exhibits a semantic
∗
†

Contributed equally and work done while Biao Jiang was a Research Intern with Tencent PCG
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

