MCUFormer: Deploying Vision Transformers on
Microcontrollers with Limited Memory

Yinan Liang1 Ziwei Wang2 Xiuwei Xu2 Yansong Tang1,∗ Jie Zhou2 Jiwen Lu2
{1 Shenzhen International Graduate School, 2 Department of Automation}, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Due to the high price and heavy energy consumption of GPUs, deploying deep
models on IoT devices such as microcontrollers makes significant contributions
for ecological AI. Conventional methods successfully enable convolutional neural network inference of high resolution images on microcontrollers, while the
framework for vision transformers that achieve the state-of-the-art performance
in many vision applications still remains unexplored. In this paper, we propose a
hardware-algorithm co-optimizations method called MCUFormer to deploy vision
transformers on microcontrollers with extremely limited memory, where we jointly
design transformer architecture and construct the inference operator library to fit
the memory resource constraint. More specifically, we generalize the one-shot
network architecture search (NAS) to discover the optimal architecture with highest
task performance given the memory budget from the microcontrollers, where we
enlarge the existing search space of vision transformers by considering the low-rank
decomposition dimensions and patch resolution for memory reduction. For the
construction of the inference operator library of vision transformers, we schedule
the memory buffer during inference through operator integration, patch embedding
decomposition, and token overwriting, allowing the memory buffer to be fully
utilized to adapt to the forward pass of the vision transformer. Experimental results
demonstrate that our MCUFormer achieves 73.62% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet
for image classification with 320KB memory on STM32F746 microcontroller.
Code is available at https://github.com/liangyn22/MCUFormer.

1

Introduction

Deep neural network deployment for realistic applications usually requires high-performance computing devices such as GPUs and TPUs [16, 12]. Due to the high price and energy consumption of
these devices, the unacceptable deployment expenses strictly restrict the utilization of deep models
in a widely variety of tasks[17, 39], especially in the scenarios without sufficient battery support.
Deploying deep neural networks on cheap IoT devices with low energy consumption becomes a
practical solution in many industrial applications such as maritime detection [34, 24], agricultural
picking [31, 43] and robot navigation [2, 29].
Recently, the hardware-algorithm co-design framework [20, 19, 30] is widely studied to deploy deep
convolutional networks with high storage and computational complexity to microcontroller units
(MCU) with extremely limited memory (SRAM) and storage (flash). By searching the optimal
architectures and arranging the memory buffer according to the overall network topology, deep
convolutional neural networks with large numbers of parameters and high FLOPs are successfully
deployed on MCUs with comparable accuracy as inferencing on high-performance computing devices.
Vision transformers [22, 33] have surpassed convolutional neural networks in a wide variety of tasks,
which can further push the limit of intelligent visual perception in resource-constrained devices.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

