Few-shot Generation via Recalling Brain-Inspired
Episodic-Semantic Memory

Zhibin Duan∗, Zhiyi Lv∗, Chaojie Wang†, Bo Chen,
National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing
Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710071, China
xd_zhibin@163.com, xd_silly@163.com, bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn
Bo An
Nanyang Technological University

Mingyuan Zhou
The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Aimed at adapting a generative model to a novel generation task with only a few
given data samples, the capability of few-shot generation is crucial for many realworld applications with limited data, e.g., artistic domains. Instead of training
from scratch, recent works tend to leverage the prior knowledge stored in previous
datasets, which is quite similar to the memory mechanism of human intelligence,
but few of these works directly imitate the memory-recall mechanism that humans make good use of in accomplishing creative tasks, e.g., painting and writing.
Inspired by the memory mechanism of human brain, in this work, we carefully
design a variational structured memory module (VSM), which can simultaneously
store both episodic and semantic memories to assist existing generative models
efficiently recall these memories during sample generation. Meanwhile, we introduce a bionic memory updating strategy for the conversion between episodic
and semantic memories, which can also model the uncertainty during conversion.
Then, we combine the developed VSM with various generative models under the
Bayesian framework, and evaluate these memory-augmented generative models
with few-shot generation tasks, demonstrating the effectiveness of our methods.

1

Introduction

A remarkable capability of human intelligence is its ability to quickly grasp the concepts of new
objects that it has never encountered before [1]. Essentially, this rapid adaptation is achieved by
utilizing the past memories stored in the human brain, which can greatly improve the efficiency
of later learning [2, 3]. Unlike human brain, existing machine learning methods often require to
be trained on a large amount of data when facing new tasks, motivating the research interests on
few-shot learning that aim at efficiently solving these unseen tasks with only a few given data samples
[4–6]. While there have been promising processes for few-shot adaptation on classification tasks, less
work has been done on few-shot generation [7–10], which is mainly due to the challenging nature of
learning the generative process with only a few samples in an unsupervised manner [11, 12].
For existing deep neural networks, to improve their abilities of few-shot adaptation, one of the most
effective methods is to introduce an augmented memory module, which can store the memory of past
experiences to adapt the model to a new task quickly [6, 13–16]. However, the most widely used
memory mechanism in exisiting works is short-term [17] with limited capacity, which focuses on the
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

