Smoothed Analysis of Sequential Probability
Assignment

Alankrita Bhatt
California Institute of Technology
abhatt@caltech.edu

Nika Haghtalab
University of California, Berkeley
nika@berkeley.edu

Abhishek Shetty
University of California, Berkeley
shetty@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We initiate the study of smoothed analysis for the sequential probability assignment
problem with contexts. We study information-theoretically optimal minmax rates
as well as a framework for algorithmic reduction involving the maximum likelihood
estimator oracle. Our approach establishes a general-purpose reduction from
minimax rates for sequential probability assignment for smoothed adversaries
to minimax rates for transductive learning. This leads to optimal (logarithmic)
fast rates for parametric classes and classes with finite VC dimension. On the
algorithmic front, we develop an algorithm that efficiently taps into the MLE
oracle, for general classes of functions. We show that under general conditions this
algorithmic approach yields sublinear regret.

1

Introduction

Sequential probability assignment — also known as online learning under the logarithmic loss — is a
fundamental problem with far-reaching impact on information theory, statistics, finance, optimization,
and sequential decision making [Rissanen, 1983, 1984, Cover, 1991, Feder et al., 1992, Xie and
Barron, 1997, Merhav and Feder, 1998, Xie and Barron, 2000, Yang and Barron, 1999, Jiao et al.,
2013, Orabona and Pál, 2016, Foster et al., 2018]. In recent years, methods for incorporating contexts
or side information into sequential probability assignment have gained much attention [Rakhlin and
Sridharan, 2015, Fogel and Feder, 2017, 2018, Foster et al., 2018, Bhatt and Kim, 2021, Bilodeau
et al., 2021, Wu et al., 2022a], in part due to their newly forged connection to sequential decision
making applications, the contextual bandit problem, and learning in Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) (see e.g. [Foster and Krishnamurthy, 2021] and [Foster et al., 2021a]). In this setting, a
forecaster who has access to historical data x1:t−1 , y1:t−1 consisting of contexts xτ (e.g., day τ ’s
meteorological information) and the outcomes yτ ∈ {0, 1} (e.g., whether τ was a rainy day) wishes
to predict yt given a new context xt . The forecaster uses a probability assignment pt to estimate the
probability of yt = 1 outcome and incurs the logarithmic loss, i.e., − log pt (yt ), which rewards the
forecasters for having assigned high probability to the realized outcome. The goal of the forecaster is
to suffer low regret against a chosen reference class of predictors.
A large body of prior work on sequential probability assignment with contexts has focused on settings
where contexts are presented i.i.d. from an unknown distribution (see [Fogel and Feder, 2017, Bhatt
and Kim, 2021, Bilodeau et al., 2021, Wu et al., 2022a] and the references within); this problem is
also referred to as conditional density estimation. In these cases, sequential probability assignment
is known to enjoy small regret for several reference classes such as Vapnik–Chervonenkis (VC)
classes. On the other hand, attempts to consider context distributions that evolve unpredictably and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

