Agnostic Multi-Group Active Learning

Nick Rittler
University of California - San Diego
nrittler@ucsd.edu

Kamalika Chaudhuri
University of California - San Diego
kamalika@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Inspired by the problem of improving classification accuracy on rare or hard subsets
of a population, there has been recent interest in models of learning where the
goal is to generalize to a collection of distributions, each representing a “group”.
We consider a variant of this problem from the perspective of active learning,
where the learner is endowed with the power to decide which examples are labeled
from each distribution in the collection, and the goal is to minimize the number
of label queries while maintaining PAC-learning guarantees. Our main challenge
is that standard active learning techniques such as disagreement-based active
learning do not directly apply to the multi-group learning objective. We modify
existing algorithms to provide a consistent active learning algorithm for an agnostic
formulation of multi-group learning, which given a collection of G distributions
and a hypothesis class H with VC-dimension d, outputs
an -optimal hypothesis

using Õ (ν 2 /2 )GdθG2 log2 (1/) + G log(1/)/2 label queries, where θG is the
worst-case disagreement coefficient over the collection. Roughly speaking, this
guarantee improves upon the label complexity of standard multi-group learning in
regimes where disagreement-based active learning algorithms may be expected to
succeed, and the number of groups is not too large. We also consider the special
case where each distribution in the collection is individually realizable with respect
to H, and demonstrate Õ (GdθG log(1/)) label queries are sufficient for learning
in this case. We further give an approximation result for the full agnostic case
inspired by the group realizable strategy.

1

Introduction

There is a growing theory literature concerned with choosing a classifier that performs well on
multiple subpopulations or “groups” [1, 2, 7, 6, 4, 5, 6, 3]. In many cases, the motivation comes from
a perspective of fairness, where a typical requirement is that we classify with similar accuracy across
groups [7, 6, 4]. In other cases, the motivation may simply be to train more reliable classifiers. For
example, cancer detection models with good overall accuracy often suffer from poor ability to detect
rare subtypes of cancer that are not well-represented or identified in training. This suggests that naive
ERM may be insufficient in practice [8].
In this work, we consider the following formulation of “multi-group” learning. The learner is given
a collection of distributions G = {Dg }G
g=1 , each corresponding to a group, and a hypothesis class
H, and wants to pick a classifier that approximately minimizes the maximum classification error
over group distributions. We consider this problem from an active learning perspective, where the
learner has the power to choose which examples from each group it wants to label during training.
In a standard extension of the active learning literature, we set out to design schemes for choosing
which examples from each group should be labeled, where the goal is to minimize the number of
label queries while retaining PAC-learning guarantees.
A major challenge in harnessing the power of active algorithms even in standard agnostic settings
is making sure they are consistent. In the case of active learning, this means that as the number
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

