Unsupervised Semantic Correspondence
Using Stable Diffusion

Eric Hedlin1 , Gopal Sharma1 , Shweta Mahajan1, 2 , Hossam Isack3 , Abhishek Kar3 ,
Andrea Tagliasacchi3, 4, 5 , Kwang Moo Yi1
1
University of British Columbia, 2 Vector Institute for AI, 3 Google,
4
Simon Fraser University, 5 University of Toronto

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models are now capable of generating images that are often
indistinguishable from real images. To generate such images, these models must
understand the semantics of the objects they are asked to generate. In this work we
show that, without any training, one can leverage this semantic knowledge within
diffusion models to find semantic correspondences – locations in multiple images
that have the same semantic meaning. Specifically, given an image, we optimize
the prompt embeddings of these models for maximum attention on the regions
of interest. These optimized embeddings capture semantic information about the
location, which can then be transferred to another image. By doing so we obtain
results on par with the strongly supervised state of the art on the PF-Willow dataset
and significantly outperform (20.9% relative for the SPair-71k dataset) any existing
weakly or unsupervised method on PF-Willow, CUB-200 and SPair-71k datasets.

1

Introduction

Estimating point correspondences between images is a fundamental problem in computer vision,
with numerous applications in areas such as image registration [1], object recognition [2], and 3D
reconstruction [3]. Work on correspondences can largely be classified into geometric and semantic
correspondence search. Geometric correspondence search aims to find points that correspond to the
same physical point of the same object and are typically solved with local feature-based methods [4,
5, 6, 7, 8] and optical flow methods [9, 10]. Semantic correspondence search – the core application
of interest in this paper – focuses on points that correspond semantically [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16], not
necessarily of the same object, but of similar objects of the same or related class. For example, given
the selected kitten paw in the (source) image of Figure 1, we would like to automatically identify
kitten paws in other (target) images. Whether geometric or semantic correspondences, a common

source image

source attention

target image

target attention

target image

target attention

Figure 1: Teaser – We optimize for the prompt embedding of the diffusion model that activates
attention in the region of the ‘paw’ for the source image, marked in yellow. With this embedding, the
attention highlights semantically similar points in various target images, which we then use to find
semantic correspondences. This holds even for “out of distribution” target images (LEGO cats).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

