FORB: A Flat Object Retrieval Benchmark for
Universal Image Embedding

Pengxiang Wu, Siman Wang, Kevin Dela Rosa, Derek Hao Hu
Snap Inc.
{pwu,swang7,kevin.delarosa,hao.hu}@snap.com

Abstract
Image retrieval is a fundamental task in computer vision. Despite recent advances
in this field, many techniques have been evaluated on a limited number of domains,
with a small number of instance categories. Notably, most existing works only consider domains like 3D landmarks, making it difficult to generalize the conclusions
made by these works to other domains, e.g., logo and other 2D flat objects. To
bridge this gap, we introduce a new dataset for benchmarking visual search methods
on flat images with diverse patterns. Our flat object retrieval benchmark (FORB)
supplements the commonly adopted 3D object domain, and more importantly, it
serves as a testbed for assessing the image embedding quality on out-of-distribution
domains. In this benchmark we investigate the retrieval accuracy of representative
methods in terms of candidate ranks, as well as matching score margin, a viewpoint
which is largely ignored by many works. Our experiments not only highlight the
challenges and rich heterogeneity of FORB, but also reveal the hidden properties of
different retrieval strategies. The proposed benchmark is a growing project and we
expect to expand in both quantity and variety of objects. The dataset and supporting
codes are available at https://github.com/pxiangwu/FORB/.

1

Introduction

Image retrieval is a fundamental and long-standing task in computer vision. Given a query image,
this task aims to search for the most similar images from a large database. Recent methods have
achieved remarkable performance on certain domains, such as 3D landmark [37, 49] and clothes
[25]. To perform image retrieval, the prevailing practice is to map the query image into a compact
embedding space, where similar images are close to each other while dissimilar ones are separated
away. This embedding space can be handcrafted and one classic design is the Bag of Words (BoW)
[2, 8]. A more effective idea is to learn the embedding automatically, based on deep neural netowrks
[11, 3, 29, 38]. However, all these methods have only been evaluated on a limited number of domains
(e.g., 3D landmarks), and as a result, it remains unclear if the embedding of one method is more
general than the others. In particular, for learning-based methods, since they are usually trained
on a specific restricted dataset with limited object classes (e.g., ImageNet [9] and Open Images
[21]), their feature embeddings could be not universal enough to generalize to various open-world
objects. Therefore, it is necessary to have benchmarks supplementary to the existing ones for a more
comprehensive evaluation of the embeddings, especially in terms of their out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization ability.
In particular, existing image retrieval benchmarks mainly involve domains of 3D objects. Examples
of the commonly considered objects include 3D landmarks, clothes, natural living things and online
products. While many recent benchmarks that curate the images of these objects have sufficiently
large query image sets, they are typically limited to a small number of object categories or instances.
Moving beyond 3D objects, there are several datasets focusing on 2D flat objects. However, these
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

