Convergence Analysis of ODE Models for Accelerated
First-Order Methods via Positive Semidefinite Kernels
Insoon Yang∗
Seoul National University
insoonyang@snu.ac.kr

Jungbin Kim
Seoul National University
kjb2952@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a novel methodology that systematically analyzes ordinary differential
equation (ODE) models for first-order optimization methods by converting the task
of proving convergence rates into verifying the positive semidefiniteness of specific
Hilbert-Schmidt integral operators. Our approach is based on the performance
estimation problems (PEP) introduced by Drori and Teboulle [8]. Unlike previous
works on PEP, which rely on finite-dimensional linear algebra, we use tools from
functional analysis. Using the proposed method, we establish convergence rates of
various accelerated gradient flow models, some of which are new. As an immediate
consequence of our framework, we show a correspondence between minimizing
function values and minimizing gradient norms.

1

Introduction

We consider the following convex optimization problem:
min f (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is a continuously differentiable (µ-strongly) convex function. We assume
that a minimizer x∗ exists. First-order methods, for example, gradient descent and Nesterov’s
accelerated gradient method, are popular in solving this problem due to their low cost per iteration
and dimension-free oracle complexities. These methods can be analyzed by examining their limiting
ODEs. For instance, the gradient descent xk+1 = xk − s∇f (xk ) corresponds to the gradient
flow Ẋ(t) = −∇f (X(t)). Building upon this idea, Su et al. [36] derived the limiting ODE for
Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method (AGM) [27] and analyzed its convergence rate, offering
valuable insights into momentum-based algorithms. A common approach to establishing convergence
rates of continuous-time ODE models involves using Lyapunov functions [23].
In this paper, we propose a generic framework that builds upon the performance estimation problem
(PEP) presented in [8] for analyzing the convergence rates of ODE models for various accelerated firstorder methods, including Nesterov’s AGM. The proposed method is designed from the Lagrangian
dual of a relaxed version of continuous-time PEP. Consequently, our framework transforms the task
of proving convergence rate into verifying the positive semidefiniteness of a specific integral kernel.
Moreover, our framework can also ensure the tightness of the resulting guarantee, meaning that the
obtained convergence guarantee is optimal among all possible convergence rates that can be derived
from weighted integrals of the inequalities employed in convergence proofs. Using the proposed
framework, we confirm the convergence rates of existing ODE models and uncover those of new
accelerated ODE models. In traditional convergence analysis of ODE models, it can be challenging
to design appropriate Lyapunov functions.2 However, in our framework, we only need to verify
∗

Corresponding author.
There is a line of work focused on systematically finding Lyapunov functions, often with the assistance of
computers. See Section 1.1 for details.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

