COCO-Counterfactuals: Automatically Constructed
Counterfactual Examples for Image-Text Pairs

Tiep Le∗
Intel Labs
tiep.le@intel.com

Vasudev Lal
Intel Labs
vasudev.lal@intel.com

Phillip Howard∗
Intel Labs
phillip.r.howard@intel.com

Abstract
Counterfactual examples have proven to be valuable in the field of natural language
processing (NLP) for both evaluating and improving the robustness of language
models to spurious correlations in datasets. Despite their demonstrated utility
for NLP, multimodal counterfactual examples have been relatively unexplored
due to the difficulty of creating paired image-text data with minimal counterfactual changes. To address this challenge, we introduce a scalable framework
for automatic generation of counterfactual examples using text-to-image diffusion models. We use our framework to create COCO-Counterfactuals, a multimodal counterfactual dataset of paired image and text captions based on the
MS-COCO dataset. We validate the quality of COCO-Counterfactuals through
human evaluations and show that existing multimodal models are challenged by
our counterfactual image-text pairs. Additionally, we demonstrate the usefulness
of COCO-Counterfactuals for improving out-of-domain generalization of multimodal vision-language models via training data augmentation. We make our code2
and the COCO-Counterfactuals dataset3 publicly available.

1

Introduction

While vision and language models have achieved remarkable performance improvements in recent
years, out-of-domain (OOD) generalization remains a challenge for even the best models, which
typically exhibit much lower performance in zero-shot evaluation settings than on withheld in-domain
test sets. This has often been attributed to spurious correlations between non-causal features and
labels in datasets which can be exploited during training as shortcuts to achieving artificially high
in-domain performance (Geirhos et al., 2020). For example, image recognition models often learn
to utilize spurious features in the backgrounds of images when trained for classification on datasets
such as ImageNet (Singla and Feizi, 2021; Xiao et al., 2020).
Augmenting training datasets with counterfactuals, which study the impact on a response variable
following a change to a causal feature, has been previously proposed as a strategy for countering
this effect in NLP models (Levesque et al., 2012; Kaushik et al., 2019). Motivated by concepts in
causal learning (Feder et al., 2022), these methods typically form counterfactual examples by making
minimal edits to an input text such that a corresponding label or attribute of the text (e.g., sentiment)
∗
2
3

Equal contribution
https://github.com/IntelLabs/multimodal_cognitive_ai/tree/main/COCO-Counterfactuals
https://huggingface.co/datasets/Intel/COCO-Counterfactuals

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

