Circuit as Set of Points
Jialv Zou†1 , Xinggang Wang‡1 , Jiahao Guo1 , Wenyu Liu1 , Qian Zhang2 , Chang Huang2
1

School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Horizon Robotics

Abstract
As the size of circuit designs continues to grow rapidly, artificial intelligence
technologies are being extensively used in Electronic Design Automation (EDA)
to assist with circuit design. Placement and routing are the most time-consuming
parts of the physical design process, and how to quickly evaluate the placement
has become a hot research topic. Prior works either transformed circuit designs
into images using hand-crafted methods and then used Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) to extract features, which are limited by the quality of the handcrafted methods and could not achieve end-to-end training, or treated the circuit
design as a graph structure and used Graph Neural Networks (GNN) to extract
features, which require time-consuming preprocessing. In our work, we propose a
novel perspective for circuit design by treating circuit components as point clouds
and using Transformer-based point cloud perception methods to extract features
from the circuit. This approach enables direct feature extraction from raw data
without any preprocessing, allows for end-to-end training, and results in high
performance. Experimental results show that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance in congestion prediction tasks on both the CircuitNet and ISPD2015
datasets, as well as in design rule check (DRC) violation prediction tasks on the
CircuitNet dataset. Our method establishes a bridge between the relatively mature
point cloud perception methods and the fast-developing EDA algorithms, enabling
us to leverage more collective intelligence to solve this task. To facilitate the
research of open EDA design, source codes and pre-trained models are released at
https://github.com/hustvl/circuitformer.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the demand for semiconductor chips for various applications has been increasing,
and the need to accelerate the chip design and manufacturing process has become increasingly urgent.
And with the development of semiconductor technology, the scale of very-large-scale integrated
(VLSI) circuits is growing exponentially, challenging the scalability and reliability of the IC design
process. As a result, the industry urgently needs more efficient Electronic Design Automation (EDA)
algorithms and tools to enable the processing of huge exploration spaces in a shorter period of time.
The layout and routing phase are particularly important in the overall EDA flow. As feature size
shrinks, routability becomes a more important constraint on the manufacturability of VLSI designs.
Routing congestion can significantly affect PPA (Performance, Power, Area) metrics, and design rule
violations can directly lead to unmanufactured designs, but there is no way to obtain an accurate
congestion and design rule violations map without conducting placement and routing attempts, which
can lead to longer design cycles and possibly some unpleasant surprises. Therefore, accurate and
rapid evaluation of placement in advance of routing will be very important, and the exploration of
routability becomes one of the key issues in modern placement for VLSI circuits [27].
†

This work was done when Jialv Zou was interning at Horizon Robotics. ‡ Xinggang Wang (xgwang@
hust.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

