ProlificDreamer: High-Fidelity and Diverse Text-to-3D
Generation with Variational Score Distillation
Zhengyi Wang∗1,3 , Cheng Lu∗1 , Yikai Wang1 , Fan Bao1,3 ,
Chongxuan Li† 2 , Hang Su1,4 , Jun Zhu† 1,3,4
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center,
Tsinghua University; 2 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China,
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
3
ShengShu, Beijing, China; 4 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
{wang-zy21, bf19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; lucheng.lc15@gmail.com;
yikaiw@outlook.com; chongxuanli@ruc.edu.cn; suhangss@tsinghua.edu.cn
dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Score distillation sampling (SDS) has shown great promise in text-to-3D generation by distilling pretrained large-scale text-to-image diffusion models, but
suffers from over-saturation, over-smoothing, and low-diversity problems. In this
work, we propose to model the 3D parameter as a random variable instead of a
constant as in SDS and present variational score distillation (VSD), a principled
particle-based variational framework to explain and address the aforementioned
issues in text-to-3D generation. We show that SDS is a special case of VSD and
leads to poor samples with both small and large CFG weights. In comparison,
VSD works well with various CFG weights as ancestral sampling from diffusion models and simultaneously improves the diversity and sample quality with
a common CFG weight (i.e., 7.5). We further present various improvements in
the design space for text-to-3D such as distillation time schedule and density
initialization, which are orthogonal to the distillation algorithm yet not well explored. Our overall approach, dubbed ProlificDreamer, can generate high rendering
resolution (i.e., 512 × 512) and high-fidelity NeRF with rich structure and complex effects (e.g., smoke and drops). Further, initialized from NeRF, meshes
fine-tuned by VSD are meticulously detailed and photo-realistic. Project page:
https://ml.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn/prolificdreamer/.

1

Introduction

3D content and technologies enable us to visualize, comprehend, and interact with complex objects
and environments that are reflective of our real-life experiences. Their pivotal role extends across a
wide array of domains, encompassing architecture, animation, gaming, and the rapidly evolving fields
of virtual and augmented reality. In spite of the extensive applications, the production of premium 3D
content often remains a formidable task. It necessitates a significant investment of time and effort,
even when undertaken by professional designers. This challenge has prompted the development of
text-to-3D methods [19, 31, 34, 20, 4, 29, 55, 16]. By automating the generation of 3D content based
on textual descriptions, these innovative methods present a promising way towards streamlining
the 3D content creation process. Furthermore, they stand to make this process more accessible,
potentially encouraging a significant paradigm shift in the aforementioned fields.
∗

Equal contribution;

†

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

