BioMassters: A Benchmark Dataset for
Forest Biomass Estimation using
Multi-modal Satellite Time Series
Andrea Nascetti1,2∗ Ritu Yadav2 Kiril Brodt3 Qixun Qu Hongwei Fan4
Yuri Shendryk5 Isha Shah6 Christine Chung6
1
University of Liège 2 KTH Royal Institute of Technology
3
University of Montreal and Novosibirsk State University 4 Imperial College of London
5
Dendra Systems 6 Driven Data

Abstract
Above Ground Biomass is an important variable as forests play a crucial role in
mitigating climate change as they act as an efficient, natural and cost-effective
carbon sink. Traditional field and airborne LiDAR measurements have been proven
to provide reliable estimations of forest biomass. Nevertheless, the use of these
techniques at a large scale can be challenging and expensive. Satellite data have
been widely used as a valuable tool in estimating biomass on a global scale.
However, the full potential of dense multi-modal satellite time series data, in
combination with modern Deep Learning (DL) approaches, has yet to be fully
explored. The aim of the "BioMassters" data challenge and benchmark dataset is to
investigate the potential of multi-modal satellite data (Sentinel-1 SAR and Sentinel2 MSI) to estimate forest biomass at a large scale using the Finnish Forest Centre’s
open forest and nature airborne LiDAR data as a reference. The performance of
the top three baseline models shows the potential of DL to produce accurate and
higher-resolution biomass maps. The dataset and the code are available on the
project website: https://nascetti-a.github.io/BioMasster/.

1

Introduction

Forests contain a significant proportion of the world’s biomass and act as carbon sinks by removing
carbon dioxide from the air through photosynthesis. On the other hand, forest release carbon dioxide
through wildfires, respiration, and decomposition. Estimate of biomass change enables a direct
measurement of carbon sequestration or loss that can help validate carbon-cycle models and quantify
the human-induced impacts on global climate change. In order to understand how much carbon
a forest contains (its carbon stock) and how it changes (carbon flux), it is important to have an
accurate measure of Above Ground Biomass (AGB). Monitoring variation of forest biomass at the
global, national and regional scales is a crucial indicator for making informed decisions and assessing
the impact of new policies for preservation and improvements of carbon sequestration. Biomass
has a direct influence on local, regional and even global climate, particularly on air temperature
and humidity [8]. Forest biomass data can play a crucial role in understanding and predicting
climate, for example in climate model initialization and testing, carbon turnover estimation, and
data assimilation in carbon cycle models. Moreover, forest AGB is one of the sub-indicators of
Sustainable Development Goal 15, which tracks changes in carbon stocks and assesses the impact
of forest degradation, deforestation and management practices on the carbon cycle. While field
measurements and Airborne Laser Scanning (ALS) are effectively used to retrieve information about
∗

Corresponding author: nascetti@kth.se

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

