Conditional independence testing under
misspecified inductive biases

Felipe Maia Polo
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
felipemaiapolo@gmail.com

Yuekai Sun
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
yuekai@umich.edu

Moulinath Banerjee
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
moulib@umich.edu

Abstract
Conditional independence (CI) testing is a fundamental and challenging task in
modern statistics and machine learning. Many modern methods for CI testing rely
on powerful supervised learning methods to learn regression functions or Bayes
predictors as an intermediate step; we refer to this class of tests as regressionbased tests. Although these methods are guaranteed to control Type-I error when
the supervised learning methods accurately estimate the regression functions or
Bayes predictors of interest, their behavior is less understood when they fail due
to misspecified inductive biases; in other words, when the employed models are
not flexible enough or when the training algorithm does not induce the desired
predictors. Then, we study the performance of regression-based CI tests under
misspecified inductive biases. Namely, we propose new approximations or upper bounds for the testing errors of three regression-based tests that depend on
misspecification errors. Moreover, we introduce the Rao-Blackwellized Predictor
Test (RBPT), a regression-based CI test robust against misspecified inductive biases. Finally, we conduct experiments with artificial and real data, showcasing the
usefulness of our theory and methods.

1

Introduction

Conditional independence (CI) testing is fundamental in modern statistics and machine learning (ML).
Its use has become widespread in several different areas, from (i) causal discovery [12, 24, 34, 11]
and (ii) algorithmic fairness [28], to (iii) feature selection/importance [5, 37] and (iv) transfer learning
[25]. Due to its growing relevance across different sub-fields of statistics and ML, new testing
methods with different natures, from regression to simulation-based tests, are often introduced.
Regression-based CI tests, i.e., tests based on supervised learning methods, have become especially
attractive in the past years due to (i) significant advances in supervised learning techniques, (ii) their
suitability for high-dimensional problems, and (iii) their simplicity and easy application. However,
regression-based tests usually depend on the assumption that we can accurately approximate the
regression functions or Bayes predictors of interest, which is hardly true if (i) either the model classes
are misspecified or if (ii) the training algorithms do not induce the desired predictors, i.e., if we
have misspecified inductive biases. Misspecified inductive biases typically lead to inflated Type-I
error rates but also can cause tests to be powerless. Even though these problems can frequently arise
in practical situations, more attention should be given to theoretically understanding the effects of
misspecification on CI hypothesis testing. Moreover, current regression-based methods are usually
not designed to be robust against misspecification errors, making CI testing less reliable. In this
work, we study the performance of three major regression-based conditional independence tests under
misspecified inductive biases and propose the Rao-Blackwellized Predictor Test (RBPT), which is
more robust against misspecification.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

