Brain-like Flexible Visual Inference by Harnessing
Feedback-Feedforward Alignment

Tahereh Toosi ∗
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience
Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute
Columbia University
New York, NY
tahereh.toosi@columbia.edu

Elias B. Issa
Department of Neuroscience
Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute
Columbia University
New York, NY
elias.issa@columbia.edu

Abstract
In natural vision, feedback connections support versatile visual inference capabilities such as making sense of the occluded or noisy bottom-up sensory information
or mediating pure top-down processes such as imagination. However, the mechanisms by which the feedback pathway learns to give rise to these capabilities
flexibly are not clear. We propose that top-down effects emerge through alignment
between feedforward and feedback pathways, each optimizing its own objectives.
To achieve this co-optimization, we introduce Feedback-Feedforward Alignment
(FFA), a learning algorithm that leverages feedback and feedforward pathways
as mutual credit assignment computational graphs, enabling alignment. In our
study, we demonstrate the effectiveness of FFA in co-optimizing classification and
reconstruction tasks on widely used MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets. Notably, the
alignment mechanism in FFA endows feedback connections with emergent visual
inference functions, including denoising, resolving occlusions, hallucination, and
imagination. Moreover, FFA offers bio-plausibility compared to traditional backpropagation (BP) methods in implementation. By repurposing the computational
graph of credit assignment into a goal-driven feedback pathway, FFA alleviates
weight transport problems encountered in BP, enhancing the bio-plausibility of the
learning algorithm. Our study presents FFA as a promising proof-of-concept for
the mechanisms underlying how feedback connections in the visual cortex support
flexible visual functions. This work also contributes to the broader field of visual
inference underlying perceptual phenomena and has implications for developing
more biologically inspired learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Humans possess remarkable abilities to infer the properties of objects even in the presence of
occlusion or noise. They can mentally imagine objects and reconstruct their complete forms, even
when only partial information is available, regardless of whether they have ever seen the complete
form before. The process of visual inference on noisy or uncertain stimuli requires additional time,
implying cognitive processes that go beyond a simple feedforward pass on visual input and suggest the
involvement of additional mechanisms such as feedback and recurrence (Kar et al., 2019; Kietzmann
et al., 2019; Gilbert and Sigman, 2007; Debes and Dragoi, 2023; Kreiman and Serre, 2020). Despite
the abundant evidence on the involvement of feedback connections in various cognitive processes,
understanding the precise mechanisms through which they flexibly give rise to the ability to infer or
generate perceptual experiences is not clear.
∗

Correspondence to: Tahereh Toosi <tahere.toosi@gmail.com>

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

