A Step Towards Worldwide Biodiversity Assessment:
The BIOSCAN-1M Insect Dataset
Zahra Gharaee3∗ , ZeMing Gong4∗ , Nicholas Pellegrino3∗ , Iuliia Zarubiieva2,5 ,
Joakim Bruslund Haurum7 , Scott C. Lowe5,8 , Jaclyn T.A. McKeown1,2 , Chris C.Y. Ho1,2 ,
Joschka McLeod1,2 , Yi-Yun C Wei1,2 , Jireh Agda1,2 , Sujeevan Ratnasingham1,2 ,
Dirk Steinke2† , Angel X. Chang4,6† , Graham W. Taylor2,5† , Paul Fieguth3†
1
Centre for Biodiversity Genomics, 2 University of Guelph, 3 University of Waterloo,
4
Simon Fraser University, 5 Vector Institute for AI, 6 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii),
7
Aalborg University and Pioneer Centre for AI, 8 Dalhousie University
https://biodiversitygenomics.net/1M_insects/

Abstract
In an effort to catalog insect biodiversity, we propose a new large dataset of
hand-labelled insect images, the BIOSCAN-1M Insect Dataset. Each record is
taxonomically classified by an expert, and also has associated genetic information
including raw nucleotide barcode sequences and assigned barcode index numbers,
which are genetically-based proxies for species classification. This paper presents
a curated million-image dataset, primarily to train computer-vision models capable of providing image-based taxonomic assessment, however, the dataset also
presents compelling characteristics, the study of which would be of interest to the
broader machine learning community. Driven by the biological nature inherent
to the dataset, a characteristic long-tailed class-imbalance distribution is exhibited. Furthermore, taxonomic labelling is a hierarchical classification scheme,
presenting a highly fine-grained classification problem at lower levels. Beyond
spurring interest in biodiversity research within the machine learning community,
progress on creating an image-based taxonomic classifier will also further the
ultimate goal of all BIOSCAN research: to lay the foundation for a comprehensive
survey of global biodiversity. This paper introduces the dataset and explores the
classification task through the implementation and analysis of a baseline classifier. The code repository of the BIOSCAN-1M-Insect dataset is available at
https://github.com/zahrag/BIOSCAN-1M

1

Introduction

Global change is restructuring ecosystems on a planetary scale, creating an increasingly urgent need
to track impacts on biodiversity. Such tracking is exceptionally challenging because life is highly
diverse: the biosphere comprises more than 10 million multicellular species [42]. Until recently,
this complexity has meant that an Earth observation system for biodiversity was inconceivable,
however the increased power of DNA sequencing and the recognition that living organisms can be
discriminated by short stretches of DNA have revealed a way forward, which has become the central
focus of the International Barcode of Life (iBOL) Consortium.
Discriminating organisms by DNA sequences [22, 6] can revolutionize our understanding of biodiversity, not only by providing a reliable species proxy for known and unknown species, but also
by revealing their interactions and assessing their responses to changes in the ecosystem. This is
essential to mitigate a looming mass extinction, where an eighth of all species may become extinct by
2100 unless there is a significant change in human behaviour [10, 11].
∗

Joint first author.
Joint senior/last author.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.
†

