Error Discovery By Clustering Influence Embeddings

Fulton Wang∗
Meta

Julius Adebayo∗
Prescient Design / Genentech

Sarah Tan
Cornell University

Diego Garcia-Olano
Meta

Narine Kokhlikyan
Meta

Abstract
We present a method for identifying groups of test examples—slices—on which
a model under-performs, a task now known as slice discovery. We formalize
coherence—a requirement that erroneous predictions, within a slice, should be
wrong for the same reason—as a key property that any slice discovery method
should satisfy. We then use influence functions to derive a new slice discovery
method, InfEmbed, which satisfies coherence by returning slices whose examples
are influenced similarly by the training data. InfEmbed is simple, and consists
of applying K-Means clustering to a novel representation we deem influence
embeddings. We show InfEmbed outperforms current state-of-the-art methods on
2 benchmarks, and is effective for model debugging across several case studies.2

1

Introduction

Error analysis is a longstanding challenge in machine learning [Pope, 1976, Amershi et al., 2015,
Sculley et al., 2015, Chung et al., 2019, Chakarov et al., 2016, Cadamuro et al., 2016, Kearns et al.,
2018, Kim et al., 2019, Zinkevich Martin, 2020]. Recently, Eyuboglu et al. [2022b] formalized a
type of error analysis termed the slice discovery problem. In the slice discovery problem, given
a multi-class classification model and test data, the goal is to partition the test data into a set of
slices—groups of test examples—by model performance. An effective slice discovery method (SDM)
should satisfy two desiderata:
1. Error surfacing: Identify under-performing slices, i.e. slices with low accuracy, if they exist.
2. Coherence: Return slices that are coherent in the following sense: Erroneous predictions in
a given slice should have the same root cause, i.e. be “wrong for the same reason”.
To illustrate, suppose we have a pre-trained model that detects hip fractures from an x-ray, trained
on data from one hospital, that is now deployed in a new hospital. The model might err frequently
on two groups: 1) examples containing a spurious signal like the frequency signature of the scanner
from the first hospital [Badgeley et al., 2019], and 2) examples from patients not represented in the
new hospital. An effective SDM should uncover these two groups. The slice discovery problem
has taken on renewed importance given that models trained via empirical risk minimization exhibit
degraded performance on certain data groups—slices—due to distribution shift [Koh et al., 2021],
noisy labels [Northcutt et al., 2021], and imbalanced data [Idrissi et al., 2022].
In developing a SDM, there are two key challenges. First, formalizing the coherence property,
i.e., defining the root cause of an error, identifying whether two errors have similar root causes,
and ultimately, defining whether a slice is coherent. Second, identifying the representation to use:
∗
2

The two authors contributed equally. Correspondence to fultonwang@meta.com
Code to replicate our findings is available at: https://github.com/adebayoj/infembed

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

