2Direction: Theoretically Faster Distributed Training
with Bidirectional Communication Compression

Alexander Tyurin
KAUST
Saudi Arabia
alexandertiurin@gmail.com

Peter Richtárik
KAUST
Saudi Arabia
richtarik@gmail.com

Abstract
We consider distributed convex optimization problems in the regime when the
communication between the server and the workers is expensive in both uplink
and downlink directions. We develop a new and provably accelerated method,
which we call 2Direction, based on fast bidirectional compressed communication
and a new bespoke error-feedback mechanism which may be of independent interest. Indeed, we find that the EF and EF21-P mechanisms (Seide et al., 2014;
Gruntkowska et al., 2023) that have considerable success in the design of efficient
non-accelerated methods are not appropriate for accelerated methods. In particular, we prove that 2Direction improves the previous state-of-the-art communicae (K × (L/αµ + Lmax ω/nµ + ω)) (Gruntkowska et al., 2023) to
tion complexity
Θ
p
p
2
e
Θ(K × ( L(ω+1)/αµ + Lmax ω /nµ + 1/α + ω)) in the µ–strongly-convex setting, where L and Lmax are smoothness constants, n is # of workers, ω and α
are compression errors of the RandK and TopK sparsifiers (as examples), K is
# of coordinates/bits that the server and workers send to each other. Moreover,
our method is the first that improves upon the communication complexity of the
vanilla accelerated gradient descent (AGD) method (Nesterov, 2018). We obtain
similar improvements in the general convex regime as well. Finally, our theoretical findings are corroborated by experimental evidence.

1

Introduction

We consider convex optimization problems in the centralized distributed setting. These types of
problems appear in federated learning (Konečný et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017) and distributed
optimization (Ramesh et al., 2021). In this setting, one of the main problems is the communication
bottleneck: the connection link between the server and the workers can be very slow. We focus our
attention on methods that aim to address this issue by applying lossy compression to the communicated messages (Alistarh et al., 2017; Mishchenko et al., 2019; Gruntkowska et al., 2023).
1.1

The problem

Formally, we consider the optimization problem


n
P
min f (x) := n1
fi (x) ,
x∈Rd

(1)

i=1

where n is the number of workers and fi : Rd → R are smooth convex functions for all i ∈ [n] :=
{1, . . . , n}. We consider the centralized distributed optimization setting in which each ith worker
contains the function fi , and all workers are directly connected to a server (Kairouz et al., 2021). In
general, we want to find a (possibly random) point x
b such that E [f (b
x)] − f (x∗ ) ≤ ε, where x∗ is
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

