Interpretable and Explainable Logical Policies
via Neurally Guided Symbolic Abstraction

Quentin Delfosse∗
Technical University of Darmstadt
National Research Center for Applied Cybersecurity
quentin.delfosse@tu-darmstadt.de
Devendra Singh Dhami
Eindhoven University of Technology†
Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI)
d.s.dhami@tue.nl

Hikaru Shindo∗
Technical University of Darmstadt
hikaru.shindo@tu-darmstadt.de

Kristian Kersting
Technical University Darmstadt
Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI)
German Research Center for AI (DFKI)
kersting@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
The limited priors required by neural networks make them the dominating choice to encode
and learn policies using reinforcement learning (RL). However, they are also black-boxes,
making it hard to understand the agent’s behaviour, especially when working on the image level.
Therefore, neuro-symbolic RL aims at creating policies that are interpretable in the first place.
Unfortunately, interpretability is not explainability. To achieve both, we introduce Neurally
gUided Differentiable loGic policiEs (NUDGE). NUDGE exploits trained neural networkbased agents to guide the search of candidate-weighted logic rules, then uses differentiable
logic to train the logic agents. Our experimental evaluation demonstrates that NUDGE agents
can induce interpretable and explainable policies while outperforming purely neural ones and
showing good flexibility to environments of different initial states and problem sizes.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents use neural networks to take decisions from the unstructured input state
space without manual engineering [Mnih et al., 2015]. However, these black-box policies lack interpretability [Rudin, 2019], i.e. the capacity to articulate the thinking behind the action selection. They are also not robust
to environmental changes [Pinto et al., 2017, Wulfmeier et al., 2017]. Although performing object detection and
policy optimization independently can get over these issues Devin et al. [2018], doing so comes at the cost of the
aforementioned issues when employing neural networks to encode the policy.
As logic constitutes a unified symbolic language that humans use to compose the reasoning behind their behavior,
logic-based policies can tackle the interpretability problems for RL. Recently proposed Neural Logic RL (NLRL)
agents [Jiang and Luo, 2019] construct logic-based policies using differentiable rule learners called ∂ILP [Evans
and Grefenstette, 2018], which can then be integrated with gradient-based optimization methods for RL. It
represents the policy as a set of weighted rules, and performs policy gradients-based learning to solve RL tasks
which require relational reasoning. It successfully produces interpretable rules, which describe each action
in terms of its preconditions and outcome. However, the number of potential rules grows exponentially with
the number of considered actions, entities, and their relations. NLRL is a memory-intensive approach, i.e. it
generates a set of potential simple rules based on rule templates and can only be evaluated on simple abstract
∗
†

Equal contribution.
DSD contributed while being with hessian.AI and TU Darmstadt before joining TU\e.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

