Swarm Reinforcement Learning for Adaptive Mesh
Refinement
Niklas Freymuth1∗ Philipp Dahlinger1 Tobias Würth2 Simon Reisch1
Luise Kärger2 Gerhard Neumann1
1
Autonomous Learning Robots, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe
2
Institute of Vehicle Systems Technology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe

Abstract
Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR) enhances the Finite Element Method, an important technique for simulating complex problems in engineering, by dynamically
refining mesh regions, enabling a favorable trade-off between computational speed
and simulation accuracy. Classical methods for AMR depend on heuristics or
expensive error estimators, hindering their use for complex simulations. Recent
learning-based AMR methods tackle these issues, but so far scale only to simple
toy examples. We formulate AMR as a novel Adaptive Swarm Markov Decision
Process in which a mesh is modeled as a system of simple collaborating agents
that may split into multiple new agents. This framework allows for a spatial reward
formulation that simplifies the credit assignment problem, which we combine with
Message Passing Networks to propagate information between neighboring mesh
elements. We experimentally validate our approach, Adaptive Swarm Mesh Refinement (ASMR), on challenging refinement tasks. Our approach learns reliable
and efficient refinement strategies that can robustly generalize to different domains
during inference. Additionally, it achieves a speedup of up to 2 orders of magnitude
compared to uniform refinements in more demanding simulations. We outperform
learned baselines and heuristics, achieving a refinement quality that is on par with
costly error-based oracle AMR strategies.

1

Introduction

The Finite Element Method (FEM) is a widely used numerical technique in engineering and applied
sciences for solving complex partial differential equations [1, 2, 3, 4]. The method discretizes
the continuous problem domain into smaller, finite elements, allowing for an efficient numerical
solution. A key aspect of the FEM for complex systems is Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR),
which dynamically refines regions of high solution variability, allowing for a favorable trade-off
between computational speed and simulation accuracy [5, 6, 7]. As problems in engineering grow
more complex, the FEM and especially Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR) techniques have become
increasingly important tools in providing computationally tractable yet precise solutions. Applications
of AMR include fluid dynamics [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13], structural mechanics [14, 15, 16, 17], and
astrophysics [18, 19, 20]. Yet, classical approaches for AMR usually rely on either problem-dependent
or more general but potentially suboptimal error indicators, or require expensive error estimates
[21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 12]. In either case, they can be cumbersome to use in practice.
To address this issue, we formalize AMR as a Reinforcement Learning (RL) [27] problem. Following
previous work [28, 29, 30], each refinement step encodes the state of the current simulation as local
observations that we feed to RL agents, who then determine which elements of a mesh to refine.
However, previous work has issues with scalability due to an expensive inference process [28],
∗

correspondence to niklas.freymuth@kit.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

