Dynamics Generalisation in Reinforcement Learning
via Adaptive Context-Aware Policies

Michael Beukman1,2∗ Devon Jarvis1,3
Richard Klein1 Steven James1 Benjamin Rosman1
1

University of the Witwatersrand

2

University of Oxford

3

University College London

Abstract
While reinforcement learning has achieved remarkable successes in several domains, its real-world application is limited due to many methods failing to generalise to unfamiliar conditions. In this work, we consider the problem of generalising
to new transition dynamics, corresponding to cases in which the environment’s
response to the agent’s actions differs. For example, the gravitational force exerted
on a robot depends on its mass and changes the robot’s mobility. Consequently,
in such cases, it is necessary to condition an agent’s actions on extrinsic state
information and pertinent contextual information reflecting how the environment
responds. While the need for context-sensitive policies has been established, the
manner in which context is incorporated architecturally has received less attention.
Thus, in this work, we present an investigation into how context information should
be incorporated into behaviour learning to improve generalisation. To this end, we
introduce a neural network architecture, the Decision Adapter, which generates
the weights of an adapter module and conditions the behaviour of an agent on the
context information. We show that the Decision Adapter is a useful generalisation
of a previously proposed architecture and empirically demonstrate that it results in
superior generalisation performance compared to previous approaches in several
environments. Beyond this, the Decision Adapter is more robust to irrelevant
distractor variables than several alternative methods.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful tool, and has displayed recent success in several settings [1–
4]. However, despite its potential, RL faces a significant challenge: generalisation. Current agents
and algorithms struggle to perform well beyond the narrow settings in which they were trained [5–7],
which is a major limitation that hinders the practical application of RL. For RL algorithms to be
effective in real-world scenarios, they must be capable of adapting to changes in the environment and
performing well in settings that are different, but related, to those they trained on [7].
To illustrate this point, consider a legged robot trained to walk on a tiled floor. While the agent would
perform well in these conditions, it will likely struggle in other reasonable settings, such as walking
on asphalt or when carrying cargo. When walking on another surface, the friction characteristics
would differ from what the robot trained on, which may cause it to slip. When carrying additional
weight, the robot is heavier, with a potentially different center of mass. This may mean that the robot
must exert more force to lift its legs or be more careful to prevent falling over. This limitation is far
from ideal; we want our agents to excel in tasks with minor differences in dynamics (the effect of the
agent’s actions) without requiring additional training.
∗

Correspondence to mbeukman@robots.ox.ac.uk. Work done while at the University of the Witwatersrand,
now at the University of Oxford.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

