GradOrth: A Simple yet Efficient Out-of-Distribution
Detection with Orthogonal Projection of Gradients

Sima Behpour

Thang Doan

Xin Li

Wenbin He

Liang Gou

Liu Ren

Bosch Research North America, Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
{sima.behpour, thang.doan, xin.li9, wenbin.he2, liang.gou, liu.ren}@us.bosch.com

Abstract
Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) data is crucial for ensuring the safe deployment of machine learning models in real-world applications. However, existing
OOD detection approaches primarily rely on the feature maps or the full gradient
space information to derive OOD scores neglecting the role of most important
parameters of the pre-trained network over in-distribution (ID) data. In this study,
we propose a novel approach called GradOrth to facilitate OOD detection based
on one intriguing observation that the important features to identify OOD data lie
in the lower-rank subspace of ID data. In particular, we identify OOD data by
computing the norm of gradient projection on the subspaces considered important
for the in-distribution data. A large orthogonal projection value (i.e., a small
projection value) indicates the sample as OOD as it captures a weak correlation of
the ID data. This simple yet effective method exhibits outstanding performance,
showcasing a notable reduction in the average false positive rate at a 95% true
positive rate (FPR95) of up to 8% when compared to the current state-of-the-art
methods.

1

Introduction

The issue of identifying out-of-distribution (OOD) data, which falls outside training data distributions,
has become a significant focus in deep learning. OOD data challenges real-world model deployment,
as it can lead to unreliable or incorrect predictions, particularly in safety-critical applications such
as healthcare, autonomous vehicles, and physical sciences [14, 55, 64, 1, 4, 2]. This problem arises
because modern Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) produce overconfident predictions on OOD inputs,
complicating the separation of in-distribution (ID) and OOD data [63, 41]. The main goal of OOD
detection is to develop methods that can accurately detect when a model encounters OOD data,
allowing the model to either reject these inputs or provide more informative responses, such as
uncertainty indication or confidence measures.
Many studies have investigated approaches to detecting OOD in deep learning [5, 18, 22, 27, 29,
32–34, 38, 39]. The majority of prior work focused on calculating OOD uncertainty from the
activation space of a neural network, for example, by using model output [18, 27, 32, 34] or feature
representations [29]. Another line of studies like ODIN [32], GradNorm [23], and ExGrad [24]
leverage the gradient information of deep neural network models to compute OOD uncertainty score
and achieve performant results. GradNorm [23] investigates the richness of the gradient space and
presents that gradients provide valuable information for OOD detection. In particular, GradNorm
utilizes the vector norm of gradients explicitly as an OOD scoring function. GradNorm, however,
considers the full gradient space information, which might be noisy and lead to sub-optimal solutions.
A recent direction of research employs network parameter sparsification to improve OOD detection
performance like DICE [47] and ASH [12]. ASH removes a majority of the activation by obtaining
the pth-percentile of the entire representation. However, the potential consequence may result in
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

