IPMix: Label-Preserving Data Augmentation Method
for Training Robust Classifiers
Zhenglin Huang1 , Xianan Bao1 , Na Zhang1∗, Qingqi Zhang2 ,
Xiaomei Tu3 , Biao Wu1 , and Xi Yang4
1

School of Artificial Intellienge, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University
2
Yamaguchi University 3 ZGUC
4
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China

Abstract
Data augmentation has been proven effective for training high-accuracy convolutional neural network classifiers by preventing overfitting. However, building deep
neural networks in real-world scenarios requires not only high accuracy on clean
data but also robustness when data distributions shift. While prior methods have
proposed that there is a trade-off between accuracy and robustness, we propose
IPMix, a simple data augmentation approach to improve robustness without hurting
clean accuracy. IPMix integrates three levels of data augmentation (image-level,
patch-level, and pixel-level) into a coherent and label-preserving technique to
increase the diversity of training data with limited computational overhead. To
further improve the robustness, IPMix introduces structural complexity at different
levels to generate more diverse images and adopts the random mixing method for
multi-scale information fusion. Experiments demonstrate that IPMix outperforms
state-of-the-art corruption robustness on CIFAR-C and ImageNet-C. In addition,
we show that IPMix also significantly improves the other safety measures, including robustness to adversarial perturbations, calibration, prediction consistency,
and anomaly detection, achieving state-of-the-art or comparable results on several
benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.com/hzlsaber/IPMix.

1

Introduction

Deep neural network models have recently achieved remarkable performance on various computer
vision tasks, such as zero-shot image classification [1–3], 3D object detection [4–6], and face
recognition [7, 8]. In real-world scenarios, models can achieve impressive accuracy when training
and test distributions are identical, but challenges appear when confronted with out-of-distribution
examples [9–11], such as natural corruptions [12], adversarial perturbations [13], and anomaly
patterns [14], necessitating robustness across distribution shifts. Data augmentation has been proposed
to partially alleviate this issue, which applies diverse transformations on clean images to generate
new training examples [15, 16]. Furthermore, a high diversity of augmented images enables neural
networks to resist data distribution shifts and improve robustness [17]. Data augmentation approaches
generally fall into three subgroups: image-level, patch-level, and pixel-level augmentations.
Image-level augmentation techniques [18–20] apply transformations on the whole image, such as
brightness, sharpness, and solarization, to increase the total amount of training data. Patch-level augmentation techniques [21, 22] typically mask or replace a region of an image, compelling classifiers
to focus on less discriminative portions. Meanwhile, pixel-level augmentation techniques [23, 24]
mix images using pixel-wise weighted averages to increase diversity within the training dataset.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

