The Shaped Transformer: Attention Models
in the Infinite Depth-and-Width Limit

Lorenzo Noci∗†
Thomas Hofmann†

Chuning Li∗‡

Mufan (Bill) Li∗‡

Chris Maddison‡

Bobby He§

Daniel M. Roy‡

Abstract
In deep learning theory, the covariance matrix of the representations serves as a
proxy to examine the network’s trainability. Motivated by the success of Transformers, we study the covariance matrix of a modified Softmax-based attention model
with skip connections in the proportional limit of infinite-depth-and-width. We
show that at initialization the limiting distribution can be described by a stochastic
differential equation (SDE) indexed by the depth-to-width ratio. To achieve a
well-defined stochastic limit, the Transformer’s attention mechanism is modified
by centering the Softmax output at identity, and scaling the Softmax logits by a
width-dependent temperature parameter. We examine the stability of the network
through the corresponding SDE, showing how the scale of both the drift and diffusion can be elegantly controlled with the aid of residual connections. The existence
of a stable SDE implies that the covariance structure is well-behaved, even for very
large depth and width, thus preventing the notorious issues of rank degeneracy
in deep attention models. Finally, we show, through simulations, that the SDE
provides a surprisingly good description of the corresponding finite-size model.
We coin the name shaped Transformer for these architectural modifications.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained large language models have experienced a remarkable increase in popularity due to their
eerily human-like ability to puzzle through complex reasoning tasks, solve coding challenges, and
produce pages of logically sound text [1]. Arguably, the Transformer is the foundation of these
successes [2]. Recent research has found evidence for scaling laws, linking the performance of these
architectures to their parameter counts and the quantity of training data, fueling the desire to train
deeper and wider models on ever larger datasets in order to unlock new levels of performance [3–7].
Bundled with the increased expressivity of deep architectures, however, is increased numerical
instability, both in the forward pass and gradients, which hinders training. One of the clearest
examples of instability is the so-called rank collapse phenomenon [8, 9] – the observation that, in
Softmax-based attention models, the network’s representation of different tokens tend to perfectly
align at large depth. The resulting poorly conditioned covariance and correlation between tokens
leads to exploding and/or vanishing gradients at initialization, disrupting gradient updates of the
affected parameters. This situation violates a well-known guiding principle from the literature of deep
signal propagation: a stable covariance is a necessary condition for stable training [10–15]. In fact,
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to:
lorenzo.noci@inf.ethz.ch, chuning.li@mail.utoronto.ca, mufan.li@mail.utoronto.ca
†
ETH Zurich
‡
University of Toronto and Vector Institute
§
University of Oxford

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

