Predicting mutational effects on protein-protein
binding via a side-chain diffusion probabilistic model
Shiwei Liu1,2⇤

Tian Zhu1,2⇤

Milong Ren1,2

Dongbo Bu1,2,3

Chungong Yu1,2

Haicang Zhang1,2†

1. Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China.
2. University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China.
3. Central China Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence Technologies, Zhengzhou 450046, China

Abstract
Many crucial biological processes rely on networks of protein-protein interactions.
Predicting the effect of amino acid mutations on protein-protein binding is vital in
protein engineering and therapeutic discovery. However, the scarcity of annotated
experimental data on binding energy poses a significant challenge for developing
computational approaches, particularly deep learning-based methods. In this work,
we propose SidechainDiff, a representation learning-based approach that leverages
unlabelled experimental protein structures. SidechainDiff utilizes a Riemannian
diffusion model to learn the generative process of side-chain conformations and
can also give the structural context representations of mutations on the proteinprotein interface. Leveraging the learned representations, we achieve state-of-theart performance in predicting the mutational effects on protein-protein binding.
Furthermore, SidechainDiff is the first diffusion-based generative model for sidechains, distinguishing it from prior efforts that have predominantly focused on
generating protein backbone structures.

1

Introduction

Many crucial biological processes, including membrane transport and cell signaling, are likely
regulated by intricate networks of protein-protein interactions rather than single proteins acting
independently [Calakos et al., 1994, Jones and Thornton, 1996, Levskaya et al., 2009, Schwikowski
et al., 2000]. One representative example is the interaction between the spike protein of the SARSCoV-2 virus and its receptor protein ACE2 on the surface of human cells, which is crucial for the
virus to invade target cells [Lan et al., 2020]. Meanwhile, specific human antibodies, an essential
type of protein in the immune system, can prevent the virus entry by competitively binding to the
spike protein [Shan et al., 2022].
In protein engineering and therapeutic discovery, it is a crucial step to induce amino acid mutations on
the protein-protein interface to modulate binding affinity [T O’Neil and Hoess, 1995]. For example,
to enhance the efficacy of an antibody against a virus, one practical approach is to introduce amino
acid mutations and filter the resulting antibody sequences to increase binding affinity and specificity
to the target viral protein [Mason et al., 2021]. However, the variant space that can be explored
⇤
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence should be addressed to H.Z. (zhanghaicang@ict.ac.cn)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

