FIRAL: An Active Learning Algorithm for
Multinomial Logistic Regression
Youguang Chen
George Biros
Oden Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
We investigate theory and algorithms for pool-based active learning for multiclass
classification using multinomial logistic regression. Using finite sample analysis,
we prove that the Fisher Information Ratio (FIR) lower and upper bounds the excess
risk. Based on our theoretical analysis, we propose an active learning algorithm that
employs regret minimization to minimize the FIR. To verify our derived excess risk
bounds, we conduct experiments on synthetic datasets. Furthermore, we compare
FIRAL with five other methods and found that our scheme outperforms them: it
consistently produces the smallest classification error in the multiclass logistic
regression setting, as demonstrated through experiments on MNIST, CIFAR-10,
and 50-class ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Active learning is of interest in applications with large pools of unlabeled data for which labeling is
expensive. In pool active learning, we’re given a set of unlabeled points U , an initial set of labeled
points S0 , and a budget of new points b, our goal is to algorithmically select b new points to label in
order to minimize the log-likelihood error over the unlabeled points. Equivalently instead of selecting
points directly, we seek to find a probability density function that we can use to sample the b points.
Informally (precise formulation in § 2), let x denote a data point and p(x) denote the distribution
density of unlabeled points. Let q(x) be the sampling distribution we will use to select the new b
points for labeling. We will choose q(x) in order to minimize the generalization error (or excess risk)
of the classifier over p(x). Our theory is classifier specific: it assumes multinomial logistic regression
with parameters ✓. The expectations of the Hessian—with respect to ✓—of the classifier loss function
over p(x) and q(x) distributions are denoted by Hp and Hq respectively. Using finite sample analysis,
our first result (Theorem 3 in § 3) is to show that the unlabeled data excess risk is bounded below
and above by the Fisher information ratio Trace(Hq 1 Hp ), subject to the assumption of p being a
sub-Gaussian distribution. Our second result (Theorem 4 in § 4) is to propose and analyze a point
selection algorithm based on regret minimization that allows us to bound the generalization error.
There is a large body of work on various active learning methods based on uncertainty estimation
([1, 2, 3]), sample diversity ([4, 5]), Bayesian inference ( [6, 7]), and many others ([8]). Here
we just discuss the papers closest to our scheme. Zhang and Oles [9] claimed without proof that
FIR is asymptotically proportional to the log-likelihood error of unlabeled data. Sourati et al. [10]
proved that FIR is an upper bound of the expected variance of the asymptotic distribution of the
log-likelihood error. Chaudhuri et al. [11] proved non-asymptotic results indicating that FIR is closely
related to the expected log-likelihood error of an Maximum Likelihood Estimation-based classifier in
bounded domain. In this work, we use finite sample analysis to establish FIR-based bounds for the
excess risk in the case of multinomial logistic regression with sub-Gaussian assumption for the point
distributions.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

