Concept Distillation: Leveraging Human-Centered
Explanations for Model Improvement

Avani Gupta1,2† Saurabh Saini2 P J Narayanan 2
1
M42, UAE 2 IIIT Hyderabad, India
{avani.gupta, saurabh.saini}@research.iiit.ac.in
pjn@iiit.ac.in

Abstract
Humans use abstract concepts for understanding instead of hard features. Recent
interpretability research has focused on human-centered concept explanations of
neural networks. Concept Activation Vectors (CAVs) estimate a model’s sensitivity
and possible biases to a given concept. In this paper, we extend CAVs from posthoc analysis to ante-hoc training in order to reduce model bias through fine-tuning
using an additional Concept Loss. Concepts were defined on the final layer of the
network in the past. We generalize it to intermediate layers using class prototypes.
This facilitates class learing in the last convolution layer which is known to be most
informative. We also introduce Concept Distillation t create richer concepts using
a pre-trained knowledgeable model as the teacher. Our method can sensitize or
desensitize a model towards concepts. We show applications of concept-sensitive
training to debias several classification problems. We also use concepts to induce
prior knowledge into IID, a reconstruction problem. Concept-sensitive training can
improve model interpretability, reduce biases, and induce prior knowledge. Please
visit https://avani17101.github.io/Concept-Distilllation/ for code and more details.

1

Introduction

EXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) methods are useful to understand a trained model’s behavior
[74]. They open the black box of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to enable post-training identification
of unintended correlations or biases using similarity scores or saliency maps. Humans, however,
think in terms of abstract concepts, defined as groupings of similar entities [27]. Recent efforts in
XAI have focused on concept-based model explanations to make them more aligned with human
cognition. Kim et al. [32] introduce Concept Activation Vectors (CAVs) using a concept classifier
hyperplane to quantify the importance given by the model to a particular concept. For instance,
CAVs can determine the model’s sensitivity on ‘striped-ness’ or ‘dotted-ness’ to classify Zebra or
Cheetah using user-provided concept samples. They measure the concept sensitivity of the model’s
final layer prediction with respect to intermediate layer activations (outputs). Such post-hoc analysis
can evaluate the transparency, accountability, and reliability of a learned model [14] and can identify
biases or unintended correlations acquired by the models via shortcut learning [32, 5].
The question we ask in this paper is: If CAVs can identify and quantify sensitivity to concepts, can
they also be used to improve the model? Can we learn less biased and more human-centered models?
In this paper, we extend CAVs to ante-hoc model improvement through a novel concept loss to
desensitize/sensitize against concepts. We also leverage the broader conceptual knowledge of a large
pre-trained model as a teacher in a concept distillation framework for it.
†

Work done while at IIIT Hyderabad

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

