Efficient Model-Free Exploration in Low-Rank MDPs

Zakaria Mhammedi
MIT

Adam Block
MIT

Dylan J. Foster
Microsoft Research

Alexander Rakhlin
MIT

mhammedi@mit.edu

ablock@mit.edu

dylanfoster@microsoft.com

rakhlin@mit.edu

Abstract
A major challenge in reinforcement learning is to develop practical, sample-efficient
algorithms for exploration in high-dimensional domains where generalization and
function approximation is required. Low-Rank Markov Decision Processes—where
transition probabilities admit a low-rank factorization based on an unknown feature
embedding—offer a simple, yet expressive framework for RL with function approximation, yet existing algorithms either (1) are computationally intractable, or (2)
require restrictive statistical assumptions such as latent variable structure or access
to model-based function approximation. In this work, we propose the first provably
sample-efficient algorithm for exploration in Low-Rank MDPs that is both computationally efficient and model-free, allowing for general function approximation
while requiring no structural assumptions beyond a reachability condition that
we show is substantially weaker than that assumed in prior work. Our algorithm,
SpanRL, uses the notion of a barycentric spanner for the feature embedding as an
efficiently computable basis for exploration, performing efficient spanner computation by interleaving representation learning and policy optimization subroutines.
Our analysis—which is appealingly simple and modular—carefully combines several techniques, including a new approach to error-tolerant barycentric spanner
computation, and a new analysis of a certain minimax representation learning
objective found in prior work.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning and control, many of the most promising application domains require
the agent to navigate complex, high-dimensional state and action spaces, where generalization and
function approximation is necessary. The last decade has witnessed impressive empirical success in
domains where data are abundant [34, 38, 26, 28, 27], but when data are limited, ensuring efficient
exploration in large domains is a major research question. For statistical efficiency, the foundations
have recently begun to take shape, with a line of research providing structural conditions that
facilitate sample-efficient exploration, as well as fundamental limits [37, 21, 39, 42, 14, 24, 17, 18].
Computational efficiency, however, remains a major challenge: outside of simple settings [7, 23],
existing algorithms with provable sample complexity guarantees are computationally inefficient, and
typically require solving intractable non-convex optimization problems [21, 11, 24, 10]. The prospect
of developing practical algorithms for exploration in high-dimensional state spaces that are both
computationally and statistically efficient raises three fundamental questions:
1. What are the right computational primitives for exploration? That is, how can one efficiently
represent and compute exploratory policies that allow the learner to explore the state space and
gather useful data?
2. How should one leverage function approximation—for example, via representation learning—to
discover such primitives in a computationally and statistically efficient fashion?
3. Given answers to the first two questions, how can one efficiently interleave function approximation and exploration to provide provably efficient algorithms?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

