Probabilistic Weight Fixing: Large-scale training of
neural network weight uncertainties for quantization

Christopher Subia-Waud
School of Electronics & Computer Science
University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
cc2u18@soton.ac.uk

Srinandan Dasmahapatra
School of Electronics & Computer Science
University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
sd@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Abstract
Weight-sharing quantization has emerged as a technique to reduce energy expenditure during inference in large neural networks by constraining their weights
to a limited set of values. However, existing methods often assume weights are
treated solely based on value, neglecting the unique role of weight position. This
paper proposes a probabilistic framework based on Bayesian neural networks
(BNNs) and a variational relaxation to identify which weights can be moved to
which cluster center and to what degree based on their individual position-specific
learned uncertainty distributions. We introduce a new initialization setting and a
regularization term, enabling the training of BNNs with complex dataset-model
combinations. Leveraging the flexibility of weight values from probability distributions, we enhance noise resilience and compressibility. Our iterative clustering
procedure demonstrates superior compressibility and higher accuracy compared to
state-of-the-art methods on both ResNet models and the more complex transformerbased architectures. In particular, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art
quantization method top-1 accuracy by 1.6% on ImageNet using DeiT-Tiny, with
its 5 million+ weights now represented by only 296 unique values. Code available
at https://github.com/subiawaud/PWFN.

1

Introduction

Weight-sharing quantization is a technique developed to lower the energy costs associated with
inference in deep neural networks. By constraining the network weights to take on a limited set of
values, the technique can significantly reduce the data-movement costs within hardware accelerators,
which represent the primary source of energy expenditure (DRAM read costs can be as much as 200
times higher than multiplication costs [Horowitz, 2014, Jouppi et al., 2017, Sze et al., 2017]). Storing
the weight values close to computation and reusing them multiple times also becomes more feasible,
thanks to the limited range of possible values. Various studies have explored the effectiveness of
weight-sharing quantization, including [Ullrich et al., 2017, Subia-Waud and Dasmahapatra, 2022,
Wu et al., 2018b, Han et al., 2015, 2016].
Weight-sharing quantization approaches face a common challenge in determining how much a single
weight can be moved to a cluster center. Traditional methods rely on the magnitude or relative
movement distances between weight and cluster to decide which weights can be moved to which
clusters [Han et al., 2015, Subia-Waud and Dasmahapatra, 2022], irrespective of which filter or layer
in the network the weight is located. However, this assumption neglects the fact that weights with
the same value may have different roles in the network, and their placement within the architecture
may affect their likelihood of being moved to a particular cluster. We posit that context-dependent
movement of weights to clusters can, instead, better preserve the representational capacity of the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

