Transfer learning for atomistic simulations using
GNNs and kernel mean embeddings

John I. Falk
CSML
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Genova, Italy
me@isakfalk.com

Luigi Bonati
Atomistic Simulations
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Genova, Italy
luigi.bonati@iit.it

Michele Parrinello
Atomistic Simulations
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Genova, Italy
michele.parrinello@iit.it

Pietro Novelli
CSML
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Genova, Italy
pietro.novelli@iit.it

Massimiliano Pontil
CSML
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Genova, Italy
University College London, U.K.
massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Abstract
Interatomic potentials learned using machine learning methods have been successfully applied to atomistic simulations. However, accurate models require
large training datasets, while generating reference calculations is computationally
demanding. To bypass this difficulty, we propose a transfer learning algorithm
that leverages the ability of graph neural networks (GNNs) to represent chemical
environments together with kernel mean embeddings. We extract a feature map
from GNNs pre-trained on the OC20 dataset and use it to learn the potential energy
surface from system-specific datasets of catalytic processes. Our method is further
enhanced by incorporating into the kernel the chemical species information, resulting in improved performance and interpretability. We test our approach on a series
of realistic datasets of increasing complexity, showing excellent generalization and
transferability performance, and improving on methods that rely on GNNs or ridge
regression alone, as well as similar fine-tuning approaches.

1

Introduction

Atomistic simulations have become a pillar of modern science and are pervasively used in many
areas of physics, chemistry, and biology. Among these techniques, molecular dynamics plays a
prominent role. This method simulates the time evolution of a system of atoms by integrating
Newton’s equation of motion [1]. The forces acting on the particles are determined from a model
for the interactions, called the potential energy surface (PES), on whose accuracy the reliability of
the simulation depends. For a long time, the interactions were modeled in a rather empirical, and of
course, not very accurate way [1, 2]. A significant step forward was made with the introduction of ab
initio molecular dynamics in which the interactions are computed on the fly from accurate electronic
structure calculations [3, 4]. This implies solving at every step the Schroedinger equation, typically
with the use of some approximation such as the popular Density Functional Theory (DFT) scheme [5].
This approach is much more accurate but at the same time more computationally expensive, limiting
the system size (i.e. the number of atoms) and the time scale that can be simulated.
Starting with the work of Behler and Parrinello [6], machine learning potentials have emerged as
promising candidates to alleviate the tension between accuracy and efficiency [7, 8]. They regress the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

