Decentralized Randomly Distributed Multi-agent
Multi-armed Bandit with Heterogeneous Rewards

1

Mengfan Xu1 Diego Klabjan1
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University
MengfanXu2023@u.northwestern.edu, d-klabjan@northwestern.edu

Abstract
We study a decentralized multi-agent multi-armed bandit problem in which multiple clients are connected by time dependent random graphs provided by an
environment. The reward distributions of each arm vary across clients and rewards
are generated independently over time by an environment based on distributions
that include both sub-exponential and sub-Gaussian distributions. Each client
pulls an arm and communicates with neighbors based on the graph provided by
the environment. The goal is to minimize the overall regret of the entire system
through collaborations. To this end, we introduce a novel algorithmic framework,
which first provides robust simulation methods for generating random graphs using
rapidly mixing Markov chains or the random graph model, and then combines an
averaging-based consensus approach with a newly proposed weighting technique
and the upper confidence bound to deliver a UCB-type solution. Our algorithms
account for the randomness in the graphs, removing the conventional doubly
stochasticity assumption, and only require the knowledge of the number of clients
at initialization. We derive optimal instance-dependent regret upper bounds of
order log T in both sub-Gaussian and sub-exponential environments,
and a nearly
√
optimal mean-gap independent regret upper bound of order T log T up to a log T
factor. Importantly, our regret bounds hold with high probability and capture graph
randomness, whereas prior works consider expected regret under assumptions and
require more stringent reward distributions.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed Bandit (MAB) [Auer et al., 2002a,b] is an online sequential decision-making process
that balances exploration and exploitation while given partial information. In this process, a single
player (agent, client) aims to maximize a cumulative reward or, equivalently, minimize the cumulative
loss, known as regret, by pulling an arm and observing the reward of that arm at each time step.
The two variants of MAB are adversarial and stochastic MAB, depending on whether rewards are
chosen arbitrarily or follow a time-invariant distribution, respectively. Recently, motivated by the
development of federated learning [McMahan et al., 2017], multi-agent stochastic multi-armed
bandit has been drawing increasing attention (commonly referred to as multi-agent MAB). In this
variant, multiple clients collaboratively work with multiple stochastic MABs to maximize the overall
performance of the entire system. Likewise, regret is an important performance measure, which is the
difference between the cumulative reward of always pulling the global optimal arm by all clients and
the actual cumulative reward gained by the clients at the end of the game, where global optimality is
defined with respect to the average expected reward values of arms across clients. Thereafter, the
question for each client to answer is essentially how to guarantee an optimal regret with limited
observations of arms and insufficient information of other clients. Assuming the existence of a central
server, also known as the controller, [Bistritz and Leshem, 2018, Zhu et al., 2021b, Huang et al., 2021,
Mitra et al., 2021, Réda et al., 2022, Yan et al., 2022], allow a controller-client framework where the
controller integrates and distributes the inputs from and to clients, adequately addressing the challenge
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

