AlberDICE: Addressing Out-Of-Distribution Joint
Actions in Offline Multi-Agent RL via Alternating
Stationary Distribution Correction Estimation

Daiki E. Matsunaga ∗
Jongmin Lee ∗
Jaeseok Yoon
KAIST
UC Berkeley
KAIST
dematsunaga@ai.kaist.ac.kr jongmin.lee@berkeley.edu jsyoon@ai.kaist.ac.kr
Stefanos Leonardos
King’s College London
stefanos.leonardos@kcl.ac.uk

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley
pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu

Kee-Eung Kim
KAIST
kekim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
One of the main challenges in offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) is the distribution shift that arises from the learned policy deviating from the data collection
policy. This is often addressed by avoiding out-of-distribution (OOD) actions
during policy improvement as their presence can lead to substantial performance
degradation. This challenge is amplified in the offline Multi-Agent RL (MARL)
setting since the joint action space grows exponentially with the number of agents.
To avoid this curse of dimensionality, existing MARL methods adopt either value
decomposition methods or fully decentralized training of individual agents. However, even when combined with standard conservatism principles, these methods
can still result in the selection of OOD joint actions in offline MARL. To this
end, we introduce AlberDICE, an offline MARL algorithm that alternatively performs centralized training of individual agents based on stationary distribution
optimization. AlberDICE circumvents the exponential complexity of MARL by
computing the best response of one agent at a time while effectively avoiding OOD
joint action selection. Theoretically, we show that the alternating optimization
procedure converges to Nash policies. In the experiments, we demonstrate that
AlberDICE significantly outperforms baseline algorithms on a standard suite of
MARL benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) has emerged as a promising paradigm to train RL agents
solely from pre-collected datasets [13, 16]. Offline RL aims to address real-world settings in which
further interaction with the environment during training is dangerous or prohibitively expensive, e.g.,
autonomous-car driving, healthcare operations or robotic control tasks [3, 4, 39]. One of the main
challenges for successful offline RL is to address the distribution shift that arises from the difference
between the policy being learned and the policy used for data collection. Conservatism is a commonly
adopted principle to mitigate the distribution shift, which prevents the selection of OOD actions via
conservative action-value estimates [11] or direct policy constraints [6].
However, avoiding the selection of OOD actions becomes very challenging in offline Multi-Agent
RL (MARL)2 , as the goal is now to stay close to the states and joint actions in the dataset. This is
∗
2

Equal Contribution
We assume cooperative MARL for this paper in which agents have common rewards.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

