Sampling weights of deep neural networks

Erik Lien Bolager+

Iryna Burak+ Chinmay Datar+† Qing Sun+ Felix Dietrich+∗
Technical University of Munich
+
School of Computation, Information and Technology; † Institute for Advanced Study

Abstract
We introduce a probability distribution, combined with an efficient sampling algorithm, for weights and biases of fully-connected neural networks. In a supervised
learning context, no iterative optimization or gradient computations of internal
network parameters are needed to obtain a trained network. The sampling is based
on the idea of random feature models. However, instead of a data-agnostic distribution, e.g., a normal distribution, we use both the input and the output training
data to sample shallow and deep networks. We prove that sampled networks are
universal approximators. For Barron functions, we show that the L2 -approximation
error of sampled shallow networks decreases with the square root of the number
of neurons. Our sampling scheme is invariant to rigid body transformations and
scaling of the input data, which implies many popular pre-processing techniques
are not required. In numerical experiments, we demonstrate that sampled networks
achieve accuracy comparable to iteratively trained ones, but can be constructed
orders of magnitude faster. Our test cases involve a classification benchmark from
OpenML, sampling of neural operators to represent maps in function spaces, and
transfer learning using well-known architectures.

1

Introduction

Training deep neural networks involves finding all weights and biases. Typically, iterative, gradientbased methods are employed to solve this high-dimensional optimization problem. Randomly
sampling all weights and biases before the last, linear layer circumvents this optimization and
results in much shorter training time. However, the drawback of this approach is that the probability
distribution of the parameters must be chosen. Random projection networks [54] or extreme learning
machines [30] involve weight distributions that are completely problem- and data-agnostic, e.g., a
normal distribution. In this work, we introduce a data-driven sampling scheme to construct weights
and biases close to gradients of the target function (cf. Figure 1). This idea provides a solution to three
main challenges that have prevented randomly sampled networks to compete successfully against
iterative training in the setting of supervised learning: deep networks, accuracy, and interpretability.

Figure 1: Random feature models choose weights in a data-agnostic way, compared to sampling them
where it matters: at large gradients. The arrows illustrate where the network weights are placed.
∗

Corresponding author, felix.dietrich@tum.de.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

