Landscape Surrogate: Learning Decision Losses for
Mathematical Optimization Under Partial Information

Arman Zharmagambetov1
Brandon Amos1
Aaron Ferber2
2
2
Taoan Huang
Bistra Dilkina
Yuandong Tian1
1
2
FAIR at Meta
University of Southern California
{armanz,bda,yuandong}@meta.com
{aferber,taoanhua,dilkina}@usc.edu

Abstract
Recent works in learning-integrated optimization have shown promise in settings
where the optimization problem is only partially observed or where general-purpose
optimizers perform poorly without expert tuning. By learning an optimizer g to
tackle these challenging problems with f as the objective, the optimization process
can be substantially accelerated by leveraging past experience. The optimizer can
be trained with supervision from known optimal solutions or implicitly by optimizing the compound function f ◦ g. The implicit approach may not require optimal
solutions as labels and is capable of handling problem uncertainty; however, it is
slow to train and deploy due to frequent calls to optimizer g during both training
and testing. The training is further challenged by sparse gradients of g, especially
for combinatorial solvers. To address these challenges, we propose using a smooth
and learnable Landscape Surrogate M as a replacement for f ◦ g. This surrogate,
learnable by neural networks, can be computed faster than the solver g, provides
dense and smooth gradients during training, can generalize to unseen optimization
problems, and is efficiently learned via alternating optimization. We test our approach on both synthetic problems, including shortest path and multidimensional
knapsack, and real-world problems such as portfolio optimization, achieving comparable or superior objective values compared to state-of-the-art baselines while
reducing the number of calls to g. Notably, our approach outperforms existing
methods for computationally expensive high-dimensional problems.

1

Introduction

Mathematical optimization problems in various settings have been widely studied, and numerous
methods exist to solve them [25, 32]. Although the literature on this topic is immense, real-world
applications consider settings that are nontrivial or extremely costly to solve. The issue often stems
from uncertainty in the objective or in the problem definition. For example, combinatorial problems
involving nonlinear objectives are generally hard to address, even if there are efficient methods that
can handle special cases (e.g., k-means). One possible approach could be learning so-called linear
surrogate costs [16] that guide an efficient linear solver towards high quality solutions for the original
hard nonlinear problem. This automatically finds a surrogate mixed integer linear program (MILP),
for which relatively efficient solvers exist [19]. Another example is the smart predict+optimize
framework (a.k.a. decision-focused learning) [13, 41] where some problem parameters are unknown
at test time and must be inferred from the observed input using a model (e.g., neural nets).
Despite having completely different settings and purposes, what is common among learning surrogate
costs, smart predict+optimize, and other integrations of learning and optimization, is the need to
learn a certain target mapping to estimate the parameters of a latent optimization problem. This
makes the optimization problem well-defined, easy to address, or both. In this work, we draw general
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

