On the Adversarial Robustness of Out-of-distribution
Generalization Models
Xin Zou
Weiwei Liu∗
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization has attracted increasing research attention
in recent years, due to its promising experimental results in real-world applications.
Interestingly, we find that existing OOD generalization methods are vulnerable
to adversarial attacks. This motivates us to study OOD adversarial robustness.
We first present theoretical analyses of OOD adversarial robustness in two different complementary settings. Motivated by the theoretical results, we design
two algorithms to improve the OOD adversarial robustness. Finally, we conduct
experiments to validate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithms. Our code is
available at https://github.com/ZouXinn/OOD-Adv.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the remarkable success of modern machine learning techniques in many
applications. A fundamental assumption of most machine learning algorithms is that the training
and test data are drawn from the same underlying distribution. However, this assumption is always
violated in many practical applications. The test environment is influenced by a range of factors,
such as the distributional shifts across the photos caused by different cameras in image classification
tasks, the voices of different persons in voice recognition tasks, and the variations between scenes in
self-driving tasks [48]. Therefore, there is now a rapidly growing body of research with a focus on
generalizing to unseen distributions, namely out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization [56].
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance in many fields. However,
several prior works [59, 25] have demonstrated that DNNs may be vulnerable to imperceptibly
changed adversarial examples, which has increased focus on the adversarial robustness of the models.
Adversarial robustness refers to the invariance of a model to small perturbations of its input [54],
while adversarial accuracy refers to a model’s prediction performance on adversarial examples
generated by an attacker. However, the adversarial robustness of OOD generalization models (OOD
adversarial robustness) is less explored, despite its importance in many systems requiring high security
such as self-driving cars. We evaluate the adversarial robustness of the models trained with the current
OOD generalization algorithms (the detailed experimental settings can be found in Appendix C.3),
and present the results in Table 1. Surprisingly, under the PGD-20 [44] attack, the algorithms achieve
nearly 0% adversarial accuracy on RotatedMNIST [21], VLCS [15], PACS [38], and OfficeHome
[62], and no more than 10% adversarial accuracy on ColoredMNIST [4]. These results show that
even if the OOD generalization algorithms generalize well in different scenes, they remain highly
vulnerable to adversarial attacks.
Motivated by these limitations of existing algorithms, we provide theoretical analyses for OOD
adversarial robustness in two different but complementary OOD settings. We then design two
∗

Corresponding author: Weiwei Liu (liuweiwei863@gmail.com).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

