ASIF: Coupled Data Turns Unimodal Models to
Multimodal without Training

Antonio Norelli ∗
Marco Fumero∗ Valentino Maiorca∗
Emanuele Rodolà∗
∗

Luca Moschella∗

Francesco Locatello†

Sapienza Università di Roma, dipartimento di Informatica
†

Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)

Abstract
CLIP [1] proved that aligning visual and language spaces is key to solving many
vision tasks without explicit training, but required to train image and text encoders
from scratch on a huge dataset. LiT [2] improved this by only training the text
encoder and using a pre-trained vision network. In this paper, we show that a
common space can be created without any training at all, using single-domain
encoders (trained with or without supervision) and a much smaller amount of imagetext pairs. Furthermore, our model has unique properties. Most notably, deploying
a new version with updated training samples can be done in a matter of seconds.
Additionally, the representations in the common space are easily interpretable
as every dimension corresponds to the similarity of the input to a unique imagetext pair in the multimodal dataset. Experiments on standard zero-shot visual
benchmarks demonstrate the typical transfer ability of image-text models. Overall,
our method represents a simple yet surprisingly strong baseline for foundation
multimodal models, raising important questions on their data efficiency and on the
role of retrieval in machine learning.

1

Introduction
CLIP

LiT

ASIF

Large multimodal models such as
CLIP [1] are rapidly becoming the standard for foundation models [3] in computer vision. This is largely due to
their zero-shot and open-world capabilities that enable diverse suites of downstream tasks, from classification to de- Figure 1: ASIF is a simple recipe to align the representations
tection and visual search.
of two frozen pre-trained encoders.
Overall, Radford et al. [1] demonstrated that treating image recognition as language interpretation
allows generalizing to a multitude of tasks without training explicitly for them. By building an
interpreter, CLIP changed the way computer vision is approached [4]: rather than extracting the “dog”
label from an image like a CNN [5], CLIP tests the hypothesis of a dog being in the image against
all the other hypotheses. The success of this image-text association is a testament to the power of
deep learning: the CLIP model was the first of its kind, and building it required a joint training of two
large neural encoders on a vast collection of image-text pairs.
Correspondence to Antonio Norelli <norelli@di.uniroma1.it>. A demo sufficient to reproduce the main results in
the paper within minutes, even from smartphone, can be found here: https://github.com/noranta4/ASIF
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

