A General Framework for Robust G-Invariance
in G-Equivariant Networks

Sophia Sanborn
sanborn@ucsb.edu

Nina Miolane
ninamiolane@ucsb.edu

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
UC Santa Barbara

Abstract
We introduce a general method for achieving robust group-invariance in groupequivariant convolutional neural networks (G-CNNs), which we call the G-triplecorrelation (G-TC) layer. The approach leverages the theory of the triple-correlation
on groups, which is the unique, lowest-degree polynomial invariant map that is
also complete. Many commonly used invariant maps—such as the max—are
incomplete: they remove both group and signal structure. A complete invariant,
by contrast, removes only the variation due to the actions of the group, while
preserving all information about the structure of the signal. The completeness of
the triple correlation endows the G-TC layer with strong robustness, which can
be observed in its resistance to invariance-based adversarial attacks. In addition,
we observe that it yields measurable improvements in classification accuracy over
standard Max G-Pooling in G-CNN architectures. We provide a general and
efficient implementation of the method for any discretized group, which requires
only a table defining the group’s product structure. We demonstrate the benefits
of this method for G-CNNs defined on both commutative and non-commutative
groups—SO(2), O(2), SO(3), and O(3) (discretized as the cyclic C8, dihedral
D16, chiral octahedral O and full octahedral Oh groups)—acting on R2 and R3 on
both G-MNIST and G-ModelNet10 datasets.

1

Introduction

The pooling operation is central to the convolutional neural network (CNN). It was originally
introduced in the first CNN architecture—Fukushima’s 1980 Neocognitron [17]—and remained a
fixture of the model since. The Neocognitron was directly inspired by the canonical model of the
visual cortex as a process of hierarchical feature extraction and local pooling [25, 1]. In both the
neuroscience and CNN model, pooling is intended to serve two purposes. First, it facilitates the
local-to-global coarse-graining of structure in the input. Second, it facilitates invariance to local
changes—resulting in network activations that remain similar under small perturbations of the input.
In this way, CNNs construct hierarchical, multi-scale features that have increasingly large extent and
increasing invariance.
The pooling operation in traditional CNNs, typically a local max or average, has remained largely
unchanged over the last forty years. The variations that have been proposed in the literature [40, 56]
mostly tackle its coarse-graining purpose, improve computational efficiency, or reduce overfitting,
but do not seek to enhance its properties with respect to invariance. Both max and avg operations are
reasonable choices to fulfill the goal of coarse-graining within CNNs and G-CNNs. However, they
are excessively imprecise and lossy with respect to the goal of constructing robust representations
of objects that are invariant only to irrelevant visual changes. Indeed, the max and avg operations
are invariant to many natural image transformations such as translations and rotations, but also
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

