Two Heads are Better Than One:
A Simple Exploration Framework for Efficient
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Jiahui Li1 , Kun Kuang1∗, Baoxiang Wang2,3 , Xingchen Li1 , Fei Wu1 , Jun Xiao1 , Long Chen4
1
Zhejiang University, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, 4 HKUST
{jiahuil,kunkuang}@zju.edu.cn, bxiangwang@cuhk.edu.cn,
xingchenl@zju.edu.cn, {wufei,junx}@cs.zju.edu.cn, longchen@ust.hk

Abstract
Exploration strategy plays an important role in reinforcement learning, especially
in sparse-reward tasks. In cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL),
designing a suitable exploration strategy is much more challenging due to the large
state space and the complex interaction among agents. Currently, mainstream
exploration methods in MARL either contribute to exploring the unfamiliar states
which are large and sparse, or measuring the interaction among agents with high
computational costs. We found an interesting phenomenon that different kinds
of exploration plays a different role in different MARL scenarios, and choosing
a suitable one is often more effective than designing an exquisite algorithm. In
this paper, we propose a exploration method that incorporate the CuriOsity-based
and INfluence-based exploration (COIN) which is simple but effective in various
situations. First, COIN measures the influence of each agent on the other agents
based on mutual information theory and designs it as intrinsic rewards which
are applied to each individual value function. Moreover, COIN computes the
curiosity-based intrinsic rewards via prediction errors which are added to the
extrinsic reward. For integrating the two kinds of intrinsic rewards, COIN utilizes
a novel framework in which they complement each other and lead to a sufficient
and effective exploration on cooperative MARL tasks. We perform extensive
experiments on different challenging benchmarks, and results across different
scenarios show the superiority of our method.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has been widely used to solve numerous complex
real-world problems, such as traffic control [38], autonomous robotics control [17, 26], game AI [25],
and network routing [40], etc.. Compared with single-agent reinforcement learning, the joint state
and action space grows exponentially with the number of agents. To overcome this challenge, the
Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) [20, 12] paradigm is proposed, where
the joint value function is estimated in the central critic during training, and the local agents execute
actions according to their own policies.
Based on the CTDE paradigm, numerous deep MARL methods have been proposed [27, 32, 35, 15].
The most commonly used method for exploration is ϵ-greedy. However, these methods may perform
poorly in complex scenarios [13, 29] with a large number of agents and a vast action space. The main
issue is that the ϵ-greedy exploration strategy requires a significant number of attempts to become
∗

Correspongding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

