An Efficient Doubly-Robust Test for the
Kernel Treatment Effect
Diego Martinez-Taboada
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
diegomar@andrew.cmu.edu

Aaditya Ramdas
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
aramdas@stat.cmu.edu

Edward H. Kennedy
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
edward@stat.cmu.edu

Abstract
The average treatment effect, which is the difference in expectation of the counterfactuals, is probably the most popular target effect in causal inference with binary
treatments. However, treatments may have effects beyond the mean, for instance
decreasing or increasing the variance. We propose a new kernel-based test for
distributional effects of the treatment. It is, to the best of our knowledge, the first
kernel-based, doubly-robust test with provably valid type-I error. Furthermore, our
proposed algorithm is computationally efficient, avoiding the use of permutations.

1

Introduction

In the context of causal inference, potential outcomes (Rubin, 2005) are widely used to address
counterfactual questions (e.g. what would have happened had some intervention been performed?).
This framework considers
(X, A, Y ) ∼ P,
where X and Y represent the covariates and outcome respectively, and A ∈ {0, 1} is a binary
treatment. Furthermore, the following three conditions are assumed:
i) (Consistency) Y = AY1∗ + (1 − A)Y0∗ (where Y1∗ , Y0∗ are the potential outcomes).
ii) (No unmeasured confounding) Y0∗ , Y1∗ ⊥⊥ A | X.
iii) (Overlap) For some ϵ > 0, we have ϵ < π(X) := PA|X (A = 1|X) < 1 − ϵ almost surely.
Such assumptions allow for identification of causal target parameters. For instance, one may be
interested in the average variance-weighted treatment effects (Robins et al., 2008; Li et al., 2011),
stochastic intervention effects (Muñoz and Van Der Laan, 2012; Kennedy, 2019), or treatment effect
bounds (Richardson et al., 2014; Luedtke et al., 2015). However, most of the literature focuses on
estimation and inference of the average treatment effect (Imbens, 2004; Hernan and Robins, 2020),
defined as the difference in expectation of the potential outcomes
ψ = E[Y1∗ − Y0∗ ].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

