Single-Pass Pivot Algorithm for Correlation
Clustering. Keep it simple!

Konstantin Makarychev∗
Northwestern University

Sayak Chakrabarty
Northwestern University

Abstract
We show that a simple single-pass semi-streaming variant of the Pivot algorithm
for Correlation Clustering gives a (3 + ε)-approximation using O(n/ε) words of
memory. This is a slight improvement over the recent results of Cambus, Kuhn,
Lindy, Pai, and Uitto, who gave a (3 + ε)-approximation using O(n log n) words
of memory, and Behnezhad, Charikar, Ma, and Tan, who gave a 5-approximation
using O(n) words of memory. One of the main contributions of this paper is that
both the algorithm and its analysis are very simple, and also the algorithm is easy
to implement.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we provide a simple single-pass streaming algorithm for Correlation Clustering. The
Correlation Clustering model was introduced by Bansal, Blum, and Chawla [2004]. In this model,
we have a set of objects represented by vertices of a graph. A noisy binary classifier labels all edges
of the graph with “+” and “-” signs. We call edges labeled with a “+” sign – positive edges and edges
labeled with a “-” sign – negative edges. A positive edge indicates that the endpoints of the edge are
similar, and a negative edge indicates that the endpoints are dissimilar. Given a labeled graph, our
goal is to find a clustering that disagrees with the minimum number of edge labels. A positive edge
disagrees with the clustering if its endpoints are in different clusters, and a negative edge disagrees
with the clustering if its endpoints are in the same cluster. We assume that the classifier can make
many errors and, consequently, there may be no clustering that agrees with all labels of the graph.
Correlation Clustering has been widely studied in ML and theoretical computer science communities.
It was used for image-segmentation (Kim et al. [2014]), link prediction (Yaroslavtsev and Vadapalli
[2018]), document clustering (Bansal et al. [2004]), community detection (Veldt et al. [2018], Shi
et al. [2021]), and other problems.
In Section 1.1, we discuss various objectives and assumptions used for Correlation Clustering. We
now focus on the most common setting, where the graph G is a complete graph (i.e., we have a “+”
or “-” label for each pair of vertices u and v), the classifier can make arbitrary mistakes, and the
objective is to minimize the number of disagreements.
In their original paper, Bansal, Blum, and Chawla [2004] gave a constant factor approximation for
Correlation Clustering on complete graphs. Charikar, Guruswami, and Wirth [2005] improved the
approximation factor to 4. Then, Ailon, Charikar, and Newman [2008] proposed combinatorial and
LP-based P IVOT algorithms, with approximation factors 3 and 2.5, respectively. The LP-based P IVOT
algorithm was further improved by Chawla, Makarychev, Schramm, and Yaroslavtsev [2015], who
provided a 2.06 approximation. Finally, Cohen-Addad, Lee, and Newman [2022b] and Cohen-Addad,
Lee, Li, and Newman [2023] used a Sherali-Adams relaxation for the problem to obtain 1.994 + ε
and 1.73 + ε approximations, respectively. On the hardness side, Charikar, Guruswami, and Wirth
[2005] proved that the problem is APX-Hard and thus unlikely to admit a PTAS.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

