Universality and Limitations of Prompt Tuning

Yihan Wang
UCLA
wangyihan617@gmail.com

Jatin Chauhan
UCLA
chauhanjatin100@gmail.com

Wei Wang
UCLA
weiwang@cs.ucla.edu

Cho-Jui Hsieh
Google and UCLA
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Despite the demonstrated empirical efficacy of prompt tuning to adapt a pretrained
language model for a new task, the theoretical underpinnings of the difference
between "tuning parameters before the input" against "the tuning of model weights"
are limited. We thus take one of the first steps to understand the role of soft-prompt
tuning for transformer-based architectures. By considering a general purpose
architecture, we analyze prompt tuning from the lens of both: universal approximation and limitations with finite-depth fixed-weight pretrained transformers for
continuous-valued functions. Our universality result guarantees the existence of
a strong transformer with a prompt to approximate any sequence-to-sequence
function in the set of Lipschitz functions. The limitations of prompt tuning for
limited-depth transformers are first proved by constructing a set of datasets, that
cannot be memorized by a prompt of any length for a given single encoder layer.
We also provide a lower bound on the required number of tunable prompt parameters and compare the result with the number of parameters required for a low-rank
update (based on LoRA) for a single-layer setting. We finally extend our analysis to
multi-layer settings by providing sufficient conditions under which the transformer
can at best learn datasets from invertible functions only. Our theoretical claims are
also corroborated by empirical results.

1

Introduction

The surge in the empirical research of large-scale models has led to the emergence of a new paradigm
of prompt tuning. Current large models consist of billions of parameters [Brown et al., 2020,
Chowdhery et al., 2022], which greatly exacerbate the cost of tuning the entire model weights via
gradient-based optimization. On the other hand, the power of scale in both model size and pretraining
dataset size has demonstrated strong capabilities by achieving reasonable performance through a
learnable prompt appended before the input [Li and Liang, 2021, Lester et al., 2021]. Despite this,
several questions emanate around the abilities and limitations of prompt tuning.
In this work, we aim to characterize some natural yet essential questions about prompt tuning with
transformer architectures. Firstly, are prompts universal approximators, i.e. with a fixed pretrained
transformer network, can we find a prompt to approximate any sequence-to-sequence function in
a given space? If yes, can we construct the transformer for this universality result? Second, can
we identify failure modes of prompt tuning when applied on potentially non-optimal but non-trivial
transformers? Moreover, since prompt tuning is usually compared against LoRA[Hu et al., 2021]
in consideration to parameter-efficient tuning, is prompt tuning then more/less parameter-efficient
than LoRA? Answering these questions can lead to important insights on when and how to perform
prompt tuning to adapt a pretrained transformer network to a given downstream task of interest.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

