Explaining V1 Properties with a Biologically
Constrained Deep Learning Architecture

Galen Pogoncheff
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
galenpogoncheff@ucsb.edu

Jacob Granley
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
jgranley@ucsb.edu

Michael Beyeler
Department of Computer Science
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
mbeyeler@ucsb.edu

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have recently emerged as promising models of the ventral visual stream, despite their lack of biological specificity. While
current state-of-the-art models of the primary visual cortex (V1) have surfaced from
training with adversarial examples and extensively augmented data, these models
are still unable to explain key neural properties observed in V1 that arise from biological circuitry. To address this gap, we systematically incorporated neurosciencederived architectural components into CNNs to identify a set of mechanisms and
architectures that more comprehensively explain V1 activity. Upon enhancing
task-driven CNNs with architectural components that simulate center-surround
antagonism, local receptive fields, tuned normalization, and cortical magnification,
we uncover models with latent representations that yield state-of-the-art explanation of V1 neural activity and tuning properties. Moreover, analyses of the learned
parameters of these components and stimuli that maximally activate neurons of the
evaluated networks provide support for their role in explaining neural properties
of V1. Our results highlight an important advancement in the field of NeuroAI,
as we systematically establish a set of architectural components that contribute to
unprecedented explanation of V1. The neuroscience insights that could be gleaned
from increasingly accurate in-silico models of the brain have the potential to greatly
advance the fields of both neuroscience and artificial intelligence.

1

Introduction

Many influential deep learning architectures and mechanisms that are widely used today, such as
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [1] and mechanisms of attention [2–5], draw inspiration from
biological intelligence. Despite decades of research into computational models of the visual system,
our understanding of its complexities remains far from complete. Existing neuroscientific models of
the visual system (e.g., generalized linear-nonlinear models [6–9]) are often founded upon empirical
observations from relatively small datasets, and are therefore unlikely to capture the true complexity
of the visual system. While these models have successfully explained many properties of neural
response to simple stimuli, their simplicity does not generalize to complex image stimuli [10].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

