Stochastic Approximation Algorithms
for Systems of Interacting Particles

Mohammad Reza Karimi
ETH Zürich
mkarimi@inf.ethz.ch

Ya-Ping Hsieh
ETH Zürich
yaping.hsieh@inf.ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Interacting particle systems have proven highly successful in various machine
learning tasks, including approximate Bayesian inference and neural network
optimization. However, the analysis of these systems often relies on the simplifying
assumption of the mean-field limit, where particle numbers approach infinity and
infinitesimal step sizes are used. In practice, discrete time steps, finite particle
numbers, and complex integration schemes are employed, creating a theoretical
gap between continuous-time and discrete-time processes. In this paper, we present
a novel framework that establishes a precise connection between these discretetime schemes and their corresponding mean-field limits in terms of convergence
properties and asymptotic behavior. By adopting a dynamical system perspective,
our framework seamlessly integrates various numerical schemes that are typically
analyzed independently. For example, our framework provides a unified treatment
of optimizing an infinite-width two-layer neural network and sampling via Stein
Variational Gradient descent, which were previously studied in isolation.

1

Introduction

Dynamics of interacting particle systems are central to many challenges in modern machine learning.
These range from algorithm design for approximate Bayesian inference, to the study of equilibria in
games [26, 31, 34]. Moreover, researchers have gained valuable insights by interpreting the training
process of over-parametrized two-layer neural networks as a system of interacting particles, thereby
advancing our intuition in this domain [11, 12, 36–38, 46, 51].
Analyzing the behavior of such systems poses a significant challenge. To simplify the analysis,
researchers often turn to the concept of the mean-field limit. In this approach, the number of particles
is increased to infinity, the step-size of the algorithm shrinks to zero, and results are deduced from this
continuous limit. Specifically, an initial probability distribution is assigned to the infinitely many particles, and a continuous-time evolution is derived for this distribution. The resulting evolutionary equation serves as a powerful tool for gaining insights into the system’s asymptotic behavior, significantly
aiding in the comprehension of systems with a large number of interacting particles [1, 5, 22, 26, 47].
Although the mean-field limit has offered valuable insights into the aforementioned problems, its
rigorous justification necessitates examining systems with both a finite number of particles and the
discrete-time algorithms commonly used in practice. Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge,
while a substantial body of work exists on finite-particle systems (see, e.g., the review papers [8, 9]
and references therein), these studies are confined to analyzing continuous-time dynamics. As a
result, a gap between theory and practice has emerged, and a precise link between continuous and
discrete-time schemes is still largely lacking.
§ Contributions. Our paper aims to bridge this gap by rigorously establishing the convergence
of discrete-time algorithms to their continuous-time counterparts in terms of long-term behavior.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

