L-C2ST: Local Diagnostics for Posterior
Approximations in Simulation-Based Inference

Julia Linhart
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA
Palaiseau 91120, France
julia.linhart@inria.fr

Alexandre Gramfort∗
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA
Palaiseau 91120, France
alexandre.gramfort@inria.fr

Pedro L. C. Rodrigues
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK
Grenoble 38000, France
pedro.rodrigues@inria.fr

Abstract
Many recent works in simulation-based inference (SBI) rely on deep generative
models to approximate complex, high-dimensional posterior distributions. However, evaluating whether or not these approximations can be trusted remains a
challenge. Most approaches evaluate the posterior estimator only in expectation
over the observation space. This limits their interpretability and is not sufficient
to identify for which observations the approximation can be trusted or should be
improved. Building upon the well-known classifier two-sample test (C2ST), we
introduce ℓ-C2ST, a new method that allows for a local evaluation of the posterior
estimator at any given observation. It offers theoretically grounded and easy to
interpret – e.g. graphical – diagnostics, and unlike C2ST, does not require access
to samples from the true posterior. In the case of normalizing flow-based posterior
estimators, ℓ-C2ST can be specialized to offer better statistical power, while being
computationally more efficient. On standard SBI benchmarks, ℓ-C2ST provides
comparable results to C2ST and outperforms alternative local approaches such as
coverage tests based on highest predictive density (HPD). We further highlight the
importance of local evaluation and the benefit of interpretability of ℓ-C2ST on a
challenging application from computational neuroscience.

1

Introduction

Expressive simulators are at the core of modern experimental science, enabling the exploration of
rare or challenging-to-measure events in complex systems across various fields such as population
genetics [43], astrophysics [7], cosmology [32], and neuroscience [28, 16, 1, 20]. These simulators
implicitly encode the intractable likelihood function p(x | θ) of the underlying mechanistic model,
where θ represents a set of relevant parameters and x ∼ Simulator(θ) is the corresponding realistic
observation. The main objective is to infer the parameters associated with a given observation using
the simulator’s posterior distribution p(θ | x) [4]. However, classical methods for sampling posterior
distributions, such as MCMC [41] and variational inference [40], rely on the explicit evaluation of
the model-likelihood, which is not possible when working with most modern simulators.
Simulation-based inference (SBI) [4] addresses this problem by estimating the posterior distribution
on simulated data from the joint distribution. This can be done after choosing a prior distribution
∗

A. Gramfort joined Meta and can be reached at agramfort@meta.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

