Reduced Policy Optimization for Continuous Control
with Hard Constraints
Shutong Ding1
1

Jingya Wang1

ShanghaiTech University

2

Yali Du2

Ye Shi1 ∗

King’s College London

{dingsht, wangjingya, shiye}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
yali.du@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent advances in constrained reinforcement learning (RL) have endowed reinforcement learning with certain safety guarantees. However, deploying existing
constrained RL algorithms in continuous control tasks with general hard constraints
remains challenging, particularly in those situations with non-convex hard constraints. Inspired by the generalized reduced gradient (GRG) algorithm, a classical
constrained optimization technique, we propose a reduced policy optimization
(RPO) algorithm that combines RL with GRG to address general hard constraints.
RPO partitions actions into basic actions and nonbasic actions following the GRG
method and output the basic actions via a policy network. Subsequently, RPO
calculates the nonbasic actions by solving equations based on equality constraints
using the obtained basic actions. The policy network is then updated by implicitly
differentiating nonbasic actions with respect to basic actions. Additionally, we
introduce an action projection procedure based on the reduced gradient and apply
a modified Lagrangian relaxation technique to ensure inequality constraints are
satisfied. To the best of our knowledge, RPO is the first attempt that introduces
GRG to RL as a way of efficiently handling both equality and inequality hard
constraints. It is worth noting that there is currently a lack of RL environments with
complex hard constraints, which motivates us to develop three new benchmarks:
two robotics manipulation tasks and a smart grid operation control task. With
these benchmarks, RPO achieves better performance than previous constrained RL
algorithms in terms of both cumulative reward and constraint violation. We believe
RPO, along with the new benchmarks, will open up new opportunities for applying
RL to real-world problems with complex constraints.

1

Introduction

The past few years have witnessed the significant success of reinforcement learning (RL) [41] in
various fields such as mastering GO [38], robotic manipulations [20, 24], autonomous driving [34],
and smart grid controlling [52, 47, 33], etc. However, it is still challenging to deploy RL algorithms in
real-world control tasks, such as operating robots on a specific surface, controlling power generation
to fulfill the demand, etc. The principal reason here is that hard constraints must be taken into
account in these control problems. Concretely, such constraints come in the form of both equality
and inequality constraints and can be nonlinear or even nonconvex, which makes it difficult to handle
them in RL. Moreover, unlike soft constraints, hard constraints take explicit form and require strict
compliance, which poses additional challenges.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

