On the Pareto Front of Multilingual Neural Machine
Translation
Liang Chen1∗ Shuming Ma2∗ Dongdong Zhang2 Furu Wei2 Baobao Chang1†
1
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Microsoft Research
leo.liang.chen@outlook.com chbb@pku.edu.cn
{shumma,dozhang,fuwei}@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this work, we study how the performance of a given direction changes with its
sampling ratio in Multilingual Neural Machine Translation (MNMT). By training
over 200 multilingual models with various model sizes, data sizes, and language
directions, we ﬁnd it interesting that the performance of certain translation direction does not always improve with the increase of its weight in the multi-task
optimization objective. Accordingly, scalarization method leads to a multitask
trade-off front that deviates from the traditional Pareto front when there exists
data imbalance in the training corpus, which poses a great challenge to improve
the overall performance of all directions. Based on our observations, we propose the Double Power Law to predict the unique performance trade-off front in
MNMT, which is robust across various languages, data adequacy, and the number
of tasks. Finally, we formulate the sample ratio selection problem in MNMT as
an optimization problem based on the Double Power Law. In our experiments,
it achieves better performance than temperature searching and gradient manipulation methods with only 1/5 to 1/2 of the total training budget. We release the code
at https://github.com/pkunlp-icler/ParetoMNMT for reproduction.

1

Introduction

Multilingual Neural Machine Translation (MNMT) enables multiple translation directions in a single
model, signiﬁcantly reducing deployment costs of translation systems and beneﬁting low-resource
directions (Sennrich et al., 2015). MNMT can be framed as a multi-task learning problem, where
we expect to improve the overall performance across translation directions. However, it is infeasible
to ﬁnd an optimal solution for all translation tasks because of the negative interference among translation directions (Lin et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021). A common method to make
trade-offs among different languages is scalarization, where a combination of normalized weights
is assigned to the loss of each direction during training. Xin et al. (2022) empirically show that
different weight combinations can result in Pareto optimal solutions, where no one solution could
outperform another in all tasks. All such solutions could form a Pareto front as shown in Figure 1.
Fernandes et al. (2023) show that there is a power law between the weight of one direction and its
ﬁnal generalization performance, indicating a positive relation between weight and performance.
In this work, we empirically ﬁnd that the positive relation together with the power law from Fernandes et al. (2023) does not hold true in a more realistic MNMT scenario where the data for different
directions is highly imbalanced. The performance of a direction may decrease as its weight increases.
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

