Labeling Neural Representations with Inverse
Recognition

Kirill Bykov∗
UMI Lab
ATB Potsdam
Potsdam, Germany
kbykov@atb-potsdam.de
Shinichi Nakajima
Machine Learning Group
TU Berlin
Berlin, Germany
nakajima@tu-berlin.de

Laura Kopf
UMI Lab
ATB Potsdam
Potsdam, Germany
lkopf@atb-potsdam.de

Marius Kloft
Machine Learning Group
RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau
Kaiserslautern, Germany
kloft@cs.uni-kl.de

Marina M.-C. Höhne
UMI Lab
ATB Potsdam
University of Potsdam, Germany
mhoehne@atb-potsdam.de

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) demonstrate remarkable capabilities in learning
complex hierarchical data representations, but the nature of these representations
remains largely unknown. Existing global explainability methods, such as Network
Dissection, face limitations such as reliance on segmentation masks, lack of statistical significance testing, and high computational demands. We propose Inverse
Recognition (INVERT), a scalable approach for connecting learned representations
with human-understandable concepts by leveraging their capacity to discriminate
between these concepts. In contrast to prior work, INVERT is capable of handling
diverse types of neurons, exhibits less computational complexity, and does not
rely on the availability of segmentation masks. Moreover, INVERT provides an
interpretable metric assessing the alignment between the representation and its
corresponding explanation and delivering a measure of statistical significance. We
demonstrate the applicability of INVERT in various scenarios, including the identification of representations affected by spurious correlations, and the interpretation
of the hierarchical structure of decision-making within the models.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated exceptional performance across a broad spectrum
of domains due to their ability to learn complex, high-dimensional representations from vast volumes
of data [1]. Nevertheless, despite these impressive accomplishments, our comprehension of the
concepts encoded within these representations remains limited. The "black-box" nature of representations, combined with the known susceptibility of networks to learn spurious correlations [2, 3, 4],
biases [5] and harmful stereotypes [6] poses significant risks for the application of DNN systems,
particularly in safety-critical domains [7].
To tackle the problem of the inherent opacity of DNNs, the field of Explainable AI (XAI) has
emerged [8, 9, 10]. The global explanation methods aim to explain the concepts and abstractions
learned within the DNNs representations. This is often achieved by establishing associations between
neurons and human-understandable concepts [11, 12, 13, 14], or by visualizing the stimuli responsible
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

