Are aligned neural networks adversarially aligned?

Nicholas Carlini1 , Milad Nasr1 , Christopher A. Choquette-Choo1 ,
Matthew Jagielski1 , Irena Gao2 , Anas Awadalla3 , Pang Wei Koh13 ,
Daphne Ippolito1 , Katherine Lee1 , Florian Tramèr4 , Ludwig Schmidt3
1
Google DeepMind 2 Stanford 3 University of Washington 4 ETH Zurich

Abstract
Large language models are now tuned to align with the goals of their creators,
namely to be “helpful and harmless.” These models should respond helpfully to
user questions, but refuse to answer requests that could cause harm. However, adversarial users can construct inputs which circumvent attempts at alignment. In
this work, we study adversarial alignment, and ask to what extent these models
remain aligned when interacting with an adversarial user who constructs worstcase inputs (adversarial examples). These inputs are designed to cause the model
to emit harmful content that would otherwise be prohibited. We show that existing NLP-based optimization attacks are insufficiently powerful to reliably attack
aligned text models: even when current NLP-based attacks fail, we can find adversarial inputs with brute force. As a result, the failure of current attacks should not
be seen as proof that aligned text models remain aligned under adversarial inputs.
However the recent trend in large-scale ML models is multimodal models that
allow users to provide images that influence the text that is generated. We show
these models can be easily attacked, i.e., induced to perform arbitrary un-aligned
behavior through adversarial perturbation of the input image. We conjecture that
improved NLP attacks may demonstrate this same level of adversarial control over
text-only models. Warning: some content generated by language models in
this paper may be offensive to some readers.

Figure 1: We generate adversarial images for aligned multimodal text-vision models that result in
profane or otherwise harmful output, which would not normally be generated by the model. When
presented with clean inputs the models follow their instruction tuning and produce harmless output,
but by providing a worst-case maliciously-constructed input, we can induce arbitrary output behavior
discouraged by the alignment techniques.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

