Uncertainty-Aware Instance Reweighting for
Off-Policy Learning

Xiaoying Zhang1

Junpu Chen2 Hongning Wang3 Hong Xie4 Yang Liu1
John C.S. Lui5 Hang Li1
1
ByteDance Research 2 ChongQing University 3 Tsinghua University
4
Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of Science
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{zhangxiaoying.xy,yang.liu01,lihang.lh}@bytedance.com
{jumpchan98,hongx87,wang.hongn}@gmail.com
cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Off-policy learning, referring to the procedure of policy optimization with access
only to logged feedback data, has shown importance in various real-world applications, such as search engines and recommender systems. While the ground-truth
logging policy is usually unknown, previous work simply employs its estimated
value for the off-policy learning, ignoring the negative impact from both high
bias and high variance resulted from such an estimator. And such impact is often
magnified on samples with small and inaccurately estimated logging probabilities.
The contribution of this work is to explicitly model the uncertainty in the estimated
logging policy, and propose an Uncertainty-aware Inverse Propensity Score estimator (UIPS) for improved off-policy learning, with a theoretical convergence
guarantee. Experiment results on the synthetic and real-world recommendation
datasets demonstrate that UIPS significantly improves the quality of the discovered
policy, when compared against an extensive list of state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications, including search engines [2], online advertisements [35], recommender systems [8, 22], only logged data is available for subsequent policy learning. For example, in
recommender systems, various complex recommendation policies are optimized over logged user
interactions (e.g., clicks or stay time) with items recommended by previous recommendation policies
(referred to as the logging policy) [51, 14]. However, such logged data is often known to be biased,
since the feedback on items where the logging policy did not take is unknown. This inevitably distorts
the evaluation and optimization of a new policy when it differs from the logging policy.
Off-policy learning [41, 27] thus emerges as a preferred way to learn an improved policy only from
the logged data, by addressing the mismatch between the learning and logging policies. One of the
most commonly used off-policy learning methods is the Inverse Propensity Scoring (IPS) [8, 25],
which assigns per-sample importance weight (i.e., propensity score) to the training objective on the
logged data, so as to get an unbiased optimization objective in expectation. The importance weight in
IPS is the probability ratio of taking an action between the learning and logging policies.
Unfortunately, the ground-truth logging policy is oftentimes unavailable to the learner in practice, due
to reasons like legacy issues, i.e., it was not recorded in the data. Additionally, in specific situations
like the healthcare domain [28] or two-stage recommender systems [8], access to the ground-truth
logging policy is not feasible. One common treatment by many previous studies [35, 22, 8, 24]
is to first estimate the logging policy using a supervised learning method (e.g., logistic regression,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

