Equivariant Light Field Convolution and Transformer
in Ray Space

Yinshuang Xu
University of Pennsylvania
xuyin@seas.upenn.edu

Jiahui Lei
University of Pennsylvania
leijh@seas.upenn.edu

Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania
and Archimedes, Athena RC
kostas@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract
3D reconstruction and novel view rendering can greatly benefit from geometric
priors when the input views are not sufficient in terms of coverage and inter-view
baselines. Deep learning of geometric priors from 2D images requires each image
to be represented in a 2D canonical frame and the prior to be learned in a given
or learned 3D canonical frame. In this paper, given only the relative poses of the
cameras, we show how to learn priors from multiple views equivariant to coordinate frame transformations by proposing an SE(3)-equivariant convolution and
transformer in the space of rays in 3D. We model the ray space as a homogeneous
space of SE(3) and introduce the SE(3)-equivariant convolution in ray space.
Depending on the output domain of the convolution, we present convolution-based
SE(3)-equivariant maps from ray space to ray space and to R3 . Our mathematical
framework allows us to go beyond convolution to SE(3)-equivariant attention in
the ray space. We showcase how to tailor and adapt the equivariant convolution and
transformer in the tasks of equivariant 3D reconstruction and equivariant neural
rendering from multiple views. We demonstrate SE(3)-equivariance by obtaining robust results in roto-translated datasets without performing transformation
augmentation.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen significant advances in learning-based techniques [67, 68, 60, 69, 61, 73,
11, 53] harnessing the power of deep learning for extraction of geometric priors from multiple
images and associated ground-truth shapes. Such approaches extract features from each view and
aggregate these features into a geometric prior. However, these approaches are not SE(3)-equivariant
to transformations of the frame where the priors and images are defined. While view pooling or
calculating variance [69, 72, 46, 73, 11] can be used to aggregate features and tackle equivariance,
view pooling discards the rich geometric information contained in a multiple view setup.
In this paper, we address the problem of learning geometric priors that are SE(3)-equivariant with
respect to transformations of the reference coordinate frame. We argue that all information needed
for tasks like novel view rendering or 3D reconstruction is contained in the light field [6, 37]. Our
input is a light field, a function defined on oriented rays in 3D whose values can be the radiance or
features extracted from pixel values. We will use the term light field, and we will be specific when it
is a radiance field or a feature field. Images are discrete samples of this field: the camera position
determines which rays are sampled, while the camera orientation leaves the sample of the light field
unchanged up to pixel discretization. We model the light field as a field over a homogeneous space of
SE(3), the ray space R parameterized by the Plücker coordinates. The ray space R is the space of
oriented light rays, for any ray x ∈ R, the Plücker coordinate is x = (d, m), where d ∈ S2 is the
direction of the ray, and m = x × d where x is any point on the ray.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

