Implicit Transfer Operator Learning: Multiple
Time-Resolution Surrogates for Molecular Dynamics
Mathias Schreiner⇤
DTU†,
Chalmers University of Technology
matschreiner@gmail.com

Ole Winther
DTU

Simon Olsson‡
Chalmers University of Technology
simonols@chalmers.se

Abstract
Computing properties of molecular systems rely on estimating expectations of the
(unnormalized) Boltzmann distribution. Molecular dynamics (MD) is a broadly
adopted technique to approximate such quantities. However, stable simulations
rely on very small integration time-steps (10 15 s), whereas convergence of some
moments, e.g. binding free energy or rates, might rely on sampling processes on
time-scales as long as 10 1 s, and these simulations must be repeated for every
molecular system independently. Here, we present Implicit Transfer Operator (ITO)
Learning, a framework to learn surrogates of the simulation process with multiple
time-resolutions. We implement ITO with denoising diffusion probabilistic models
with a new SE(3) equivariant architecture and show the resulting models can
generate self-consistent stochastic dynamics across multiple time-scales, even
when the system is only partially observed. Finally, we present a coarse-grained
CG-SE3-ITO model which can quantitatively model all-atom molecular dynamics
using only coarse molecular representations. As such, ITO provides an important
step towards multiple time- and space-resolution acceleration of MD. Code is
available at https://github.com/olsson-group/ito.

1

Introduction

p( )

Numerical simulation of stochastic differential equations
(SDE) is critical in the sciences, including statistics, physics,
chemistry, and biology applications [1]. Molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations are an important example of such simulations [2]. These simulations prescribe a set of mechanistic rules governing the time evolution of a molecular system
through numerical integration of, for example, the Langevin
equation [3]. MD grants mechanistic insights into experiT (1)
mental observables. These observables are expectations, including time-correlations, of observable functions (e.g., paire
Tim
T (N )
wise distances or angles) computed for the Boltzmann distribution µ̂(x) / exp[ U (x)] corresponding to the potential U (·) : ⌦ ! R of a M -particle molecular system, Figure 1: Implicit Transfer Operax 2 ⌦ ⇢ R3M kept at the inverse temperature = 1/kT . tor: A multiple time-scale surrogate
However, stable numerical integration relies on time steps, ⌧ , of stochastic molecular dynamics.
which are strictly smaller than the fastest characteristic time⇤

Contributions to this work were done while visiting Chalmers University of Technology
Technical University of Denmark
‡
Corresponding author
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

