Arbitrarily Scalable Environment Generators via
Neural Cellular Automata
Yulun Zhang1

Matthew C. Fontaine2
Varun Bhatt2
Stefanos Nikolaidis2
1
Jiaoyang Li
1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California
yulunzhang@cmu.edu, {mfontain,vsbhatt,nikolaid}@usc.edu,
jiaoyangli@cmu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of generating arbitrarily large environments to improve
the throughput of multi-robot systems. Prior work proposes Quality Diversity
(QD) algorithms as an effective method for optimizing the environments of automated warehouses. However, these approaches optimize only relatively small
environments, falling short when it comes to replicating real-world warehouse
sizes. The challenge arises from the exponential increase in the search space as
the environment size increases. Additionally, the previous methods have only
been tested with up to 350 robots in simulations, while practical warehouses could
host thousands of robots. In this paper, instead of optimizing environments, we
propose to optimize Neural Cellular Automata (NCA) environment generators via
QD algorithms. We train a collection of NCA generators with QD algorithms in
small environments and then generate arbitrarily large environments from the generators at test time. We show that NCA environment generators maintain consistent,
regularized patterns regardless of environment size, significantly enhancing the
scalability of multi-robot systems in two different domains with up to 2,350 robots.
Additionally, we demonstrate that our method scales a single-agent reinforcement
learning policy to arbitrarily large environments with similar patterns. We include
the source code at https://github.com/lunjohnzhang/warehouse_
env_gen_nca_public.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of generating arbitrarily large environments to improve the throughput of multirobot systems. As a motivating example, consider a multi-robot system for automated warehousing
where thousands of robots transport inventory pods in a shared warehouse environment. While
numerous works have studied the underlying Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) problem [42] to
more effectively coordinate the robots to improve the throughput [4, 6, 8, 24, 27, 29, 31, 35, 46], we
can also optimize the throughput by designing novel warehouse environments. A well-optimized
environment can alleviate traffic congestion and reduce the travel distances for the robots to fulfill
their tasks in the warehouse.
A recent work [51] formulates the environment optimization problem as a Quality Diversity (QD)
optimization problem and optimizes the environments by searching for the best allocation of shelf
and endpoint locations (where endpoints are locations where the robots can interact with the shelves).
It uses a QD algorithm to iteratively generate new environments and then repairs them with a Mixed
Integer Linear Programming (MILP) solver to enforce domain-specific constraints, such as the storage
capacity and connectivity of the environment. The repaired environments are evaluated with an
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

