Single-Call Stochastic Extragradient Methods
for Structured Non-monotone Variational Inequalities:
Improved Analysis under Weaker Conditions

Sayantan Choudhury
AMS & MINDS
Johns Hopkins University

Eduard Gorbunov
MBZUAI

Nicolas Loizou
AMS & MINDS
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Single-call stochastic extragradient methods, like stochastic past extragradient
(SPEG) and stochastic optimistic gradient (SOG), have gained a lot of interest in
recent years and are one of the most efficient algorithms for solving large-scale minmax optimization and variational inequalities problems (VIP) appearing in various
machine learning tasks. However, despite their undoubted popularity, current
convergence analyses of SPEG and SOG require strong assumptions like bounded
variance or growth conditions. In addition, several important questions regarding
the convergence properties of these methods are still open, including mini-batching,
efficient step-size selection, and convergence guarantees under different sampling
strategies. In this work, we address these questions and provide convergence
guarantees for two large classes of structured non-monotone VIPs: (i) quasistrongly monotone problems (a generalization of strongly monotone problems) and
(ii) weak Minty variational inequalities (a generalization of monotone and Minty
VIPs). We introduce the expected residual condition, explain its benefits, and show
how it allows us to obtain a strictly weaker bound than previously used growth
conditions, expected co-coercivity, or bounded variance assumptions. Finally, our
convergence analysis holds under the arbitrary sampling paradigm, which includes
importance sampling and various mini-batching strategies as special cases.

1

Introduction

Differentiable game formulations where several parameterized models/players compete to minimize
their respective objective functions have recently gained much attention from the machine learning
community. Some landmark advances in machine learning that are framed as games (or in their
simplified form as min-max optimization problems) are Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [19,
2], adversarial training of neural networks [46, 72], reinforcement learning [9, 64], and distributionally
robust learning [51, 73].
In this work, we consider a more abstract formulation of the problem and focus on solving the
following unconstrained stochastic variational inequality problem (VIP):
n
1X
Find x∗ ∈ Rd : such that F (x∗ ) =
Fi (x∗ ) = 0
(1)
n i=1
where each Fi : Rd → Rd is a Lipschitz continuous operator. Problem (1) generalizes the solution of
several types of stochastic smooth games [16, 44, 20, 7]. The simplest example is the unconstrained
min-max optimization problem (also called a zero-sum game):
n
1X
gi (x1 , x2 ) ,
(2)
min max
x1 ∈Rd1 x2 ∈Rd2 n
i=1
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

