Self-Supervised Learning with Lie Symmetries for
Partial Differential Equations

Grégoire Mialon†
Meta, FAIR

Danyal Rehman
MIT

Quentin Garrido†
Meta, FAIR
Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, LIGM
Yann LeCun
Meta, FAIR
NYU

Hannah Lawrence
Meta, FAIR
MIT
Bobak T. Kiani∗
MIT

Abstract
Machine learning for differential equations paves the way for computationally
efficient alternatives to numerical solvers, with potentially broad impacts in science
and engineering. Though current algorithms typically require simulated training
data tailored to a given setting, one may instead wish to learn useful information
from heterogeneous sources, or from real dynamical systems observations that are
messy or incomplete. In this work, we learn general-purpose representations of
PDEs from heterogeneous data by implementing joint embedding methods for selfsupervised learning (SSL), a framework for unsupervised representation learning
that has had notable success in computer vision. Our representation outperforms
baseline approaches to invariant tasks, such as regressing the coefficients of a PDE,
while also improving the time-stepping performance of neural solvers. We hope
that our proposed methodology will prove useful in the eventual development of
general-purpose foundation models for PDEs.

1

Introduction

Dynamical systems governed by differential equations are ubiquitous in fluid dynamics, chemistry,
astrophysics, and beyond. Accurately analyzing and predicting the evolution of such systems is
of paramount importance, inspiring decades of innovation in algorithms for numerical methods.
However, high-accuracy solvers are often computationally expensive. Machine learning has recently
arisen as an alternative method for analyzing differential equations at a fraction of the cost [1, 2, 3].
Typically, the neural network for a given equation is trained on simulations of that same equation,
generated by numerical solvers that are high-accuracy but comparatively slow [4]. What if we instead
wish to learn from heterogeneous data, e.g., data with missing information, or gathered from actual
observation of varied physical systems rather than clean simulations?
For example, we may have access to a dataset of instances of time-evolution, stemming from a family
of partial differential equations (PDEs) for which important characteristics of the problem, such as
viscosity or initial conditions, vary or are unknown. In this case, representations learned from such a
large, “unlabeled” dataset could still prove useful in learning to identify unknown characteristics, given
only a small dataset “labeled" with viscosities or reaction constants. Alternatively, the “unlabeled”
dataset may contain evolutions over very short periods of time, or with missing time intervals; possible
goals are then to learn representations that could be useful in filling in these gaps, or regressing other
quantities of interest.
∗

Correspondence to: gmialon@meta.com, garridoq@meta.com, and bkiani@mit.edu, † Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

