Focus Your Attention when Few-Shot Classification
Haoqing Wang
Shibo Jie
Zhi-Hong Deng∗
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
{wanghaoqing, parsley, zhdeng}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Since many pre-trained vision transformers emerge and provide strong representation for various downstream tasks, we aim to adapt them to few-shot image
classification tasks in this work. The input images typically contain multiple entities. The model may not focus on the class-related entities for the current few-shot
task, even with fine-tuning on support samples, and the noise information from
the class-independent entities harms performance. To this end, we first propose
a method that uses the attention and gradient information to automatically locate
the positions of key entities in the support images, denoted as position prompts.
Then we employ the cross-entropy loss between their many-hot presentation and
the attention logits to optimize the model to focus its attention on the key entities
during fine-tuning. This ability then can generalize to the query samples. Our
method is applicable to different vision transformers (e.g., columnar or pyramidal
ones), and also to different pre-training ways (e.g., single-modal or vision-language
pre-training). Extensive experiments show that our method can improve the performance of full or parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods on few-shot tasks. Code
is available at https://github.com/Haoqing-Wang/FORT.

1

Introduction

Based on the accumulated experience, humans can learn from few labeled samples for solving novel
tasks, and this is a key aspect of human intelligence. Few-shot learning [12, 31] aims to imitate this
ability and has attracted widely attention from the machine learning community [71]. Traditionally,
a base dataset is collected for learning prior knowledge before solving novel few-shot tasks. The
meta-learning methods learn the task-shared inductive bias, e.g., parameter initialization [13, 41],
metric function [52, 32, 54] or optimizer [2, 47]. The transfer learning methods [56, 48] learn
generalizing representation to novel tasks, and achieve comparable or better performance.
Some works [56, 46] find that the well-learned embedding model contributes the most to few-shot
classification performance, and even more important than the sophisticated meta-learning algorithms.
However, the commonly-used base datasets are far from large enough for learning generalizing
embedding, e.g., miniImageNet [60], which severely limits the performance of few-shot classification.
In fact, the few-shot learning ability of humans benefits from the supervised or unsupervised learning
from massive signals since birth, which helps us accumulating enough general knowledge. On the
other hand, self-supervised learning [66, 19, 8, 18, 5] can learn well-generalizing representation
from nearly-free massive unlabeled data and is beneficial for broad downstream tasks. Using these
pre-trained models for few-shot tasks conforms to the learning paradigm of humans and has achieved
remarkable success [5, 74, 15] in Natural Language Processing (NLP). In this work, we aim to adapt
the pre-trained models to few-shot image classification tasks, without using any base datasets.
Recently, vision transformers [11, 36, 70] play an increasingly important role in computer vision,
so we use them as the backbone for few-shot tasks. Note that it is a non-trivial problem to finetune the pre-trained large vision transformers on few support samples due to their data-hungry
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

