Embroid: Unsupervised Prediction Smoothing Can
Improve Few-Shot Classification

Neel Guha*
Stanford University
Kush Bhatia*
Stanford University

Mayee F. Chen*
Stanford University

Azalia Mirhoseini
Anthropic

Frederic Sala
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Christopher Ré
Stanford University

Abstract
Recent work has shown that language models’ (LMs) prompt-based learning capabilities make them well suited for automating data labeling in domains where
manual annotation is expensive. The challenge is that while writing an initial
prompt is cheap, improving a prompt is costly—practitioners often require significant labeled data in order to evaluate the impact of prompt modifications. Our work
asks whether it is possible to improve prompt-based learning without additional
labeled data. We approach this problem by attempting to modify the predictions
of a prompt, rather than the prompt itself. Our intuition is that accurate predictions should also be consistent: samples which are similar under some feature
representation should receive the same prompt prediction. We propose E MBROID,
a method which computes multiple representations of a dataset under different
embedding functions, and uses the consistency between the LM predictions for
neighboring samples to identify mispredictions. E MBROID then uses these neighborhoods to create additional predictions for each sample, and combines these
predictions with a simple latent variable graphical model in order to generate a final
corrected prediction. In addition to providing a theoretical analysis of E MBROID,
we conduct a rigorous empirical evaluation across six different LMs and up to 95
different tasks. We find that (1) E MBROID substantially improves performance over
original prompts (e.g., by an average of 7.3 points on GPT-JT), (2) also realizes
improvements for more sophisticated prompting strategies (e.g., chain-of-thought),
and (3) can be specialized to domains like law through the embedding functions.

1

Introduction

Acquiring labeled data for domains like medicine and law is essential to training machine learning
models or performing basic data analysis (e.g., “how many contracts contain a choice-of-forum
clause" or “how many patient medical histories discuss an adverse reaction to a drug?”) [15, 18, 19].
However, building large labeled datasets is difficult, and efforts like [25] show that manual labeling
with domain experts is cost-prohibitive. Recent works have begun exploring if language models
(LMs) could learn annotation tasks in-context [6] and replace manual labeling at scale [13, 15, 23, 31].
The promise of this approach is that LMs’ in-context capabilities enable them to learn tasks from
descriptions of the the task (i.e., prompts). However, the challenge is that producing high performance
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

