Complementary Benefits of Contrastive Learning and
Self-Training Under Distribution Shift

Saurabh Garg˚
Carnegie Mellon University
sgarg2@andrew.cmu.edu

Amrith Setlur˚
Carnegie Mellon University
asetlur@andrew.cmu.edu

Zachary C. Lipton
Carnegie Mellon University
zlipton@andrew.cmu.edu

Sivaraman Balakrishnan
Carnegie Mellon University
sbalakri@andrew.cmu.edu

Virginia Smith
Carnegie Mellon University
smithv@andrew.cmu.edu

Aditi Raghunathan
Carnegie Mellon University
aditirag@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Self-training and contrastive learning have emerged as leading techniques for
incorporating unlabeled data, both under distribution shift (unsupervised domain
adaptation) and when it is absent (semi-supervised learning). However, despite
the popularity and compatibility of these techniques, their efficacy in combination
remains surprisingly unexplored. In this paper, we first undertake a systematic
empirical investigation of this combination, finding (i) that in domain adaptation
settings, self-training and contrastive learning offer significant complementary
gains; and (ii) that in semi-supervised learning settings, surprisingly, the benefits
are not synergistic. Across eight distribution shift datasets (e.g., BREEDs, WILDS),
we demonstrate that the combined method obtains 3–8% higher accuracy than
either approach independently. Finally, we theoretically analyze these techniques
in a simplified model of distribution shift demonstrating scenarios under which
the features produced by contrastive learning can yield a good initialization for
self-training to further amplify gains and achieve optimal performance, even when
either method alone would fail.

1

Introduction

Even under natural, non-adversarial distribution shifts, the performance of machine learning models
often drops [65, 83, 47, 29]. While we might hope to retrain our models on labeled samples from the
new distribution, this option is often unavailable due to the expense or impracticality of collecting
new labels. Consequently, researchers have investigated the Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA)
setting. Here, given labeled source data and unlabeled out-of-distribution (OOD) target data, the goal
is to produce a classifier that performs well on the target. Because UDA is generally underspecified [7],
researchers have focused on two main paths: (i) domain adaptation papers that explore heuristics
for incorporating the unlabeled target data, relying on benchmark datasets ostensibly representative
of “real-world shifts” to adjudicate progress [72, 85, 47]; and (ii) theoretically motivated papers
that explore structural assumptions under which UDA problems are well posed [77, 74]. This work
engages with the former focusing on two popular methods: self-training and contrastive pretraining.
Self-training [75, 52, 79, 90, 86] and contrastive pretraining [13, 16, 93] were both proposed, initially,
for traditional Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) problems, where the labeled and unlabeled data are
drawn from the same distribution. Here the central challenge is statistical: to exploit the unlabeled
data to learn a better predictor than one would get by training on the (small) labeled data alone. More
˚

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

