Neural Combinatorial Optimization with Heavy
Decoder: Toward Large Scale Generalization

Fu Luo1∗ Xi Lin2∗ Fei Liu2 Qingfu Zhang2 Zhenkun Wang1†
1
Southern University of Science and Technology
2
City University of Hong Kong
luof2023@mail.sustech.edu.cn, {xi.lin, fliu36-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk,
qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk, wangzhenkun90@gmail.com

Abstract
Neural combinatorial optimization (NCO) is a promising learning-based approach
for solving challenging combinatorial optimization problems without specialized
algorithm design by experts. However, most constructive NCO methods cannot
solve problems with large-scale instance sizes, which significantly diminishes their
usefulness for real-world applications. In this work, we propose a novel Light
Encoder and Heavy Decoder (LEHD) model with a strong generalization ability
to address this critical issue. The LEHD model can learn to dynamically capture
the relationships between all available nodes of varying sizes, which is beneficial
for model generalization to problems of various scales. Moreover, we develop
a data-efficient training scheme and a flexible solution construction mechanism
for the proposed LEHD model. By training on small-scale problem instances, the
LEHD model can generate nearly optimal solutions for the Travelling Salesman
Problem (TSP) and the Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP) with up to
1000 nodes, and also generalizes well to solve real-world TSPLib and CVRPLib
problems. These results confirm our proposed LEHD model can significantly improve the state-of-the-art performance for constructive NCO. The code is available
at https://github.com/CIAM-Group/NCO_code/tree/main/single_objective/LEHD.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization (CO) holds significant practical value across various domains, such as
vehicle routing [48], production planning [11], and drug discovery [34]. Due to the NP-hardness and
the presence of numerous complex variants, solving CO problems remains an extremely challenging
task [31]. In the past few decades, many powerful algorithms have been proposed to tackle different
CO problems, but they mainly suffer from two major limitations. Firstly, solving each new problem
requires extensive domain knowledge to design a proper algorithm by experts, which could lead to
a significant development cost. In addition, these algorithms usually require an excessively long
execution time due to the NP-hardness of CO problems [49]. These limitations make the classical
algorithms undesirable and impractical for many real-world applications.
Recently, many learning-based neural combinatorial optimization (NCO) methods have been proposed
to solve CO problems without handcrafted algorithm design. These methods build neural network
models to generate the solution for given CO problem instances, which can be trained by supervised
learning (SL) [51, 22, 13, 23, 28, 18] or reinforcement learning (RL) [4, 27, 17, 19, 6, 9, 53, 37,
29, 36, 24, 39, 40, 54, 52, 1]. Although these methods can achieve promising performance on
∗
†

Equal contributors
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

