Fairness Continual Learning Approach to Semantic
Scene Understanding in Open-World Environments

Thanh-Dat Truong1 , Hoang-Quan Nguyen1 , Bhiksha Raj2,3 , and Khoa Luu1
1
CVIU Lab, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, 72701
2
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213
3
Mohammed bin Zayed University of AI, Abu Dhabi, UAE
{tt032, hn016, khoaluu}@uark.edu, bhiksha@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Continual semantic segmentation aims to learn new classes while maintaining
the information from the previous classes. Although prior studies have shown
impressive progress in recent years, the fairness concern in the continual semantic
segmentation needs to be better addressed. Meanwhile, fairness is one of the most
vital factors in deploying the deep learning model, especially in human-related or
safety applications. In this paper, we present a novel Fairness Continual Learning
approach to the semantic segmentation problem. In particular, under the fairness
objective, a new fairness continual learning framework is proposed based on class
distributions. Then, a novel Prototypical Contrastive Clustering loss is proposed to
address the significant challenges in continual learning, i.e., catastrophic forgetting
and background shift. Our proposed loss has also been proven as a novel, generalized learning paradigm of knowledge distillation commonly used in continual
learning. Moreover, the proposed Conditional Structural Consistency loss further
regularized the structural constraint of the predicted segmentation. Our proposed
approach has achieved State-of-the-Art performance on three standard scene understanding benchmarks, i.e., ADE20K, Cityscapes, and Pascal VOC, and promoted
the fairness of the segmentation model.

1

Introductions

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [5, 7]
and Transformers [45, 8] have been introduced
to approach semantic segmentation tasks where
the models learn from the large-scale data having known classes at once. These segmentation
models learned on large-scale data may perform
poorly as they may counter the new objects or
new environments. To bridge this gap, several approaches have been proposed to adapt the model
to the new data. Domain Adaptation is one of the
common approaches [39, 42, 43, 1, 18] that adaptively transfer the segmentation model into the Figure 1: The Class Distribution of ADE20K.
deployed environment. However, domain adapta- In the ADE20K 50-50 (3 steps) benchmark, the
tion cannot handle when new objects appear due distribution of classes in the majority group in
to its close-set setup. Also, this approach requires the early step dominates the ones in the minority
access to both original and new training data. In groups in the later steps. The distributions of
practice, the segmentation models should be ca- classes gradually decrease over steps.
pable of learning new classes continually without
re-training from the previous data. This paradigm is defined as Continual Semantic Segmentation
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

