You Only Condense Once: Two Rules for Pruning
Condensed Datasets
B

Yang He, Lingao Xiao, Joey Tianyi Zhou
CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
{He_Yang, Joey_Zhou}@cfar.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
Dataset condensation is a crucial tool for enhancing training efficiency by reducing
the size of the training dataset, particularly in on-device scenarios. However, these
scenarios have two significant challenges: 1) the varying computational resources
available on the devices require a dataset size different from the pre-defined condensed dataset, and 2) the limited computational resources often preclude the possibility of conducting additional condensation processes. We introduce You Only
Condense Once (YOCO) to overcome these limitations. On top of one condensed
dataset, YOCO produces smaller condensed datasets with two embarrassingly simple dataset pruning rules: Low LBPE Score and Balanced Construction. YOCO
offers two key advantages: 1) it can flexibly resize the dataset to fit varying computational constraints, and 2) it eliminates the need for extra condensation processes,
which can be computationally prohibitive. Experiments validate our findings on
networks including ConvNet, ResNet and DenseNet, and datasets including CIFAR10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet. For example, our YOCO surpassed various dataset
condensation and dataset pruning methods on CIFAR-10 with ten Images Per Class
(IPC), achieving 6.98-8.89% and 6.31-23.92% accuracy gains, respectively. The
code is available at: https://github.com/he-y/you-only-condense-once.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models often require vast amounts of data to achieve optimal performance. This
data-hungry nature of deep learning algorithms, coupled with the growing size and complexity of
datasets, has led to the need for more efficient dataset handling techniques. Dataset condensation is a
promising approach that enables models to learn from a smaller and more representative subset of
the entire dataset. Condensed datasets are especially utilized in on-device scenarios, where limited
computational resources and storage constraints necessitate the use of a compact training set.
However, these on-device scenarios have two significant constraints. First, the diverse and fluctuating
computational resources inherent in these scenarios necessitate a level of flexibility in the size of
the dataset. But the requirement of flexibility is not accommodated by the fixed sizes of previous
condensed datasets. Second, the limited computational capacity in these devices also makes extra
condensation processes impractical, if not impossible. Therefore, the need for adaptability in the size
of the condensed dataset becomes increasingly crucial. Furthermore, this adaptability needs to be
realized without introducing another computationally intensive condensation process.
We introduce You Only Condense Once (YOCO) to enable the flexible resizing (pruning) of
condensed datasets to fit varying on-device scenarios without extra condensation process (See Fig. 1).
The first rule of our proposed method involves a metric to evaluate the importance of training samples
in the context of dataset condensation.
B

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

