MEMTO: Memory-guided Transformer for
Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection

Junho Song1∗ Keonwoo Kim1,2∗ Jeonglyul Oh1 Sungzoon Cho1†
1
Seoul National University
2
VRCREW Inc.
{jhsong, keonwookim, jamesoh0813}@bdai.snu.ac.kr
zoon@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Detecting anomalies in real-world multivariate time series data is challenging
due to complex temporal dependencies and inter-variable correlations. Recently,
reconstruction-based deep models have been widely used to solve the problem.
However, these methods still suffer from an over-generalization issue and fail
to deliver consistently high performance. To address this issue, we propose the
MEMTO, a memory-guided Transformer using a reconstruction-based approach.
It is designed to incorporate a novel memory module that can learn the degree
to which each memory item should be updated in response to the input data. To
stabilize the training procedure, we use a two-phase training paradigm which
involves using K-means clustering for initializing memory items. Additionally,
we introduce a bi-dimensional deviation-based detection criterion that calculates
anomaly scores considering both input space and latent space. We evaluate our
proposed method on five real-world datasets from diverse domains, and it achieves
an average anomaly detection F1-score of 95.74%, significantly outperforming
the previous state-of-the-art methods. We also conduct extensive experiments to
empirically validate the effectiveness of our proposed model’s key components.

1

Introduction

As cyber-physical systems advance, a vast amount of time series data is continuously collected from
numerous sensors. Anomalies resulting from malfunctions in critical infrastructures, such as water
treatment facilities and space probes, can incur fatal property loss. The task of multivariate time
series anomaly detection involves identifying whether each timestamp of the multivariate time series
is normal or abnormal. Anomaly detection in real-world scenarios is challenging due to severe
data imbalance and the prevalence of unlabeled anomalies. We have formulated the problem as an
unsupervised learning task to tackle these challenges. The underlying assumption of this approach is
that the training data solely consists of normal samples [25, 42].
Traditional unsupervised learning methods such as one-class SVM (OC-SVM) [28], support vector
data description (SVDD) [35], isolation forest [20], and local outlier factor (LOF) [5] have been
widely used for anomaly detection tasks. Recently, density-estimation methods combined with
deep representation learning, such as DAGMM [45] and MPPCACD [41], have also been presented.
For the clustering-based method, Deep SVDD [25] finds the smallest hyper-sphere enclosing most
normal samples in the feature space trained using deep neural networks. However, they exhibit poor
performance in the time series domain due to their inability to capture dynamic nonlinear temporal
∗
†

indicates equal contributions
indicates corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

