Unified Enhancement of Privacy Bounds for Mixture
Mechanisms via f -Differential Privacy
Chendi Wang⇤
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA, 19104 &
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big data
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China, 518000
chendi@wharton.upenn.edu
Jiayuan Ye
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
Singapore
jiayuan@comp.nus.edu.sg

Buxin Su⇤
Department of Mathematics
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA, 19104
subuxin@sas.upenn.edu

Reza Shokri
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
Singapore
reza@comp.nus.edu.sg

Weijie J. Su
Wharton Statistics and Data Science Department
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA, 19104
suw@wharton.upenn.edu

Abstract
Differentially private (DP) machine learning algorithms incur many sources of randomness, such as random initialization, random batch subsampling, and shuffling.
However, such randomness is difficult to take into account when proving differential
privacy bounds because it induces mixture distributions for the algorithm’s output
that are difficult to analyze. This paper focuses on improving privacy bounds for
shuffling models and one-iteration differentially private gradient descent (DP-GD)
with random initializations using f -DP. We derive a closed-form expression of the
trade-off function for shuffling models that outperforms the most up-to-date results
based on (✏, )-DP. Moreover, we investigate the effects of random initialization on
the privacy of one-iteration DP-GD. Our numerical computations of the trade-off
function indicate that random initialization can enhance the privacy of DP-GD. Our
analysis of f -DP guarantees for these mixture mechanisms relies on an inequality
for trade-off functions introduced in this paper. This inequality implies the joint
convexity of F -divergences. Finally, we study an f -DP analog of the advanced
joint convexity of the hockey-stick divergence related to (✏, )-DP and apply it to
analyze the privacy of mixture mechanisms.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP, [16, 17]) is a rigorous mathematical framework for ensuring data privacy
and has become a cornerstone of privacy-preserving data analysis over the past two decades. DP has
found widespread applications in various data science fields, such as machine learning [12, 6, 44],
⇤

equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

