On the Sublinear Regret of GP-UCB
Justin Whitehouse
Carnegie Mellon University
jwhiteho@andrew.cmu.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Aaditya Ramdas
Carnegie Mellon University
aramdas@cmu.edu

Abstract
In the kernelized bandit problem, a learner aims to sequentially compute the optimum of a function lying in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space given only noisy
evaluations at sequentially chosen points. In particular, the learner aims to minimize regret, which is a measure of the suboptimality of the choices made. Arguably the most popular algorithm is the Gaussian Process Upper Confidence
Bound (GP-UCB) algorithm, which involves acting based on a simple linear estimator of the unknown function. Despite its popularity, existing analyses of GPUCB give a suboptimal regret rate, which fails to be sublinear for many commonly
used kernels such as the Matérn kernel. This has led to a longstanding open question: are existing regret analyses for GP-UCB tight, or can bounds be improved
by using more sophisticated analytical techniques? In this work, we resolve this
open question and show that GP-UCB enjoys nearly optimal regret. In particular,
our results yield sublinear regret rates for the Matérn kernel, improving over the
state-of-the-art analyses and partially resolving a COLT open problem posed by
Vakili et al. Our improvements rely on a key technical contribution — regularizing
kernel ridge estimators in proportion to the smoothness of the underlying kernel
k. Applying this key idea together with a largely overlooked concentration result in separable Hilbert spaces (for which we provide an independent, simplified
derivation), we are able to provide a tighter analysis of the GP-UCB algorithm.

1

Introduction

An essential problem in areas such as econometrics [12, 13], medicine [22, 23], optimal control
[4, 3], and advertising [21] is to optimize an unknown function given bandit feedback, in which
algorithms only get to observe the outcomes for the chosen actions. Due to the bandit feedback,
there is a fundamental tradeoff between exploiting what has been observed about the local behavior
of the function and exploring to learn more about the function’s global behavior. There has been a
long line of work on bandit learning that investigates this tradeoff across different settings, including
multi-armed bandits [29, 19, 37], linear bandits [2, 30], and kernelized bandits [5, 26, 32].
In this work, we focus on the kernelized bandit framework, which can be viewed as an extension
of the well-studied linear bandit setting to an infinite-dimensional reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(or RKHS) (H, h·, ·iH ). In this problem, there is some unknown function f ⇤ : X ! R of bounded
norm in H, where X ⇢ Rd is a bounded set. In each round t 2 [T ], the learner uses previous
observations to select an action Xt 2 X , and then observes feedback Yt := f ⇤ (Xt ) + ✏t , where ✏t is
a zero-mean noise variable. The learner aims to minimize (with high probability) the regret at time
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

