Gigastep - One Billion Steps per Second Multi-agent
Reinforcement Learning

Mathias Lechner
MIT CSAIL
mlechner@mit.edu
Wei Xiao
MIT CSAIL
weixy@mit.edu

Lianhao Yin
MIT CSAIL
lianhao@mit.edu

Ramin Hasani
MIT CSAIL
rhasani@mit.edu

Tim Seyde
MIT CSAIL
tseyde@mit.edu

Tsun-Hsuan Wang
MIT CSAIL
tsunw@mit.edu

Joshua Rountree
United States Air Force
rountree@mit.edu

Daniela Rus
MIT CSAIL
rus@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) research is faced with a trade-off: it
either uses complex environments requiring large compute resources, which makes
it inaccessible to researchers with limited resources, or relies on simpler dynamics
for faster execution, which makes the transferability of the results to more realistic
tasks challenging. Motivated by these challenges, we present Gigastep, a fully
vectorizable, MARL environment implemented in JAX, capable of executing up to
one billion environment steps per second on consumer-grade hardware. Its design
allows for comprehensive MARL experimentation, including a complex, highdimensional space defined by 3D dynamics, stochasticity, and partial observations.
Gigastep supports both collaborative and adversarial tasks, continuous and discrete
action spaces, and provides RGB image and feature vector observations, allowing
the evaluation of a wide range of MARL algorithms. We validate Gigastep’s
usability through an extensive set of experiments, underscoring its role in widening
participation and promoting inclusivity in the MARL research community. MIT
licensed code is available at https://github.com/mlech26l/gigastep.

1

Introduction

Decentralized partially observable Markov decision processes (Dec-POMDPs) [4, 42] represent a
practically relevant yet largely unsolved challenge within the domain of deep reinforcement learning
(Deep RL). These decision-making frameworks involve multiple agents operating in an environment
where each agent has access to only partial observations, making it necessary to reason about both
the global state and the private information of individual agents. Solving Dec-POMDPs efficiently
and effectively has profound implications for real-world applications [9], such as human-machine
interaction [30], multi-robot systems [13], autonomous driving [28, 29, 10], and decentralized control
of complex networks [71, 11].
To address this challenge, numerous environments have been proposed, each with unique strengths
and weaknesses. For instance, the Starcraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) [50] emerged as a
popular platform for benchmarking Dec-POMDP algorithms. However, the SMAC v2 [15] revealed
that this environment is fundamentally deterministic, allowing agents to memorize action sequences
rather than developing genuinely generalizable behavior, thus providing a skewed perspective on
algorithmic performance. Consequently, it is essential to question the robustness and effectiveness of
the solutions that have been evaluated only in single environments.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

