Training biologically plausible recurrent
neural networks on cognitive tasks
with long-term dependencies

Wayne W.M. Soo
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
wmws2@cam.ac.uk

Vishwa Goudar
Center for Neural Science
New York University
vishwa.goudar@nyu.edu

Xiao-Jing Wang
Center for Neural Science
New York University
xjwang@nyu.edu

Abstract
Training recurrent neural networks (RNNs) has become a go-to approach for generating and evaluating mechanistic neural hypotheses for cognition. The ease and
efficiency of training RNNs with backpropagation through time and the availability of robustly supported deep learning libraries has made RNN modeling more
approachable and accessible to neuroscience. Yet, a major technical hindrance remains. Cognitive processes such as working memory and decision making involve
neural population dynamics over a long period of time within a behavioral trial and
across trials. It is difficult to train RNNs to accomplish tasks where neural representations and dynamics have long temporal dependencies without gating mechanisms
such as LSTMs or GRUs which currently lack experimental support and prohibit
direct comparison between RNNs and biological neural circuits. We tackled this
problem based on the idea of specialized skip-connections through time to support
the emergence of task-relevant dynamics, and subsequently reinstitute biological
plausibility by reverting to the original architecture. We show that this approach
enables RNNs to successfully learn cognitive tasks that prove impractical if not
impossible to learn using conventional methods. Over numerous tasks considered
here, we achieve less training steps and shorter wall-clock times, particularly in
tasks that require learning long-term dependencies via temporal integration over
long timescales or maintaining a memory of past events in hidden-states. Our methods expand the range of experimental tasks that biologically plausible RNN models
can learn, thereby supporting the development of theory for the emergent neural
mechanisms of computations involving long-term dependencies.

1

Introduction

The adoption of deep learning methods in neuroscience research has fostered entirely new approaches
to modeling neural systems and developing scientific hypotheses [1–4]. Moreover, rapid advances in
network initialization and optimization techniques has reduced the threshold knowledge for designing
and training neural networks and improved the accessibility of model development in neuroscience.
Consequently, it is now far more feasible to formulate theories and even take a theory-first approach
to neuroscience. Technological advances in experimental neuroscience are also making it easier
to study increasingly complex neural computations, escalating the demand for models that support
much longer time-scale dependencies than are conventionally modeled with biologically plausible
RNNs (see Appendix A). However, fundamental physiological and anatomical properties of the brain
constrain the neural network architectures that are permissible for study in neuroscience. First, the
brain’s connectivity is highly recurrent at multiple spatial scales, making recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) [5] the modeling tool of choice in neuroscience [2, 4, 6]. The training and analysis of RNNs
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

