Likelihood-Based Diffusion Language Models

Ishaan Gulrajani
Stanford University
igul222@gmail.com

Tatsunori B. Hashimoto
Stanford University
thashim@stanford.edu

Abstract
Despite a growing interest in diffusion-based language models, existing work has
not shown that these models can attain nontrivial likelihoods on standard language
modeling benchmarks. In this work, we take the first steps towards closing the
likelihood gap between autoregressive and diffusion-based language models, with
the goal of building and releasing a diffusion model which outperforms a small
but widely-known autoregressive model. We pursue this goal through algorithmic
improvements, scaling laws, and increased compute. On the algorithmic front,
we introduce several methodological improvements for the maximum-likelihood
training of diffusion language models. We then study scaling laws for our diffusion
models and find compute-optimal training regimes which differ substantially from
autoregressive models. Using our methods and scaling analysis, we train and
release Plaid 1B, a large diffusion language model which outperforms GPT-2 124M
in likelihood on benchmark datasets and generates fluent samples in unconditional
and zero-shot control settings. 1

1

Introduction

Large language models lie at the center of recent advances in artificial intelligence. Shared across
nearly all such language models is a common recipe: learn a model that maximizes data likelihoods
using an autoregressive, left-to-right factorization. Maximum-likelihood pretraining has been a
remarkably successful paradigm, leading to models that perform well on a range of downstream tasks
and display complex behaviors like in-context learning [1, 28].
Thus far, autoregressive modeling has been a core part of this process due to its computational
efficiency and empirical performance. However, this choice carries drawbacks. Autoregressive models
generate tokens one at a time, making it difficult to perform long-range planning or controllable
generation [17, 19, 21]. In addition, certain sequence distributions may be fundamentally more
difficult to model autoregressively [22].
Given the importance of language modeling, these potential drawbacks motivate us to explore
alternatives to the autoregressive approach. As a promising candidate, we turn to continuous diffusion
models [32, 12], which have achieved state-of-the-art results in image modeling [5, 30, 31]. In
language, prior works on diffusion models exist [e.g. 21, 10, 6], but these optimize non-likelihoodbased objectives. Without the ability to use standard likelihood-based benchmarks [25, 14, 26], it
is difficult to say precisely how these models compare to autoregressive models (see Section 7 for
a discussion). Somewhat concerningly, there is no work showing that it is possible for diffusion
language models to achieve any nontrivial likelihoods on standard benchmarks.
In this work, we explore the limits of likelihood-based diffusion language models. Our goal is to
train and release a diffusion model which achieves better likelihoods than GPT-2 124M [29], which
we consider the smallest widely-adopted autoregressive model today. To achieve this goal, we first
1

We release our code and pretrained models at https://github.com/igul222/plaid.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

