Truly Scale-Equivariant Deep Nets
with Fourier Layers
Md Ashiqur Rahman Raymond A. Yeh
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
{rahman79, rayyeh}@purdue.edu

Abstract
In computer vision, models must be able to adapt to changes in image resolution
to effectively carry out tasks such as image segmentation; This is known as scaleequivariance. Recent works have made progress in developing scale-equivariant
convolutional neural networks, e.g., through weight-sharing and kernel resizing.
However, these networks are not truly scale-equivariant in practice. Specifically,
they do not consider anti-aliasing as they formulate the down-scaling operation in
the continuous domain. To address this shortcoming, we directly formulate downscaling in the discrete domain with consideration of anti-aliasing. We then propose
a novel architecture based on Fourier layers to achieve truly scale-equivariant
deep nets, i.e., absolute zero equivariance-error. Following prior works, we test
this model on MNIST-scale and STL-10 datasets. Our proposed model achieves
competitive classification performance while maintaining zero equivariance-error.

1

Introduction

Consider the task of image classification; if an object in the image is scaled (resized), then its
corresponding object label should remain the same, i.e., scale-invariant. Similarly, for semantic
segmentation, if an object is scaled, then its corresponding mask should also be scaled accordingly, i.e.,
scale-equivariant. Similarly, one would expect the features extracted to be scale-equivariant; see Fig. 1
for illustration. These invariant and equivariant properties are important to many computer vision
tasks due to the nature of images. A photo of the same scenery can be taken from different distances,
and objects in the scenes may come in different sizes. Developing representations that effectively
capture this multi-resolution aspect of images has been a long-standing quest [1, 9, 11, 17, 53].
Recently, there has been a line of work on developing scale-equivariant convolutions networks [8, 13,
41, 42, 46] to more effectively learn multi-resolution features. At a high level, these works achieve
scale-equivariant convolution layers through weight-sharing and kernel resizing, i.e., use the “same”
but resized kernel across all scales [5]. The innovation of these works is how to properly resize the
kernel. For example, Bekkers [2] and Sosnovik et al. [41] formulate kernel resizing as a continuous
operation and then discretize the kernel when implemented in practice. However, this discretization
leads to non-negligible equivariance error. On the other hand, Worrall and Welling [46] and Sosnovik
et al. [42] directly formulate kernel resizing in the discrete domain, e.g., using dilation or solving for
the best kernel given a fixed scale set, and achieve low equivariance-error.
Despite these successes, we point out that the aforementioned works are not truly scale-equivariant in
practice. Specifically, these works are derived using a continuous domain down-scaling operation,
i.e., there is no need to consider anti-aliasing. However, when performing a down-scaling on discrete
space, the Nyquist theorem [23, 30] tells us that an anti-alias filter is necessary to avoid high-frequency
content to alias into lower frequencies. The canonical example of aliasing is the “wagon-wheel effect”,
where a wheel in a video appears to be rotating slower or even in reverse from its true rotation. To
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

