Describe, Explain, Plan and Select:
Interactive Planning with Large Language Models
Enables Open-World Multi-Task Agents

Zihao Wang1,2 , Shaofei Cai1,2 , Guanzhou Chen3 , Anji Liu4 , Xiaojian Ma4 , Yitao Liang1,5∗
Team CraftJarvis
1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
4
Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles
5
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
{zhwang,caishaofei}@stu.pku.edu.cn,rayment@bupt.edu.cn
liuanji@cs.ucla.edu,xiaojian.ma@ucla.edu,yitaol@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We investigate the challenge of task planning for multi-task embodied agents in
open-world environments.2 Two main difficulties are identified: 1) executing
plans in an open-world environment (e.g., Minecraft) necessitates accurate and
multi-step reasoning due to the long-term nature of tasks, and 2) as vanilla planners
do not consider how easy the current agent can achieve a given sub-task when
ordering parallel sub-goals within a complicated plan, the resulting plan could be
inefficient or even infeasible. To this end, we propose “Describe, Explain, Plan
and Select” (DEPS), an interactive planning approach based on Large Language
Models (LLMs). DEPS facilitates better error correction on initial LLM-generated
plan by integrating description of the plan execution process and providing selfexplanation of feedback when encountering failures during the extended planning
phases. Furthermore, it includes a goal selector, which is a trainable module that
ranks parallel candidate sub-goals based on the estimated steps of completion,
consequently refining the initial plan. Our experiments mark the milestone of the
first zero-shot multi-task agent that can robustly accomplish 70+ Minecraft tasks
and nearly double the overall performances. Further testing reveals our method’s
general effectiveness in popularly adopted non-open-ended domains as well (i.e.,
ALFWorld and tabletop manipulation). The ablation and exploratory studies detail
how our design beats the counterparts and provide a promising update on the
ObtainDiamond grand challenge with our approach. The code is released at
https://github.com/CraftJarvis/MC-Planner.

1

Introduction

Developing multi-task agents that can accomplish a vast and diverse suite of tasks in complex domains
has been viewed as one of the key milestones towards generally capable artificial intelligence [36, 1,
5, 10, 25]. To enable such capabilities, earlier works have suggested employing a hierarchical goal
execution architecture [2, 4], where a planner generates action plans that would then be executed by
low-level goal-conditioned controllers. This architecture has been delivering promising progress in
∗

Corresponding Author.
We borrow the term “open world” from the game community. It highlights that the agent can navigate inside
a diverse environment and accomplish open-ended tasks freely.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

