Learn to Categorize or Categorize to Learn?
Self-Coding for Generalized Category Discovery

Sarah Rastegar, Hazel Doughty∗, Cees G. M. Snoek
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
In the quest for unveiling novel categories at test time, we confront the inherent
limitations of traditional supervised recognition models that are restricted by a predefined category set. While strides have been made in the realms of self-supervised
and open-world learning towards test-time category discovery, a crucial yet often
overlooked question persists: what exactly delineates a category? In this paper, we
conceptualize a category through the lens of optimization, viewing it as an optimal
solution to a well-defined problem. Harnessing this unique conceptualization,
we propose a novel, efficient and self-supervised method capable of discovering
previously unknown categories at test time. A salient feature of our approach is the
assignment of minimum length category codes to individual data instances, which
encapsulates the implicit category hierarchy prevalent in real-world datasets. This
mechanism affords us enhanced control over category granularity, thereby equipping our model to handle fine-grained categories adeptly. Experimental evaluations,
bolstered by state-of-the-art benchmark comparisons, testify to the efficacy of our
solution in managing unknown categories at test time. Furthermore, we fortify our
proposition with a theoretical foundation, providing proof of its optimality. Our
code is available at: https://github.com/SarahRastegar/InfoSieve.

1

Introduction

The human brain intuitively classifies objects into distinct categories, a process so intrinsic that its complexity is often overlooked. However, translating this seemingly innate understanding of categorization into the realm of machine learning opens
a veritable Pandora’s box of differing interpretations for what
constitutes a category? [1, 2]. Prior to training machine learning models for categorization tasks, it is indispensable to first Figure 1: What is the correct catdemystify this concept of a category.
egory? Photo of a flying fox fruit
In the realm of conventional supervised learning [3–7], each bat. This image can be categorized
category is represented by arbitrary codes, with the expectation as bat, bird, mammal, flying bat,
that machines produce corresponding codes upon encountering and other categories. How should
objects from the same category. Despite its widespread use, we define which answer is correct?
this approach harbors several pitfalls: it suffers from label This paper uses self-supervision to
inconsistency, overlooks category hierarchies, and, as the main learn an implicit category code tree
that reveals different levels of grantopic of this paper, struggles with open-world recognition.
ularity in the data.
Pitfall I: Label Inconsistency. Assessing a model’s performance becomes problematic when category assignments are subject to noise [8, 9] or exhibit arbitrary
variation across different datasets. For example, if a zoologist identifies the bird in Figure 1 as a
flying fox fruit bat, it is not due to a misunderstanding of what constitutes a bird or a dog. Rather, it
signifies a more nuanced understanding of these categories. However, conventional machine learning
∗

Currently at Leiden University

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

