Statistical and Computational Trade-off in
Multi-Agent Multi-Armed Bandits

Filippo Vannella
KTH and Ericsson Research
Stockholm, Sweden
vannella@kth.se

Alexandre Protiuere
KTH
Stockholm, Sweden
alepro@kth.se

Jaeseong Jeong
Ericsson Research
Stockholm, Sweden
jaeseong.jeong@ericsson.com

Abstract
We study the problem of regret minimization in Multi-Agent Multi-Armed Bandits
(MAMABs) where the rewards are defined through a factor graph. We derive an
instance-specific regret lower bound and characterize the minimal expected number
of times each global action should be explored. This bound and the corresponding
optimal exploration process are obtained by solving a combinatorial optimization
problem whose set of variables and constraints exponentially grow with the number
of agents, and cannot be exploited in the design of efficient algorithms. Inspired by
Mean Field approximation techniques used in graphical models, we provide simple
upper bounds of the regret lower bound. The corresponding optimization problems
have a reduced number of variables and constraints. By tuning the latter, we may
explore the trade-off between the achievable regret and the complexity of computing
the corresponding exploration process. We devise Efficient Sampling for MAMAB
(ESM), an algorithm whose regret asymptotically matches the approximated lower
bounds. The regret and computational complexity of ESM are assessed numerically,
using both synthetic and real-world experiments in radio communications networks.

1

Introduction

The stochastic Multi-Agent Multi-Armed Bandits (MAMABs) [35, 2, 3] is a combinatorial sequential
decision-making problem that generalizes the classical stochastic MAB problem by assuming that
(i) a global action is defined by actions individually selected by a set of agents, and (ii) the reward
function is defined through a factor graph, which defines inter-dependencies between agents. This
reward structure arises naturally in applications where agents interact in a graph with the need to
coordinate towards a common goal. MAMABs can model a wide range of real-world problems, from
wind farm control [2, 37] to radio communication networks parameters optimization (see Fig. 1).
Despite the wide spectrum of their potential applications, MAMABs are extremely hard to solve,
even when the reward function is known. The main challenge stems from the combinatorial structure
of the action set (there are K N possible global actions, where N is the number of agents and K is
the number of actions per agent). This issue is exacerbated in the learning setting where the reward
function has to be inferred. In this work, we study the regret minimization problem in MAMABs,
and more specifically, the trade-off between statistical efficiency (the learner aims at achieving low
regret), and computational efficiency (she will typically have to solve combinatorial optimization
problems over the set of possible global actions while learning).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

