Riemannian Laplace approximations for Bayesian
neural networks
Federico Bergamin, Pablo Moreno-Muñoz, Søren Hauberg, Georgios Arvanitidis
Section for Cognitive Systems, DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark
{fedbe, pabmo, sohau, gear}@dtu.dk

Abstract
Bayesian neural networks often approximate the weight-posterior with a Gaussian
distribution. However, practical posteriors are often, even locally, highly nonGaussian, and empirical performance deteriorates. We propose a simple parametric
approximate posterior that adapts to the shape of the true posterior through a
Riemannian metric that is determined by the log-posterior gradient. We develop
a Riemannian Laplace approximation where samples naturally fall into weightregions with low negative log-posterior. We show that these samples can be drawn
by solving a system of ordinary differential equations, which can be done efficiently
by leveraging the structure of the Riemannian metric and automatic differentiation.
Empirically, we demonstrate that our approach consistently improves over the
conventional Laplace approximation across tasks. We further show that, unlike
the conventional Laplace approximation, our method is not overly sensitive to the
choice of prior, which alleviates a practical pitfall of current approaches.

1

Introduction

Bayesian deep learning estimates the weight-posterior
Riem. LA (ours)
of a neural network given data, i.e. p(θ|D). Due to the
LA
generally high dimensions of the weight-space, the normalization of this posterior is intractable and approximate
inference becomes a necessity. The most common parametric choice approximates the posterior with a Gaussian
distribution, p(θ|D) ≈ q(θ|D) = N (θ|µ, Σ), which is estimated variationally [Blundell et al., 2015], using Laplace
approximations [MacKay, 1992] or with other techniques
[Maddox et al., 2019]. Empirical evidence, however, sug- Figure 1: Our Riemannian Laplace apgests that the log-posterior is not locally concave [Sagun proximation is a simple parametric diset al., 2016], indicating that the Gaussian approximation tribution, which is shaped according to
is overly crude. Indeed, this approximation is known the local loss landscape through a Rieto be brittle as the associated covariance is typically ill- mannian metric.
conditioned implying a suboptimal behavior [Daxberger et al., 2021a, Farquhar et al., 2020], and for
this reason, alternative approaches have been proposed to fix this issue [Mackay, 1992]. Nonetheless,
the Gaussian approximation is widely used due to the many benefits of parametric distributions, over
e.g. Monte Carlo sampling [Neal, 1995] or deep ensembles [Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017].
In this paper we argue that the underlying issue is not with the Gaussian approximation, but rather
with the weight-space over which the approximation is applied. We show that a Gaussian approximation can locally adapt to the loss by equipping the weight-space with a simple Riemannian metric and
performing the approximation tangentially to the associated manifold. Practically, this ensures that
samples from the Riemannian approximate posterior land in regions of weight-space yielding low
training loss, which significantly improves over the usual Gaussian approximation. We obtain our
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

