Gács-Körner Common Information Variational
Autoencoder
Michael Kleinman1 Alessandro Achille2,3∗ Stefano Soatto1 Jonathan C. Kao1
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 AWS AI Labs 3 Caltech
michael.kleinman@ucla.edu aachille@amazon.com
soatto@cs.ucla.edu kao@seas.ucla.edu

Abstract
We propose a notion of common information that allows one to quantify and
separate the information that is shared between two random variables from the
information that is unique to each. Our notion of common information is defined
by an optimization problem over a family of functions and recovers the GácsKörner common information as a special case. Importantly, our notion can be
approximated empirically using samples from the underlying data distribution. We
then provide a method to partition and quantify the common and unique information
using a simple modification of a traditional variational auto-encoder. Empirically,
we demonstrate that our formulation allows us to learn semantically meaningful
common and unique factors of variation even on high-dimensional data such as
images and videos. Moreover, on datasets where ground-truth latent factors are
known, we show that we can accurately quantify the common information between
the random variables.2

1

Introduction

Data coming from different sensors often capture information related to common latent factors.
For example, many animals have two eyes that capture different but highly-correlated views of the
same objects in the scene. Similarly, sensors of different modalities, such as eyes and ears, capture
correlated information about the underlying scene, as do videos and other time series, where the
sensors are separated in time rather than in modality. Learning how information of one sensor maps to
information of another provides a self-supervised signal to disentangle the variability that is intrinsic
in a sensor from the latent causes (e.g., objects) that are shared between multiple sensors. Indeed,
there is evidence that infants spend a long time during development purposefully experiencing objects
through different senses at the same time [1].
Motivated by this, we propose to learn meaningful representations of multi-view data by quantifying
and exploiting such structure in a self-supervised fashion by using an information theoretic notion of
common information as the guiding signal to disentangle common shared information present in high
dimensional sensory data (Fig. 1).
However, defining a notion of common information is itself not trivial. The most natural and typical
way to quantify the “common part” between random variables would be by quantifying their mutual
information. But mutual information has no clear interpretation in terms of a decomposition of
random variables in unique and common components. In particular, [2] note that there is generally
no way to write two variables X and Y using a three part code (A, B, C) such that X = f (A, C),
Y = g(B, C) and where C encodes all and only the mutual information I(X; Y ). Discovering the
∗
2

Work performed as external collaboration not related to Amazon
Code available at: https://github.com/mjkleinman/common-vae

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

