CamoPatch: An Evolutionary Strategy for Generating
Camouflaged Adversarial Patches

Phoenix Neale Williams
Department of Computer Science
University of Exeter
Exeter, EX4 4RN
pw384@exeter.ac.uk

Ke Li
Department of Computer Science
University of Exeter
Exeter, EX4 4RN
k.li@exeter.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated vulnerabilities to adversarial
examples, which raises concerns about their reliability in safety-critical applications.
While the majority of existing methods generate adversarial examples by making
small modifications to the entire image, recent research has proposed a practical
alternative known as adversarial patches. Adversarial patches have shown to be
highly effective in causing DNNs to misclassify by distorting a localized area
(patch) of the image. However, existing methods often produce clearly visible
distortions since they do not consider the visibility of the patch. To address this, we
propose a novel method for constructing adversarial patches that approximates the
appearance of the area it covers. We achieve this by using a set of semi-transparent,
RGB-valued circles, drawing inspiration from the computational art community.
We utilize an evolutionary strategy to optimize the properties of each shape, and
employ a simulated annealing approach to optimize the patch’s location. Our
approach achieves better or comparable performance to state-of-the-art methods on
ImageNet DNN classifiers while achieving a lower l2 distance from the original
image. By minimizing the visibility of the patch, this work further highlights the
vulnerabilities of DNNs to adversarial patches.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have revolutionized the field of computer vision, demonstrating
significant progress in several tasks [38, 51, 53]. Nevertheless, they are not without vulnerabilities.
Recent studies highlight a critical weakness: susceptibility to adversarial examples, where subtle,
intentionally designed perturbations to input images result in the DNNs misclassification [22, 54, 43].
The existence of these adversarial examples in the physical world poses a significant threat to
security-critical applications such as autonomous vehicles and medical imaging [31, 56, 33, 5]. As a
result, developing methods to generate adversarial images has emerged as a critical research area for
assessing the robustness of DNNs [3].
While initial studies emphasized the creation of adversarial examples with lp -norm (p can be 1, 2, or
∞) constrained perturbations, current research has shifted towards generating sparse perturbations,
which alter only a small portion of the original image [12, 19, 15, 61]. These sparse perturbations
have proven to be as effective as traditional l2 or l∞ -constrained perturbations. Adversarial patches,
localized perturbations affecting a small portion of the image, have garnered significant interest as a
type of sparse perturbation [47, 66, 33]. Various methods for generating adversarial patches have
been proposed for both white-box (where complete information about the model is known) and blackbox (where only the input-output pairs are accessible) scenarios [29, 7, 47, 15, 66, 20, 28, 11, 27].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

