Strong and Precise Modulation of Human Percepts
via Robustified ANNs
Guy Gaziv∗
Michael J. Lee∗
James J. DiCarlo
McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Dept. of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
The visual object category reports of artificial neural networks (ANNs) are notoriously sensitive to tiny, adversarial image perturbations. Because human category
reports (aka human percepts) are thought to be insensitive to those same small-norm
perturbations – and locally stable in general – this argues that ANNs are incomplete
scientific models of human visual perception. Consistent with this, we show that
when small-norm image perturbations are generated by standard ANN models,
human object category percepts are indeed highly stable. However, in this very
same “human-presumed-stable” regime, we find that robustified ANNs reliably discover low-norm image perturbations that strongly disrupt human percepts. These
previously undetectable human perceptual disruptions are massive in amplitude,
approaching the same level of sensitivity seen in robustified ANNs. Further, we
show that robustified ANNs support precise perceptual state interventions: they
guide the construction of low-norm image perturbations that strongly alter human
category percepts toward specific prescribed percepts. In sum, these contemporary
models of biological visual processing are now accurate enough to guide strong
and precise interventions on human perception.
Code

1

Webpage

Introduction

Based on empirical alignment, some fully-trained artificial neural networks (ANNs) are the current
leading scientific models of the integrated mechanisms of the adult primate visual ventral stream
– in particular, its multi-level neural computations and some of the visually-guided behaviors it
supports [1–10]. However, individual ANNs are also notoriously susceptible to adversarial attack:
Adding of a tiny (e.g., ultra-low norm ℓ2 -norm) pixel perturbation to the model’s input, which is
optimized to disrupt the model’s categorization of the original image [11–13]. Because human object
category perception has been shown to be only weakly sensitive to those same small-norm pixel
perturbations [14–16], if at all, this argues against those ANNs as scientific models of human visual
perception [17, 18].
Moreover, human object category perception is empirically robust to random image perturbations of
sufficiently low-norm, here estimated to be ||δ||2 ≤ 30 (see Methods). The corresponding assumption
is that humans are robust to any perturbation with low norm (Fig 1a, but see [19, 20] for special
cases). Our primary goal here was to re-examine this prevailing assumption, and to systematically
compare human and ANN model categorization behavior in this low-norm pixel perturbation regime.
We were motivated by three recent observations: First, much recent work has been aimed at addressing
the adversarial sensitivity of ANNs [21], including adversarial training [22] – a training scheme in
which insensitivity to low-norm pixel perturbations is explicitly imposed by generating adversarial
examples during model optimization (a procedure we refer to here as “robustification”). Intriguingly,
the resultant robustified ANNs are not only less susceptible to adversarial attacks on new clean
*Equal contribution
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

