Federated Multi-Objective Learning

Haibo Yang
Dept. of Comput. & Info. Sci.
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY 14623
hbycis@rit.edu

Zhuqing Liu
Dept. of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus,OH 43210
liu.9384@osu.edu

Chaosheng Dong
Amazon.com Inc.
Seattle, WA 98109
chaosd@amazon.com

Jia Liu
Dept. of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus,OH 43210
liu@ece.osu.edu

Michinari Momma
Amazon.com Inc.
Seattle, WA 98109
michi@amazon.com

Abstract
In recent years, multi-objective optimization (MOO) emerges as a foundational
problem underpinning many multi-agent multi-task learning applications. However, existing algorithms in MOO literature remain limited to centralized learning
settings, which do not satisfy the distributed nature and data privacy needs of
such multi-agent multi-task learning applications. This motivates us to propose a
new federated multi-objective learning (FMOL) framework with multiple clients
distributively and collaboratively solving an MOO problem while keeping their
training data private. Notably, our FMOL framework allows a different set of objective functions across different clients to support a wide range of applications, which
advances and generalizes the MOO formulation to the federated learning paradigm
for the first time. For this FMOL framework, we propose two new federated
multi-objective optimization (FMOO) algorithms called federated multi-gradient
descent averaging (FMGDA) and federated stochastic multi-gradient descent averaging (FSMGDA). Both algorithms allow local updates to significantly reduce
communication costs, while achieving the same convergence rates as those of their
algorithmic counterparts in the single-objective federated learning. Our extensive
experiments also corroborate the efficacy of our proposed FMOO algorithms.

1

Introduction

In recent years, multi-objective optimization (MOO) has emerged as a foundational problem underpinning many multi-agent multi-task learning applications, such as training neural networks for multiple
tasks [1], hydrocarbon production optimization [2], recommendation system [3], tissue engineering
[4], and learning-to-rank [5, 6, 7]. MOO aims at optimizing multiple objectives simultaneously,
which can be mathematically cast as:
min F(x) := [f1 (x), · · · , fS (x)],
x∈D

(1)

where x ∈ D ⊆ Rd is the model parameter, and fs : Rd → R, s ∈ [S] is one of the objective
functions. Compared to conventional single-objective optimization, one key difference in MOO is the
coupling and potential conflicts between different objective functions. As a result, there may not exist
a common x-solution that minimizes all objective functions. Rather, the goal in MOO is to find a
Pareto stationary solution that is not improvable for all objectives without sacrificing some objectives.
For example, in recommender system designs for e-commerce, the platform needs to consider different
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

