Federated Compositional Deep AUC Maximization

Xinwen Zhang ∗
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA, USA
ellenz@temple.edu

Yihan Zhang ∗
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA, USA
yihan.zhang0002@temple.edu

Richard Souvenir
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA, USA
souvenir@temple.edu

Tianbao Yang
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
ianbao-yang@tamu.edu

Hongchang Gao
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA, USA
hongchang.gao@temple.edu

Abstract
Federated learning has attracted increasing attention due to the promise of balancing privacy and large-scale learning; numerous approaches have been proposed.
However, most existing approaches focus on problems with balanced data, and
prediction performance is far from satisfactory for many real-world applications
where the number of samples in different classes is highly imbalanced. To address
this challenging problem, we developed a novel federated learning method for
imbalanced data by directly optimizing the area under curve (AUC) score. In
particular, we formulate the AUC maximization problem as a federated compositional minimax optimization problem, develop a local stochastic compositional
gradient descent ascent with momentum algorithm, and provide bounds on the
computational and communication complexities of our algorithm. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work to achieve such favorable theoretical results.
Finally, extensive experimental results confirm the efficacy of our method.

1

Introduction

Federated learning [19, 34] is a paradigm for training a machine learning model across multiple
devices without sharing the raw data from each device. Practically, models are trained on each device,
and, periodically, model parameters are exchanged between these devices. By not sharing the data
itself, federated learning allows private information in the raw data to be preserved to some extent.
This property has allowed federated learning to be proposed for numerous real-world computer vision
and machine learning tasks.
Currently, one main drawback of existing federated learning methodologies is the assumption of
balanced data, where the number of samples across classes is essentially the same. Most real-world
data is imbalanced, even highly imbalanced. For example, in the healthcare domain, it is common
to encounter problems where the amount of data from one class (e.g., patients with a rare disease)
is significantly lower than the other class(es), leading to a distribution that is highly imbalanced.
Traditional federated learning methods do not handle such imbalanced data scenarios very well.
Specifically, training the classifier typically requires minimizing a classification-error induced loss
function (e.g., cross-entropy). As a result, the resulting classifier may excel at classifying the majority,
while failing to classify the minority.
To handle imbalanced data classification, the most common approach is to train the classifier by
optimizing metrics designed for imbalanced data distributions. For instance, under the single-machine
∗

Equal contributions

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

