Model-Based Control with Sparse Neural Dynamics

Ziang Liu1,2 Genggeng Zhou2∗ Jeff He2∗ Tobia Marcucci3
Li Fei-Fei2 Jiajun Wu2 Yunzhu Li2,4
1
Cornell University 2 Stanford University
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
4
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
ziangliu@cs.cornell.edu
{g9zhou,jeff2024}@stanford.edu
tobiam@mit.edu
{feifeili,jiajunwu}@cs.stanford.edu
yunzhuli@illinois.edu

Abstract
Learning predictive models from observations using deep neural networks (DNNs) is a promising new approach to many real-world planning and
control problems. However, common DNNs are too unstructured for effective
planning, and current control methods typically rely on extensive sampling or
local gradient descent. In this paper, we propose a new framework for integrated
model learning and predictive control that is amenable to efficient optimization algorithms. Specifically, we start with a ReLU neural model of the system dynamics and, with minimal losses in prediction accuracy, we gradually sparsify it by
removing redundant neurons. This discrete sparsification process is approximated
as a continuous problem, enabling an end-to-end optimization of both the model
architecture and the weight parameters. The sparsified model is subsequently
used by a mixed-integer predictive controller, which represents the neuron activations as binary variables and employs efficient branch-and-bound algorithms.
Our framework is applicable to a wide variety of DNNs, from simple multilayer
perceptrons to complex graph neural dynamics. It can efficiently handle tasks
involving complicated contact dynamics, such as object pushing, compositional
object sorting, and manipulation of deformable objects. Numerical and hardware
experiments show that, despite the aggressive sparsification, our framework can
deliver better closed-loop performance than existing state-of-the-art methods. †

1

Introduction

Our mental model of the physical environment enables us to easily carry out a broad spectrum of
complex control tasks, many of which lie far beyond the capabilities of present-day robots [32].
It is, therefore, desirable to build predictive models of the environment from observations and develop optimization algorithms to help the robots understand the impact of their actions and make
effective plans to achieve a given goal. Physics-based models [26, 73] have excellent generalization
ability but typically require full-state information of the environment, which is hard and sometimes
impossible to obtain in complicated robotic (manipulation) tasks. Learning-based dynamics modeling circumvents the problem by learning a predictive model directly from raw sensory observations, and recent successes are rooted in the use of deep neural networks (DNNs) as the functional
class [14, 21, 56, 47]. Despite their improved prediction accuracy, DNNs are highly nonlinear,
∗
†

denotes equal contribution
Please see our website at robopil.github.io/Sparse-Dynamics/ for additional visualizations.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

