G LIME: General, Stable and Local LIME Explanation

Zeren Tan
Tsinghua University
thutzr1019@gmail.com

Yang Tian
Tsinghua University
tyanyang04@gmail.com

Jian Li
Tsinghua University
lapordge@gmail.com

Abstract
As black-box machine learning models grow in complexity and find applications
in high-stakes scenarios, it is imperative to provide explanations for their predictions. Although Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME) [22] is
a widely adpoted method for understanding model behaviors, it is unstable with
respect to random seeds [35, 24, 3] and exhibits low local fidelity (i.e., how well
the explanation approximates the model’s local behaviors) [21, 16]. Our study
shows that this instability problem stems from small sample weights, leading to the
dominance of regularization and slow convergence. Additionally, LIME’s sampling
neighborhood is non-local and biased towards the reference, resulting in poor local
fidelity and sensitivity to reference choice. To tackle these challenges, we introduce
G LIME, an enhanced framework extending LIME and unifying several prior methods. Within the G LIME framework, we derive an equivalent formulation of LIME
that achieves significantly faster convergence and improved stability. By employing
a local and unbiased sampling distribution, G LIME generates explanations with
higher local fidelity compared to LIME. G LIME explanations are independent of
reference choice. Moreover, G LIME offers users the flexibility to choose a sampling
distribution based on their specific scenarios.

1

Introduction

Why a patient is predicted to have a brain tumor [10]? Why a credit application is rejected [11]? Why
a picture is identified as an electric guitar [22]? As black-box machine learning models continue to
evolve in complexity and are employed in critical applications, it is imperative to provide explanations
for their predictions, making interpretability a central concern [1]. In response to this imperative,
various explanation methods have been proposed [39, 26, 4, 19, 22, 28, 30], aiming to provide insights
into the internal mechanisms of deep learning models.
Among the various explanation methods, Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME)
[22] has attracted significant attention, particularly in image classification tasks. LIME explains
predictions by assigning each region within an image a weight indicating the influence of this region
to the output. This methodology entails segmenting the image into super-pixels, as illustrated in the
lower-left portion of Figure 1a, introducing perturbations, and subsequently approximating the local
model prediction using a linear model. The approximation is achieved by solving a weighted Ridge
regression problem, which estimates the impact (i.e., weight) of each super-pixel on the classifier’s
output.
Nevertheless, LIME has encountered significant instability due to its random sampling procedure
[35, 24, 3]. In LIME, a set of samples perturbing the original image is taken. As illustrated in
Figure 1a, LIME explanations generated with two different random seeds display notable disparities,
despite using a large sample size (16384). The Jaccard index, measuring similarity between two
explanations on a scale from 0 to 1 (with higher values indicating better similarity), is below 0.4.
While many prior studies aim to enhance LIME’s stability, some sacrifice computational time for
stability [24, 40], and others may entail the risk of overfitting [35]. The evident drawback of unstable
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

