HyenaDNA: Long-Range Genomic Sequence
Modeling at Single Nucleotide Resolution
Eric Nguyen∗,1 , Michael Poli∗,1 , Marjan Faizi2,∗ ,
Armin W. Thomas1 , Callum Birch Sykes3 , Michael Wornow1 , Aman Patel1 ,
Clayton Rabideau3 , Stefano Massaroli4 , Yoshua Bengio4 , Stefano Ermon1 ,
Stephen A. Baccus1,† , Christopher Ré1,†

Abstract
Genomic (DNA) sequences encode an enormous amount of information for gene
regulation, protein synthesis, and numerous other cellular properties. Similar to
natural language models, researchers have proposed foundation models in genomics to learn generalizable features from unlabeled genome data that can then
be fine-tuned for downstream tasks such as identifying regulatory elements. Due
to the quadratic scaling of attention, previous Transformer-based genomic models
have used 512 to 4k tokens as context (<0.001% of the human genome), significantly limiting the modeling of long-range interactions in DNA. In addition, these
methods rely on tokenizers or fixed k-mers to aggregate meaningful DNA units,
losing single nucleotide resolution (i.e. DNA "characters") where subtle genetic
variations can completely alter protein function via single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Recently, Hyena, a large language model based on implicit convolutions was shown to match attention in quality while allowing longer context
lengths and lower time complexity. Leveraging Hyena’s new long-range capabilities, we present HyenaDNA, a genomic foundation model pretrained on the
human reference genome with context lengths of up to 1 million tokens at the
single nucleotide-level – an up to 500x increase over previous dense attentionbased models. HyenaDNA scales sub-quadratically in sequence length (training
up to 160x faster than Transformer), uses single nucleotide tokens, and has full
global context at each layer. We explore what longer context enables - including
the first use of in-context learning in genomics for simple adaptation to novel tasks
without updating pretrained model weights. On a long-range species classification
task, HyenaDNA is able to effectively solve the challenge by increasing the context length to 1M without downsampling. On fine-tuned benchmarks from the
Nucleotide Transformer, HyenaDNA reaches state-of-the-art (SotA) on 12 of 18
datasets using a model with orders of magnitude less parameters and pretraining
data.2 On the GenomicBenchmarks, HyenaDNA surpasses SotA on 7 of 8 datasets
on average by +10 accuracy points, and by as much as +20 accuracy points on enhancer identification. Code available at https://github.com/HazyResearch/hyenadna.

∗
Equal contribution. † Equal senior authorship. 1 Stanford University. 2 Harvard University. 3 SynTensor.
Mila and Université de Montréal.
2
On benchmarks from Nucleotide Transformer, HyenaDNA uses a model with 1500x fewer parameters
(2.5B vs 1.6M) and 3200x less pretraining data (3202 vs 1 human reference genome).
4

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

