HA-ViD: A Human Assembly Video Dataset for
Comprehensive Assembly Knowledge Understanding

Hao Zheng∗
hzhe951@aucklanduni.ac.nz

Regina Lee∗
klee702@aucklanduni.ac.nz

Yuqian Lu†
yuqian.lu@auckland.ac.nz
Department of Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering
The University of Auckland

Abstract
Understanding comprehensive assembly knowledge from videos is critical for
futuristic ultra-intelligent industry. To enable technological breakthrough, we
present HA-ViD – an assembly video dataset that features representative industrial assembly scenarios, natural procedural knowledge acquisition process, and
consistent human-robot shared annotations. Specifically, HA-ViD captures diverse collaboration patterns of real-world assembly, natural human behaviors and
learning progression during assembly, and granulate action annotations to subject, action verb, manipulated object, target object, and tool. We provide 3222
multi-view and multi-modality videos, 1.5M frames, 96K temporal labels and
2M spatial labels. We benchmark four foundational video understanding tasks:
action recognition, action segmentation, object detection and multi-object tracking.
Importantly, we analyze their performance and the further reasoning steps for
comprehending knowledge in assembly progress, process efficiency, task collaboration, skill parameters and human intention. Details of HA-ViD is available at:
https://iai-hrc.github.io/ha-vid.

1

Introduction

Assembly knowledge understanding from videos is crucial for futuristic ultra-intelligent industrial
applications, such as robot skill learning [1], human-robot collaborative assembly [2] and quality
assurance [3]. To enable assembly video understanding, a video dataset is required. Such a video
dataset should (1) represent real-world assembly scenarios, (2) capture the comprehensive assembly
knowledge, (3) follow a consistent annotation protocol that aligns both human and robot assembly
comprehension. However, existing datasets fall short in meeting all these requirements.
First, the assembled products in existing datasets are either highly application-specific [4–9] or lack
representative assembly parts and tools [5–7, 9]. Second, many datasets did not design assembly
tasks to foster the emergence of natural behaviors (e.g., varying efficiency, alternative routes, pauses
and errors) during procedural knowledge acquisition. Third, thorough understanding of nuanced
assembly knowledge is challenging with existing datasets as they often do not to annotate subjects,
objects, tools and their interactions in a systematic approach.
Therefore, we introduce HA-ViD: a human assembly video dataset recording people assembling the
Generic Assembly Box (GAB, see Figure 1). We benchmark on four foundational video understanding
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

