Learning World Models with Identifiable Factorization
Yu-Ren Liu∗,1,4 , Biwei Huang ∗,2 , Zhengmao Zhu1,4 , Honglong Tian1 ,
Mingming Gong5,4 , Yang Yu†,1,6,7 , Kun Zhang†,3,4
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
University of California San Diego, USA
3
Carnegie Mellon University, USA
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
5
University of Melbourne, Australia
6
Polixir.ai, China
7
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{liuyr,zhuzm, tianhl, yuy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn bih007@ucsd.edu
mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract
Extracting a stable and compact representation of the environment is crucial for
efficient reinforcement learning in high-dimensional, noisy, and non-stationary
environments. Different categories of information coexist in such environments –
how to effectively extract and disentangle the information remains a challenging
problem. In this paper, we propose IFactor, a general framework to model four
distinct categories of latent state variables that capture various aspects of information within the RL system, based on their interactions with actions and rewards.
Our analysis establishes block-wise identifiability of these latent variables, which
not only provides a stable and compact representation but also discloses that all
reward-relevant factors are significant for policy learning. We further present a
practical approach to learning the world model with identifiable blocks, ensuring
the removal of redundancies but retaining minimal and sufficient information for
policy optimization. Experiments in synthetic worlds demonstrate that our method
accurately identifies the ground-truth latent variables, substantiating our theoretical
findings. Moreover, experiments in variants of the DeepMind Control Suite and
RoboDesk showcase the superior performance of our approach over baselines.

1

Introduction

Humans excel at extracting various categories of information from complex environments [1, 2]. By
effectively distinguishing between task-relevant information and noise, humans can learn efficiently
and avoid distractions. Similarly, in the context of reinforcement learning, it’s crucial for an agent to
precisely extract information from high-dimensional, noisy, and non-stationary environments.
World models [3, 4] tackle this challenge by learning compact representations from images and
modeling dynamics using low-dimensional features. Recent research has demonstrated that learning
policies through latent imagination in world models significantly enhances sample efficiency [5, 6,
7, 8]. However, these approaches often treat all information as an undifferentiated whole, leaving
policies susceptible to irrelevant distractions [9] and lacking transparency in decision-making [10].
This paper investigates the extraction and disentanglement of diverse information types within an
environment. To address this, we tackle two fundamental questions: 1) How can we establish a
∗

: Equal contribution. †: Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

