Multi-Agent First Order Constrained Optimization in
Policy Space

Youpeng Zhao1 , Yaodong Yang2 † , Zhenbo Lu3 † , Wengang Zhou1,3 , Houqiang Li1,3
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Institute for AI, Peking University
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
zyp123@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn
luzhenbo@iai.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In the realm of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), achieving high performance is crucial for a successful multi-agent system. Meanwhile, the ability to
avoid unsafe actions is becoming an urgent and imperative problem to solve for
real-life applications. Whereas, it is still challenging to develop a safety-aware
method for multi-agent systems in MARL. In this work, we introduce a novel
approach called Multi-Agent First Order Constrained Optimization in Policy Space
(MAFOCOPS), which effectively addresses the dual objectives of attaining satisfactory performance and enforcing safety constraints. Using data generated from
the current policy, MAFOCOPS first finds the optimal update policy by solving
a constrained optimization problem in the nonparameterized policy space. Then,
the update policy is projected back into the parametric policy space to achieve
a feasible policy. Notably, our method is first-order in nature, ensuring the ease
of implementation, and exhibits an approximate upper bound on the worst-case
constraint violation. Empirical results show that our approach achieves remarkable
performance while satisfying safe constraints on several safe MARL benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent systems play a significant role in various domains, where a group of agents
coordinate with each other to accomplish tasks and collaboratively optimize cumulative rewards for
the team[1, 2]. Such a setting is frequently employed in many real-life scenarios such as robotics
[3], autonomous vehicles [4], traffic light control [5] and the smart grid [6].Thanks to the recent
remarkable advance of reinforcement learning techniques in various complex tasks [7–9], multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) has attracted substantial attention and quite a few algorithms have
been proposed, including value-based methods [10–14] and policy gradient methods [15–18]. Despite
the notable achievement in academia, most MARL algorithms prioritize policy optimization solely
for reward maximization, while disregarding potential negative or harmful consequences resulting
from the agents’ behaviors. Consequently, these methods can not be directly deployed in practice. In
reality, many applications often require the agents to refrain from taking certain actions or visiting
particular states [19, 20]. For instance, an unmanned car must adhere to traffic regulations by not
crossing a red light, even while pursuing its destination, in order to prioritize safety.
To address the above issues, researchers have been devoted to developing algorithms that learn policies
which adhere to safety constraints and great progress has been made in single-agent RL setting[20–
23]. However, it is still a daunting challenge to develop safe policies for multi-agent systems.
Because of the existence of multiple agents, the environment may suffer from non-stationarity due to
simultaneously learning agents, posing a non-negligible challenge to the training process. Moreover,
ensuring safety in MARL is highly intricate. To provide a better depiction of the inherent challenges,
†

Corresponding authors: Yaodong Yang and Zhenbo Lu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

