Physics-Driven ML-Based Modelling for Correcting
Inverse Estimation
Ruiyuan Kang ∗
Bayanat AI
Abu Dhabi, UAE
ruiyuan.kang@bayanat.ai

Tingting Mu
University of Manchester
Manchester, M13 9PL, United Kingdom
tingting.mu@manchester.ac.uk

Panos Liatsis
Khalifa Univeristy
Abu Dhabi, UAE
panos.liatsis@ku.ac.ae

Dimitrios C. Kyritsis
Khalifa Univeristy
Abu Dhabi, UAE
dimitrios.kyritsis@ku.ac.ae

Abstract
When deploying machine learning estimators in science and engineering (SAE)
domains, it is critical to avoid failed estimations that can have disastrous consequences, e.g., in aero engine design. This work focuses on detecting and correcting
failed state estimations before adopting them in SAE inverse problems, by utilizing
simulations and performance metrics guided by physical laws. We suggest to flag
a machine learning estimation when its physical model error exceeds a feasible
threshold, and propose a novel approach, GEESE, to correct it through optimization,
aiming at delivering both low error and high efficiency. The key designs of GEESE
include (1) a hybrid surrogate error model to provide fast error estimations to
reduce simulation cost and to enable gradient based backpropagation of error feedback, and (2) two generative models to approximate the probability distributions
of the candidate states for simulating the exploitation and exploration behaviours.
All three models are constructed as neural networks. GEESE is tested on three
real-world SAE inverse problems and compared to a number of state-of-the-art
optimization/search approaches. Results show that it fails the least number of times
in terms of finding a feasible state correction, and requires physical evaluations
less frequently in general.

1

Introduction

Many estimation problems in science and engineering (SAE) are fundamentally inverse problem,
where the goal is to estimate the state x ∈ X of a system from its observation y ∈ Y. Examples
include estimating the temperature state from the observed spectrum in combustion diagnostics
[1], and discovering design parameters (state) of aero engine according to a group of performance
parameters (observation) [2]. Traditional physics-driven inverse solvers are supported by rigorous
physical laws, which vary depending on the application, e.g., the two-colour method for spectrum
estimation [3], and cycle analysis for aero engine design [4]. Recent advances take advantage of
machine learning (ML) techniques, constructing mapping functions F to directly estimate the state
from the observation, i.e., x̂ = F (y) [5, 6, 7]. Such ML solutions are more straightforward to
develop, moreover, efficient and easy to use. However, ML-based state estimates can sometimes be
erroneous, while SAE applications have very low error tolerance. One can imagine the disastrous
∗

The work is done during Ruiyuan’s PhD and Postdoc at Khalifa Univeristy

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

