FlatMatch: Bridging Labeled Data and Unlabeled Data
with Cross-Sharpness for Semi-Supervised Learning

Zhuo Huang1 , Li Shen2 , Jun Yu3 , Bo Han4 , Tongliang Liu1,∗
3

1
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney; 2 JD Explore Academy;
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China;
4
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University

zhua0420@uni.sydney.edu.au, mathshenli@gmail.com, harryjun@ustc.edu.cn,
bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) has been an effective way to leverage abundant
unlabeled data with extremely scarce labeled data. However, most SSL methods
are commonly based on instance-wise consistency between different data transformations. Therefore, the label guidance on labeled data is hard to be propagated to
unlabeled data. Consequently, the learning process on labeled data is much faster
than on unlabeled data which is likely to fall into a local minima that does not
favor unlabeled data, leading to sub-optimal generalization performance. In this
paper, we propose FlatMatch which minimizes a cross-sharpness measure to ensure
consistent learning performance between the two datasets. Specifically, we increase
the empirical risk on labeled data to obtain a worst-case model which is a failure
case that needs to be enhanced. Then, by leveraging the richness of unlabeled data,
we penalize the prediction difference (i.e., cross-sharpness) between the worst-case
model and the original model so that the learning direction is beneficial to generalization on unlabeled data. Therefore, we can calibrate the learning process
without being limited to insufficient label information. As a result, the mismatched
learning performance can be mitigated, further enabling the effective exploitation
of unlabeled data and improving SSL performance. Through comprehensive validation, we show FlatMatch achieves state-of-the-art results in many SSL settings.
Our code is available at https://github.com/tmllab/2023_NeurIPS_FlatMatch.

1

Introduction

Training deep models [31, 45] not only requires countless data but also hungers for label supervision
which commonly consumes huge human laboring and unaffordable monetary costs. To ease the
dependency on labeled data, semi-supervised learning (SSL) [6, 12, 27] has been one of the most
effective strategies to exploit abundant unlabeled data by leveraging scarce labeled data. Traditional
SSL commonly leverages unlabeled data by analyzing their manifold information. For example,
semi-supervised support vector machine [6, 13] finds a classifier that crosses the low-density region
based on large-margin theorem and label-propagation [60, 84] computes an affinity matrix in the
input space to propagate the labels to their neighbor unlabeled data. Due to the computational
burden of exploring manifold knowledge, recent advances in SSL benefit from sophisticated data
augmentation techniques [4, 19, 20, 74, 80], they usually enforce predictive consistency between the
original inputs and their augmented variants [75, 8, 7, 57, 66, 71, 76, 79], meanwhile using pseudo
labels [46, 52, 53, 2] to guide the learning on unlabeled data.
∗

Corresponding to Tongliang Liu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

