Exploring Geometry of Blind Spots in Vision Models

Sriram Balasubramanian∗
sriramb@cs.umd.edu

Gaurang Sriramanan∗
gaurangs@cs.umd.edu

Vinu Sankar Sadasivan
vinu@cs.umd.edu

Soheil Feizi
sfeizi@cs.umd.edu
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
Despite the remarkable success of deep neural networks in a myriad of settings, several works have demonstrated their overwhelming sensitivity to near-imperceptible
perturbations, known as adversarial attacks. On the other hand, prior works have
also observed that deep networks can be under-sensitive, wherein large-magnitude
perturbations in input space do not induce appreciable changes to network
activations. In this work, we study in detail the phenomenon of under-sensitivity
in vision models such as CNNs and Transformers, and present techniques to study
the geometry and extent of “equi-confidence” level sets of such networks. We
propose a Level Set Traversal algorithm that iteratively explores regions of high
confidence with respect to the input space using orthogonal components of the
local gradients. Given a source image, we use this algorithm to identify inputs
that lie in the same equi-confidence level set as the source image despite being
perceptually similar to arbitrary images from other classes. We further observe that
the source image is linearly connected by a high-confidence path to these inputs,
uncovering a star-like structure for level sets of deep networks. Furthermore, we
attempt to identify and estimate the extent of these connected higher-dimensional
regions over which the model maintains a high degree of confidence. The code
for this project is publicly available at this URL.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have demonstrated remarkable success in various diverse domains including
computer vision and natural language processing, surpassing the performance of classical algorithms
by a significant margin. However, though they achieve state of the art results on many computer
vision tasks like image classification, sometimes even exceeding human-level performance [He et al.,
2015, 2016], the overall visual processing conducted by such models can deviate significantly from
that effectively observed in the human visual system. Perhaps most iconic and representative of these
differences lies in the overwhelming susceptibility of neural networks to near-imperceptible changes
to their inputs — commonly called adversarial attacks [Szegedy et al., 2014] — an extraordinary
failure mode that highlights the over-sensitivity of such models. Indeed, an active area of research
over the past few years has been focused towards analyzing adversarial perturbations under different
threat models [Goodfellow et al., 2015, Tramèr et al., 2018, Wong et al., 2019, Laidlaw et al.,
2021, Croce and Hein, 2022] and in addressing adversarial vulnerabilities using robust training
methodologies [Madry et al., 2018, Zhang et al., 2019b, Singla and Feizi, 2020, Wu et al., 2020,
Laidlaw et al., 2021, Levine and Feizi, 2021].
∗

Equal Contribution, author names ordered alphabetically

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

