The Waymo Open Sim Agents Challenge

Nico Montali

John Lambert

Paul Mougin

Alex Kuefler

Nicholas Rhinehart

Michelle Li

Cole Gulino

Tristan Emrich

Zoey Yang

Shimon Whiteson

Brandyn White

Dragomir Anguelov
Waymo LLC

Abstract
Simulation with realistic, interactive agents represents a key task for autonomous
vehicle software development. In this work, we introduce the Waymo Open Sim
Agents Challenge (WOSAC). WOSAC is the first public challenge to tackle this
task and propose corresponding metrics. The goal of the challenge is to stimulate
the design of realistic simulators that can be used to evaluate and train a behavior
model for autonomous driving. We outline our evaluation methodology, present
results for a number of different baseline simulation agent methods, and analyze
several submissions to the 2023 competition which ran from March 16, 2023 to
May 23, 2023. The WOSAC evaluation server remains open for submissions and
we discuss open problems for the task.

1

Introduction

Simulation environments allow cheap and fast evaluation of autonomous driving behavior systems,
while also reducing the need to deploy potentially risky software releases to physical systems. While
generation of synthetic sensor data was an early goal [19, 43] of simulation, use cases have evolved
as perception systems have matured. Today, one of the most promising use cases for simulation
is system safety validation via statistical model checking [1, 16] with Monte Carlo trials involving
realistically modeled traffic participants, i.e., simulation agents.
Simulation agents are controlled objects that perform realistic behaviors in a virtual world. In this challenge, in order
to reduce the computational burden and complexity of simulation, we focus on simulating agent behavior as captured
by the outputs of a perception system, e.g., mid-level object
representations [2, 79] such as object trajectories, rather than
simulating the underlying sensor data [13, 37, 62, 76] (see
Figure 1).
A requirement for modeling realistic behavior in simulation
is the ability for sim agents to respond to arbitrary behavior of the autonomous vehicle (AV). “Pose divergence” or
“simulation drift” [3] is defined as the deviation between the
AV’s behavior in driving logs and its behavior during simulation, which may be represented through differing position,
heading, speed, acceleration, and more. Directly replaying
logged behavior of all other objects in the scene [32, 34, 35]

Figure 1: WOSAC models the simulation problem as simulation of midlevel object representations, rather
than as sensor simulation.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

