MoCa: Measuring Human-Language Model
Alignment on Causal and Moral Judgment Tasks

Allen Nie1∗ Yuhui Zhang1 Atharva Amdekar2
Chris Piech1 Tatsunori Hashimoto1 Tobias Gerstenberg3∗
1
Computer Science 2 ICME 3 Psychology
Stanford University
*{anie, gerstenberg}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Human commonsense understanding of the physical and social world is organized
around intuitive theories. These theories support making causal and moral judgments. When something bad happens, we naturally ask: who did what, and why? A
rich literature in cognitive science has studied people’s causal and moral intuitions.
This work has revealed a number of factors that systematically influence people’s
judgments, such as the violation of norms and whether the harm is avoidable or
inevitable. We collected a dataset of stories from 24 cognitive science papers and
developed a system to annotate each story with the factors they investigated. Using
this dataset, we test whether large language models (LLMs) make causal and moral
judgments about text-based scenarios that align with those of human participants.
On the aggregate level, alignment has improved with more recent LLMs. However,
using statistical analyses, we find that LLMs weigh the different factors quite differently from human participants. These results show how curated, challenge datasets
combined with insights from cognitive science can help us go beyond comparisons
based merely on aggregate metrics: we uncover LLMs implicit tendencies and
show to what extent these align with human intuitions.

1

Introduction

Humans rely on their intuition to understand the world. This intuition helps us to understand not only
physical events (e.g., one ball caused the other to move) but also complex social situations (e.g., the
collapse of Sam Bankman-Fried’s FTX caused unprecedented turmoil in the cryptocurrency market).
Given a complex set of events, even with a great amount of ambiguity, we can answer questions
such as “What or who caused it?” Our answers to this question reflect how we intuitively understand
events, people, and the world around us (Sloman & Lagnado, 2015; Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018). How
do humans handle this complexity?
Cognitive scientists have proposed that we do so by organizing our understanding of the world into
intuitive theories (Gerstenberg & Tenenbaum, 2017; Wellman & Gelman, 1992). Accordingly, people
have intuitive theories of the physical and social world with which we reason about how objects
and agents interact with one another (Battaglia et al., 2013; Ullman et al., 2017; Gerstenberg et al.,
2021; Baker et al., 2017; Davis & Marcus, 2015; Lake et al., 2017). Concepts related to causality and
morality form key ingredients of people’s physical and social theories. Given a story, humans can
readily make causal and moral judgments about the objects and agents involved in the story.
Studying these human intuitions or systematic tendencies when making decisions or judgments
is the central focus of psychological experimentations. What are these tendencies? How do they
influence our judgment? Over the last several decades, using text-based vignettes, psychologists
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

