Label Poisoning is All You Need

Rishi D. Jha* Jonathan Hayase* Sewoong Oh
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington, Seattle
{rjha01, jhayase, sewoong}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
In a backdoor attack, an adversary injects corrupted data into a model’s training
dataset in order to gain control over its predictions on images with a specific
attacker-defined trigger. A typical corrupted training example requires altering
both the image, by applying the trigger, and the label. Models trained on clean
images, therefore, were considered safe from backdoor attacks. However, in
some common machine learning scenarios, the training labels are provided by
potentially malicious third-parties. This includes crowd-sourced annotation and
knowledge distillation. We, hence, investigate a fundamental question: can we
launch a successful backdoor attack by only corrupting labels? We introduce a
novel approach to design label-only backdoor attacks, which we call FLIP, and
demonstrate its strengths on three datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and TinyImageNet) and four architectures (ResNet-32, ResNet-18, VGG-19, and Vision
Transformer). With only 2% of CIFAR-10 labels corrupted, FLIP achieves a nearperfect attack success rate of 99.4% while suffering only a 1.8% drop in the clean
test accuracy. Our approach builds upon the recent advances in trajectory matching,
originally introduced for dataset distillation.

1

Introduction

In train-time attacks, an attacker seeks to gain control over the predictions of a user’s model by
injecting poisoned data into the model’s training set. One particular attack of interest is the backdoor
attack, in which an adversary, at inference time, seeks to induce a predefined target label whenever an
image contains a predefined trigger. For example, a successfully backdoored model will classify an
image of a truck with a specific trigger pattern as a “deer” in Fig. 1. Typical backdoor attacks, (e.g.,
[34, 57]), construct poisoned training examples by applying the trigger directly on a subset of clean
training images and changing their labels to the target label. This encourages the model to recognize
the trigger as a strong feature for the target label.
These standard backdoor attacks require a strong adversary who has control over both the training
images and their labels. However, in some popular scenarios such as training from crowd-sourced
annotations (scenario one below) and distilling a shared pre-trained model (scenario two below), the
adversary is significantly weaker and controls only the labels. This can give a false sense of security
against backdoor attacks. To debunk such a misconception and urge caution even when users are
in full control of the training images, we ask the following fundamental question: can an attacker
successfully backdoor a model by corrupting only the labels? Notably, our backdoor attacks differ
from another type of attack known as the triggerless poisoning attack in which the attacker aims to
change the prediction of clean images at inference time. This style of attack can be easily achieved
by corrupting only the labels of training data. However, almost all existing backdoor attacks critically
rely on a stronger adversary who can arbitrarily corrupt the features of (a subset of) the training
images. We provide details in Section 1.2 and Appendix A.
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

