On kernel-based statistical learning in the mean field
limit
Christian Fiedler1
1,3

Michael Herty2

Sebastian Trimpe3

Institute for Data Science in Mechanical Engineering (DSME)
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
{fiedler,trimpe}@dsme.rwth-aachen.de
2

Institute for Geometry and Practical Mathematics (IGPM)
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
herty@igpm.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract
In many applications of machine learning, a large number of variables are considered. Motivated by machine learning of interacting particle systems, we consider
the situation when the number of input variables goes to infinity. First, we continue
the recent investigation of the mean field limit of kernels and their reproducing
kernel Hilbert spaces, completing the existing theory. Next, we provide results
relevant for approximation with such kernels in the mean field limit, including
a representer theorem. Finally, we use these kernels in the context of statistical
learning in the mean field limit, focusing on Support Vector Machines. In particular, we show mean field convergence of empirical and infinite-sample solutions as
well as the convergence of the corresponding risks. On the one hand, our results
establish rigorous mean field limits in the context of kernel methods, providing
new theoretical tools and insights for large-scale problems. On the other hand, our
setting corresponds to a new form of limit of learning problems, which seems to
have not been investigated yet in the statistical learning theory literature.

1

Introduction

Models with many variables play an important role in many fields of mathematical and physical
sciences. In this context, going to the limit of infinitely many variables is an important analysis and
modeling approach. Interacting particle systems are a classic example; these are usually modeled as
dynamical systems describing the temporal evolution of many interacting objects. In physics, such
systems were first investigated in the context of gas dynamics, cf. [1]. Since even small volumes
of gases typically contain an enormous number of molecules, a microscopic modeling approach
quickly becomes infeasible and one considers the evolution of densities instead [2]. In the past
decades, interacting particle systems arising from many different domains have been considered, for
example, animal movement (inter alia swarms of birds, schools of fish, colonies of microorganisms)
[3, 4], social and political dynamics [5, 6], crowd modeling and control (pedestrian movement,
gathering at large events like football games or concerts) [7–9], swarms of robots [10–12] or vehicular
traffic (in particular, traffic jams) [13]. There is now a vast literature on such applications, and
we refer to the surveys [14–16] as starting points. A prototypical example of such a system is
PM
1
given by ẋi = M
j=1 ϕ(xi , xj )(xj − xi ), for i = 1, . . . , M , where M ∈ N+ particles or agents
are modelled by their state xi ∈ Rd , i = 1, . . . , M , evolving according to some interaction rule
ϕ : Rd × Rd → R. Typical questions then concern the long-term behavior of such systems, in
particular, emergent phenomena like consensus or alignment [17]. While first-principles modeling
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

