State2Explanation: Concept-Based Explanations to
Benefit Agent Learning and User Understanding

Devleena Das
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
ddas41@gatech.edu

Sonia Chernova
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
chernova@gatech.edu

Been Kim
Google Research
beenkim@google.com

Abstract
As more non-AI experts use complex AI systems for daily tasks, there has been
an increasing effort to develop methods that produce explanations of AI decision
making that are understandable by non-AI experts. Towards this effort, leveraging
higher-level concepts and producing concept-based explanations have become a
popular method. Most concept-based explanations have been developed for classification techniques, and we posit that the few existing methods for sequential
decision making are limited in scope. In this work, we first contribute a desiderata
for defining “concepts” in sequential decision making settings. Additionally, inspired by the Protégé Effect which states explaining knowledge often reinforces
one’s self-learning, we explore how concept-based explanations of an RL agent’s
decision making can in turn improve the agent’s learning rate, as well as improve
end-user understanding of the agent’s decision making. To this end, we contribute
a unified framework, State2Explanation (S2E), that involves learning a joint embedding model between state-action pairs and concept-based explanations, and
leveraging such learned model to both (1) inform reward shaping during an agent’s
training, and (2) provide explanations to end-users at deployment for improved
task performance. Our experimental validations, in Connect 4 and Lunar Lander,
demonstrate the success of S2E in providing a dual-benefit, successfully informing reward shaping and improving agent learning rate, as well as significantly
improving end user task performance at deployment time.

1

Introduction

Black-box AI systems are increasingly being deployed to help end-users with everyday tasks. Examples include doctors leveraging decision support systems to aid in diagnosis [39], warehouse managers
relying on robots for goods transportation [8], and drivers using autonomous vehicles for assisted
driving [18]. To increase the transparency of these black-box models, researchers have developed
numerous techniques to provide explanations of agent decision making [45, 2, 23, 51, 14, 9, 30, 15].
A popular method towards non-expert friendly explanations has been to attribute higher-level “concepts” to an agent’s decision making, and these concepts have primarily been used to explain
classification-based AI systems [30, 33, 54, 19]. An example of a concept-based explanation for
a classification model includes, “wing color” for a bird class label [19]. In sequential decision
making, concept-based explanations have been less widely explored, and existing works leverage
preconditions of states and action costs [48] or logical formulas [22] as “concepts”.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

