Collaborative Learning via Prediction Consensus

Dongyang Fan1

Celestine Mendler-Dünner2,3 Martin Jaggi1
1
EPFL, Switzerland
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
ELLIS Institute Tübingen, Germany
{dongyang.fan, martin.jaggi}@epfl.ch
celestine@tue.ellis.eu

Abstract
We consider a collaborative learning setting where the goal of each agent is to
improve their own model by leveraging the expertise of collaborators, in addition
to their own training data. To facilitate the exchange of expertise among agents,
we propose a distillation-based method leveraging shared unlabeled auxiliary data,
which is pseudo-labeled by the collective. Central to our method is a trust weighting
scheme that serves to adaptively weigh the influence of each collaborator on the
pseudo-labels until a consensus on how to label the auxiliary data is reached. We
demonstrate empirically that our collaboration scheme is able to significantly boost
individual models’ performance in the target domain from which the auxiliary
data is sampled. At the same time, it can provably mitigate the negative impact
of bad models on the collective. By design, our method adeptly accommodates
heterogeneity in model architectures and substantially reduces communication
overhead compared to typical collaborative learning methods.

1

Introduction

This work considers a decentralized learning setting where each agent has access to a labeled dataset
and a local model. The agents may differ in the data distribution they have access to as well as the
quality of their local models. In addition, we assume a shared unlabeled dataset X ∗ sampled from
a target distribution Q is available to all agents. The central question is how can agents effectively
exchange information to benefit from each other’s local expertise in order to improve their predictive
performance on the target domain Q?
Towards this goal, our work takes inspiration from social science on how a panel of human experts
collaborate on a task. Humans typically engage in discourse to exchange information, they share
their opinions, and based on how much they trust their peers, each individual will then adjust their
subjective belief towards the opinion of peers. When repeated, this process gives rise to a dynamic
process of consensus finding, as formalized by DeGroot [1]. Central to the consensus mechanism of
DeGroot is the concept of trust. It determines how much individual agents influence each other’s
opinion, and thus the influence of each agent on the final consensus.
Our proposed algorithm mimics this consensus-finding mechanism in the context of collaborative
learning, inspired by [2]. In particular, our consensus procedure is aimed at how to label the shared
dataset X ∗ . Therefore, we carefully design a strategy by which each agent determines the trust
towards others, given its local information, to optimally leverage each agent’s expertise to collectively
pseudo-label X ∗ . This mechanism of knowledge distillation is then combined with techniques from
self-training [3] in order to transfer the shared knowledge from the pseudo-labels into the local models
in an iterative fashion.
Code available at https://github.com/fan1dy/collaboration-consensus
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

