A Unifying Perspective on Multicalibration: Game
Dynamics for Multi-Objective Learning∗

Nika Haghtalab, Michael I. Jordan, and Eric Zhao
University of California, Berkeley
{nika,jordan,eric.zh}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We provide a unifying framework for the design and analysis of multicalibrated
predictors. By placing the multicalibration problem in the general setting of multiobjective learning—where learning guarantees must hold simultaneously over a
set of distributions and loss functions—we exploit connections to game dynamics
to achieve state-of-the-art guarantees for a diverse set of multicalibration learning
problems. In addition to shedding light on existing multicalibration guarantees and
greatly simplifying their analysis, our approach also yields improved guarantees,
such as error tolerances that scale with the square-root of group size versus the
constant tolerances guaranteed by prior works, and improving the complexity
of k-class multicalibration by an exponential factor of k versus Gopalan et al.
[17]. Beyond multicalibration, we use these game dynamics to address emerging
considerations in the study of group fairness and multi-distribution learning.

1

Introduction

Multicalibration has emerged as a powerful tool for addressing fairness considerations in machine
learning. Based on calibrated forecasting [6, 12]—which requires among instances x a predictor
h predicts the probability h(x) = v, a fraction v have a positive outcome—multicalibration yields
more fine-grained guarantees by seeking calibration across large and possibly overlapping collections
of sub-populations [21]. Multicalibration has been studied in numerous settings, including those
with rich label sets (multi-class multicalibration [17]), adversarial rather than stochastic data (online
multicalibration [18]), and problems where no Bayes classifier exists (agnostic multicalibration [38]).
The concept of multicalibration has also been applied to estimate other quantities, such as higher
moments [22], and been strengthened in various ways, such as providing conditional guarantees [2].
Multicalibration’s versatility has led to the development of numerous specialized algorithms, each
tailored to a unique multicalibration problem and requiring its own individualized analysis. Promising
attempts to provide an overarching conceptual framework for multicalibration, such as outcome
indistinguishability [7], have had limited success in unifying these various algorithms. In this paper,
we tackle this challenge, developing a general-purpose algorithmic framework to guide the design of
multicalibrated learning algorithms for a wide range of settings and considerations.
Our approach is a dynamical systems and game-theoretic approach [see, e.g., 13, 9]. We demonstrate
that many multicalibration algorithms can be formulated as particular instances of two-player zerosum games where players independently either run no-regret algorithms or best-response algorithms.
A wide range of multicalibration algorithms that exhibit varying trade-offs can be obtained by
plugging in different no-regret and best-response algorithms. This unified framework both recovers
existing guarantees and in many cases improves upon them.
∗

Authors are ordered alphabetically. Correspondence to eric.zh@berkeley.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

