Recurrent Hypernetworks are Surprisingly Strong in
Meta-RL
Jacob Beck
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, United Kingdom
jacob_beck@alumni.brown.edu

Risto Vuorio
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, United Kingdom
risto.vuorio@keble.ox.ac.uk

Zheng Xiong
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, United Kingdom
zheng.xiong@cs.ox.ac.uk

Shimon Whiteson
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, United Kingdom
shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) is notoriously impractical to deploy due to sample inefficiency. Meta-RL directly addresses this sample inefficiency by learning
to perform few-shot learning when a distribution of related tasks is available for
meta-training. While many specialized meta-RL methods have been proposed,
recent work suggests that end-to-end learning in conjunction with an off-the-shelf
sequential model, such as a recurrent network, is a surprisingly strong baseline.
However, such claims have been controversial due to limited supporting evidence,
particularly in the face of prior work establishing precisely the opposite. In this paper, we conduct an empirical investigation. While we likewise find that a recurrent
network can achieve strong performance, we demonstrate that the use of hypernetworks is crucial to maximizing their potential. Surprisingly, when combined with
hypernetworks, the recurrent baselines that are far simpler than existing specialized
methods actually achieve the strongest performance of all methods evaluated. We
provide code at https://github.com/jacooba/hyper.

1

Introduction

Meta-reinforcement learning [Beck et al., 2023] uses sample-inefficient reinforcement learning (RL)
to learn a sample-efficient reinforcement learning algorithm. The sample-efficient algorithm maps
the data an agent has gathered so far to a policy based on that experience. To this end, any sequential
model such as a recurrent neural network (RNN), can be deployed to learn this mapping end-to-end
[Duan et al., 2016, Wang et al., 2016]. Such methods are also called black-box [Beck et al., 2023].
Alternatively, much prior work has focused on a category of task-inference methods that are specialized for meta-RL. A meta-RL algorithm learns to reinforcement learn over a distribution of MDPs,
or tasks. By explicitly learning to infer the task, many methods have shown improved performance
relative to the recurrent baseline Humplik et al. [2019], Zintgraf et al. [2020], Kamienny et al. [2020],
Liu et al. [2021], Beck et al. [2022].
Recent work has shown the simpler recurrent methods to be a competitive baseline relative to
task-inference methods [Ni et al., 2022]. However, such claims are contentious, as the supporting
experiments compare only to one task-inference method designed for meta-RL, the experiments
provide additional compute to the recurrent baseline, and the results still show similar or inferior
performance to more complicated methods on the majority of difficult domains. In particular, they
consider two toy domains and four challenging domains, with RNNs significantly outperformed on
two of the four challenging domains, and superior to the single task-inference baseline on only one.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

