ISP: Multi-Layered Garment Draping with Implicit
Sewing Patterns

Ren Li

ren.li@epfl.ch

Benoît Guillard
Pascal Fua
Computer Vision Lab, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
benoit.guillard@epfl.ch

pascal.fua@epfl.ch

Abstract
Many approaches to draping individual garments on human body models are
realistic, fast, and yield outputs that are differentiable with respect to the body
shape on which they are draped. However, they are either unable to handle multilayered clothing, which is prevalent in everyday dress, or restricted to bodies in
T-pose. In this paper, we introduce a parametric garment representation model that
addresses these limitations. As in models used by clothing designers, each garment
consists of individual 2D panels. Their 2D shape is defined by a Signed Distance
Function and 3D shape by a 2D to 3D mapping. The 2D parameterization enables
easy detection of potential collisions and the 3D parameterization handles complex
shapes effectively. We show that this combination is faster and yields higher
quality reconstructions than purely implicit surface representations, and makes the
recovery of layered garments from images possible thanks to its differentiability.
Furthermore, it supports rapid editing of garment shapes and texture by modifying
individual 2D panels.

1

Introduction

Draping virtual garments on body models has many applications in fashion design, movie-making,
virtual try-on, virtual and augmented reality, among others. Traditionally, garments are represented
by 3D meshes and the draping relies on physics-based simulations (PBS) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12] to produce realistic interactions between clothes and body. Unfortunately PBS is
often computationally expensive and rarely differentiable, which limits the scope of downstream
applications. Hence, many recent techniques use neural networks to speed up the draping and to
make it differentiable. The garments can be represented by 3D mesh templates [13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20], point clouds [21, 22], UV maps [23, 24, 25, 26, 27], or implicit surfaces [28, 29, 30].
Draping can then be achieved by Linear Blend Skinning (LBS) from the shape and pose parameters
of a body model, such as SMPL [31].
Even though all these methods can realistically drape individual garments over human bodies, none
can handle multiple clothing layers, despite being prevalent in everyday dress. To address overlapping
clothing layers such as those in Fig. 1 while preserving expressivity, we introduce an Implicit Sewing
Pattern (ISP), a new representation inspired by the way fashion designers represent clothes. As shown
in Fig. 2, a sewing pattern is made of several 2D panels implicitly represented by signed distance
functions (SDFs) that model their 2D extent and are conditioned on a latent vector z, along with
information about how to stitch them into a complete garment. To each panel is associated a 2D to
3D mapping representing its 3D shape, also conditioned on z. The 2D panels make it easy to detect
collisions between surfaces and to prevent interpenetrations. In other words, the garment is made of
panels whose 2D extent is learned instead of having to be carefully designed by a human and whose
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

