BiSLS/SPS: Auto-tune Step Sizes for
Stable Bi-level Optimization
Chen Fan1 , Gaspard Choné-Ducasse2 , Mark Schmidt1,3 , and Christos Thrampoulidis1
1

University of British Columbia
2
Ecole Normale Supérieure
3
Canada CIFAR AI Chair (Amii)

Abstract
The popularity of bi-level optimization (BO) in deep learning has spurred a growing
interest in studying gradient-based BO algorithms. However, existing algorithms
involve two coupled learning rates that can be affected by approximation errors
when computing hypergradients, making careful fine-tuning necessary to ensure
fast convergence. To alleviate this issue, we investigate the use of recently proposed
adaptive step-size methods, namely stochastic line search (SLS) and stochastic
Polyak step size (SPS), for computing both the upper and lower-level learning rates.
First, we revisit the use of SLS and SPS in single-level optimization without the
additional interpolation condition that is typically assumed in prior works. For such
settings, we investigate new variants of SLS and SPS that improve upon existing
suggestions in the literature and are simpler to implement. Importantly, these two
variants can be seen as special instances of general family of methods with an
envelope-type step-size. This unified envelope strategy allows for the extension
of the algorithms and their convergence guarantees to BO settings. Finally, our
extensive experiments demonstrate that the new algorithms, which are available in
both SGD and Adam versions, can find large learning rates with minimal tuning
and converge faster than corresponding vanilla SGD or Adam BO algorithms that
require fine-tuning.

1

Introduction

Bi-level optimization (BO) has found its applications in various fields of machine learning such
as hyperparameter optimization [14, 17, 30, 40], adversarial training [51], data distillation [2, 53],
neural architecture search [28, 39], neural-network pruning [52], and meta-learning [13, 37, 11].
Specifically, BO is used widely for problems that exhibit a hierarchical structure of the following
form:
min F (x) = Eϕ [f (x, y ∗ (x); ϕ)]

x∈X

s.t.

y ∗ (x) = argmin Eψ [g(x, y; ψ)].

(1)

y∈Y

Here, the solution to the lower-level objective g becomes the input to the upper-level objective f , and
in (1) the upper-level variable x is fixed when optimizing the lower-level variable y. To solve such
bi-level problems using gradient-based methods requires computing the hypergradient of F , which
based on the chain rule is given as [15]:
∇F (x) = ∇x f (x, y ∗ (x)) − ∇2xy g(x, y ∗ (x))[∇2yy g(x, y ∗ (x))]−1 ∇y f (x, y ∗ (x)).

(2)

In practice, the closed-form solution y ∗ (x) can be difficult to obtain, and one strategy is to run a
few steps of (stochastic) gradient descent on g with respect to y to get an approximation ȳ, and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

