Can LLM Already Serve as A Database Interface?
A BIg Bench for Large-Scale Database Grounded
Text-to-SQLs
Jinyang Li1,♣ ,‡ Binyuan Hui2,♣ , Ge Qu1,♣ , Jiaxi Yang2 , Binhua Li2 , Bowen Li6 ,
Bailin Wang5 , Bowen Qin2 , Ruiying Geng2 , Nan Huo1 , Xuanhe Zhou3 , Chenhao Ma6 ,
Guoliang Li3 , Kevin C.C. Chang7 , Fei Huang2 , Reynold Cheng1 , Yongbin Li2
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3
Tsinghua University 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 MIT CSAIL
6
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
7
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{jl0725,quge}@connect.hku.hk, ckcheng@cs.hku.hk
binyuan.hby@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Text-to-SQL parsing, which aims at converting natural language questions into
executable SQLs, has gained increasing attention in recent years. In particular,
GPT-4 and Claude-2 have shown impressive results in this task. However, most of
the prevalent benchmarks, i.e., Spider, and WikiSQL, focus on database schema
with few rows of database values leaving the gap between academic study and
real-world applications. To mitigate this gap, we present B IRD, a BIg bench for
laRge-scale Database grounded in text-to-SQL tasks, containing 12,751 text-toSQL pairs and 95 databases with a total size of 33.4 GB, spanning 37 professional
domains. Our emphasis on database values highlights the new challenges of dirty
and noisy database values, external knowledge grounding between NL questions
and database values, and SQL efficiency, particularly in the context of massive
databases. To solve these problems, text-to-SQL models must feature database
value comprehension in addition to semantic parsing. The experimental results
demonstrate the significance of database values in generating accurate text-to-SQLs
for big databases. Furthermore, even the most effective text-to-SQL models, i.e.
GPT-4, only achieve 54.89% in execution accuracy, which is still far from the
human result of 92.96%, proving that challenges still stand. We also provide
an efficiency analysis to offer insights into generating text-to-efficient-SQLs that
are beneficial to industries. We believe that B IRD will contribute to advancing
real-world applications of text-to-SQL research. The leaderboard and source code
are available: https://bird-bench.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Text-to-SQL parsing [55, 50, 51, 3, 52, 37], which focuses on converting natural language questions
into SQL queries, has attracted significant research interests from both academia and industry. This
attention stems from its potential to empower non-expert data analysts in automatically extracting
desired information from ubiquitous relational databases using natural language. Recent advances in
neural models, including those based on large language models (LLMs), have led to an impressive
performance on existing benchmarks such as S PIDER [53] and WikiSQL [58]. For instance, the
execution accuracy of the top-performing model in the S PIDER leaderboard has increased from 53.5%
‡

♣ Equal contribution.
Work done during an intern at Alibaba DAMO Academy.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

