Connected Superlevel Set in (Deep) Reinforcement
Learning and its Application to Minimax Theorems

Sihan Zeng
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30318
szeng30@gatech.edu

Thinh T. Doan
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24061
thinhdoan@vt.edu

Justin Romberg
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30318
jrom@ece.gatech.edu

Abstract
The aim of this paper is to improve the understanding of the optimization landscape
for policy optimization problems in reinforcement learning. Specifically, we show
that the superlevel set of the objective function with respect to the policy parameter
is always a connected set both in the tabular setting and under policies represented
by a class of neural networks. In addition, we show that the optimization objective
as a function of the policy parameter and reward satisfies a stronger “equiconnectedness” property. To our best knowledge, these are novel and previously unknown
discoveries.
We present an application of the connectedness of these superlevel sets to the derivation of minimax theorems for robust reinforcement learning. We show that any
minimax optimization program which is convex on one side and is equiconnected
on the other side observes the minimax equality (i.e. has a Nash equilibrium). We
find that this exact structure is exhibited by an interesting class of robust reinforcement learning problems under an adversarial reward attack, and the validity of
its minimax equality immediately follows. This is the first time such a result is
established in the literature.

1

Introduction

Policy optimization problems in reinforcement learning (RL) are usually formulated as the maximization of a non-concave objective function over a convex constraint set. Such non-convex programs
are generally difficult to solve globally, as gradient-based optimization algorithms can be trapped in
sub-optimal first-order stationary points. Interestingly, recent advances in RL theory [Fazel et al.,
2018, Agarwal et al., 2021, Mei et al., 2020] have discovered a “gradient domination” structure in the
optimization landscape, which qualitatively means that every stationary point of the objective function
is globally optimal. An important consequence of this condition is that any first-order algorithm that
converges to a stationary point is guaranteed to find the global optimality.
In this work, our aim is to enhance the understanding of the optimization landscape in RL beyond
the gradient domination condition. Inspired by Mohammadi et al. [2021], Fatkhullin and Polyak
[2021] that discuss properties of the sublevel set for the linear-quadratic regulator (LQR), we study
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

