Distributional Model Equivalence for Risk-Sensitive
Reinforcement Learning

Tyler Kastner∗
University of Toronto, Vector Institute

Murat A. Erdogdu
University of Toronto, Vector Institute

Amir-massoud Farahmand
Vector Institute, University of Toronto

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning models for risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. We theoretically demonstrate that proper value equivalence, a method of
learning models which can be used to plan optimally in the risk-neutral setting, is
not sufficient to plan optimally in the risk-sensitive setting. We leverage distributional reinforcement learning to introduce two new notions of model equivalence,
one which is general and can be used to plan for any risk measure, but is intractable;
and a practical variation which allows one to choose which risk measures they may
plan optimally for. We demonstrate how our framework can be used to augment
any model-free risk-sensitive algorithm, and provide both tabular and large-scale
experiments to demonstrate its ability.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning is a general framework where agents learn to sequentially make decisions to
optimize an objective, such as the expected value of future rewards (risk-neutral objective) or the
conditional value at risk of future rewards (risk-sensitive objective). It is a popular belief that a truly
general agent must have a world model to plan with and limit the number of environment interactions
needed (Russell, 2010). One way this is achieved is through model-based reinforcement learning,
where an agent learns a model of the environment as well as its policy which it uses to act.
The classical approach to learning a model is to use maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) based on
data, which given a model class selects the model which is most likely to have produced the data seen.
If the model class is expressive enough, and there is enough data, we may expect a model learnt using
MLE to be useful for risk-sensitive planning. However, the success of this method relies on the model
being able to model everything about the environment, which is an unrealistic assumption in general.
As opposed to learning models which are accurate in modelling every aspect of the environment,
recent works have advocated for learning models with the decision problem in mind, known as
decision-aware model learning (Farahmand et al., 2017; Farahmand, 2018; D’Oro et al., 2020; Abachi
et al., 2020; Grimm et al., 2020, 2021). In particular, Farahmand et al. (2017) introduced value-aware
model learning, which uses a model loss that weighs model errors based on the effect the errors have
on potential value functions. This framework has since been iterated on and improved upon in later
works such as Farahmand (2018); Abachi et al. (2020); Voelcker et al. (2021). Complementarily,
Grimm et al. (2020) introduced the value equivalence principle, a framework of partitioning the
space of models based on the properties of the Bellman operators they induce. This framework has
been extended by Grimm et al. (2021), where the authors introduce a related partitioning, called
∗

Correspondence to: tkastner@cs.toronto.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

