Adaptive Uncertainty Estimation via
High-Dimensional Testing on Latent Representations

Tsai Hor Chan
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
The University of Hong Kong
hchanth@connect.hku.hk
Jiajun Shen
TCL AI Lab
Hong Kong
shenjiajun90@gmail.com

Kin Wai Lau
TCL AI Lab
Hong Kong
stevenlau@tcl.com

Guosheng Yin
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
guosheng.yin@imperial.ac.uk

Lequan Yu∗
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
The University of Hong Kong
lqyu@hku.hk

Abstract
Uncertainty estimation aims to evaluate the confidence of a trained deep neural network. However, existing uncertainty estimation approaches rely on lowdimensional distributional assumptions and thus suffer from the high dimensionality
of latent features. Existing approaches tend to focus on uncertainty on discrete
classification probabilities, which leads to poor generalizability to uncertainty
estimation for other tasks. Moreover, most of the literature require seeing the outof-distribution (OOD) data in the training for better estimation of uncertainty, which
limits the uncertainty estimation performance in practice because the OOD data
are typically unseen. To overcome these limitations, we propose a new framework
using data-adaptive high-dimensional hypothesis testing for uncertainty estimation,
which leverages the statistical properties of the feature representations. Our method
directly operates on latent representations and thus does not require retraining the
feature encoder under a modified objective. The test statistic relaxes the feature
distribution assumptions to high dimensionality, and it is more discriminative to
uncertainties in the latent representations. We demonstrate that encoding features
with Bayesian neural networks can enhance testing performance and lead to more
accurate uncertainty estimation. We further introduce a family-wise testing procedure to determine the optimal threshold of OOD detection, which minimizes the
false discovery rate (FDR). Extensive experiments validate the satisfactory performance of our framework on uncertainty estimation and task-specific prediction over
a variety of competitors. The experiments on the OOD detection task also show satisfactory performance of our method when the OOD data are unseen in the training.
Codes are available at https://github.com/HKU-MedAI/bnn_uncertainty.

∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

