ParaFuzz: An Interpretability-Driven Technique for
Detecting Poisoned Samples in NLP
Lu Yan
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
yan390@purdue.edu

Zhuo Zhang
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
zhan3299@purdue.edu

Guanhong Tao
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
taog@purdue.edu

Kaiyuan Zhang
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
zhan4057@purdue.edu

Xuan Chen
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
chen4124@purdue.edu

Guangyu Shen
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
shen447@purdue.edu

Xiangyu Zhang
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47907
xyzhang@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract
Backdoor attacks have emerged as a prominent threat to natural language processing (NLP) models, where the presence of specific triggers in the input can
lead poisoned models to misclassify these inputs to predetermined target classes.
Current detection mechanisms are limited by their inability to address more covert
backdoor strategies, such as style-based attacks. In this work, we propose an
innovative test-time poisoned sample detection framework that hinges on the interpretability of model predictions, grounded in the semantic meaning of inputs.
We contend that triggers (e.g., infrequent words) are not supposed to fundamentally alter the underlying semantic meanings of poisoned samples as they want to
stay stealthy. Based on this observation, we hypothesize that while the model’s
predictions for paraphrased clean samples should remain stable, predictions for
poisoned samples should revert to their true labels upon the mutations applied to
triggers during the paraphrasing process. We employ ChatGPT, a state-of-the-art
large language model, as our paraphraser and formulate the trigger-removal task as
a prompt engineering problem. We adopt fuzzing, a technique commonly used for
unearthing software vulnerabilities, to discover optimal paraphrase prompts that
can effectively eliminate triggers while concurrently maintaining input semantics.
Experiments on 4 types of backdoor attacks, including the subtle style backdoors,
and 4 distinct datasets demonstrate that our approach surpasses baseline methods,
including STRIP, RAP, and ONION, in precision and recall.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have significantly transformed various fields such as computer
vision and natural language processing (NLP) with their remarkable performance in complex tasks.
However, this advancement has not been without its challenges. A prominent and growing threat
in these fields is the backdoor attack, where attackers train a model to behave normally for clean
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

