Decision Stacks: Flexible Reinforcement Learning
via Modular Generative Models
Siyan Zhao
Department of Computer Science
University of California Los Angeles
siyanz@cs.ucla.edu

Aditya Grover
Department of Computer Science
University of California Los Angeles
adityag@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning presents an attractive paradigm to reason about several
distinct aspects of sequential decision making, such as specifying complex goals,
planning future observations and actions, and critiquing their utilities. However, the
combined integration of these capabilities poses competing algorithmic challenges
in retaining maximal expressivity while allowing for flexibility in modeling choices
for efficient learning and inference. We present Decision Stacks, a generative
framework that decomposes goal-conditioned policy agents into 3 generative modules. These modules simulate the temporal evolution of observations, rewards, and
actions via independent generative models that can be learned in parallel via teacher
forcing. Our framework guarantees both expressivity and flexibility in designing
individual modules to account for key factors such as architectural bias, optimization objective and dynamics, transferrability across domains, and inference speed.
Our empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness of Decision Stacks for offline
policy optimization for several MDP and POMDP environments, outperforming
existing methods and enabling flexible generative decision making.1

1

Introduction

Modularity is a critical design principle for both software systems and artificial intelligence (AI). It
allows for the creation of flexible and maintainable systems by breaking them down into smaller, independent components that can be easily composed and adapted to different contexts. For modern deep
learning systems, modules are often defined with respect to their input and output modalities and their
task functionalities. For example, Visual ChatGPT [Wu et al., 2023] defines a family of 22+ vision
and language foundation models, such as ChatGPT [OpenAI, 2022] (language generation), SAM [Kirillov et al., 2023] (image segmentation), and StableDiffusion [Rombach et al., 2022] (text-to-image
generation) for holistic reasoning over text and images. In addition to enabling new compositional
applications, modularity offers the promise of interpretability, reusability, and debugging for complex
workflows, each of which poses a major challenge for real-world AI deployments.
This paper presents progress towards scalable and flexible reinforcement learning (RL) through the
introduction of a new modular probabilistic framework based on deep generative models. Prior work
in modular RL focuses on spatiotemporal abstractions that simplify complex goals via hierarchical
RL, e.g., [McGovern and Barto, 2001, Andreas et al., 2017, Simpkins and Isbell, 2019, Ahn et al.,
2022, Kulkarni et al., 2016, Mendez et al., 2021]. Distinct but complementary to the prior lines of
work, our motivating notion of modularity is based on enforcing token-level hierarchies in generative
models of trajectories. In the context of RL, trajectories typically consist of a multitude of different
tokens of information: goals, observations, rewards, actions. As shown in many recent works [Chen
et al., 2021, Janner et al., 2021, 2022, Ajay et al., 2022, Zheng et al., 2022, Reed et al., 2022], we can
effectively reduce RL to probabilistic inference [Levine, 2018] via learning deep generative models
1

The project website and code can be found here: https://siyan-zhao.github.io/decision-stacks/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

