Beta Diffusion
Mingyuan Zhou∗, Tianqi Chen, Zhendong Wang, and Huangjie Zheng
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712

Abstract
We introduce beta diffusion, a novel generative modeling method that integrates
demasking and denoising to generate data within bounded ranges. Using scaled
and shifted beta distributions, beta diffusion utilizes multiplicative transitions over
time to create both forward and reverse diffusion processes, maintaining beta
distributions in both the forward marginals and the reverse conditionals, given the
data at any point in time. Unlike traditional diffusion-based generative models
relying on additive Gaussian noise and reweighted evidence lower bounds (ELBOs),
beta diffusion is multiplicative and optimized with KL-divergence upper bounds
(KLUBs) derived from the convexity of the KL divergence. We demonstrate that
the proposed KLUBs are more effective for optimizing beta diffusion compared
to negative ELBOs, which can also be derived as the KLUBs of the same KL
divergence with its two arguments swapped. The loss function of beta diffusion,
expressed in terms of Bregman divergence, further supports the efficacy of KLUBs
for optimization. Experimental results on both synthetic data and natural images
demonstrate the unique capabilities of beta diffusion in generative modeling of
range-bounded data and validate the effectiveness of KLUBs in optimizing diffusion
models, thereby making them valuable additions to the family of diffusion-based
generative models and the optimization techniques used to train them.

1

Introduction

Diffusion-based deep generative models have been gaining traction recently. One representative
example is Gaussian diffusion [57, 59, 23, 60, 35] that uses a Gaussian Markov chain to gradually
diffuse images into Gaussian noise for training. The learned reverse diffusion process, defined
by a Gaussian Markov chain in reverse order, iteratively refines noisy inputs towards clean photorealistic images. Gaussian diffusion can also be viewed from the lens of denoising score matching
[28, 64, 59, 60] and stochastic differential equations [61]. They have shown remarkable success
across a wide range of tasks, including but not limited to generating, restoring, and editing images [14,
24, 50, 53, 54, 70, 67], transforming 2D to 3D [49, 1], synthesizing audio [9, 37, 73], reinforcement
learning [31, 66, 48], quantifying uncertainty [19], and designing drugs and proteins [56, 44, 32].
Constructing a diffusion-based generative model often follows a general recipe [57, 23, 35, 34]. The
recipe involves three basic steps: First, defining a forward diffusion process that introduces noise into
the data and corrupts it with decreasing signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) as time progresses from 0 to 1.
Second, defining a reverse diffusion process that denoises the corrupted data as time reverses from 1
to 0. Third, discretizing the time interval from 0 to 1 into a finite number of intervals, and viewing
the discretized forward and reverse processes as a fixed inference network and a learnable generator,
respectively. Auto-encoding variational inference [36, 51] is then applied to optimize the parameters
of the generator by minimizing a weighted negative ELBO that includes a Kullback–Leibler (KL)
divergence-based loss term for each discretized reverse step.
∗

Corresponding to: mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu
PyTorch code is available at: https://github.com/mingyuanzhou/Beta-Diffusion

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

