Generalized Weighted Path Consistency for Mastering
Atari Games
Dengwei Zhao
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
zdwccc@sjtu.edu.cn

Shikui Tu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
tushikui@sjtu.edu.cn

Lei Xu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Guangdong Institute of Intelligence Science and Technology
leixu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Reinforcement learning with the help of neural-guided search consumes huge
computational resources to achieve remarkable performance. Path consistency
(PC), i.e., f values on one optimal path should be identical, was previously imposed
on MCTS by PCZero to improve the learning efficiency of AlphaZero. Not only
PCZero still lacks a theoretical support but also considers merely board games.
In this paper, PCZero is generalized into GW-PCZero for real applications with
non-zero immediate reward. A weighting mechanism is introduced to reduce the
variance caused by scouting’s uncertainty on the f value estimation. For the first
time, it is theoretically proved that neural-guided MCTS is guaranteed to find
the optimal solution under the constraint of PC. Experiments are conducted on
the Atari 100k benchmark with 26 games and GW-PCZero achieves 198% mean
human performance, higher than the state-of-the-art EfficientZero’s 194%, while
consuming only 25% of the computational resources consumed by EfficientZero.

1

Introduction

In recent years, combining neural networks with search algorithms has achieved remarkable success
in Reinforcement Learning (RL) [22, 24, 23]. The application scenarios include not only board games
but also knowledge-free real-world problems [19]. One critical challenge is that huge computational
resources are required to collect interactive experiences in order to obtain reliable policy and value
networks with remarkable performance. For example, 1000 third-generation TPUs were used to
generate selfplay games in MuZero [19], roughly 10 ∼ 50 years of experience per Atari game, which
is unaffordable in regular situations. It is essential for an algorithm to achieve high performance with
limited computational cost. Otherwise, it is difficult to generalize the algorithm to more applications.
For sequential decision problems, an interactive process between an agent and the environment
is regarded as a playing path, which is collected to update the parameters of the policy and value
network. In turn, the learned policy and value provide guidance for Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)
in determining the next action. This iterative process generates a large number of playing paths in
order to obtain reliable policy and value estimators. The evaluation function f at state st is defined
as the summation of g(st ), the accumulated reward from the initial state s0 to st , and h(st ), the
expected return received after st , which is equivalent to the state value v(st ). That is, we have
f (st ) = g(st ) + h(st ).
(1)
To find the optimal path L∗ that leads to the desired termination state, the A∗ search algorithm [5]
establishes an optimality condition for f values, i.e., f (st ) = f (s0 ) for all st ∈ L∗ , where s0 is
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

