ESSEN: Improving Evolution State Estimation for
Temporal Networks using Von Neumann Entropy

Qiyao Huang† , Yingyue Zhang† , Zhihong Zhang†∗ , Edwin R. Hancock‡
†
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
‡
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, UK.
{30920211154155, 30920221154261}@stu.xmu.edu.cn
zhihong@xmu.edu.cn, edwin.hancock@york.ac.uk

Abstract
Temporal networks are widely used as abstract graph representations for real-world
dynamic systems. Indeed, recognizing the network evolution states is crucial in
understanding and analyzing temporal networks. For instance, social networks
will generate the clustering and formation of tightly-knit groups or communities
over time, relying on the triadic closure theory. However, the existing methods
often struggle to account for the time-varying nature of these network structures,
hindering their performance when applied to networks with complex evolution
states. To mitigate this problem, we propose a novel framework called ESSEN,
an Evolution StateS awarE Network, to measure temporal network evolution
using von Neumann entropy and thermodynamic temperature. The developed
framework utilizes a von Neumann entropy aware attention mechanism and network
evolution state contrastive learning in the graph encoding. In addition, it employs
a unique decoder the so-called Mixture of Thermodynamic Experts (MoTE) for
decoding. ESSEN extracts local and global network evolution information using
thermodynamic features and adaptively recognizes the network evolution states.
Moreover, the proposed method is evaluated on link prediction tasks under both
transductive and inductive settings, with the corresponding results demonstrating
its effectiveness compared to various state-of-the-art baselines1 .

1

Introduction

Recently, graph representation learning has demonstrated excellent performance for various types
of static graphs [7; 14; 28; 18]. Indeed, the success of static graph representation learning has
led to a growing interest in continuous-time dynamic graph representation learning. Temporal
network representation learning has emerged as an active research area focusing on learning lowdimensional representations that capture topological and temporal properties. However, learning
effective representations is still a difficult task in many temporal networks, which are naturally
generated in real-world systems such as social networks[12] and citation networks. The evolving
nature of these networks poses a significant challenge for network analysis and modeling as the
relationships between nodes and their properties evolve. The existing methods often struggle to
account for the time-varying nature of these network structures, hindering their performance when
applied to networks with complex time-evolving states. However, capturing the evolution states
of temporal networks suffers from the following challenges: (1) Temporal networks have different
types of evolution states, such as periodic, linear, or non-linear changes in their structure over time.
Moreover, the evolving patterns can change at different stages in the evolution of the network. As
∗
1

Corresponding author.
Code is available at https://github.com/QiyaoHuang/ESSEN

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

