Unsupervised Optical Flow Estimation with Dynamic
Timing Representation for Spike Camera

Lujie Xia1,2 , Ziluo Ding2,3 , Rui Zhao1,2 , Jiyuan Zhang1,2 ,
Lei Ma5 , Zhaofei Yu1,2,4 , Tiejun Huang1,2 , Ruiqin Xiong1,2∗
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology (NERCVT)
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
5
National Biomedical Imaging Center, College of Future Technology, Peking University
{lujie.xia, ziluo, lei.ma, yuzf12, tjhuang, rqxiong}@pku.edu.cn
{ruizhao, jyzhang}@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Efficiently selecting an appropriate spike stream data length to extract precise
information is the key to the spike vision tasks. To address this issue, we propose
a dynamic timing representation for spike streams. Based on multi-layers architecture, it applies dilated convolutions on temporal dimension to extract features
on multi-temporal scales with few parameters. And we design layer attention to
dynamically fuse these features. Moreover, we propose an unsupervised learning
method for optical flow estimation in a spike-based manner to break the dependence
on labeled data. In addition, to verify the robustness, we also build a spike-based
synthetic validation dataset for extreme scenarios in autonomous driving, denoted
as SSES dataset. It consists of various corner cases. Experiments show that our
method can predict optical flow from spike streams in different high-speed scenes,
including real scenes. For instance, our method achieves 15% and 19% error reduction on PHM dataset compared to the best spike-based work, SCFlow, in ∆t = 10
and ∆t = 20 respectively, using the same settings as in previous works. The source
code and dataset are available at https://github.com/Bosserhead/USFlow.

1

Introduction

Optical flow is defined as the apparent motion of individual pixels on the image plane and is prevalent
for being an auxiliary tool for various vision tasks, e.g. frame rate conversion [15], scene segmentation
[43, 38], and object detection [49]. In high-speed scenes, the optical flow estimation may suffer
from blurry images from low frame-rate traditional cameras. Obtaining the data with a device that
can precisely record the continuous light intensity changes of the scene is the key to addressing this
issue. Recently, neuromorphic cameras have been developed greatly, such as event camera and spike
camera. They can record light intensity changes in high-speed scenes. Especially, for spike camera,
each pixel of it responds independently to the accumulation of photons by generating asynchronous
spikes. It records full visual details with an ultra-high temporal resolution (up to 40kHZ). With these
features, spike camera has demonstrated superiority in handling some high-speed scenarios, such as
video frame interpolation [35] and dynamic scene reconstruction [40, 42, 7, 8, 48].
Since spike camera can record details of high-speed moving objects, it has enormous potential for
estimating more accurate optical flow in high-speed scenes. Considering that deep learning has
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

