On Differentially Private Sampling from Gaussian and
Product Distributions
Badih Ghazi
Google Research
Mountain View, CA, US
badihghazi@gmail.com

Xiao Hu∗
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Canada
xiaohu@uwaterloo.ca

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
Mountain View, CA, US
ravi.k53@gmail.com

Pasin Manurangsi
Google Research
Bangkok, Thailand
pasin@google.com

Abstract
Given a dataset of n i.i.d. samples from an unknown distribution P , we consider
the problem of generating a sample from a distribution that is close to P in total
variation distance, under the constraint of differential privacy (DP). We study the
problem when P is a multi-dimensional Gaussian distribution, under different
assumptions on the information available to the DP mechanism: known covariance,
unknown bounded covariance, and unknown unbounded covariance. We present
new DP sampling algorithms, and show that they achieve near-optimal sample
complexity in the first two settings. Moreover, when P is a product distribution on
the binary hypercube, we obtain a pure-DP algorithm whereas only an approximateDP algorithm (with slightly worse sample complexity) was previously known.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) [18, 16] is a strong and rigorous notion of privacy that has been increasingly
studied and deployed as protection against the leakage of personal data used to train ML models.
A basic setting widely studied in ML is distribution learning, where given samples drawn i.i.d. from
an unknown distribution P , we seek to output a distribution Q that is as close to P as possible
(formal definitions are given in Section 1.1). Recent works [27, 2, 29, 4] have studied DP distribution
learning, whereby the output distribution is guaranteed to stay roughly the same when a single
input sample is changed. A closely related setting is DP mean and covariance estimation studied
by [38, 21, 36, 30, 7, 8, 11, 15, 28, 25, 9, 26]. Motivated by the fact that tasks often require much fewer
samples than full-fledged learning, the very recent work of [35] studied the task of DP distribution
sampling, where the goal is to generate a sample from a distribution Q that is as close as possible to
the distribution P from which the input samples are drawn i.i.d. (In the non-private setting, variants
of the sampling task have also been studied, e.g., in the work on sample amplification by [5].)
In this work, we study DP distribution sampling, and the quantitative gap with respect to the a priori
more challenging task of DP distribution learning. For the case of multi-dimensional Gaussians,
we consider three natural settings: known covariance, unknown bounded covariance, and unknown
unbounded covariance; for the first two, we obtain near-tight bounds. This answers an open question
of [35]. Moreover, we obtain near-tight bounds on sampling in the case of product distributions on
{0, 1}d with pure-DP, also improving upon previous work.
∗

This work was done while the author was visiting Google Research.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

