Differentiable Registration of Images and LiDAR
Point Clouds with VoxelPoint-to-Pixel Matching

Junsheng Zhou1∗ Baorui Ma1,2∗ Wenyuan Zhang1 Yi Fang3
Yu-Shen Liu1† Zhizhong Han4
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China1
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence2 New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE3
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA4
zhoujs21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn brma@baai.ac.cn zhangwen21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
3mmyfang@nyu.edu liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Cross-modality registration between 2D images from cameras and 3D point clouds
from LiDARs is a crucial task in computer vision and robotic. Previous methods
estimate 2D-3D correspondences by matching point and pixel patterns learned by
neural networks, and use Perspective-n-Points (PnP) to estimate rigid transformation during post-processing. However, these methods struggle to map points and
pixels to a shared latent space robustly since points and pixels have very different characteristics with patterns learned in different manners (MLP and CNN),
and they also fail to construct supervision directly on the transformation since
the PnP is non-differentiable, which leads to unstable registration results. To
address these problems, we propose to learn a structured cross-modality latent
space to represent pixel features and 3D features via a differentiable probabilistic
PnP solver. Specifically, we design a triplet network to learn VoxelPoint-to-Pixel
matching, where we represent 3D elements using both voxels and points to learn
the cross-modality latent space with pixels. We design both the voxel and pixel
branch based on CNNs to operate convolutions on voxels/pixels represented in
grids, and integrate an additional point branch to regain the information lost during voxelization. We train our framework end-to-end by imposing supervisions
directly on the predicted pose distribution with a probabilistic PnP solver. To
explore distinctive patterns of cross-modality features, we design a novel loss
with adaptive-weighted optimization for cross-modality feature description. The
experimental results on KITTI and nuScenes datasets show significant improvements over the state-of-the-art methods. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/junshengzhou/VP2P-Match.

1

Introduction

Image-to-Point Cloud registration finds the rigid transformation (e.g. translation and rotation) that
aligns the projection of a LiDAR frame represented as a point cloud to the reference image captured
by cameras. The key here is to determine the extrinsic parameters of the camera with respect to the
reference frame of LiDAR. It plays an important role in autonomous driving, 3D computer vision,
augmented/virtual reality, etc. Despite a plethora of approaches have explored the same-modality
registration tasks (e.g. Image-to-Image [50, 13] and Point Cloud-to-Point Cloud registration [25, 1])
and achieve promising results, few researches have shown convincing performances on cross-modality
registration between images and point clouds due to its inherent difficulty.
∗

Equal contribution.† The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

