The Behavior and Convergence of
Local Bayesian Optimization

Kaiwen Wu
University of Pennsylvania
kaiwenwu@seas.upenn.edu

Kyurae Kim
University of Pennsylvania
kyrkim@seas.upenn.edu

Roman Garnett
Washington University in St. Louis
garnett@wustl.edu

Jacob R. Gardner
University of Pennsylvania
jacobrg@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
A recent development in Bayesian optimization is the use of local optimization
strategies, which can deliver strong empirical performance on high-dimensional
problems compared to traditional global strategies. The “folk wisdom” in the literature is that the focus on local optimization sidesteps the curse of dimensionality;
however, little is known concretely about the expected behavior or convergence
of Bayesian local optimization routines. We first study the behavior of the local
approach, and find that the statistics of individual local solutions of Gaussian
process sample paths are surprisingly good compared to what we would expect to
recover from global methods. We then present the first rigorous analysis of such a
Bayesian local optimization algorithm recently proposed by Müller et al. (2021),
and derive convergence rates in both the noiseless and noisy settings.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) [11] is among the most well studied and successful algorithms for solving
black-box optimization problems, with wide ranging applications from hyperparameter tuning [23],
reinforcement learning [19, 27], to recent applications in small molecule [18, 26, 7, 13, 12] and
sequence design [25]. Despite its success, the curse of dimensionality has been a long-standing
challenge for the framework. Cumulative regret for BO scales exponentially with the dimensionality
of the search space, unless strong assumptions like additive structure [15] are met. Empirically, BO
has historically struggled on optimization problems with more than a handful of dimensions.
Recently, local approaches to Bayesian optimization have empirically shown great promise in
addressing high-dimensional optimization problems [10, 19, 20, 27, 17]. The approach is intuitively
appealing: a typical claim is that a local optimum can be found relatively quickly, and exponential
sample complexity is only necessary if one wishes to enumerate all local optima. However, these
intuitions have not been fully formalized. While global Bayesian optimization is well studied under
controlled assumptions [24, 3], little is known about the behavior or convergence properties of local
Bayesian optimization in these same settings — the related literature focuses mostly on strong
empirical results on real-world applications.
In this paper, we begin to close this gap by investigating the behavior of and proving convergence
rates for local BO under the same well-studied assumptions commonly used to analyze global BO.
We divide our study of the properties of local BO in to two questions:
Q1 Using common assumptions (e.g., when the objective function is a sample path from a GP with
known hyperparameters), how good are the local solutions that local BO converges to?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

