S WIFT S AGE: A Generative Agent with
Fast and Slow Thinking for Complex Interactive Tasks
Bill Yuchen Lin 1 Yicheng Fu 4 Karina Yang 2 Faeze Brahman 13
Chandra Bhagavatula 1 Prithviraj Ammanabrolu 67 Yejin Choi 31
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
University of Southern California 3 University of Washington
5
4Paradigm Inc. 6 University of California, San Diego

Shiyu Huang 5
Xiang Ren 21

1

2

4

Tsinghua University
MosaicML

7

https://swiftsage.github.io

Abstract
We introduce S WIFT S AGE, a novel agent framework inspired by the dual-process
theory of human cognition, designed to excel in action planning for complex
interactive reasoning tasks. S WIFT S AGE integrates the strengths of behavior
cloning and prompting large language models (LLMs) to enhance task completion
performance. The framework comprises two primary modules: the S WIFT module,
representing fast and intuitive thinking, and the S AGE module, emulating deliberate
thought processes. The S WIFT module is a small encoder-decoder LM fine-tuned
on the oracle agent’s action trajectories, while the S AGE module employs LLMs
such as GPT-4 for subgoal planning and grounding. We develop a heuristic method
to harmoniously integrate the two modules, resulting in a more efficient and
robust problem-solving process. In 30 tasks from the ScienceWorld benchmark,
S WIFT S AGE significantly outperforms other methods such as SayCan, ReAct, and
Reflexion, demonstrating its effectiveness in solving complex interactive tasks.1

1

Introduction

The advancement of artificial general intelligence is largely dependent on the development of agents
that are proficient in complex interactive reasoning tasks. These agents should be capable of exhibiting
problem-solving abilities akin to humans within dynamic, open-world environments [26, 7]. For
example, the ScienceWorld benchmark [36] features a task where an agent must determine the
electrical conductivity of an unknown object. In a simulated environment, the agent must navigate to
appropriate rooms, locate and acquire essential items, such as batteries and light bulbs, build a circuit,
perform an experiment, and interpret the results. Tackling such a complex interactive task demands
agents to exhibit long-horizon planning, long-term memorization, subgoal decomposition, spatial
reasoning, exception handling, and commonsense knowledge capabilities [37].
There are three primary approaches to developing agents capable of addressing complex interactive
reasoning tasks: (1) (deep) reinforcement learning (RL), (2) behavior cloning (BC) [34] through
sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) learning [33], and (3) prompting large language models (LLMs) [6].
In addition to conventional RL methods such as DRRN [14], interactive reasoning can be framed as a
seq2seq task, where the input text serves as the current state description and the output text corresponds
to the subsequent action [9, 3]. By leveraging numerous gold trajectories generated by oracle agents,
it becomes feasible to fine-tune Transformer models [35], like T5 [25], to effectively imitate the
1

Contact: yuchenl@allenai.org

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

