TD Convergence: An Optimization Perspective

Kavosh Asadi∗
Amazon
Yao Liu
Amazon

Shoham Sabach∗
Amazon & Technion

Omer Gottesman
Amazon

Rasool Fakoor
Amazon

Abstract
We study the convergence behavior of the celebrated temporal-difference (TD)
learning algorithm. By looking at the algorithm through the lens of optimization,
we first argue that TD can be viewed as an iterative optimization algorithm where
the function to be minimized changes per iteration. By carefully investigating
the divergence displayed by TD on a classical counter example, we identify two
forces that determine the convergent or divergent behavior of the algorithm. We
next formalize our discovery in the linear TD setting with quadratic loss and prove
that convergence of TD hinges on the interplay between these two forces. We extend this optimization perspective to prove convergence of TD in a much broader
setting than just linear approximation and squared loss. Our results provide a theoretical explanation for the successful application of TD in reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Temporal-difference (TD) learning is arguably one of the most important algorithms in reinforcement learning (RL), and many RL algorithms are based on principles that TD embodies. TD is at
the epicenter of some of the recent success examples of RL [1, 2], and has influenced many areas of
science such as AI, economics, and neuroscience. Despite the remarkable success of TD in numerous settings, the algorithm is shown to display divergent behavior in contrived examples [3, 4, 5].
In practice, however, divergence rarely manifests itself even in situations where TD is used in conjunction with complicated function approximators. Thus, it is worthwhile to obtain a deeper understanding of TD, and to generalize existing convergence results to explain its practical success.
In this paper, our desire is to study TD through the lens of optimization. We argue that TD could
best be thought of as an iterative optimization algorithm, which proceeds as follows:
θt+1 ≈ arg min H(θt , w) .
w

(1)

Here, the objective H is constructed by a) choosing a function approximator such as a neural network
and b) defining a discrepancy measure between successive predictions, such as the squared error. We
will discuss more examples later.
This process involves two different parameters, namely the target parameter θt that remains fixed at
each iteration t, and the optimization parameter w that is adjusted during each iteration to minimize
the corresponding loss function. Using the more familiar deep-RL terminology, θt corresponds to
the parameters of the target network, whereas w corresponds to the parameters of the online network.
Many RL algorithms can be described by this iterative process with the main difference being the
approach taken to (approximately) perform the minimization. At one side of the spectrum lies the
original TD algorithm [6], which proceeds by taking a single gradient-descent step to adjust w and
immediately updating θ. More generally, at each iteration t we can update the w parameter K times
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

