The Tunnel Effect: Building Data Representations
in Deep Neural Networks

Wojciech Masarczyk1,*

Mateusz Ostaszewski1

Piotr Miłoś4,5

Ehsan Imani2

Razvan Pascanu3

Tomasz Trzciński1,4,6

Abstract
Deep neural networks are widely known for their remarkable effectiveness across
various tasks, with the consensus that deeper networks implicitly learn more
complex data representations. This paper shows that sufficiently deep networks
trained for supervised image classification split into two distinct parts that contribute
to the resulting data representations differently. The initial layers create linearlyseparable representations, while the subsequent layers, which we refer to as the
tunnel, compress these representations and have a minimal impact on the overall
performance. We explore the tunnel’s behavior through comprehensive empirical
studies, highlighting that it emerges early in the training process. Its depth depends
on the relation between the network’s capacity and task complexity. Furthermore,
we show that the tunnel degrades out-of-distribution generalization and discuss its
implications for continual learning.

1

Introduction

Accuracy

Numerical rank

Neural networks have been the powerhouse
0.9
6000
of machine learning in the last decade. A
0.8
significant effort has been put into under0.7
4000
Numerical rank
standing the mechanisms underlying their
Linear probing ACC 0.6
effectiveness. One example is the analysis
0.5
2000
of building representations in neural net0.4
works applied to image processing [1]. The
0
0.3
consensus is that networks learn to use lay1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
ers in the hierarchy by extracting more comLayer
plex features than the layers before [2, 3],
meaning that each layer contributes to the Figure 1: The tunnel effect for VGG19 trained on the
final network performance.
CIFAR-10. In the tunnel (shaded area), the performance of
Extensive research has shown that increas- linear probes attached to each layer saturates (blue line), and
the representations rank is steeply reduced (red dashed line).
ing network depth exponentially enhances
capacity, measured as the number of linear regions [4–6]. However, practical scenarios reveal
that deep and overparameterized neural networks tend to simplify representations with increasing
1

Warsaw University of Technology, Poland
University of Alberta, Canada
3
University College London, UK
4
IDEAS NCBR, Poland
5
Institute of Mathematics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland
6
Tooploox, Poland
* Corresponding author: wojciech.masarczyk@gmail.com
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

