ReSync: Riemannian Subgradient-based
Robust Rotation Synchronization

Huikang Liu
School of Information Management and Engineering
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
liuhuikang@shufe.edu.cn
Xiao Li∗
School of Data Science
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
lixiao@cuhk.edu.cn
Anthony Man-Cho So
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
manchoso@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
This work presents ReSync, a Riemannian subgradient-based algorithm for solving
the robust rotation synchronization problem, which arises in various engineering
applications. ReSync solves a least-unsquared minimization formulation over
the rotation group, which is nonsmooth and nonconvex, and aims at recovering
the underlying rotations directly. We provide strong theoretical guarantees for
ReSync under the random corruption setting. Specifically, we first show that the
initialization procedure of ReSync yields a proper initial point that lies in a local
region around the ground-truth rotations. We next establish the weak sharpness
property of the aforementioned formulation and then utilize this property to derive
the local linear convergence of ReSync to the ground-truth rotations. By combining
these guarantees, we conclude that ReSync converges linearly to the ground-truth
rotations under appropriate conditions. Experiment results demonstrate the effectiveness of ReSync.

1

Introduction

Rotation synchronization (RS) is a fundamental problem in many engineering applications. For
instance, RS (also known as “rotation averaging”) is an important subproblem of structure from
motion (SfM) and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) in computer vision [20, 22, 17],
where the goal is to compute the absolute orientations of objects from relative rotations between pairs
of objects. RS has also been applied to sensor network localization [41, 12], signal recovery from
phaseless observations [2], digital communications [36], and cryo-EM imaging [35, 33].
Practical measurements of relative rotations are often incomplete and corrupted, leading to the
problem of robust rotation synchronization (RRS) [28, 21, 22, 39, 9, 31]. The goal of RRS is to
reconstruct a set of ground-truth rotations X1? , · · · , Xi? , · · · , Xn? ∈ SO(d) from measurements of
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

