Scenario Diffusion: Controllable Driving Scenario
Generation With Diffusion
Ethan Pronovost∗ Meghana Reddy Ganesina Noureldin Hendy Zeyu Wang†
Andres Morales Kai Wang Nicholas Roy
Zoox
{epronovost,mrganesina,nhendy,zewang,andres,kai,nroy}@zoox.com

Abstract
Automated creation of synthetic traffic scenarios is a key part of validating the
safety of autonomous vehicles (AVs). In this paper, we propose Scenario Diffusion,
a novel diffusion-based architecture for generating traffic scenarios that enables
controllable scenario generation. We combine latent diffusion, object detection and
trajectory regression to generate distributions of synthetic agent poses, orientations
and trajectories simultaneously. To provide additional control over the generated
scenario, this distribution is conditioned on a map and sets of tokens describing the
desired scenario. We show that our approach has sufficient expressive capacity to
model diverse traffic patterns and generalizes to different geographical regions.

1

Introduction

Automated creation of synthetic traffic scenarios is a key part of validating the safety of autonomous
vehicles (AVs). To efficiently target rare and safety critical scenarios we would like to direct scenario
generation to produce specific types of events. Prior methods for heuristically created scenarios tend
to be of limited complexity and miss a large number of possible real-world situations [5, 7, 16, 17].
Recent works using deep learning models [2, 6, 32] are able to produce complex scenarios conditioned
on a map region, but do not offer additional controls over the generation process. In this paper we
propose Scenario Diffusion: a novel architecture for generating realistic traffic scenarios that enables
controllable scenario generation.
Our problem setting is to generate a set of bounding boxes with associated trajectories that describe
the location and behavior of agents in a driving scenario. We accomplish this scenario generation
using a denoising diffusion generative model [12, 27, 29]. We condition our model on both a map
image and a set of tokens describing the scenario. We leverage these tokens to provide a variable
rate of control over the generated scenario, so that the diffusion model can generalize to complex
scenes conditioned only on a small set of tokens that control both a subset of the individual agents
and global scene properties. Further, this variable rate of control allows us to learn the model from
partially tokenized training instances, substantially reducing the labelling requirements.
Motivated by the insight that the instantaneous position of each agent is inextricably linked to
their behaviors, we combine latent diffusion [24], object detection, and trajectory regression to
simultaneously generate both oriented bounding boxes and trajectories, providing a generative model
of both the static placement of agents and their behaviors. We evaluate Scenario Diffusion at
generating driving scenarios conditioned on only the map, and with additional conditioning tokens
as well. Finally, we provide an analysis of the generalization capabilities of our model across
geographical regions, showing that our diffusion-based approach has sufficient expressive capacity to
model diverse traffic patterns.
∗
†

Corresponding author
Work done during an internship at Zoox

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

