Learning Motion Refinement for Unsupervised
Face Animation
Jiale Tao1∗ Shuhang Gu1 Wen Li2† Lixin Duan1,2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, UESTC1
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, UESTC2
{jialetao.std, shuhanggu, liwenbnu, lxduan}@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised face animation aims to generate a human face video based on the
appearance of a source image, mimicking the motion from a driving video. Existing
methods typically adopted a prior-based motion model (e.g., the local affine motion
model or the local thin-plate-spline motion model). While it is able to capture
the coarse facial motion, artifacts can often be observed around the tiny motion
in local areas (e.g., lips and eyes), due to the limited ability of these methods
to model the finer facial motions. In this work, we design a new unsupervised
face animation approach to learn simultaneously the coarse and finer motions. In
particular, while exploiting the local affine motion model to learn the global coarse
facial motion, we design a novel motion refinement module to compensate for
the local affine motion model for modeling finer face motions in local areas. The
motion refinement is learned from the dense correlation between the source and
driving images. Specifically, we first construct a structure correlation volume based
on the keypoint features of the source and driving images. Then, we train a model
to generate the tiny facial motions iteratively from low to high resolution. The
learned motion refinements are combined with the coarse motion to generate the
new image. Extensive experiments on widely used benchmarks demonstrate that
our method achieves the best results among state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Face animation aims to generate a human face video based on the appearance of a source image to
mimic the motion from a driving video. It has gained increasing attention from the community in
recent years, due to its great potential in various applications including face swapping, digital humans,
video conferencing, and more. Additionally, the emergence of large-scale face video datasets [18, 44]
has further contributed to this growing interest.
Existing works on face animation can generally be divided into two categories: model-based and
model-free methods (a.k.a supervised and unsupervised methods). On one hand, model-based
methods [7, 33] typically use predefined 2D or 3D facial priors, such as 2D landmarks [20] and
3DMM parameters [2], to provide pose and expression information in the generated videos. While
these methods have the advantage of describing accurate face poses, they are limited by overly strict
structure priors that are not robust to hair and neck motions, which can heavily affect their performance
in real-world applications. On the other hand, model-free animation is a more challenging and
interesting problem, which aims to automatically learn the motion patterns without using predefined
2D or 3D facial models, thus being more flexible and robust in real-world scenarios. With the
emergence of large-scale face video datasets, model-free methods have become more popular in
∗
†

Codes will be available at https://github.com/JialeTao/MRFA/
The Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

