A Unified Approach to Domain Incremental Learning
with Memory: Theory and Algorithm

Haizhou Shi
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854
haizhou.shi@rutgers.edu

Hao Wang
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854
hw488@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Domain incremental learning aims to adapt to a sequence of domains with access
to only a small subset of data (i.e., memory) from previous domains. Various
methods have been proposed for this problem, but it is still unclear how they are
related and when practitioners should choose one method over another. In response,
we propose a unified framework, dubbed Unified Domain Incremental Learning
(UDIL), for domain incremental learning with memory. Our UDIL unifies various
existing methods, and our theoretical analysis shows that UDIL always achieves
a tighter generalization error bound compared to these methods. The key insight
is that different existing methods correspond to our bound with different fixed
coefficients; based on insights from this unification, our UDIL allows adaptive
coefficients during training, thereby always achieving the tightest bound. Empirical
results show that our UDIL outperforms the state-of-the-art domain incremental
learning methods on both synthetic and real-world datasets. Code will be available
at https://github.com/Wang-ML-Lab/unified-continual-learning.

1

Introduction

Despite recent success of large-scale machine learning models [35, 48, 36, 28, 92, 22, 33], continually
learning from evolving environments remains a longstanding challenge. Unlike the conventional
machine learning paradigms where learning is performed on a static dataset, domain incremental
learning, i.e., continual learning with evolving domains, hopes to accommodate the model to the
dynamically changing data distributions, while retaining the knowledge learned from previous
domains [90, 60, 41, 97, 27]. Naive methods, such as continually finetuning the model on newcoming domains, will suffer a substantial performance drop on the previous domains; this is referred
to as “catastrophic forgetting” [46, 58, 81, 105, 52]. In general, domain incremental learning
algorithms aim to minimize the total risk of all domains, i.e.,
L∗ (θ) = Lt (θ) + L1:t−1 (θ) = E(x,y)∼Dt [ℓ(y, hθ (x)] +

t−1
X

E(x,y)∼Di [ℓ(y, hθ (x)],

(1)

i=1

where Lt calculates model hθ ’s expected prediction error ℓ over the current domain’s data distribution
Dt . L1:t−1 is the total error evaluated on the past t − 1 domains’ data distributions, i.e., {Di }t−1
i=1 .
The main challenge of domain incremental learning comes from the practical memory constraint
that no (or only very limited) access to the past domains’ data is allowed [52, 46, 105, 74]. Under
such a constraint, it is difficult, if not impossible, to accurately estimate and optimize the past error
L1:t−1 . Therefore the main focus of recent domain incremental learning methods has been to develop
effective surrogate learning objectives for L1:t−1 . Among these methods [46, 81, 2, 105, 58, 10, 75,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

