Easy Learning from Label Proportions

Robert Busa-Fekete
Google Research
busarobi@google.com

Heejin Choi∗
Coupang Inc
hechoi53@coupang.com

Claudio Gentile
Google Research
cgentilek@google.com

Travis Dick
Google Research
tdick@google.com

Andres Munoz Medina
Google Research
ammmedina@google.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of Learning from Label Proportions (LLP), a weakly
supervised classification setup where instances are grouped into i.i.d. “bags”, and
only the frequency of class labels at each bag is available. Albeit, the objective
of the learner is to achieve low task loss at an individual instance level. Here
we propose E ASY LLP, a flexible and simple-to-implement debiasing approach
based on aggregate labels, which operates on arbitrary loss functions. Our technique allows us to accurately estimate the expected loss of an arbitrary model at
an individual level. We elucidate the differences between our method and standard methods based on label proportion matching, in terms of applicability and
optimality conditions. We showcase the flexibility of our approach compared to
alternatives by applying our method to popular learning frameworks, like Empirical
Risk Minimization (ERM) and Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with provable
guarantees on instance level performance. Finally, we validate our theoretical
results on multiple datasets, empirically illustrating the conditions under which our
algorithm is expected to perform better or worse than previous LLP approaches.

1

Introduction

In traditional supervised learning problems, a learner has access to a sample of labeled examples. This
collection of labeled examples is used to fit a model – to name a few, decision trees, neural networks,
random forests – by minimizing a loss over the observed sample. By contrast, in the problem of
Learning from Label Proportions (LLP), the learner only observes collections of unlabeled feature
vectors called bags, together with the proportion of positive examples in each bag. The LLP problem
is motivated by a number of applications where access to individual examples is too expensive or
impossible to achieve, or available at aggregate level for privacy-preserving reasons. Examples
include e-commerce, fraud detection, medical databases [20], high energy physics [6], election
prediction [30], medical image analysis [4], remote sensing [7].
As a weakly supervised learning paradigm, LLP traces back to at least [5, 19, 22, 23, 32], and was
motivated there by learning scenarios where access to individual examples is often not available. A
paradigmatic example is perhaps a political campaign trying to predict the preference of the electorate.
Since voting is anonymous, a political analyst may not be able to observe individual votes, yet, they
have access to aggregate voting preferences at the district level.
The problem has received renewed interest more recently (e.g., [8, 17, 26, 24, 25, 31, 16, 34]), driven
by the desire to provide more privacy to user information. For instance the ad conversion reporting
∗

Work done while at Google.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

