Error Bounds for Learning with
Vector-Valued Random Features
Samuel Lanthaler∗
California Institute of Technology
slanth@caltech.edu

Nicholas H. Nelsen∗
California Institute of Technology
nnelsen@caltech.edu

Abstract
This paper provides a comprehensive error analysis of learning with vector-valued
random features (RF). The theory is developed for RF ridge regression in a fully
general infinite-dimensional input-output setting, but nonetheless applies to and
improves existing finite-dimensional analyses. In contrast to comparable work in
the literature, the approach proposed here relies on a direct analysis of the underlying risk functional and completely avoids the explicit RF ridge regression solution
formula in terms of random matrices. This removes the need for concentration
results in random matrix theory or their generalizations to random operators. The
main results established in this paper include strong consistency of vector-valued
RF estimators under model misspecification and minimax optimal convergence
rates in the well-specified setting. The parameter complexity (number of random
features) and sample complexity (number of labeled data) required to achieve such
rates are comparable with Monte Carlo intuition and free from logarithmic factors.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning of an unknown mapping G : X → Y is a core task in machine learning. The
random feature model (RFM), proposed in [36, 37], combines randomization with optimization to
accomplish this task. The RFM is based on a linear expansion with respect to a randomized basis, the
random features (RF). The coefficients in this RF expansion are optimized to fit the given data of
input-output pairs. For popular loss functions, such as the square loss, the RFM leads to a convex
optimization problem which can be solved efficiently and reliably.
The RFM provides a scalable approximation of an underlying kernel method [36, 37]. While the former is based on an expansion in M random features φ( · ; θ1 ), . . . , φ( · ; θM ), the corresponding kernel
method relies on an expansion in values of a positive definite kernel function K( · , u1 ), . . . , K( · , uN )
on a dataset of size N . Kernel methods are conceptually appealing, theoretically sound, and have
attracted considerable interest [1, 6, 40]. However, they require the storage, manipulation, and often
inversion of the kernel matrix K with entries K(ui , uj ). The size of K scales quadratically in the
number of samples N , which can be prohibitive for large datasets. When the underlying input-output
map is vector-valued with dim(Y) = p, the often significant computational cost of kernel methods is
further exacerbated by the fact that each entry K(ui , uj ) of K is, in general, a p-by-p matrix. Hence,
the size of K scales quadratically in both N and p. This severely limits the applicability of kernel
methods to problems with high-dimensional, or indeed infinite-dimensional, output space. In contrast,
learning with RF only requires storage of RF matrices whose size is quadratic in the number of
features M . When M ≪ N p, this implies substantial computational savings, with the most extreme
case being the infinite-dimensional setting in which p = ∞.
In the context of operator learning, the underlying target mapping is an operator G : X → Y with
infinite-dimensional input and output spaces. Such operators appear naturally in scientific computing
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

