Hybrid Search for Efficient Planning with
Completeness Guarantees

Kalle Kujanpää1,3∗, Joni Pajarinen2,3 , Alexander Ilin1,3,4
1
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University
2
Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Aalto University
3
Finnish Center for Artificial Intelligence FCAI
4
System 2 AI
{kalle.kujanpaa,joni.pajarinen,alexander.ilin}@aalto.fi

Abstract
Solving complex planning problems has been a long-standing challenge in computer science. Learning-based subgoal search methods have shown promise in
tackling these problems, but they often suffer from a lack of completeness guarantees, meaning that they may fail to find a solution even if one exists. In this paper,
we propose an efficient approach to augment a subgoal search method to achieve
completeness in discrete action spaces. Specifically, we augment the high-level
search with low-level actions to execute a multi-level (hybrid) search, which we
call complete subgoal search. This solution achieves the best of both worlds: the
practical efficiency of high-level search and the completeness of low-level search.
We apply the proposed search method to a recently proposed subgoal search algorithm and evaluate the algorithm trained on offline data on complex planning
problems. We demonstrate that our complete subgoal search not only guarantees
completeness but can even improve performance in terms of search expansions
for instances that the high-level could solve without low-level augmentations. Our
approach makes it possible to apply subgoal-level planning for systems where
completeness is a critical requirement.

1

Introduction

Combining planning with deep learning has led to significant advances in many fields, such as
automated theorem proving [33], classical board games [39], puzzles [1], Atari games [38], video
compression [24], robotics [5], and autonomous driving [43]. However, deep learning-based methods
often plan in terms of low-level actions, such as individual moves in chess or commands in Atari
games, whereas humans tend to plan by decomposing problems into smaller subproblems [11]. This
observation has inspired a lot of recent research into methods that solve complex tasks by performing
hierarchical planning and search. In the continuous setting, hierarchical planning has been applied to,
for instance, robotic manipulation and navigation [31, 25, 12, 6, 15]. Discrete hierarchical planning
methods, when trained entirely on offline data, can solve complex problems with high combinatorial
complexity. These methods are efficient at long-term planning thanks to the hierarchy reducing the
effective planning horizon [4, 18, 45]. Furthermore, they reduce the impact of noise on planning [4]
and show promising generalization ability to out-of-distribution tasks [45]. Training RL agents on
diverse multi-task offline data has been shown to scale and generalize broadly to new tasks, and being
compatible with training without any environment interaction can be seen as an additional strength of
these methods [20, 5, 42].
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

