Optimal Rates for Bandit Nonstochastic Control
Y. Jennifer Sun ⇤
Princeton University
Google DeepMind
ys7849@princeton.edu

Stephen Newman ⇤
Princeton University
sn9581@princeton.edu

Elad Hazan
Princeton University & Google DeepMind
ehazan@princeton.edu

Abstract
Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) and Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) control
are foundational and extensively researched problems in optimal control. We
investigate LQR and LQG problems with semi-adversarial perturbations and timevarying adversarial bandit loss functions. The best-known sublinear regret algo3
rithm of Gradu et al. [2020] has a T 4 time horizon dependence,
and the authors
p
posed an open question about whether a tight rate of T could be achieved. We
answer in the affirmative, giving an algorithm for bandit LQR and LQG which
attains optimal regret (up to logarithmic factors) for both known and unknown
systems. A central component of our method is a new scheme for bandit convex
optimization with memory, which is of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Linear-Quadratic Regulator (LQR) and the more general Linear-Gaussian (LQG) control problems
have been extensively studied in the field of control theory due to their wide range of applications
and admittance of analytical solutions by the seminal works of Bellman [1954] and Kalman [1960].
LQR and LQG control problems study the design of a feedback control policy for a linear dynamical
system with the goal of minimizing cumulative, possibly time-varying quadratic costs. The discrete
version of the problem studies the control of the following linear dynamical system governed by
dynamics (A, B, C) 1 :
xt+1 = Axt + But + wt , yt = Cxt + et ,
where at time t, xt represents the system’s state, ut represents the control exerted on the system,
and {wt }Tt=1 represents a sequence of i.i.d. centered Gaussian perturbations injected to the system.
For a simple example of the model, consider the problem of controlling an elevator to reach the
desired floors while minimizing the discomfort (due to acceleration or deceleration) and the energy
consumption. In this case, the state xt would be a vector consisting of the elevator’s position and
velocity at time t. The control input ut is the force applied by the elevator motor at time t. wt
represents process noise at time t, caused possibly by unexpected mechanical disturbances. In the
generality of LQG, the system’s states are not accessible. In the elevator example, one may not have
the access to the measurement of the elevator’s velocity or the precise position of the elevator. Instead,
the algorithm has access to an observation yt , which is a linear transformation of state perturbed by a
sequence {et }Tt=1 of i.i.d. centered Gaussian noises, i.e. the elevator’s observed position. The cost is
1
The LQR/LQG dynamics can be generalized to time-varying linear dynamical systems. Here we restrict
ourselves to linear time-invariant systems for simplicity.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

