Cinematic Mindscapes: High-quality Video
Reconstruction from Brain Activity

Zijiao Chen∗
National University of Singapore
zijiao.chen@u.nus.edu

Jiaxin Qing∗
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
jqing@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Juan Helen Zhou†
National University of Singapore
helen.zhou@nus.edu.sg

https://mind-video.com
Abstract
Reconstructing human vision from brain activities has been an appealing task that
helps to understand our cognitive process. Even though recent research has seen great
success in reconstructing static images from non-invasive brain recordings, work on
recovering continuous visual experiences in the form of videos is limited. In this work,
we propose MinD-Video that learns spatiotemporal information from continuous fMRI
data of the cerebral cortex progressively through masked brain modeling, multimodal
contrastive learning with spatiotemporal attention, and co-training with an augmented
Stable Diffusion model that incorporates network temporal inflation. We show that
high-quality videos of arbitrary frame rates can be reconstructed with MinD-Video
using adversarial guidance. The recovered videos were evaluated with various semantic
and pixel-level metrics. We achieved an average accuracy of 85% in semantic
classification tasks and 0.19 in structural similarity index (SSIM), outperforming the
previous state-of-the-art by 45%. We also show that our model is biologically plausible
and interpretable, reflecting established physiological processes.

1 Introduction
Life unfolds like a film reel, each moment seamlessly transitioning into the next, forming a “perpetual
theater” of experiences. This dynamic narrative forms our perception, explored through the naturalistic
paradigm, painting the brain as a moviegoer engrossed in the relentless film of experience. Understanding
the information hidden within our complex brain activities is a big puzzle in cognitive neuroscience. The task
of recreating human vision from brain recordings, especially using non-invasive tools like functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), is an exciting but difficult task. Non-invasive methods, while less intrusive,
capture limited information, susceptible to various interferences like noise [1]. Furthermore, the acquisition
of neuroimaging data is a complex, costly process. Despite these complexities, progress has been made,
notably in learning valuable fMRI features with limited fMRI-annotation pairs. Deep learning and representation learning have achieved significant results in visual class detections [2, 3] and static image reconstruction [4, 5, 6, 7, 8], advancing our understanding of the vibrant, ever-changing spectacle of human perception.
Unlike still images, our vision is a continuous, diverse flow of scenes, motions, and objects. To recover
dynamic visual experience, the challenge lies in the nature of fMRI, which measures blood oxygenation
level dependent (BOLD) signals and captures snapshots of brain activity every few seconds. Each fMRI scan
∗
†

Equal contributions
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

