Optimal approximation
using complex-valued neural networks

Paul Geuchen
MIDS,
KU Eichstätt-Ingolstadt,
Auf der Schanz 49,
85049 Ingolstadt, Germany
paul.geuchen@ku.de

Felix Voigtlaender
MIDS,
KU Eichstätt-Ingolstadt,
Auf der Schanz 49,
85049 Ingolstadt, Germany
felix.voigtlaender@ku.de

Abstract
Complex-valued neural networks (CVNNs) have recently shown promising
empirical success, for instance for increasing the stability of recurrent neural
networks and for improving the performance in tasks with complex-valued inputs,
such as in MRI fingerprinting. While the overwhelming success of Deep Learning
in the real-valued case is supported by a growing mathematical foundation, such a
foundation is still largely lacking in the complex-valued case. We thus analyze the
expressivity of CVNNs by studying their approximation properties. Our results
yield the first quantitative approximation bounds for CVNNs that apply to a wide
class of activation functions including the popular modReLU and complex cardioid
activation functions. Precisely, our results apply to any activation function that
is smooth but not polyharmonic on some non-empty open set; this is the natural
generalization of the class of smooth and non-polynomial activation functions to
the complex setting. Our main result shows that the error for the approximation of
C k -functions scales as m−k/(2n) for m → ∞ where m is the number of neurons,
k the smoothness of the target function and n is the (complex) input dimension.
Under a natural continuity assumption, we show that this rate is optimal; we further
discuss the optimality when dropping this assumption. Moreover, we prove that the
problem of approximating C k -functions using continuous approximation methods
unavoidably suffers from the curse of dimensionality.

1

Introduction

Deep Learning currently predominantly relies on real-valued neural networks, which have led to
breakthroughs in fields like image classification or speech recognition [23, 27, 43]. However, recent
work has uncovered several application areas in which the use of complex-valued neural networks
(CVNNs) leads to better results than the use of their real-valued counterparts. These application
areas mainly include tasks where complex numbers inherently occur as inputs of a machine learning
model such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) [16, 38, 44] and Polarimetric Synthetic Aperture
Radar (PolSAR) Imaging [8, 9, 48]. Moreover, CVNNs have been used to improve the stability
of recurrent neural networks [5] and have been successfully applied in various other fields [32,
37]. The mathematical theory of these complex-valued neural networks, however, is still in its
infancy. There is therefore a great interest in studying CVNNs and in particular in uncovering the
differences and commonalities between CVNNs and their real-valued counterparts. A prominent
example highlighting the unexpected differences between both network classes is the universal
approximation theorem for neural networks, whose most general real-valued version was proven in
1993 [28] (with a more restricted version appearing earlier [17]) and which was recently generalized
to the case of CVNNs [45]. The two theorems describe necessary and sufficient conditions on
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

