Energy-Based Models for Anomaly Detection:
A Manifold Diffusion Recovery Approach

Sangwoong Yoon
Korea Institute for Advanced Study
swyoon@kias.re.kr

Young-Uk Jin
Samsung Electronics
yueric.jin@samsung.com

Yung-Kyun Noh∗
Hanyang University
Korea Institute for Advanced Study
nohyung@hanyang.ac.kr

Frank C. Park∗
Seoul National University
Saige Research
fcp@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a new method of training energy-based models (EBMs) for anomaly
detection that leverages low-dimensional structures within data. The proposed
algorithm, Manifold Projection-Diffusion Recovery (MPDR), first perturbs a data
point along a low-dimensional manifold that approximates the training dataset.
Then, EBM is trained to maximize the probability of recovering the original
data. The training involves the generation of negative samples via MCMC, as in
conventional EBM training, but from a different distribution concentrated near the
manifold. The resulting near-manifold negative samples are highly informative,
reflecting relevant modes of variation in data. An energy function of MPDR
effectively learns accurate boundaries of the training data distribution and excels
at detecting out-of-distribution samples. Experimental results show that MPDR
exhibits strong performance across various anomaly detection tasks involving
diverse data types, such as images, vectors, and acoustic signals.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised detection of anomalous data appears frequently in practical applications, such as
industrial surface inspection [1], machine fault detection [2, 3], and particle physics [4]. Modeling
the probability distribution of normal data pdata (x) is a principled approach for anomaly detection
[5]. Anomalies, often called outliers or out-of-distribution (OOD) samples, lie outside of the
data distribution and can thus be characterized by low probability density under the distribution.
However, many deep generative models that can evaluate the likelihood of data, including variational
autoencoders (VAE; [6]), autoregressive models [7], and flow-based models [8] are known to perform
poorly on popular anomaly detection benchmarks such as CIFAR-10 (in) vs SVHN (out), by assigning
high likelihood on seemingly trivial outliers [9, 10].
On the other hand, deep energy-based models (EBMs) have demonstrated notable improvement in
anomaly detection compared to other deep generative models [11]. While the specific reason for the
superior performance of EBMs has not been formally analyzed, one probable factor is the explicit
mechanism employed in EBM’s maximum likelihood training that reduces the likelihood of negative
samples. These negative samples are generated from the model distribution pθ (x) using Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). Since modern EBMs operate in high-dimensional data spaces, it is
extremely difficult to cover the entire space with a finite-length Markov chain. The difficulty in
∗

Corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

