RangePerception: Taming LiDAR Range View for
Efficient and Accurate 3D Object Detection

Yeqi Bai1 Ben Fei1,2 Youquan Liu1 Tao Ma1,3
Yuenan Hou1 Botian Shi1,∗ Yikang Li1
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Fudan University
3
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{baiyeqi,feiben,liuyouquan,matao}@pjlab.org.cn
{houyuenan,shibotian,liyikang}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
LiDAR-based 3D detection methods currently use bird’s-eye view (BEV) or range
view (RV) as their primary basis. The former relies on voxelization and 3D convolutions, resulting in inefficient training and inference processes. Conversely,
RV-based methods demonstrate higher efficiency due to their compactness and
compatibility with 2D convolutions, but their performance still trails behind that of
BEV-based methods. To eliminate this performance gap while preserving the efficiency of RV-based methods, this study presents an efficient and accurate RV-based
3D object detection framework termed RangePerception. Through meticulous
analysis, this study identifies two critical challenges impeding the performance
of existing RV-based methods: 1) there exists a natural domain gap between the
3D world coordinate used in output and 2D range image coordinate used in input,
generating difficulty in information extraction from range images; 2) native range
images suffer from vision corruption issue, affecting the detection accuracy of the
objects located on the margins of the range images. To address the key challenges
above, we propose two novel algorithms named Range Aware Kernel (RAK) and
Vision Restoration Module (VRM), which facilitate information flow from range
image representation and world-coordinate 3D detection results. With the help of
RAK and VRM, our RangePerception achieves 3.25/4.18 higher averaged L1/L2
AP compared to previous state-of-the-art RV-based method RangeDet, on Waymo
Open Dataset. For the first time as an RV-based 3D detection method, RangePerception achieves slightly superior averaged AP compared with the well-known
BEV-based method CenterPoint and the inference speed of RangePerception is 1.3
times as fast as CenterPoint.

1

Introduction

In recent years, LiDAR-based 3D perception [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] has made tremendous advances in the
field of autonomous driving. One primary task in this area is 3D detection [1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10],
which involves predicting the 3D locations of objects of interest, as well as their geometric and
motional properties, including categories, 3D sizes, headings, and velocities. Despite sharing some
similarities, there is a fundamental difference between LiDAR-based 3D detection and image-based
2D detection [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]: RGB images are inherently well-structured matrices, whereas
LiDAR signals are sets of sparse and unordered points in 3D space. Considering modern computer
vision techniques, such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [17, 18] and Vision Transformers
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

