Stochastic Multi-armed Bandits: Optimal Trade-off
among Optimality, Consistency, and Tail Risk

David Simchi-Levi
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
dslevi@mit.edu

Zeyu Zheng
Industrial Engineering & Operations Research
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
zyzheng@berkeley.edu

Feng Zhu
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
fengzhu@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider the stochastic multi-armed bandit problem and fully characterize the
interplays among three desired properties for policy design: worst-case optimality,
instance-dependent consistency, and light-tailed risk. We show how the order of
expected regret exactly affects the decaying rate of the regret tail probability for
both the worst-case and instance-dependent scenario. A novel policy is proposed
to achieve the optimal regret tail risk for any regret threshold. Concretely, for any
given α ∈ [1/2, 1) and β ∈ [0, 1), our policy achieves a worst-case expected regret
of Õ(T α ) and instance-dependent expected regret of Õ(T β ), while enjoys a probability of incurring an Ω(T δ ) regret that decays exponentially with a polynomial T
term. Such decaying rate is proved to be best achievable. We also generalize our
analysis to the stochastic multi-armed bandit problem with non-stationary baseline
rewards, where in each time period t, the decision maker pulls one of K arms and
collects a reward which is the sum of three terms: the mean of the pulled arm, an
independent noise, and a non-stationary baseline reward as a function of t. Our
results reveal insights on the trade-off between expected regret and tail risk for both
worst-case and instance-dependent scenario, indicating that more sub-optimality
and inconsistency leaves space for more light-tailed risk of incurring a large regret.

1

Introduction

The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a well-established area of research in sequential
decision-making under uncertainty, applications of which include online advertising, recommendation
systems, digital clinical trials, etc. Let T be a pre-fixed time horizon. In a standard MAB problem,
the decision maker selects one of several arms (rewards of which are unknown a priori) in each time
period t ∈ [T ] with the goal of maximizing the expected sum of rewards over all time periods. The
MAB problem highlights the exploration-exploitation trade-off: the decision maker must balance
between exploring arms with relatively unknown reward distributions and exploiting arms with
relatively known high expected rewards. There is a significant amount of literature on MAB, with a
comprehensive review provided in [25].
In order to evaluate policy performance and guide policy design, much of the MAB literature uses
the metric of maximizing the expected cumulative reward, or equivalently minimizing the expected
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

