A Unified Approach for Maximizing Continuous
DR-submodular Functions
Mohammad Pedramfar
Purdue University
mpedramf@purdue.edu

Christopher John Quinn
Iowa State University
cjquinn@iastate.edu

Vaneet Aggarwal
Purdue University
vaneet@purdue.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a unified approach for maximizing continuous DRsubmodular functions that encompasses a range of settings and oracle access
types. Our approach includes a Frank-Wolfe type offline algorithm for both monotone and non-monotone functions, with different restrictions on the general convex
set. We consider settings where the oracle provides access to either the gradient of
the function or only the function value, and where the oracle access is either deterministic or stochastic. We determine the number of required oracle accesses in all
cases. Our approach gives new/improved results for nine out of the sixteen considered cases, avoids computationally expensive projections in three cases, with
the proposed framework matching performance of state-of-the-art approaches in
the remaining four cases. Notably, our approach for the stochastic function valuebased oracle enables the first regret bounds with bandit feedback for stochastic
DR-submodular functions.

1

Introduction

The problem of optimizing DR-submodular functions over a convex set has attracted considerable
interest in both the machine learning and theoretical computer science communities [2, 5, 16, 26].
This is due to its many practical applications in modeling real-world problems, such as influence/revenue maximization, facility location, and non-convex/non-concave quadratic programming
[3, 9, 18, 15, 20]. as well as more recently identified applications like serving heterogeneous learners
under networking constraints [20] and joint optimization of routing and caching in networks [21].
Numerous studies investigated developing approximation algorithms for constrained DRsubmodular maximization, utilizing a variety of algorithms and proof analysis techniques. These
studies have addressed both monotone and non-monotone functions and considered various types
of constraints on the feasible region. The studies have also considered different types of oracles—
gradient oracles and value oracles, where the oracles could be exact (deterministic) or stochastic.
Lastly, for some of the aforementioned offline problem settings, some studies have also considered
analogous online optimization problem settings as well, where performance is measured in regret
over a horizon. This paper aims to unify the disparate offline problems under a single framework
by providing a comprehensive algorithm and analysis approach that covers a broad range of setups.
By providing a unified framework, this paper presents novel results for several cases where previous
research was either limited or non-existent, both for offline optimization problems and extensions to
related stochastic online optimization problems.
This paper presents a Frank-Wolfe based meta-algorithm for (offline) constrained DR-submodular
maximization where we could only query within the constraint set, with sixteen variants for sixteen
problem settings. The algorithm is designed to handle settings where (i) the function is monotone
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants CCF-2149588 and CCF2149617, and Cisco, Inc.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

