Empowering Collaborative Filtering with Principled
Adversarial Contrastive Loss
An Zhang1∗ Leheng Sheng2∗ Zhibo Cai3† Xiang Wang4 Tat-Seng Chua1
1
National University of Singapore
2
Tsinghua University
3
Center for Applied Statistics and School of Statistics, Renmin University of China
4
University of Science and Technology of China
anzhang@u.nus.edu, chenglh22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
caizhibo@ruc.edu.cn, xiangwang1223@gmail.com, dcscts@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Contrastive Learning (CL) has achieved impressive performance in self-supervised
learning tasks, showing superior generalization ability. Inspired by the success,
adopting CL into collaborative filtering (CF) is prevailing in semi-supervised topK recommendations. The basic idea is to routinely conduct heuristic-based data
augmentation and apply contrastive losses (e.g., InfoNCE) on the augmented views.
Yet, some CF-tailored challenges make this adoption suboptimal, such as the issue
of out-of-distribution, the risk of false negatives, and the nature of top-K evaluation.
They necessitate the CL-based CF scheme to focus more on mining hard negatives
and distinguishing false negatives from the vast unlabeled user-item interactions,
for informative contrast signals. Worse still, there is limited understanding of
contrastive loss in CF methods, especially w.r.t. its generalization ability. To bridge
the gap, we delve into the reasons underpinning the success of contrastive loss in
CF, and propose a principled Adversarial InfoNCE loss (AdvInfoNCE), which is
a variant of InfoNCE, specially tailored for CF methods. AdvInfoNCE adaptively
explores and assigns hardness to each negative instance in an adversarial fashion
and further utilizes a fine-grained hardness-aware ranking criterion to empower
the recommender’s generalization ability. Training CF models with AdvInfoNCE,
we validate the effectiveness of AdvInfoNCE on both synthetic and real-world
benchmark datasets, thus showing its generalization ability to mitigate out-ofdistribution problems. Given the theoretical guarantees and empirical superiority
of AdvInfoNCE over most contrastive loss functions, we advocate its adoption as
a standard loss in recommender systems, particularly for the out-of-distribution
tasks. Codes are available at https://github.com/LehengTHU/AdvInfoNCE.

1

Introduction

Contrastive Learning (CL) has emerged as a potent tool in self-supervised learning tasks [1–4], given
its superior generalization ability. By simultaneously pulling positive pairs close together while
pushing apart negative pairs in the feature space [5], CL has demonstrated the ability to extract general
features from limited signals. This promising result has propelled research interest in leveraging CL
for Collaborative Filtering (CF) in top-K recommendation tasks, leading to a marked enhancement
in performance and generalization ability [6–12]. Specifically, the prevalent paradigm in CL-based
CF methods is to routinely adopt heuristic-based data augmentation for user-item bipartite graphs
∗
†

An Zhang and Leheng Sheng contribute equally to this work.
Zhibo Cai is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

