Adapting Neural Link Predictors
for Data-Efficient Complex Query Answering

Erik Arakelyan∗1
Pasquale Minervini∗†2
Daniel Daza3,4,5
3,5
Michael Cochez
Isabelle Augenstein1
1
University of Copenhagen 2 University of Edinburgh 3 Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
4
University of Amsterdam 5 Discovery Lab, Elsevier, The Netherlands
{erik.a,augenstein}@di.ku.dk p.minervini@ed.ac.uk {d.dazacruz,m.cochez}@vu.nl

Abstract
Answering complex queries on incomplete knowledge graphs is a challenging task
where a model needs to answer complex logical queries in the presence of missing
knowledge. Prior work in the literature has proposed to address this problem
by designing architectures trained end-to-end for the complex query answering
task with a reasoning process that is hard to interpret while requiring data and
resource-intensive training. Other lines of research have proposed re-using simple
neural link predictors to answer complex queries, reducing the amount of training
data by orders of magnitude while providing interpretable answers. The neural
link predictor used in such approaches is not explicitly optimised for the complex
query answering task, implying that its scores are not calibrated to interact together.
We propose to address these problems via CQDA , a parameter-efficient score
adaptation model optimised to re-calibrate neural link prediction scores for the
complex query answering task. While the neural link predictor is frozen, the
adaptation component – which only increases the number of model parameters by
0.03% – is trained on the downstream complex query answering task. Furthermore,
the calibration component enables us to support reasoning over queries that include
atomic negations, which was previously impossible with link predictors. In our
experiments, CQDA produces significantly more accurate results than current
state-of-the-art methods, improving from 34.4 to 35.1 Mean Reciprocal Rank
values averaged across all datasets and query types while using ≤ 30% of the
available training query types. We further show that CQDA is data-efficient,
achieving competitive results with only 1% of the complex training queries, and
robust in out-of-domain evaluations. Source code and datasets are available at
https://github.com/EdinburghNLP/adaptive-cqd.

1

Introduction

A Knowledge Graph (KG) is a knowledge base representing the relationships between entities in a
relational graph structure. The flexibility of this knowledge representation formalism allows KGs to
be widely used in various domains. Examples of KGs include general-purpose knowledge bases such
as Wikidata [Vrandečić and Krötzsch, 2014], DBpedia [Auer et al., 2007], Freebase [Bollacker et al.,
2008], and YAGO [Suchanek et al., 2007]; application-driven graphs such as the Google Knowledge
Graph, Microsoft’s Bing Knowledge Graph, and Facebook’s Social Graph [Noy et al., 2019]; and
domain-specific ones such as SNOMED CT [Bodenreider et al., 2018], MeSH [Lipscomb, 2000],
and Hetionet [Himmelstein et al., 2017] for life sciences; and WordNet [Miller, 1992] for linguistics.
*Equal contribution, alphabetical order. † Senior author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

