Contextually Affinitive Neighborhood Refinery for
Deep Clustering

Chunlin Yu1 Ye Shi1,2 Jingya Wang1,2∗
1
ShanghaiTech University
2
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
{yuchl,shiye,wangjingya}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous endeavors in self-supervised learning have enlightened the research of
deep clustering from an instance discrimination perspective. Built upon this foundation, recent studies further highlight the importance of grouping semantically
similar instances. One effective method to achieve this is by promoting the semantic structure preserved by neighborhood consistency. However, the samples in
the local neighborhood may be limited due to their close proximity to each other,
which may not provide substantial and diverse supervision signals. Inspired by the
versatile re-ranking methods in the context of image retrieval, we propose to employ an efficient online re-ranking process to mine more informative neighbors in a
Contextually Affinitive (ConAff) Neighborhood, and then encourage the cross-view
neighborhood consistency. To further mitigate the intrinsic neighborhood noises
near cluster boundaries, we propose a progressively relaxed boundary filtering
strategy to circumvent the issues brought by noisy neighbors. Our method can
be easily integrated into the generic self-supervised frameworks and outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on several popular benchmarks. Code is available at:
https://github.com/cly234/DeepClustering-ConNR.

1

Introduction

Fueled by the expressive power of neural networks, deep clustering has emerged as a prominent
solution in the low-label regime, where traditional clustering can be significantly enhanced by utilizing
latent data representations. Recent advancements in self-supervised learning have further expanded
the possibilities for deep clustering [38, 17, 41], providing a solid foundation for grouping similar
instances. Among the various self-supervised recipes, contrastive learning methods ensure instance
discrimination backed up with sufficient negative samples, while non-contrastive learning methods
circumvent the class collision issue [37, 17] by simply pulling two augmented views closer. However,
capturing the intrinsic semantic structure with clear decision boundaries remains a challenge in deep
clustering, which has led researchers to focus on more group-aware and discriminative approaches.
Group-aware methods commonly enforce the prediction consistency between samples and their
nearest neighborhoods, measured by cosine similarity or Euclidean distance for deep clustering[42,
21, 55, 56]. Although these methods are simple and effective, a significant portion of the retrieved
neighborhoods may contain semantically redundant information. This is primarily due to the fact that
the local neighboring samples are already close to the anchor sample in the feature space, and as such,
may not provide sufficient supervision signals for deep clustering. To address this limitation, previous
works have added memory banks with historical features to enlarge the search space [21, 49], or
labeled the proximity between samples over the entire dataset [55, 56]. Building on the foundation of
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

