Discriminative Calibration: Check Bayesian
Computation from Simulations and Flexible Classifier

Yuling Yao
Flatiron Institute,
New York, NY 10010.
yyao@yyao.dev

Justin Domke
University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA 01002.
domke@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
To check the accuracy of Bayesian computations, it is common to use rank-based
simulation-based calibration (SBC). However, SBC has drawbacks: The test statistic is somewhat ad-hoc, interactions are difficult to examine, multiple testing is
a challenge, and the resulting p-value is not a divergence metric. We propose to
replace the marginal rank test with a flexible classification approach that learns test
statistics from data. This measure typically has a higher statistical power than the
SBC test and returns an interpretable divergence measure of miscalibration, computed from classification accuracy. This approach can be used with different data
generating processes to address simulation-based inference or traditional inference
methods like Markov chain Monte Carlo or variational inference. We illustrate an
automated implementation using neural networks and statistically-inspired features,
and validate the method with numerical and real data experiments.

1

Introduction

Simulation based calibration (SBC) is a default approach to diagnose Bayesian computation. SBC
was originally designed to validate if computer software accurately draws samples from the exact
posterior inference, such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC, [4, 38, 26]) and variational inference
[41]. With recent advances in amortized and simulation-based inferences [6] and growing doubt on
the sampling quality [23, 18], there has also been an increasing trend to apply SBC to likelihood-free
inference such as approximate Bayesian computation [42] and normalizing-flow-based [31, 1] neural
posterior sampling [22, 20], with a wide range of applications in science [15, 7, 34].
Bayesian computation tries to sample from the posterior distribution p(θ|y) given data y. We work
with the general setting where it may or may not be possible to evaluate the likelihood p(y|θ).
Suppose we have an inference algorithm or software q(θ|y) that attempts to approximate p(θ|y),
and we would like to assess if this q is calibrated, meaning if q(θ|y) = p(θ|y) for all possible θ, y.
Simulation based calibration involves three steps: First, we draw a θ from the prior distribution
p(θ). Second, we simulate a synthetic observation y from the data model p(y|θ). Third, given y
we draw a size-M posterior sample θ̃1 , . . . , θ̃M from the inference engine q(θ|y) that we need to
diagnose. SBC traditionally computes the rank statistic of the prior draw θ among the q samples, i.e.
PM
r = m=1 1(θ ≤ θ̃m ). If the inference q is calibrated, then given y both θ and θ̃m are from the same
distribution p(θ|y) , hence with repeated simulations of (θ, y), we should expect such rank statistics
r to appear uniform, which can be checked by a histogram visualization or a formal uniformity test.
Despite its popularity, rank-based SBC has limitations: (i) We only compute the rank of univariate
parameters. In practice, θ and y are high dimensional. We typically run SBC on each component of
θ separately, this creates many marginal histograms and does not diagnose the joint distribution or
interactions. We may compare ranks of some one-dimensional test statistics, but there is no method to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

