Robust Data Valuation with Weighted Banzhaf Values

Weida Li
vidaslee@gmail.com

Yaoliang Yu
School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Vector Institute
yaoliang.yu@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Data valuation, a principled way to rank the importance of each training datum, has
become increasingly important. However, existing value-based approaches (e.g.,
Shapley) are known to suffer from the stochasticity inherent in utility functions
that render consistent and reliable ranking difficult. Recently, Wang and Jia (2023)
proposed the noise-structure-agnostic framework to advocate the Banzhaf value for
its robustness against such stochasticity as it achieves the largest safe margin among
many alternatives. Surprisingly, our empirical study shows that the Banzhaf value
is not always the most robust when compared with a broader family: weighted
Banzhaf values. To analyze this scenario, we introduce the concept of Kronecker
noise to parameterize stochasticity, through which we prove that the uniquely robust
semi-value, which can be analytically derived from the underlying Kronecker noise,
lies in the family of weighted Banzhaf values while minimizing the worst-case
entropy. In addition, we adopt the maximum sample reuse principle to design an
estimator to efficiently approximate weighted Banzhaf values, and show that it
enjoys the best time complexity in terms of achieving an (ϵ, δ)-approximation. Our
theory is verified under both synthetic and authentic noises. For the latter, we fit a
Kronecker noise to the inherent stochasticity, which is then plugged in to generate
the predicted most robust semi-value. Our study suggests that weighted Banzhaf
values are promising when facing undue noises in data valuation.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, data curation plays a crucial role in training powerful models, and one big
difficulty facing practitioners is how to quantify the extent of usefulness each datum possesses (under
a specific application). In practice, large datasets are typically noisy and often contain mislabeled data,
which could harm the downstream performance of models trained on top. Sources that affect data
quality include mechanical or human labelling errors (Frénay and Verleysen 2013), and poisoning
attacks from malicious adversaries (Steinhardt et al. 2017). Therefore, it would be extremely useful if
the potential importance of each datum can be efficiently and reliably determined. Data valuation
aims to lay out a principled way to filter out noisy data and hunt down data that are valuable to retain.
In the emerging field of data valuation, the concept of value, originally developed in cooperative
game theory as an axiomatic and principled way to assign contributions to all players in a game, has
become increasingly popular in machine learning (e.g., Ghorbani and Zou 2019; Jia et al. 2019a,b;
Kwon and Zou 2022; Lin et al. 2022; Wang and Jia 2023). Typically, the procedures of training and
testing are treated as games that constitute utility functions while each datum serves as a player. The
contribution imputed to each player is then equivalent to the importance determined for each datum.
Recently, Wang and Jia (2023) pointed out that the inherent stochasticity in utility functions, which
stems from the procedure of training models, is substantial enough to incur unexpected inconsistency
in ranking data. To solve this issue, they introduced the noise-structure-agnostic framework to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

