HotBEV: Hardware-oriented Transformer-based
Multi-View 3D Detector for BEV Perception
Peiyan Dong1⇤, Zhenglun Kong1⇤ , Xin Meng1⇤ , Pinrui Yu1 , Yifan Gong1 , Geng Yuan2 ,
Hao Tang3†, Yanzhi Wang1
1
Northeastern University, 2 University of Georgia, 3 Carnegie Mellon University
{dong.pe, kong.zhe, yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu

Abstract
The bird’s-eye-view (BEV) perception plays a critical role in autonomous driving
systems, involving the accurate and efficient detection and tracking of objects
from a top-down perspective. To achieve real-time decision-making in self-driving
scenarios, low-latency computation is essential. While recent approaches to BEV
detection have focused on improving detection precision using Lift-Splat-Shoot
(LSS)-based or transformer-based schemas, the substantial computational and memory burden of these approaches increases the risk of system crashes when multiple
on-vehicle tasks run simultaneously. Unfortunately, there is a dearth of literature
on efficient BEV detector paradigms, let alone achieving realistic speedups. Unlike
existing works that focus on reducing computation costs, this paper focuses on
developing an efficient model design that prioritizes actual on-device latency. To
achieve this goal, we propose a latency-aware design methodology that considers
key hardware properties, such as memory access cost and degree of parallelism.
Given the prevalence of GPUs as the main computation platform for autonomous
driving systems, we develop a theoretical latency prediction model and introduce
efficient building operators. By leveraging these operators and following an effective local-to-global visual modeling process, we propose a hardware-oriented
backbone that is also optimized for strong feature capturing and fusing. Using
these insights, we present a new hardware-oriented framework for efficient yet
accurate camera-view BEV detectors. Experiments show that HotBEV achieves
a 2%⇠23% NDS gain, and 2%⇠7.8% mAP gain with a 1.1⇥⇠3.4⇥ speedups
compared to existing works on V100; On multiple GPU devices such as GPU GTX
2080 and the low-end GTX 1080, HotBEV achieves 1.1⇥⇠6.3⇥ faster than others.
The code is available at HotBEV.

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been a growing interest in 3D object detection (also known as BEV perception
tasks) from multi-camera images, especially in the context of autonomous driving. While LiDARbased methods have made remarkable progress, camera-only-based approaches have gained extensive
attention due to their lower expenses and ability to identify color-based road elements such as traffic
lights and signs [1]. Mainstream camera-only-based approaches for multi-camera 3D object detection
tasks can be broadly classified into two research domains: 1) 3D reconstruction detectors, which
project 2D features from the image view into the bird’s-eye view (BEV) to extract intrinsic and
extrinsic information [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. However, these approaches suffer from degradation due to
the inaccuracy of the depth information predicted from 2D features. 2) 3D projection detectors,
⇤
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

