Aiming towards the minimizers: fast convergence of
SGD for overparameterized problems
Chaoyue Liu* , Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy** , Yian Ma* , Damek Davis*** , and Mikhail Belkin*
*

Halicioğlu Data Science Institute, University of California San Diego
**
Mathematics Department, University of Washington
***
School of Operations Research and Information Engineering, Cornell University

Abstract
Modern machine learning paradigms, such as deep learning, occur in or close to
the interpolation regime, wherein the number of model parameters is much larger
than the number of data samples. In this work, we propose a regularity condition
within the interpolation regime which endows the stochastic gradient method with
the same worst-case iteration complexity as the deterministic gradient method,
while using only a single sampled gradient (or a minibatch) in each iteration. In
contrast, all existing guarantees require the stochastic gradient method to take small
steps, thereby resulting in a much slower linear rate of convergence. Finally, we
demonstrate that our condition holds when training sufficiently wide feedforward
neural networks with a linear output layer.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in machine learning and artificial intelligence have relied on fitting highly overparameterized models, notably deep neural networks, to observed data; e.g. [39, 37, 16, 23]. In such settings,
the number of parameters of the model is much greater than the number of data samples, thereby resulting in models that achieve near-zero training error. Although classical learning paradigms caution
against overfitting, recent work suggests ubiquity of the “double descent” phenomenon [3], wherein
significant overparameterization actually improves generalization. The stochastic gradient method is
the workhorse algorithm for fitting overparametrized models to observed data and understanding its
performance is an active area of research. The goal of this paper is to obtain improved convergence
guarantees for SGD in the interpolation regime that better align with its performance in practice.
Classical optimization literature emphasizes conditions akin to strong convexity as the phenomena
underlying rapid convergence of numerical methods. In contrast, interpolation problems are almost
never convex, even locally, around their solutions [24]. Furthermore, common optimization problems
have complex symmetries, resulting in nonconvex sets of minimizers. Case in point, standard
formulations for low-rank matrix recovery [4] are invariant under orthogonal transformations while
ReLU neural networks are invariant under rebalancing of adjacent weight matrices [9]. The PolyakŁojasiewicz (PŁ) inequality, introduced independently in [26] and [34], serves as an alternative
to strong convexity that holds often in applications and underlies rapid convergence of numerical
algorithms. Namely, it has been known since [34] that gradient descent convergences under the
PŁ condition at a linear rate O(exp(−t/κ)), where κ is the condition number of the function.1 In
contrast, convergence guarantees for the stochastic gradient method under PŁ—the predominant
algorithm in practice—are much less satisfactory. Indeed, all known results require SGD to take
1
In particular, for a smooth function with β-Lipschitz gradient satisfying a PŁ inequality with constant α, the
condition number is κ = β/α.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

