Neural Lyapunov Control for Discrete-Time Systems

Junlin Wu
Computer Science & Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
junlin.wu@wustl.edu

Andrew Clark
Electrical & Systems Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
andrewclark@wustl.edu

Yiannis Kantaros
Electrical & Systems Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
ioannisk@wustl.edu

Yevgeniy Vorobeychik
Computer Science & Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
yvorobeychik@wustl.edu

Abstract
While ensuring stability for linear systems is well understood, it remains a major
challenge for nonlinear systems. A general approach in such cases is to compute a
combination of a Lyapunov function and an associated control policy. However,
finding Lyapunov functions for general nonlinear systems is a challenging task.
To address this challenge, several methods have been proposed that represent
Lyapunov functions using neural networks. However, such approaches either focus
on continuous-time systems, or highly restricted classes of nonlinear dynamics. We
propose the first approach for learning neural Lyapunov control in a broad class of
discrete-time systems. Three key ingredients enable us to effectively learn provably
stable control policies. The first is a novel mixed-integer linear programming
approach for verifying the discrete-time Lyapunov stability conditions, leveraging
the particular structure of these conditions. The second is a novel approach for
computing verified sublevel sets. The third is a heuristic gradient-based method
for quickly finding counterexamples to significantly speed up Lyapunov function
learning. Our experiments on four standard benchmarks demonstrate that our
approach significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines. For example, on the
path tracking benchmark, we outperform recent neural Lyapunov control baselines
by an order of magnitude in both running time and the size of the region of
attraction, and on two of the four benchmarks (cartpole and PVTOL), ours is
the first automated approach to return a provably stable controller. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/jlwu002/nlc_discrete.

1

Introduction

Stability analysis for dynamical systems aims to show that the system state will return to an equilibrium under small perturbations. Designing stable control in nonlinear systems commonly relies
on constructing Lyapunov functions that can certify the stability of equilibrium points and estimate
their region of attraction. However, finding Lyapunov functions for arbitrary nonlinear systems is
a challenging task that requires substantial expertise and manual effort [Khalil, 2015, Lavaei and
Bridgeman, 2023]. To address this challenge, recent progress has been made in learning Lyapunov
functions in continuous-time nonlinear dynamics [Abate et al., 2020, Chang et al., 2019, Zhou et al.,
2022]. However, few approaches exist for doing so in discrete-time systems [Dai et al., 2021], and
none for general Lipschitz-continuous dynamics. Since modern learning-based controllers often
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

