Structured Neural Networks for Density Estimation
and Causal Inference
Asic Chen1∗ Ruian Shi1∗ Xiang Gao1 Ricardo Baptista2† Rahul G. Krishnan1†
1
University of Toronto, Vector Institute 2 California Institute of Technology
{asicchen, ruiashi, xgao, rahulgk}@cs.toronto.edu
rsb@caltech.edu

Abstract
Injecting structure into neural networks enables learning functions that satisfy
invariances with respect to subsets of inputs. For instance, when learning generative models using neural networks, it is advantageous to encode the conditional
independence structure of observed variables, often in the form of Bayesian networks. We propose the Structured Neural Network (StrNN), which injects structure
through masking pathways in a neural network. The masks are designed via a novel
relationship we explore between neural network architectures and binary matrix
factorization, to ensure that the desired independencies are respected. We devise
and study practical algorithms for this otherwise NP-hard design problem based
on novel objectives that control the model architecture. We demonstrate the utility
of StrNN in three applications: (1) binary and Gaussian density estimation with
StrNN, (2) real-valued density estimation with Structured Autoregressive Flows
(StrAFs), autoregressive normalizing flows that leverage StrNN as a conditioner,
and (3) interventional and counterfactual analysis with StrAFs. Our work opens
up new avenues for learning neural networks that enable data-efficient generative
modeling and the use of normalizing flows for causal effect estimation.

1

Introduction

The incorporation of structure into machine learning
models has been shown to provide benefits for model
generalization, learning efficiency, and interpretability.
The improvements are particularly salient when learning
from small amounts of data. This idea has found use in
reinforcement learning [Ok et al., 2018], computational
healthcare [Hussain et al., 2021, Cui et al., 2020], survival analysis [Gharari et al., 2023], time series analysis
[Curi et al., 2020], and causal inference [Balazadeh et al.,
2022].
This work focuses on the problem of density estimation
from high-dimensional data which has been approached
through a variety of lenses. For example, normalizing
flows [Tabak and Turner, 2013, Rezende and Mohamed,
2015] model data by transforming a base distribution
through a series of invertible transformations. Masked
autoencoders (MADE) [Germain et al., 2015] model the
joint distribution via an autoregressive factorization of
∗

Weight
Mask

Weight
Mask

Weight
Mask

Adjacency
Matrix

Figure 1: StrNN injects structure by masking
the weights of a neural network. Top: StrNN
connections (green) compared to a fully connected network (gray). Bottom: Binary factorization of an adjacency matrix yields weight
masks. Masked weights shown in gray.

Equal Contribution † Equal Senior Authorship

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

