One Risk to Rule Them All:
A Risk-Sensitive Perspective on Model-Based Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Marc Rigter, Bruno Lacerda, Nick Hawes
Oxford Robotics Institute
University of Oxford
Correspondence: marcrigter@gmail.com

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) is suitable for safety-critical domains where online exploration is not feasible. In such domains, decision-making should take into
consideration the risk of catastrophic outcomes. In other words, decision-making
should be risk-averse. An additional challenge of offline RL is avoiding distributional shift, i.e. ensuring that state-action pairs visited by the policy remain near
those in the dataset. Previous offline RL algorithms that consider risk combine offline RL techniques (to avoid distributional shift), with risk-sensitive RL algorithms
(to achieve risk-aversion). In this work, we propose risk-aversion as a mechanism to
jointly address both of these issues. We propose a model-based approach, and use
an ensemble of models to estimate epistemic uncertainty, in addition to aleatoric uncertainty. We train a policy that is risk-averse, and avoids high uncertainty actions.
Risk-aversion to epistemic uncertainty prevents distributional shift, as areas not
covered by the dataset have high epistemic uncertainty. Risk-aversion to aleatoric
uncertainty discourages actions that are risky due to environment stochasticity.
Thus, by considering epistemic uncertainty via a model ensemble and introducing
risk-aversion, our algorithm (1R2R) avoids distributional shift in addition to achieving risk-aversion to aleatoric risk. Our experiments show that 1R2R achieves strong
performance on deterministic benchmarks, and outperforms existing approaches
for risk-sensitive objectives in stochastic domains.

1

Introduction

In safety-critical applications, online reinforcement learning (RL) is impractical due to the requirement
for extensive random exploration that may be dangerous or costly. To alleviate this issue, offline RL
aims to find the best possible policy using only pre-collected data. In safety-critical settings we often
want decision-making to be risk-averse, and take into consideration variability in the performance
between each episode. However, the vast majority of offline RL research considers the expected value
objective, and therefore disregards such variability.
A core issue in offline RL is avoiding distributional shift: to obtain a performant policy, we must ensure
that the state-action pairs visited by the policy remain near those covered by the dataset. Another way
that we can view this is that we need the policy to be averse to epistemic uncertainty (uncertainty
stemming from a lack of data). In regions not covered by the dataset, epistemic uncertainty is high
and there will be large errors in any learned model or value function. A naively optimised policy may
exploit these errors, resulting in erroneous action choices.
In risk-sensitive RL, the focus is typically on finding policies that are risk-averse to environment
stochasticity, i.e. aleatoric uncertainty. Previous approaches to risk-sensitive offline RL [47, 68]
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

