Res-Tuning: A Flexible and Efficient Tuning Paradigm
via Unbinding Tuner from Backbone

Zeyinzi Jiang1 Chaojie Mao1 Ziyuan Huang2 Ao Ma1
Yiliang Lv1 Yujun Shen3 Deli Zhao1 Jingren Zhou1
1

Alibaba Group 2 National University of Singapore 3 Ant Group
{zeyinzi.jzyz, chaojie.mcj, dave.ma, yiliang.lyl, jingren.zhou}@alibaba-inc.com
{ziyuan.huang}@u.nus.edu {shenyujun0302, zhaodeli}@gmail.com

Abstract
Parameter-efficient tuning has become a trend in transferring large-scale foundation
models to downstream applications. Existing methods typically embed some lightweight tuners into the backbone, where both the design and the learning of the tuners
are highly dependent on the base model. This work offers a new tuning paradigm,
dubbed Res-Tuning, which intentionally unbinds tuners from the backbone. With
both theoretical and empirical evidence, we show that popular tuning approaches
have their equivalent counterparts under our unbinding formulation, and hence
can be integrated into our framework effortlessly. Thanks to the structural
disentanglement, we manage to free the design of tuners from the network
architecture, facilitating flexible combination of various tuning strategies. We
further propose a memory-efficient variant of Res-Tuning, where the bypass (i.e.,
formed by a sequence of tuners) is effectively detached from the main branch, such
that the gradients are back-propagated only to the tuners but not to the backbone.
Such a detachment also allows one-time backbone forward for multi-task inference.
Extensive experiments on both discriminative and generative tasks demonstrate
the superiority of our method over existing alternatives from the perspectives of
efficacy and efficiency. Project page: https://res-tuning.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Recently, foundation models have demonstrated strong generalization capability across numerous
visual [21, 2], language [47, 60] and multi-modal tasks [40, 1]. Pre-trained on a large corpus of
data, a foundation model offers a good initialization for downstream adaptation. Unfortunately, the
increasing model scale makes it expensive and almost infeasible to fully fine-tune such a model for
every task. Hence, parameter-efficient transfer learning (PETL) [37, 41, 27] is often resorted to as an
efficient approach for downstream adaptation without incurring an unaffordable computation burden.
Popular existing approaches for parameter-efficient tuning introduce additional tunable structures
(which we term as tuners) to the pre-trained base model [37, 41, 27]. Compared to the fully-finetuned counterparts, the light-weight tuners significantly reduce the training cost while maintaining a
competitive performance [32, 28]. However, the current designs of tuners are deeply coupled with
their base structures, as shown in Fig. 1a, thus restricting the design flexibility and impeding the
extension to new approaches. For example, prefix tuning [41] is embedded into the self-attention
operation, and prompts [28, 85] could only be introduced at the beginning or between layers, etc.
In this work, we introduce Res-Tuning, a new tuning paradigm for flexible and efficient transfer
learning. As in Fig. 1b, our Res-Tuning framework unbinds the tuners from the base model, such that
it is possible to decouple both the design and the learning of the tuners from the base structure. Since
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

