Multi-Prompt Alignment for Multi-Source
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Haoran Chen1,2
1

Xintong Han3

Zuxuan Wu1,2†

Yu-Gang Jiang1,2

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Huya Inc

Abstract
Most existing methods for unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) rely on a shared
network to extract domain-invariant features. However, when facing multiple
source domains, optimizing such a network involves updating the parameters of
the entire network, making it both computationally expensive and challenging,
particularly when coupled with min-max objectives. Inspired by recent advances
in prompt learning that adapts high-capacity models for downstream tasks in a
computationally economic way, we introduce Multi-Prompt Alignment (MPA), a
simple yet efficient framework for multi-source UDA. Given a source and target
domain pair, MPA first trains an individual prompt to minimize the domain gap
through a contrastive loss. Then, MPA denoises the learned prompts through an
auto-encoding process and aligns them by maximizing the agreement of all the
reconstructed prompts. Moreover, we show that the resulting subspace acquired
from the auto-encoding process can easily generalize to a streamlined set of target
domains, making our method more efficient for practical usage. Extensive experiments show that MPA achieves state-of-the-art results on three popular datasets
with an impressive average accuracy of 54.1% on DomainNet.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved remarkable progress in various computer vision tasks [15, 11, 31, 24].
However, the success usually relies on supervised training using a massive amount of manually
labeled data, which are often expensive and time-consuming to collect. Furthermore, current deep
models are brittle to the presence of domain shift [27, 34, 47] in the forms of different image styles,
varied lighting conditions, diverse viewpoints, etc., between training and testing distributions.
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is a popular strategy that mitigates domain discrepancies by
transferring knowledge learned from a well-labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain
[25, 4, 39, 42, 23]. While significant advances have been achieved, current approaches focus on the
single source setting, where all the labeled training data share the same distribution. In practice,
however, it is more common for the labeled data to be collected from multiple sources that are diverse
in distribution. Naturally, one could still tackle this problem by straightforwardly combining all the
data into one single source and applying off-the-shelf UDA methods. However, directly applying
single-source UDA methods often results in limited performance, as domain shift also exists among
different source domains.
The integration of multiple source domains for improved adaptation results on the unlabeled target
domain is generally known as multi-source unsupervised domain adaptation. Inspired by the theoretical analysis of Ben-David et al. [2], learning domain-invariant feature representations has become a
†

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

