Function Space Bayesian Pseudocoreset
for Bayesian Neural Networks

Balhae Kim1 , Hyungi Lee1 , Juho Lee1,2
KAIST AI1 , AITRICS2
{balhaekim, lhk2708, juholee}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
A Bayesian pseudocoreset is a compact synthetic dataset summarizing essential
information of a large-scale dataset and thus can be used as a proxy dataset for
scalable Bayesian inference. Typically, a Bayesian pseudocoreset is constructed
by minimizing a divergence measure between the posterior conditioning on the
pseudocoreset and the posterior conditioning on the full dataset. However, evaluating the divergence can be challenging, particularly for the models like deep
neural networks having high-dimensional parameters. In this paper, we propose
a novel Bayesian pseudocoreset construction method that operates on a function
space. Unlike previous methods, which construct and match the coreset and full
data posteriors in the space of model parameters (weights), our method constructs
variational approximations to the coreset posterior on a function space and matches
it to the full data posterior in the function space. By working directly on the
function space, our method could bypass several challenges that may arise when
working on a weight space, including limited scalability and multi-modality issue.
Through various experiments, we demonstrate that the Bayesian pseudocoresets
constructed from our method enjoys enhanced uncertainty quantification and better
robustness across various model architectures.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved tremendous success, but its requirement for large amounts of data makes
it often inefficient or infeasible in terms of resources and computation. To enable continuous learning
like humans, it is necessary to learn from a large number of data points in a continuous manner,
which requires the ability to discern and retain important information. This motivates the learning of
a coreset, a small dataset that is informative enough to represent a large dataset.
On the other hand, the ability to incorporate uncertainties into predictions is essential for real-world
applications, as it contributes to the safety and reliability of a model. One approach to achieving this
is by adopting a Bayesian framework, where a prior distribution is established to represent our initial
belief about the models. This belief is then updated through inference of posterior distributions based
on the acquired knowledge. Although this approach shows promise, scalability becomes a concern
when working with large-scale datasets during Bayesian inference. To address this issue, a potential
solution is to employ a Bayesian coreset. A Bayesian coreset is a small subset of the original dataset
where the posterior conditioning on it closely approximates the original posterior conditioning on the
full dataset. Once the Bayesian coreset is trained, it can be utilized as a lightweight proxy dataset for
subsequent Bayesian inference or as a replay buffer for continual learning or transfer learning.
A Bayesian coreset is constructed by selecting a subset from a large dataset. However, recent research
suggests that this approach may not be effective, especially in high-dimensional settings [19]. Instead,
an alternative method of synthesizing a coreset, wherein the coreset is learned as trainable parameters,
has been found to significantly enhance the quality of the approximation. This synthesized coreset is
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

