FlowCam: Training Generalizable 3D Radiance Fields
without Camera Poses via Pixel-Aligned Scene Flow

Cameron Smith

Yilun Du

Ayush Tewari

Vincent Sitzmann

{camsmith, yilundu, ayusht, sitzmann}@mit.edu

MIT CSAIL
cameronosmith.github.io/flowcam

Abstract
Reconstruction of 3D neural fields from posed images has emerged as a promising
method for self-supervised representation learning. The key challenge preventing
the deployment of these 3D scene learners on large-scale video data is their dependence on precise camera poses from structure-from-motion, which is prohibitively
expensive to run at scale. We propose a method that jointly reconstructs camera
poses and 3D neural scene representations online and in a single forward pass. We
estimate poses by first lifting frame-to-frame optical flow to 3D scene flow via
differentiable rendering, preserving locality and shift-equivariance of the image
processing backbone. SE(3) camera pose estimation is then performed via a
weighted least-squares fit to the scene flow field. This formulation enables us to
jointly supervise pose estimation and a generalizable neural scene representation
via re-rendering the input video, and thus, train end-to-end and fully self-supervised
on real-world video datasets. We demonstrate that our method performs robustly
on diverse, real-world video, notably on sequences traditionally challenging to
optimization-based pose estimation techniques.

1

Introduction

Recent learning-based 3D reconstruction techniques show promise in estimating the underlying 3D
appearance and geometry from just a few posed image observations, in a single feed-forward pass [1–
19]. These techniques offer an exciting new perspective on computer vision: Instead of making
predictions only on pixels, computer vision models might operate directly on the corresponding 3D
scenes. This would be a significant step towards a generalist computer vision model, applicable to
any task involving interaction with the physical world.
A core challenge to the generality of these methods is that they cannot be trained from just video, but
instead require knowledge of per-frame camera poses. Existing methods thus rely on curated datasets
that obtain camera poses via Structure-from-Motion, but this is prohibitively expensive to compute at
scale. Lifting this dataset prerequisite would unlock orders of magnitude more training data, making
large-scale 3D representation learning tractable. Meanwhile, odometry and SLAM methods offer
online camera pose estimation, but may fail to track sequences with dominant camera rotation or with
sparse visual features, and do not reconstruct dense 3D scene representations. While recent efforts
leveraging differentiable rendering have demonstrated impressive results at joint reconstruction of
camera poses and 3D scenes, they still require minutes or hours per scene. Further, these optimizationbased methods cannot leverage learned priors for camera pose estimation, leaving significant progress
in computer vision of the last decade untapped. While prior work has demonstrated self-supervised
learning of joint depth and camera pose prediction [20, 21], these models are constrained to tight
video distributions, such as self-driving video, and do not infer a full 3D representation, only depth.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

