Transformer-based Planning for Symbolic Regression

Parshin Shojaee∗ 1 , Kazem Meidani∗ 2
Amir Barati Farimani 2,3 , Chandan K. Reddy1
1
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech
2
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
3
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Symbolic regression (SR) is a challenging task in machine learning that involves
finding a mathematical expression for a function based on its values. Recent
advancements in SR have demonstrated the effectiveness of pre-trained transformer
models in generating equations as sequences, leveraging large-scale pre-training on
synthetic datasets and offering notable advantages in terms of inference time over
classical Genetic Programming (GP) methods. However, these models primarily
rely on supervised pre-training objectives borrowed from text generation and
overlook equation discovery goals like accuracy and complexity. To address this,
we propose TPSR, a Transformer-based Planning strategy for Symbolic Regression
that incorporates Monte Carlo Tree Search planning algorithm into the transformer
decoding process. Unlike conventional decoding strategies, TPSR enables the
integration of non-differentiable equation verification feedback, such as fitting
accuracy and complexity, as external sources of knowledge into the transformer
equation generation process. Extensive experiments on various datasets show
that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods, enhancing the model’s
fitting-complexity trade-off, extrapolation abilities, and robustness to noise 1 .

1

Introduction

Symbolic regression (SR) is a powerful method to discover mathematical expressions for governing
equations of complex systems and to describe data patterns in an interpretable symbolic form. It finds
extensive applications in science and engineering, enabling the modeling of physical phenomena
in various domains such as molecular dynamics, fluid dynamics, and cosmology [1–6]. Symbolic
representations provide valuable insights into complex systems, facilitating a better understanding,
prediction, and control of these systems through the design of accurate, generalizable, and efficient
models [7–9]. SR models establish the functional relationship between independent and target variables by mapping them to mathematical equations. The input data can be obtained from simulations,
experimental measurements, or real-world observations. Symbolic regression, however, poses several
challenges, including the combinatorial nature of the large optimization search space, vulnerability to
the quality of input data, and the difficulty of striking a balance between model fitting, complexity,
and generalization performance [10, 11].
Symbolic regression encompasses a wide range of methods, spanning different categories. Traditional
approaches, such as Genetic Programming (GP), use a heuristic population-based search strategy
where each individual represents a potential solution to the problem [12, 13]. Though GP algorithms
are capable of finding solutions for nonlinear and complex problems, they are typically slow to
converge due to the vast functional search space. Also, as they need to start the search from scratch
for each dataset, they tend to be computationally expensive, prone to overfitting, and sensitive to the
∗
1

Equal contribution. Contact email: parshinshojaee@vt.edu
The codes are available at: https://github.com/deep-symbolic-mathematics/TPSR

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

