Score-based Source Separation with Applications to
Digital Communication Signals

Tejas Jayashankar1 Gary C.F. Lee1 Alejandro Lancho1,2 Amir Weiss1
Yury Polyanskiy1 Gregory W. Wornell1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

2

Universidad Carlos III de Madrid

Abstract
We propose a new method for separating superimposed sources using diffusionbased generative models. Our method relies only on separately trained statistical
priors of independent sources to establish a new objective function guided by
maximum a posteriori estimation with an α-posterior, across multiple levels of
Gaussian smoothing. Motivated by applications in radio-frequency (RF) systems,
we are interested in sources with underlying discrete nature and the recovery of
encoded bits from a signal of interest, as measured by the bit error rate (BER).
Experimental results with RF mixtures demonstrate that our method results in a
BER reduction of 95% over classical and existing learning-based methods. Our
analysis demonstrates that our proposed method yields solutions that asymptotically
approach the modes of an underlying discrete distribution. Furthermore, our method
can be viewed as a multi-source extension to the recently proposed score distillation
sampling scheme, shedding additional light on its use beyond conditional sampling.
The project webpage is available at https://alpha-rgs.github.io.

1

Introduction

The problem of single-channel source separation (SCSS) is ubiquitous and arises in many different
applications, ranging from the cocktail party problem in the audio domain to interference mitigation
in the digital communications domain. Broadly speaking, the goal in SCSS is to decompose a mixture
N
y = κ1 x1 + · · · + κK xK ∈ Y N into its K constituent components, {xi }K
i=1 , xi ∈ Xi . Motivated
by applications in modern engineering, e.g., intelligent communication systems, we are particularly
interested in the SCSS problem for heterogeneous sources with underlying discrete structure.
Prior art that uses deep learning for source separation problems has been well-studied in the audio
and image domain by leveraging domain-specific structures. For example, recent end-to-end methods
in the audio domain leverage spectrogram masking techniques to separate sparse time-frequency
representations [1, 2], while in the visual domain, natural images may be separable by exploiting
local features and “smoothness" assumptions in the color space [3, 4]. More recent efforts have tried
to solve this problem by leveraging independently trained statistical priors using annealed Langevin
dynamics sampling [5–7]. However, these methods have demonstrated shortcomings on discrete
sources that exhibit intricate temporal structures with equiprobable multimodal distributions [8].
These additional challenges motivate us to develop a novel general Bayesian framework for source
separation that relies on statistical priors over sources with underlying discreteness. Specifically, we
focus on learning data-driven priors for two main reasons—i) Unknown system parameters, e.g.,
the underlying signal generation model may not be available to create hand-crafted priors; and ii)
Automation, facilitated by learning methods to create plug-and-play priors for versatile use.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

