Mitigating Over-smoothing in Transformers via
Regularized Nonlocal Functionals

Tam Nguyen
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Rice University
Houston, USA
mn72@rice.edu

Tan M. Nguyen
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
Singapore
tanmn@nus.edu.sg

Richard G. Baraniuk
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Rice University
Houston, USA
richb@rice.edu

Abstract
Transformers have achieved remarkable success in a wide range of natural language
processing and computer vision applications. However, the representation capacity
of a deep transformer model is degraded due to the over-smoothing issue in which
the token representations become identical when the model’s depth grows. In this
work, we show that self-attention layers in transformers minimize a functional
which promotes smoothness, thereby causing token uniformity. We then propose
a novel regularizer that penalizes the norm of the difference between the smooth
output tokens from self-attention and the input tokens to preserve the fidelity of
the tokens. Minimizing the resulting regularized energy functional, we derive
the Neural Transformer with a Regularized Nonlocal Functional (NeuTRENO),
a novel class of transformer models that can mitigate the over-smoothing issue.
We empirically demonstrate the advantages of NeuTRENO over the baseline
transformers and state-of-the-art methods in reducing the over-smoothing of token
representations on various practical tasks, including object classification, image
segmentation, and language modeling.

1

Introduction

Transformer models [62] have achieved substantial success in natural language processing [16, 2, 13,
10, 47, 4, 6, 14], reinforcement learning [9, 32], computer vision [19, 40, 59, 49, 44, 3, 41, 71, 27],
and other practical applications [50, 33, 70, 26, 66]. Transformers also excel at transferring knowledge
from pre-trained models to new tasks, even when limited supervision is available [45, 46, 16, 69, 39].
At the heart of transformers lies the self-attention mechanism, which computes a weighted average of
token representations within a sequence. These weights are determined based on the similarity scores
between pairs of tokens, determining their relative importance in the sequence [11, 43, 38]. This
flexibility in capturing diverse syntactic and semantic relationships has been identified as a crucial
factor contributing to the success of transformers [57, 63, 12, 64, 31].
1.1

Background: Self-Attention

For a given input sequence X := [x(1), · · · , x(N )]⊤ ∈ RN ×Dx of N feature vectors, self-attention
transforms X into the output sequence H in the following two steps:

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

