Offline Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with
Implicit Global-to-Local Value Regularization

Xiangsen Wang1∗ Haoran Xu2∗ Yinan Zheng3 Xianyuan Zhan3,4†
1
Beijing Jiaotong University 2 UT Austin 3 Tsinghua University
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
wangxiangsen@bjtu.edu.cn, haoran.xu@utexas.edu,
zhengyn23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhanxianyuan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) has received considerable attention in recent
years due to its attractive capability of learning policies from offline datasets
without environmental interactions. Despite some success in the single-agent
setting, offline multi-agent RL (MARL) remains to be a challenge. The large
joint state-action space and the coupled multi-agent behaviors pose extra complexities for offline policy optimization. Most existing offline MARL studies
simply apply offline data-related regularizations on individual agents, without fully
considering the multi-agent system at the global level. In this work, we present
OMIGA, a new offline multi-agent RL algorithm with implicit global-to-local
value regularization. OMIGA provides a principled framework to convert globallevel value regularization into equivalent implicit local value regularizations and
simultaneously enables in-sample learning, thus elegantly bridging multi-agent
value decomposition and policy learning with offline regularizations. Based on
comprehensive experiments on the offline multi-agent MuJoCo and StarCraft II
micro-management tasks, we show that OMIGA achieves superior performance
over the state-of-the-art offline MARL methods in almost all tasks. Our code is
available at https://github.com/ZhengYinan-AIR/OMIGA.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is an active research area to tackle many real-world
problems that involve multi-agent systems, such as autonomous vehicle coordination[1], network
traffic routing [2], and multi-player strategy games [3]. Although MARL has made some impressive
progress in recent years, most of its successes are restricted to simulation environments. In most
real-world applications, building high-fidelity simulators can be rather costly or even infeasible, and
online interaction with the real system during policy learning is also expensive or risky. Inspired by
the recently emerged offline RL methods [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10], equipping MARL with offline learning
capability has become an attractive direction to tackle real-world multi-agent tasks.
Offline RL focuses on learning optimal policies with pre-collected offline datasets with no further
environmental interaction. Under the offline setting, evaluating value function on out-of-distribution
(OOD) samples can cause extrapolation error accumulation on Q-values, leading to erroneously overestimated values and misguiding policy learning [4, 5]. This issue, which is also called distributional
shift [5], is one of the core challenges in offline RL. Current offline RL methods tackle this issue
primarily by incorporating various forms of data-related regularizations to restrict policy learning
* Work done during the internships with Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University.
†

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

