Accelerated Zeroth-order Method for Non-Smooth
Stochastic Convex Optimization Problem with Infinite
Variance
Nikita Kornilov
MIPT, SkolTech
kornilov.nm@phystech.edu
Darina Dvinskikh
HSE University,
ISP RAS
dmdvinskikh@hse.ru

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Alexander Gasnikov
MIPT,
ISP RAS, SkolTech
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Eduard Gorbunov
MBZUAI
eduard.gorbunov@mbzuai.ac.ae

Aleksandr Lobanov
MIPT, ISP RAS
lobanov.av@mipt.ru

Innokentiy Shibaev
MIPT,
IITP RAS
innokentiy.shibayev@phystech.edu
Samuel Horváth
MBZUAI
samuel.horvath@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
In this paper, we consider non-smooth stochastic convex optimization with two
function evaluations per round under infinite noise variance. In the classical
setting when noise has finite variance, an optimal algorithm, built upon the batched
accelerated gradient method, was proposed in [17]. This optimality is defined in
terms of iteration and oracle complexity, as well as the maximal admissible level
of adversarial noise. However, the assumption of finite variance is burdensome and
it might not hold in many practical scenarios. To address this, we demonstrate how
to adapt a refined clipped version of the accelerated gradient (Stochastic Similar
Triangles) method from [35] for a two-point zero-order oracle. This adaptation
entails extending the batching technique to accommodate infinite variance — a
non-trivial task that stands as a distinct contribution of this paper.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider stochastic non-smooth convex optimization problem
n
o
def
min f (x) = Eξ∼D [f (x, ξ)] ,
x∈Rd

(1)

where f (x, ξ) is M2 (ξ)-Lipschitz continuous in x w.r.t. the Euclidean norm, and the expectation
Eξ∼D [f (x, ξ)] is with respect to a random variable ξ with unknown distribution D. The optimization
is performed only by accessing two function evaluations per round rather than sub-gradients, i.e., for
any pair of points x, y ∈ Rd , an oracle returns f (x, ξ) and f (y, ξ) with the same ξ. The primary
motivation for this gradient-free oracle arises from different applications where calculating gradients
is computationally infeasible or even impossible. For instance, in medicine, biology, and physics,
the objective function can only be computed through numerical simulation or as the result of a
real experiment, i.e., automatic differentiation cannot be employed to calculate function derivatives.
Usually, a black-box function we are optimizing is affected by stochastic or computational noise. This
noise can arise naturally from modeling randomness within a simulation or by computer discretization.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

