How Re-sampling Helps for Long-Tail Learning?

1

Jiang-Xin Shi1∗ Tong Wei2∗ Yuke Xiang3 Yu-Feng Li1†
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
3
Consumer BG, Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China
{shijx,liyf}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, weit@seu.edu.cn, yuke.xiang@huawei.com

Abstract
Long-tail learning has received significant attention in recent years due to the
challenge it poses with extremely imbalanced datasets. In these datasets, only a few
classes (known as the head classes) have an adequate number of training samples,
while the rest of the classes (known as the tail classes) are infrequent in the training
data. Re-sampling is a classical and widely used approach for addressing class
imbalance issues. Unfortunately, recent studies claim that re-sampling brings
negligible performance improvements in modern long-tail learning tasks. This
paper aims to investigate this phenomenon systematically. Our research shows that
re-sampling can considerably improve generalization when the training images do
not contain semantically irrelevant contexts. In other scenarios, however, it can
learn unexpected spurious correlations between irrelevant contexts and target labels.
We design experiments on two homogeneous datasets, one containing irrelevant
context and the other not, to confirm our findings. To prevent the learning of
spurious correlations, we propose a new context shift augmentation module that
generates diverse training images for the tail class by maintaining a context bank
extracted from the head-class images. Experiments demonstrate that our proposed
module can boost the generalization and outperform other approaches, including
class-balanced re-sampling, decoupled classifier re-training, and data augmentation
methods. The source code is available at https://www.lamda.nju.edu.cn/
code_CSA.ashx.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved great success by applying well-designed models on large-scale
elaborated datasets [1, 2, 3]. However, real-world data often exhibits a long-tail class distribution [4,
5, 6]. Learning from long-tail datasets has two main challenges, one is the class-imbalanced problem
which causes the model biased towards the dominated head classes, and another is the data scarcity
problem leading to the poor generalization on those rare tail classes [7, 8, 9, 10].
One simple and intuitive approach to deal with the class-imbalanced problem is re-sampling [11, 12],
i.e., create the replicate of the dataset to estimate the model parameters. Unfortunately, it has
been reported that re-sampling methods achieve limited effects when applied to most long-tail
datasets [6, 13]. Currently, there are still few concrete and comprehensive explanations for this
observation. Existing works mainly conclude that re-sampling will lead to the overfitting problem,
and thus will be harmful to long-tail representation learning [6, 14].
Recently, many two-stage approaches have been proposed to improve the tail-class performance
by adopting re-sampling in the second training stage. For instance, DRS [15] adopts a re-sampling
∗
†

equal contribution
corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

