In Defense of Softmax Parametrization for Calibrated
and Consistent Learning to Defer

Yuzhou Cao1
Hussein Mozannar2
Lei Feng1∗
3
1
Hongxin Wei
Bo An
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
CSAIL and IDSS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
3
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Southern University of Science and Technology, China
yuzhou002@e.ntu.edu.sg, mozannar@mit.edu
lfengqaq@gmail.com, weihx@sustech.edu.cn, boan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Enabling machine learning classifiers to defer their decision to a downstream expert
when the expert is more accurate will ensure improved safety and performance.
This objective can be achieved with the learning-to-defer framework which aims to
jointly learn how to classify and how to defer to the expert. In recent studies, it has
been theoretically shown that popular estimators for learning to defer parameterized
with softmax provide unbounded estimates for the likelihood of deferring which
makes them uncalibrated. However, it remains unknown whether this is due to the
widely used softmax parameterization and if we can find a softmax-based estimator
that is both statistically consistent and possesses a valid probability estimator. In
this work, we first show that the cause of the miscalibrated and unbounded estimator
in prior literature is due to the symmetric nature of the surrogate losses used and
not due to softmax. We then propose a novel statistically consistent asymmetric
softmax-based surrogate loss that can produce valid estimates without the issue of
unboundedness. We further analyze the non-asymptotic properties of our method
and empirically validate its performance and calibration on benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

As machine learning models get deployed in risk-critical tasks such as autonomous driving [18],
content moderation [27], and medical diagnosis [20], we have a higher urgency to prevent incorrect
predictions. To enable a safer and more accurate system, one solution is to allow the model to defer
to a downstream human expert when necessary. The Learning to Defer (L2D) paradigm achieves this
aim [28, 30, 31, 9, 44, 32, 33, 45, 3, 35, 15, 42] and enables models to defer to an expert, i.e., abstain
from giving a prediction and request a downstream expert for an answer when needed. L2D aims to
train an augmented classifier that can choose to defer to an expert when the expert is more accurate
or make a prediction without the expert. L2D can be formulated as a risk-minimization problem that
minimizes the 0-1-deferral risk [30], which incurs a cost of one when the classifier is incorrect or
when we defer to an expert who errs and incurs a cost of zero otherwise.
Despite being formulated straightforwardly, the risk minimization problem is NP-hard even in simple
settings [15, 32] due to the discontinuous and non-convex nature of the 0-1-deferral loss. To make the
optimization problem tractable, many efforts have been made to design a continuous surrogate loss
for the 0-1-deferral loss while guaranteeing statistical consistency, which means that the minimizer of
the surrogate risk is that of the 0-1-deferral risk. In Mozannar and Sontag [30], a cross-entropy-like
∗

Corresponding author: Lei Feng.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

