Large Language Models Are Semi-Parametric
Reinforcement Learning Agents

Danyang Zhang1

Lu Chen1,2 †

Situo Zhang1

Hongshen Xu1
Zihan Zhao1
Kai Yu1,2
1
X-LANCE Lab, Department of Computer Science and Engineering
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, SJTU AI Institute
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Suzhou Laboratory, Suzhou, China
{zhang-dy20,chenlusz,situozhang,xuhongshen,zhao_mengxin,kai.yu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Inspired by the insights in cognitive science with respect to human memory and
reasoning mechanism, a novel evolvable LLM-based (Large Language Model)
agent framework is proposed as R EMEMBERER. By equipping the LLM with a longterm experience memory, R EMEMBERER is capable of exploiting the experiences
from the past episodes even for different task goals, which excels an LLM-based
agent with fixed exemplars or equipped with a transient working memory. We
further introduce Reinforcement Learning with Experience Memory (RLEM) to
update the memory. Thus, the whole system can learn from the experiences of both
success and failure, and evolve its capability without fine-tuning the parameters of
the LLM. In this way, the proposed R EMEMBERER constitutes a semi-parametric
RL agent. Extensive experiments are conducted on two RL task sets to evaluate the
proposed framework. The average results with different initialization and training
sets exceed the prior SOTA by 4% and 2% for the success rate on two task sets and
demonstrate the superiority and robustness of R EMEMBERER.1

1

Introduction

Reasoning is remembering. As declared by Seifert et al. [1997], the episodic memory of the
experiences from past episodes plays a crucial role in the complex decision-making processes of
human [Suddendorf and Corballis, 2007]. By recollecting the experiences from past episodes, the
human can learn from success to repeat it and learn from failure to avoid it. Similarly, an agent
should optimize its policy for a decision-making task with the help of reminiscence of the interaction
experiences. In this work, we primarily investigate how to utilize large language models (LLMs) as
agents and equip them with interaction experiences to solve sequential decision-making tasks.
Despite the impressive performance of LLMs on many natural language processing (NLP) tasks [Wei
et al., 2022, Kojima et al., 2022, Wang et al., 2022, Yao et al., 2022b], existing approaches still
struggle to enable LLMs to effectively learn from interaction experiences. On the one hand, the most
common approach for an agent to utilize the experiences is to fine-tune the model parameters through
reinforcement learning (RL). However, it requires a considerable expenditure to deploy and fine-tune
an LLM, which makes it difficult to apply task-aware RL to the LLM to preserve the experiences. On
the other hand, recent work like Algorithm Distillation [Laskin et al., 2022] presents an in-context
†
1

Lu Chen is the corresponding author.
The codes are open-sourced at https://github.com/OpenDFM/Rememberer.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

