On the Trade-off of Intra-/Inter-class Diversity
for Supervised Pre-training

Jieyu Zhang1∗, Bohan Wang2∗, Zhengyu Hu3 , Pang Wei Koh1 , Alexander Ratner1,4
1
University of Washington 2 USTC 3 HKUST(GZ) 4 Snorkel AI, Inc.
{jieyuz2,pangwei,ajratner}@cs.washington.edu
bhwangfy@gmail.com
zhu021@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-training datasets are critical for building state-of-the-art machine learning
models, motivating rigorous study on their impact on downstream tasks. In this
work, we study the impact of the trade-off between the intra-class diversity (the
number of samples per class) and the inter-class diversity (the number of classes)
of a supervised pre-training dataset. Empirically, given a fixed pre-training dataset
size, we find that the best downstream performance comes with a balance on the
intra-/inter-class diversity. To understand the underlying mechanism, we show
theoretically that downstream performance depends monotonically on both types
of diversity. Notably, our theory reveals that the optimal class-to-sample ratio
#classes
( #samples
per class ), i.e., the ratio of the number of pre-training classes to the number
of samples per class, is invariant to the size of the pre-training dataset, enabling
the prediction of the optimal number of pre-training classes. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of this application by an improvement of approximately 2 points on
average on downstream tasks when pre-training on ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Many state-of-the-art deep neural network models are pre-trained on large datasets before being
finetuned for downstream tasks [13, 17, 23, 1]. While the composition of their pre-training dataset
has been shown to be a key factor in the performance of these models [7, 9, 14, 8, 12, 26], how
best to design these pre-training datasets still remains underexplored. In this work, we focus on
supervised pre-training, one of the most popular pre-training paradigms, and study two key quantities
of a supervised pre-training dataset: intra-class diversity (the number of different samples within each
pre-training class) and inter-class diversity (the number of different pre-training classes). Intuitively,
both diversities are beneficial for supervised pre-training [13]. Yet when the size of the pre-training
dataset is fixed, these diversities trade off, since increasing one will decrease the other. Our work
studies the impact of this dataset diversity trade-off on downstream performance, as well as how to
balance them to design a supervised pre-training dataset with the best downstream performance.
Empirically, with ImageNet [24] as the pre-training dataset and the pre-training dataset size fixed, we
show that the optimal performance on the downstream tasks occurs when a balance on the intra-/interclass diversity is achieved. We then offer a theoretical explanation for this effect by first modeling the
dataset generation process through a two-step sampling framework, and then demonstrating that the
test error of the downstream task displays a rational relationship with respect to the class-to-sample
ratio, i.e., the ratio of the number of pre-training classes to the number of samples per class, or, in
other words, the ratio between inter-/intra-class diversity. The established analytical relationship
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

