Inner-Outer Aware Reconstruction Model for
Monocular 3D Scene Reconstruction
Yu-Kun Qiu1
Guo-Hao Xu1
Wei-Shi Zheng1,2 ∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{qiuyk,xugh23}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
wszheng@ieee.org
1

Abstract
Monocular 3D scene reconstruction aims to reconstruct the 3D structure of scenes
based on posed images. Recent volumetric-based methods directly predict the
truncated signed distance function (TSDF) volume and have achieved promising
results. The memory cost of volumetric-based methods will grow cubically as
the volume size increases, so a coarse-to-fine strategy is necessary for saving
memory. Specifically, the coarse-to-fine strategy distinguishes surface voxels
from non-surface voxels, and only potential surface voxels are considered in the
succeeding procedure. However, the non-surface voxels have various features,
and in particular, the voxels on the inner side of the surface are quite different
from those on the outer side since there exists an intrinsic gap between them.
Therefore, grouping inner-surface and outer-surface voxels into the same class
will force the classifier to spend its capacity to bridge the gap. By contrast, it
is relatively easy for the classifier to distinguish inner-surface and outer-surface
voxels due to the intrinsic gap. Inspired by this, we propose the inner-outer
aware reconstruction (IOAR) model. IOAR explores a new coarse-to-fine strategy
to classify outer-surface, inner-surface and surface voxels. In addition, IOAR
separates occupancy branches from TSDF branches to avoid mutual interference
between them. Since our model can better classify the surface, outer-surface and
inner-surface voxels, it can predict more precise meshes than existing methods.
Experiment results on ScanNet, ICL-NUIM and TUM-RGBD datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness and generalization of our model. The code is available at https:
//github.com/YorkQiu/InnerOuterAwareReconstruction.

1

Introduction

Monocular 3D Reconstruction is a fundamental task in computer vision and is the basis for various applications like robotics, augmented/virtual reality and autonomous navigation. It aims at
reconstructing the 3D structure of scenes or objects based on a sequence of monocular RGB images.
Although camera poses can be estimated accurately with state-of-the-art SLAM [1, 2] or SfM systems
[3], this task is still very challenging since the complexity of the environment. For example, indoor
scenes can contain various objects with different textures under diverse illumination.
Researchers have studied this challenging problem for many years, and conventional methods solve
this problem in a multi-view depth manner [4, 5, 6, 7]. They predict the depth map for each image
and then fuse these depth maps to generate 3D meshes. Recently, some researchers [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]
attempted to regress the 3D surface of the entire scene directly and have achieved promising results.
They first extract image features from different views and then back-project them to form volume
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

