UP-DP: Unsupervised Prompt Learning for Data
Pre-Selection with Vision-Language Models

Xin Li
Sima Behpour
Thang Doan
Wenbin He
Liang Gou
Liu Ren
Bosch Research North America, Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
{xin.li9, sima.behpour, thang.doan, wenbin.he2, liang.gou, liu.ren}@us.bosch.com

Abstract
In this study, we investigate the task of data pre-selection, which aims to select
instances for labeling from an unlabeled dataset through a single pass, thereby
optimizing performance for undefined downstream tasks with a limited annotation
budget. Previous approaches to data pre-selection relied solely on visual features
extracted from foundation models, such as CLIP and BLIP-2, but largely ignored
the powerfulness of text features. In this work, we argue that, with proper design,
the joint feature space of both vision and text can yield a better representation
for data pre-selection. To this end, we introduce UP-DP, a simple yet effective
unsupervised prompt learning approach that adapts vision-language models, like
BLIP-2, for data pre-selection. Specifically, with the BLIP-2 parameters frozen,
we train text prompts to extract the joint features with improved representation,
ensuring a diverse cluster structure that covers the entire dataset. We extensively
compare our method with the state-of-the-art using seven benchmark datasets in
different settings, achieving up to a performance gain of 20%. Interestingly, the
prompts learned from one dataset demonstrate significant generalizability and can
be applied directly to enhance the feature extraction of BLIP-2 from other datasets.
To the best of our knowledge, UP-DP is the first work to incorporate unsupervised
prompt learning in a vision-language model for data pre-selection.

1

Introduction

Data-efficient machine learning, which aims to identify the best subsets of data samples (to either
label or not) in order to achieve optimal model performance, has been a crucial research field in the
era of data-hungry deep learning [12, 31, 24, 40, 9]. In this work, we focus on a new and practical
task of data pre-selection for data-efficient visual object recognition (Fig.1-a). The goal of data
pre-selection is to select instances for labeling from an unlabeled dataset through a single pass to
maximize model performance for unknown downstream vision tasks (e.g., no knowledge about
prediction categories, shown in Fig.1-b), given a limited annotation budget. This task is motivated
by two practical needs: at the data acquisition stage, we want to collect minimal data to support
potentially diverse downstream tasks (e.g., classification, action recognition, or even detection for
videos or images in Fig.1-b) and training paradigms (e.g. active learning, semi-supervised learning,
supervised learning in Fig.1-c); at the annotation stage, we aim to achieve good performance with
fewer human annotations over the pre-selected data.
Traditionally, to tackle the challenge of data efficiency learning, there are two main approaches:
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) [3, 35, 21] and Active Learning (AL) [34, 10, 2]. SSL aims to
address the problem of label scarcity by leveraging a limited quantity of labeled data in conjunction
with a more abundant pool of unlabeled data to enhance the model’s performance. By contrast, AL
approaches start with an initial set of labeled data and select the most informative data point to label
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

