PriorBand: Practical Hyperparameter Optimization
in the Age of Deep Learning

Neeratyoy Mallik
University of Freiburg
mallik@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Edward Bergman
University of Freiburg
bergmane@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Carl Hvarfner
Lund University
carl.hvarfner@cs.lth.se

Danny Stoll
University of Freiburg
stolld@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Maciej Janowski
University of Freiburg
janowski@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Marius Lindauer
Leibniz University Hannover
m.lindauer@ai.uni-hannover.de
Frank Hutter
University of Freiburg
fh@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Luigi Nardi
Lund University
Stanford University
DBtune
luigi.nardi@cs.lth.se

Abstract
Hyperparameters of Deep Learning (DL) pipelines are crucial for their downstream
performance. While a large number of methods for Hyperparameter Optimization
(HPO) have been developed, their incurred costs are often untenable for modern
DL. Consequently, manual experimentation is still the most prevalent approach to
optimize hyperparameters, relying on the researcher’s intuition, domain knowledge,
and cheap preliminary explorations. To resolve this misalignment between HPO
algorithms and DL researchers, we propose PriorBand, an HPO algorithm tailored
to DL, able to utilize both expert beliefs and cheap proxy tasks. Empirically, we
demonstrate PriorBand’s efficiency across a range of DL benchmarks and show
its gains under informative expert input and robustness against poor expert beliefs.

1

Introduction

The performance of Deep Learning (DL) models crucially depends on dataset-specific settings of
their hyperparameters (HPs) [1, 2]. Therefore, Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) is an integral
step in the development of DL models [3–6]. HPO methods have typically been applied to traditional
machine learning models (including shallow neural networks) that focus on fairly small datasets [7, 8].
Current DL practitioners, however, often utilize much larger models and datasets (e.g., a single
training of GPT-3 [9] was estimated to require 3 · 1023 FLOPS, i.e., months on a thousand V100
GPUs [10]). As recent HPO practices continue to apply simple techniques like grid, random, or
manual search [11–14], existing HPO methods seem misaligned with DL practice.
To make the misalignment between existing HPO methods and DL practice explicit, we identify the
following desiderata for an efficient, scalable HPO method suitable for current DL:
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

