Conformal Prediction Sets for Ordinal Classification
Prasenjit Dey
prasendx@amazon.com

Srujana Merugu
smerugu@amazon.com

Sivaramakrishnan Kaveri
kavers@amazon.com
Amazon, India

Abstract
Ordinal classification (OC), i.e., labeling instances along classes with a natural
ordering, is common in multiple applications such as disease severity labeling and
size or budget based recommendations. Often in practical scenarios, it is desirable
to obtain a small set of likely classes with a guaranteed high chance of including the
true class. Recent works on conformal prediction (CP) address this problem for the
classification setting with non-ordered labels but the resulting prediction sets (PS)
are often non-contiguous and unsuitable for ordinal classification. In this work,
we propose a framework to adapt existing CP methods to generate contiguous sets
with guaranteed coverage and minimal cardinality. Our framework employs a novel
non-parametric approach for modeling unimodal distributions. Empirical results
on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms
SOTA baselines by 4% on Accuracy@K and 8% on PS size.

1

Introduction

A large number of practical applications involve ordinal classification (OC), i.e., labeling of instances
along a set of ordered discrete classes. These include applications such as determining severity level
of abuse incidents or disease diagnosis for efficient follow up, predicting customer age-range, apparel
size, and budget for improving recommendations and reducing customer cognitive effort by offering
adaptive search filters. Often, in such cases, it is desirable to identify a small set of classes (called
prediction set or PS) for a given input instance such that the true class is amongst the identified set
with a high probability (called coverage level) instead of a single point estimate of the most likely
class. This allows more flexibility in choosing operating points that balance precision-recall trade-off.
For instance, customers looking for shoes are often recommended products that are not even available
in the customer’s typical size. An OC model that predicts the customer size would be well suited
to improve the recommendations offered. However, limiting the recommendations to a single most
likely size is too restrictive because the model accuracy is often low due to variations in size over time
and across brands. Instead, it is preferable to identify a small set of product sizes with say > 90%
coverage and use that for automatically filtering the recommendations as shown in Fig. 1.
Conformal prediction (CP)[35, 1, 36, 9] is an emerging area that addresses the problem of predicting
a set of likely outputs along with a measure of the confidence or coverage level. While existing CP
methods offer ease of deployment and provable coverage guarantees, most of these methods deal
with unordered classes and output prediction sets that are non-contiguous and unsuitable for OC
settings where the underlying distribution is likely unimodal. For example, for any customer, based
on their foot size, a good fit is possible only with a small set of proximal shoe sizes resulting in a
unimodal class distribution. Recommending a non-contiguous set of sizes [4, 8, 9] is not a desirable
customer experience. On the other hand, expanding the PS to a minimal contiguous superset leads to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

