Towards Label-free Scene Understanding by Vision
Foundation Models
Runnan Chen1

Youquan Liu2 Lingdong Kong3 Nenglun Chen1 Xinge Zhu4
Yuexin Ma5∗ Tongliang Liu6 Wenping Wang7∗
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Hochschule Bremerhaven
3
National University of Singapore 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
ShanghaiTech University 6 The University of Sydney 7 Texas A&M University

Abstract
Vision foundation models such as Contrastive Vision-Language Pre-training (CLIP)
and Segment Anything (SAM) have demonstrated impressive zero-shot performance on image classification and segmentation tasks. However, the incorporation
of CLIP and SAM for label-free scene understanding has yet to be explored. In
this paper, we investigate the potential of vision foundation models in enabling
networks to comprehend 2D and 3D worlds without labelled data. The primary
challenge lies in effectively supervising networks under extremely noisy pseudo
labels, which are generated by CLIP and further exacerbated during the propagation
from the 2D to the 3D domain. To tackle these challenges, we propose a novel
Cross-modality Noisy Supervision (CNS) method that leverages the strengths of
CLIP and SAM to supervise 2D and 3D networks simultaneously. In particular, we
introduce a prediction consistency regularization to co-train 2D and 3D networks,
then further impose the networks’ latent space consistency using the SAM’s robust
feature representation. Experiments conducted on diverse indoor and outdoor
datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our method in understanding 2D
and 3D open environments. Our 2D and 3D network achieves label-free semantic
segmentation with 28.4% and 33.5% mIoU on ScanNet, improving 4.7% and 7.9%,
respectively. For nuImages and nuScenes datasets, the performance is 22.1% and
26.8% with improvements of 3.5% and 6.0%, respectively. Code is available.2

1

Introduction

Scene understanding aims to recognize the semantic information of objects within their contextual
environment, which is a fundamental task for autonomous driving, robot navigation, digital city, etc.
Existing methods have achieved remarkable advancements in 2D and 3D scene understanding [1–
10]. However, they heavily rely on extensive annotation efforts and often struggle to identify novel
object categories that were not present in the training data. These limitations hinder their practical
applicability in real-world scenarios where acquiring high-quality labelled data can be expensive
and novel objects may appear [11–17]. Consequently, label-free scene understanding, which aims to
perform semantic segmentation in real-world environments without requiring labelled data, emerges
as a highly valuable yet relatively unexplored research topic.
Vision foundation models, e.g., Contrastive Vision-Language Pre-training (CLIP) [18] and Segment
Anything (SAM) [19], have garnered significant attention due to their remarkable performance in
addressing open-world vision tasks. CLIP, trained on a large-scale collection of freely available imagetext pairs from websites, exhibits promising capabilities in open-vocabulary image classification. On
∗
2

Corresponding authors.
https://github.com/runnanchen/Label-Free-Scene-Understanding.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

