Injecting Multimodal Information into
Rigid Protein Docking via Bi-level Optimization

Ruijia Wang12∗ † Yiwu Sun1† Yujie Luo1† Shaochuan Li1† Cheng Yang2
Xingyi Cheng1
Hui Li1‡ Chuan Shi2‡ Le Song1‡
1
BioMap Research
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{wangruijia, yangcheng, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn,
{yiwu, luoyujie, shaochuan, xingyi, lihui, songle}@biomap.com

Abstract
The structure of protein-protein complexes is critical for understanding binding dynamics, biological mechanisms, and intervention strategies. Rigid protein docking,
a fundamental problem in this field, aims to predict the 3D structure of complexes
from their unbound states without conformational changes. In this scenario, we
have access to two types of valuable information: sequence-modal information,
such as coevolutionary data obtained from multiple sequence alignments, and
structure-modal information, including the 3D conformations of rigid structures.
However, existing docking methods typically utilize single-modal information,
resulting in suboptimal predictions. In this paper, we propose xTrimoBiDockα (or
BiDock for short)4 , a novel rigid docking model that effectively integrates sequenceand structure-modal information through bi-level optimization. Specifically, a crossmodal transformer combines multimodal information to predict an inter-protein
distance map. To achieve rigid docking, the roto-translation transformation is
optimized to align the docked pose with the predicted distance map. In order to
tackle this bi-level optimization problem, we unroll the gradient descent of the inner
loop and further derive a better initialization for roto-translation transformation
based on spectral estimation. Compared to baselines, BiDock achieves a promising
result of a maximum 234% relative improvement in challenging antibody-antigen
docking problem.

1

Introduction

Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) are essential to the basic functioning of cells and larger biological
systems. Due to their importance, elucidating such interactions up to atomic detail is necessary for
understanding multicomponent complexes like ribosomes and discovering protein-based drugs, e.g.,
antibodies and peptides. However, the experimental golden standard for determining the structure of
protein complexes, such as X-ray crystallography and cryo-EM, is extremely time-consuming.
Computational protein docking [49, 7, 57, 45] provides an alternative route to predict the 3D structures of complexes from unbound states. Here, we focus on the fundamental problem of rigid
protein docking [25] where no deformations occur within any protein during the docking process.
∗

Work done during an internship at BioMap
Contributed equally to this research. Each author’s contribution is provided in Section 5.
‡
Corresponding authors
4
xTrimoBiDock is a member of BioMap’s large-scale AI engine "xTrimo" series. "α" denotes the academic
version, to distinguish it from the commercial product xTrimoBiDock.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

