Calibrating Neural Simulation-Based Inference with
Differentiable Coverage Probability

Maciej Falkiewicz1,2 Naoya Takeishi3,4 Imahn Shekhzadeh1,2 Antoine Wehenkel5
Arnaud Delaunoy5 Gilles Louppe5 Alexandros Kalousis2
1
Computer Science Department, University of Geneva 2 HES-SO/HEG Genève
3
The University of Tokyo 4 RIKEN 5 University of Liège
{maciej.falkiewicz, imahn.shekhzadeh, alexandros.kalousis}@hesge.ch
ntake@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
{antoine.wehenkel, a.delaunoy, g.louppe}@uliege.be

Abstract
Bayesian inference allows expressing the uncertainty of posterior belief under a
probabilistic model given prior information and the likelihood of the evidence.
Predominantly, the likelihood function is only implicitly established by a simulator posing the need for simulation-based inference (SBI). However, the existing
algorithms can yield overconfident posteriors (Hermans et al., 2022) defeating the
whole purpose of credibility if the uncertainty quantification is inaccurate. We
propose to include a calibration term directly into the training objective of the
neural model in selected amortized SBI techniques. By introducing a relaxation of
the classical formulation of calibration error we enable end-to-end backpropagation.
The proposed method is not tied to any particular neural model and brings moderate computational overhead compared to the profits it introduces. It is directly
applicable to existing computational pipelines allowing reliable black-box posterior
inference. We empirically show on six benchmark problems that the proposed
method achieves competitive or better results in terms of coverage and expected
posterior density than the previously existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Inverse problems [46] appear in a variety of fields of human activity, including engineering [2],
geology [8], medical imaging [29], economics [21], and particle physics [1]. In some domains,
uncertainty quantification is required for results to be used in the real-world [51]. A particularly
well-suited tool for this task is Bayesian inference, where the procedure of updating prior beliefs
(knowledge) with observed evidence is formally described in the framework of probability theory. In
order to compute the posterior probability according to Bayes’ rule, the likelihood function has to
be evaluated. Often, it is only implicitly established by a simulator which given input parameters
generates (possibly stochastically) outputs. Such a situation requires the use of likelihood-free
techniques, also referred to as simulation-based inference (SBI) [9].
There exist two major classical approaches that address the problem of Bayesian inference in
the likelihood-free setting. In the first one, simulated data are used to estimate the distribution
of expert-crafted low-dimensional summary statistics with a nonparametric method like kernel
density estimation [14]. Next, the approximate density is used as a likelihood surrogate turning
the problem into likelihood-based inference. In the second approach, termed as Approximate
Bayesian Computation (ABC) [40, 38, 48, 42, 3, 44] no data is simulated upfront, but instead for
every newly appearing observation (instance of the inverse problem), an independent samplingrejection procedure with a simulator in-the-loop is run. Given some proposal distribution, candidate
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

