Does Continual Learning Meet Compositionality?
New Benchmarks and An Evaluation Framework
Weiduo Liao1,2 , Ying Wei1* , Mingchen Jiang1 , Qingfu Zhang1* , Hisao Ishibuchi2*
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
weiduliao2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, {yingwei, qingfu.zhang}@cityu.edu.hk,
jiangmingchen0129@gmail.com, hisao@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Compositionality facilitates the comprehension of novel objects using acquired
concepts and the maintenance of a knowledge pool. This is particularly crucial for
continual learners to prevent catastrophic forgetting and enable compositionally
forward transfer of knowledge. However, the existing state-of-the-art benchmarks
inadequately evaluate the capability of compositional generalization, leaving an
intriguing question unanswered. To comprehensively assess this capability, we
introduce two vision benchmarks, namely Compositional GQA (CGQA) and Compositional OBJects365 (COBJ), along with a novel evaluation framework called
Compositional Few-Shot Testing (CFST). These benchmarks evaluate the systematicity, productivity, and substitutivity aspects of compositional generalization.
Experimental results on five baselines and two modularity-based methods demonstrate that current continual learning techniques do exhibit somewhat favorable
compositionality in their learned feature extractors. Nonetheless, further efforts are
required in developing modularity-based approaches to enhance compositional generalization. We anticipate that our proposed benchmarks and evaluation protocol
will foster research on continual learning and compositionality.

1

Introduction

Human understanding of the world relies on abstraction of concrete objects, allowing for the disentanglement of high-level understandings into low-level concepts. This ability, known as compositionality,
is a crucial aspect of human intelligence as it addresses the stability-plasticity dilemma [11], and
introduces a computationally efficient learning paradigm [3, 27]. By leveraging previously acquired
concepts while acquiring new ones, individuals can effectively build and maintain knowledge when
faced with a new task. For instance, accurate comprehension of varied bird wing shapes enables
rapid identification of a new bird species by focusing on its wings. This compositional approach
allows continual learners to achieve efficient knowledge reuse, benefiting not only in preventing
catastrophic forgetting [37] of previous tasks (i.e., stability) but also in rapidly adapting to new tasks
(i.e., plasticity).
There have been various approaches to continual learning (CL) that can be roughly categorized
into three directions. Firstly, regularization-based methods [24, 33, 35] introduce regularization
techniques to control the gradient update process for the current task. Secondly, replay-based
methods [6, 4] store past tasks for later replay during training. Lastly, parameter-isolation-based
methods, specifically modularity-based methods [28, 36, 43, 41], employ static or dynamic model
architectures and allocate distinct parameters to each task. Nonetheless, it remains largely unclear
* Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

