Active Learning for Semantic Segmentation
with Multi-class Label Query

Sehyun Hwang

Sohyun Lee

Hoyoung Kim

Minhyeon Oh

Jungseul Ok

Suha Kwak

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
{sehyun03, lshig96, cskhy16, minhyeonoh, jungseul.ok, suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper proposes a new active learning method for semantic segmentation. The
core of our method lies in a new annotation query design. It samples informative
local image regions (e.g., superpixels), and for each of such regions, asks an oracle
for a multi-hot vector indicating all classes existing in the region. This multi-class
labeling strategy is substantially more efficient than existing ones like segmentation,
polygon, and even dominant class labeling in terms of annotation time per click.
However, it introduces the class ambiguity issue in training as it assigns partial
labels (i.e., a set of candidate classes) to individual pixels. We thus propose a new
algorithm for learning semantic segmentation while disambiguating the partial
labels in two stages. In the first stage, it trains a segmentation model directly
with the partial labels through two new loss functions motivated by partial label
learning and multiple instance learning. In the second stage, it disambiguates the
partial labels by generating pixel-wise pseudo labels, which are used for supervised
learning of the model. Equipped with a new acquisition function dedicated to the
multi-class labeling, our method outperforms previous work on Cityscapes and
PASCAL VOC 2012 while spending less annotation cost. Our code and results are
available at https://github.com/sehyun03/MulActSeg.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning of deep neural networks has driven significant advances of semantic segmentation
for a decade. At the same time, however, it has limited practical applications of the task as it demands
as supervision pixel-level class labels that are prohibitively expensive in general. To address this
limitation, label-efficient learning approaches such as weakly supervised learning [2, 3, 11, 20,
28, 34, 39, 40, 58, 63], semi-supervised learning [4, 12, 25, 33, 36, 37, 41–44, 48, 49], self-supervised
learning [24,60,69], and active learning (AL) [9,10,14,23,31,38,47,55,56,68] have been investigated.
This paper studies AL for semantic segmentation, where a training algorithm selects informative
samples from training data and asks an oracle to label them on a limited budget. In AL, the design
of annotation query, i.e., the granularity of query samples and the annotation format, is of vital
importance for maximizing the amount and quality of supervision provided by the oracle within
a given budget. Early approaches consider an entire image as a sample and ask for its pixel-wise
class labels [56, 68], or select individual pixels and query the oracle for their class labels [54]; they
turned out to be suboptimal since the former lacks the diversity of samples [47] and the latter is less
budget-efficient as a query provides supervision for only a single pixel.
As a compromise between these two directions, recent AL methods treat non-overlapped local image
regions as individual samples [9, 10, 14, 23, 31, 47, 55]. These region-based methods guarantee the
diversity of samples by selecting local regions from numerous images with diverse contexts. Also,
their queries are designed to obtain region-wise segmentation labels efficiently. For instance, they
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

