AIMS: All-Inclusive Multi-Level
Segmentation for Anything

Lu Qi1 Jason Kuen2 Weidong Guo3∗ Jiuxiang Gu2
Zhe Lin2 Bo Du4 Yu Xu3 Ming-Hsuan Yang1,5
1
UC Merced 2 Adobe Research 3 QQ Brower Lab, Tencent
4
Wuhan University 5 Google Research

Abstract
Despite the progress of image segmentation for accurate visual entity segmentation,
completing the diverse requirements of image editing applications for differentlevel region-of-interest selections remains unsolved. In this paper, we propose
a new task, All-Inclusive Multi-Level Segmentation (AIMS), which segments
visual regions into three levels: part, entity, and relation (two entities with some
semantic relationships). We also build a unified AIMS model through multi-dataset
multi-task training to address the two major challenges of annotation inconsistency
and task correlation. Specifically, we propose task complementarity, association,
and prompt mask encoder for three-level predictions. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization capacity of our method compared
to other state-of-the-art methods on a single dataset or the concurrent work on
segment anything. We will make our code and training model publicly available.

1

Introduction

Decomposing an image into semantically meaningful regions is a key goal of image segmentation.
With the recent emergence of photorealistic and high-quality image generation technologies [1, 2],
image segmentation has gained considerable attention for its ability to select visual entities of interest
within images. Combining image segmentation with image generation has enabled a variety of image
editing and manipulation applications, such as altering the style of a specific object or eliminating a
distracting element from a scene. Compared to bounding box-based object detection, segmentation
methods preserve the integrity of pixels outside the edited or manipulated region.
Panoptic segmentation [3], with its instance awareness and dense segmentation capabilities, is a
promising solution for various editing and manipulation applications. However, two main limitations
remain when using it: (1) it struggles to handle classes encountered ‘in the wild’ but absent in the
training set [4, 5]; and (2) existing methods typically do not explore the more general possibilities
of segmentation masks across multiple abstraction levels (e.g., a car’s wheel, the whole car, both
a person and car combined), with the exception of part-aware panoptic segmentation [6, 7] and
panoptic scene graph [8]. These tasks also fail to generalize to classes beyond those in the training
set, especially at the part-level task where annotations are sparse.
In this paper, we address the constraints inherent to different-level segmentation tasks by introducing
AIMS (All-Inclusive Multi-Level Segmentation). AIMS represents a comprehensive framework
designed to segment images across various hierarchical levels (part, entity, relation) using multiple
query-driven image decoders. Drawing inspiration from recent advancements in Entity Segmentation [4, 5], which showcased remarkable generalization capabilities on unseen classes, AIMS
performs class-agnostic segmentation across different hierarchical levels to enhance generalization.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

