EMBERSim: A Large-Scale Databank for
Boosting Similarity Search in Malware Analysis

Dragos, Georgian Corlătescu
CrowdStrike
dragos.corlatescu@crowdstrike.com

Alexandru Dinu
CrowdStrike
alexandru.dinu@crowdstrike.com

Mihaela Găman
CrowdStrike
mihaela.gaman@crowdstrike.com

Paul Sumedrea
CrowdStrike
paul.sumedrea@crowdstrike.com

Abstract
In recent years there has been a shift from heuristics-based malware detection
towards machine learning, which proves to be more robust in the current heavily
adversarial threat landscape. While we acknowledge machine learning to be better
equipped to mine for patterns in the increasingly high amounts of similar-looking
files, we also note a remarkable scarcity of the data available for similarity-targeted
research. Moreover, we observe that the focus in the few related works falls on
quantifying similarity in malware, often overlooking the clean data. This onesided quantification is especially dangerous in the context of detection bypass. We
propose to address the deficiencies in the space of similarity research on binary
files, starting from EMBER — one of the largest malware classification data sets.
We enhance EMBER with similarity information as well as malware class tags,
to enable further research in the similarity space. Our contribution is threefold:
(1) we publish EMBERSim, an augmented version of EMBER, that includes
similarity-informed tags; (2) we enrich EMBERSim with automatically determined
malware class tags using the open-source tool AVClass on VirusTotal data and (3)
we describe and share the implementation for our class scoring technique and leaf
similarity method.

1

Introduction

Malware is employed as a cyber weapon to attack both companies as well as standalone users,
having severe effects such as unauthorized access, denial of service, data corruption, and identity
theft [1]. From signature-based malware detection [2], to more sophisticated machine learning
(ML) techniques [3, 4], antivirus (AV) became a necessary layer of defense in this cyber-war. With
unprecedented access to open-source tools that facilitate replicating existing malware, the number of
similar malicious samples is constantly on the rise [5]. This poses a problem both from the perspective
of Threat Researchers having to analyze more data each year, as well as for Data Scientists training
ML models for malware detection. Including near-duplicate samples in new iterations of malware
detectors is dangerous as it can introduce biases towards certain types of attacks. Thus, we can argue
that being able to perform similarity search at scale is of utmost importance for the Cybersecurity
world [6]. Given the vast amounts of data, machine learning is better equipped to hunt for patterns in
the context of similarity search [7, 8, 9, 10, 11], rather than relying on heuristics [12, 13] or signatures
[5, 14] as it has been the case until recently.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

