Calibrating
“Cheap Signals” in Peer Review without a Prior

Yuxuan Lu
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies
School of Computer Science
Peking University
Beijing, China
yx_lu@pku.edu.cn

Yuqing Kong∗
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies
School of Computer Science
Peking University
Beijing, China
yuqing.kong@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Peer review lies at the core of the academic process, but even well-intentioned
reviewers can still provide noisy ratings. While ranking papers by average ratings
may reduce noise, varying noise levels and systematic biases stemming from
“cheap” signals (e.g. author identity, proof length) can lead to unfairness. Detecting
and correcting bias is challenging, as ratings are subjective and unverifiable. Unlike
previous works relying on prior knowledge or historical data, we propose a one-shot
noise calibration process without any prior information. We ask reviewers to predict
others’ scores and use these predictions for calibration. Assuming reviewers adjust
their predictions according to the noise, we demonstrate that the calibrated score
results in a more robust ranking compared to average ratings, even with varying
noise levels and biases. In detail, we show that the error probability of the calibrated
score approaches zero as the number of reviewers increases and is significantly
lower compared to average ratings when the number of reviewers is small.

1

Introduction

Peer review is fundamental to the scientific process. However, as noted in Rennie [1]:
But it is a human system. Everybody involved brings prejudices, misunderstandings, and gaps in
knowledge, so no one should be surprised that peer review is often biased and inefficient ... even
with the best of intentions ...
Let us consider the following scenario.
Example 1 (Peer review). We have two papers and each paper is reviewed by 5 reviewers. We can
only accept one paper. The first paper receives 4 “accept” and 1 “reject”, the second paper receives
3 “accept”and 2 “reject”.
A typical choice is to accept the first paper since it receives more fraction of “accept”. Ideally, we
should accept the paper which receives more fraction of “accept” in expectation from reviewers who
have full expertise and invest full efforts, called the clean setting. However, in practice, the ratings
can be noisy due to the lack of expertise or effort. If the noise is consistent for the two papers, the
better paper should still receive more fraction of “accept” in expectation. Nevertheless, the noise
can be different for different papers.
Example 2 (Hot vs. cold topic). The topic of the first paper is more popular than the second paper.
In this case, the first paper is easier to obtain reviewers with high expertise. Thus, in the noisy setting,
the first paper has less noisy ratings than the second paper.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

