Alignment with human representations supports
robust few-shot learning

Ilia Sucholutsky
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
is2961@princeton.edu

Thomas L. Griffiths
Departments of Psychology and Computer Science
Princeton University
tomg@princeton.edu

Abstract
Should we care whether AI systems have representations of the world that are similar to those of humans? We provide an information-theoretic analysis that suggests
that there should be a U-shaped relationship between the degree of representational
alignment with humans and performance on few-shot learning tasks. We confirm
this prediction empirically, finding such a relationship in an analysis of the performance of 491 computer vision models. We also show that highly-aligned models
are more robust to both natural adversarial attacks and domain shifts. Our results
suggest that human alignment is often a sufficient, but not necessary, condition for
models to make effective use of limited data, be robust, and generalize well.

1

Introduction

As AI systems are increasingly deployed in settings that involve interactions with humans, exploring
the extent to which these systems are aligned with humans becomes more significant. While this
exploration has largely focused on the alignment of the values of AI systems with humans [7, 16],
the alignment of their representations is also important. Representing the world in the same way is
a precursor to being able to express common values and to comprehensible generalization. To the
extent that humans have accurate representations of the world, representational alignment is also an
effective source of inductive bias that might make it possible to learn from limited data.
As a motivating example, imagine a meeting between a 16th century alchemist and a 21st century
chemist. They live in the same physical world and are intimately familiar with the materials that
comprise it, but they would have significant difficulty expressing their values and generalizing
the results of an experiment they observe together. The alchemist would likely learn poorly from
examples of a reaction demonstrated by the chemist, not having the right inductive biases for the
way the world actually works. The alchemist and the chemist lack representational alignment – they
represent the world in fundamentally different ways – and this impedes generalization and learning.
In this paper, we provide a theoretical and empirical investigation of the consequences of representational alignment with humans for AI systems, using popular computer vision tasks as a way
to study this phenomenon. We define representational alignment as the degree to which the latent
representations of a model match the latent representations of humans for the same set of stimuli, and
refer to models that are representationally aligned with humans as being “human-aligned.” Several
recent papers have proposed ways to measure [23, 24], explain [26, 20], and even improve [29, 6]
the representational alignment of models. However, many models that score low on these alignment
metrics still have high performance on downstream tasks like image classification [20, 26, 6].
So, are there any real advantages (or disadvantages) to using human-aligned models? To answer this
question, we develop an information-theoretic framework for analyzing representational alignment.
This framework enables us to make predictions about emergent behavior in human-aligned models.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

