EgoEnv: Human-centric environment representations
from egocentric video

Tushar Nagarajan2 , Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan1 , Ruta Desai2 ,
James Hillis2 , Kristen Grauman1,2
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 FAIR, Meta

Abstract
First-person video highlights a camera-wearer’s activities in the context of their
persistent environment. However, current video understanding approaches reason
over visual features from short video clips that are detached from the underlying
physical space and capture only what is immediately visible. To facilitate humancentric environment understanding, we present an approach that links egocentric
video and the environment by learning representations that are predictive of the
camera-wearer’s (potentially unseen) local surroundings. We train such models
using videos from agents in simulated 3D environments where the environment is
fully observable, and test them on human-captured real-world videos from unseen
environments. On two human-centric video tasks, we show that models equipped
with our environment-aware features consistently outperform their counterparts
with traditional clip features. Moreover, despite being trained exclusively on simulated videos, our approach successfully handles real-world videos from HouseTours
and Ego4D, and achieves state-of-the-art results on the Ego4D NLQ challenge.
Project page: https://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/ego-env/

1

Introduction

Egocentric video offers a unique view into human activities through the eyes of a camera-wearer.
Understanding this type of video is core to building augmented reality (AR) applications that can
provide context-relevant assistance to humans based on their activity. Ego-video is thus the subject of
several recent datasets and benchmarks that are driving new research [47, 75, 13, 26].
A key feature of the egocentric setting is the tight coupling of a camera-wearer and their persistent
physical environment, i.e., a person’s mental model of their surroundings informs their actions. This
mental model is important, for example, to reach for a cabinet door out of view, to re-visit the couch to
search for a misplaced phone or to visit spaces configured to support certain activities. This raises an
important need for human-centric environment understanding — to learn representations from video
that capture the camera-wearer’s activities in the context of their environment. Such representations
would encode the human-environment link, and allow models to jointly reason about both (e.g., to
answer “what did the person cut near the sink?”). See Fig. 1.
Despite its importance, there has been only limited work on learning human-centric environment
representations. Current video models segment a video into short clips (1-2s long) and then aggregate
clip features over time (e.g., with recurrent, graph or transformer-based networks) for tasks like action
forecasting [24, 26, 57, 25], temporal action localization [95, 50, 51, 96], episodic memory [26, 15],
and movie understanding [90]. Critically, the clip features encode what is immediately visible in a
short time window, and their aggregation over time does not equate to linking them in physical space.
Other approaches use explicit camera pose information (e.g., from SLAM) to localize the camerawearer, but not its relation to surrounding objects (e.g., forecasting [58, 68, 27]) or to group activities
by location, but do not learn representations for agent video (e.g., affordance prediction [67, 57]).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

