Convergence of Alternating Gradient Descent for
Matrix Factorization
Tamara G. Kolda
MathSci.ai
Dublin, CA
tammy.kolda@mathsci.ai

Rachel Ward
University of Texas
Austin, TX
rward@math.utexas.edu

Abstract
We consider alternating gradient descent (AGD) with fixed step size applied to
the asymmetric matrix factorization objective. We show that, for a rank-r matrix
2
log(1/ϵ) iterations of alternating gradient descent
A ∈ Rm×n , T = C σσr1 (A)
(A)
suffice to reach an ϵ-optimal factorization ∥A − XT Y⊺T ∥2F ≤ ϵ∥A∥2F with high
probability starting from an atypical random initialization. The factors have rank
d ≥ r so that XT ∈ Rm×d and YT ∈ Rn×d , and mild overparameterization
suffices for the constant C in the iteration complexity T to be an absolute constant.
Experiments suggest that our proposed initialization is not merely of theoretical
benefit, but rather significantly improves the convergence rate of gradient descent
in practice. Our proof is conceptually simple: a uniform Polyak-Łojasiewicz
(PL) inequality and uniform Lipschitz smoothness constant are guaranteed for a
sufficient number of iterations, starting from our random initialization. Our proof
method should be useful for extending and simplifying convergence analyses for a
broader class of nonconvex low-rank factorization problems.

1

Introduction

This paper focuses on the convergence behavior of alternating gradient descent (AGD) on the low-rank
matrix factorization objective
min f (X, Y) ≡

1
∥XY⊺ − A∥2F
2

subject to X ∈ Rm×d , Y ∈ Rn×d .

(1)

Here, we assume m, n ≫ d ≥ r = rank(A). While there are a multitude of more efficient
algorithms for low-rank matrix approximation, this serves as a simple prototype and special case of
more complicated nonlinear optimization problems where gradient descent (or stochastic gradient
descent) is the method of choice but not well-understood theoretically. Such problems include
low-rank tensor factorization using the GCP algorithm descent [HKD20], a stochastic gradient variant
of the GCP algorithm [KH20], as well as deep learning optimization.
Surprisingly, the convergence behavior of gradient descent for low-rank matrix factorization is still
not completely understood, in the sense that there is a large gap between theoretical guarantees and
empirical performance. We take a step in closing this gap, providing a sharp linear convergence
rate from a simple asymmetric random initialization. Precisely, we show that if A is rank-r, then a
σ 2 (A)
number of iterations T = C (√d−√d r−1)2 σ12 (A) log(1/ϵ) suffices to obtain an ϵ-optimal factorization
r

with high probability. Here, σk (A) denotes the kth singular value of A and C > 0 is a numerical
constant. To the authors’ knowledge, this improves on the state-of-art convergence result in the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

