Low Tensor Rank Learning of Neural Dynamics

Arthur Pellegrino
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
pellegrino.arthur@ed.ac.uk
N Alex Cayco-Gajic∗
Département d’Etudes Cognitives
Ecole Normale Supérieure
natasha.cayco.gajic@ens.fr

Angus Chadwick∗
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
angus.chadwick@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning relies on coordinated synaptic changes in recurrently connected populations of neurons. Therefore, understanding the collective evolution of synaptic
connectivity over learning is a key challenge in neuroscience and machine learning.
In particular, recent work has shown that the weight matrices of task-trained RNNs
are typically low rank, but how this low rank structure unfolds over learning is
unknown. To address this, we investigate the rank of the 3-tensor formed by the
weight matrices throughout learning. By fitting RNNs of varying rank to largescale neural recordings during a motor learning task, we find that the inferred
weights are low-tensor-rank and therefore evolve over a fixed low-dimensional
subspace throughout the entire course of learning. We next validate the observation
of low-tensor-rank learning on an RNN trained to solve the same task. Finally, we
present a set of mathematical results bounding the matrix and tensor ranks of gradient descent learning dynamics which show that low-tensor-rank weights emerge
naturally in RNNs trained to solve low-dimensional tasks. Taken together, our
findings provide insight on the evolution of population connectivity over learning
in both biological and artificial neural networks, and enable reverse engineering of
learning-induced changes in recurrent dynamics from large-scale neural recordings.

1

Introduction

Populations of neurons perform tasks through their dynamics, and these computations can be understood through the lens of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [1, 2]. Recent work has shown
that RNNs trained on idealized versions of behavioural tasks from neuroscience experiments can
be reverse-engineered to better understand the dynamical principles by which they perform tasks
[3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. RNNs can also be fitted to neural data to infer the latent dynamics that drive neural
activity in specific tasks [8, 9, 10, 11]. However, an understanding of task learning in the brain
requires methods to understand how these latent dynamics evolve over trials, and to map these
computational changes to learning-induced changes in neural connectivity [12, 13]. For example, it
has been observed that gradient descent in task-trained RNNs tends to drive low-rank weight updates
[14]. Yet the structure of learning dynamics itself remains largely unknown, both in the context of
gradient-based optimization of neural networks and biological learning in neural systems.
To address this question, we consider how RNN dynamics evolve as a result of structured changes
in connectivity over learning. Specifically, we consider changes in RNN connectivity over multiple
∗

These last authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

