Breadcrumbs to the Goal: Goal-Conditioned
Exploration from Human-in-the-Loop Feedback

Marcel Torne1,2 Max Balsells3 Zihan Wang3 Samedh Desai3
Tao Chen1
Pulkit Agrawal1 Abhishek Gupta3
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Harvard University 3 University of Washington
{marcelto,taochen,pulkitag}@mit.edu
{balsells,avinwang,samedh,abhgupta}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Exploration and reward specification are fundamental and intertwined challenges
for reinforcement learning. Solving sequential decision-making tasks requiring
expansive exploration requires either careful design of reward functions or the use
of novelty-seeking exploration bonuses. Human supervisors can provide effective guidance in the loop to direct the exploration process, but prior methods to
leverage this guidance require constant synchronous high-quality human feedback,
which is expensive and impractical to obtain. In this work, we present a technique
called Human Guided Exploration (HuGE), which uses low-quality feedback from
non-expert users that may be sporadic, asynchronous, and noisy. HuGE guides
exploration for reinforcement learning not only in simulation but also in the real
world, all without meticulous reward specification. The key concept involves bifurcating human feedback and policy learning: human feedback steers exploration,
while self-supervised learning from the exploration data yields unbiased policies.
This procedure can leverage noisy, asynchronous human feedback to learn policies with no hand-crafted reward design or exploration bonuses. HuGE is able
to learn a variety of challenging multi-stage robotic navigation and manipulation
tasks in simulation using crowdsourced feedback from non-expert users. Moreover, this paradigm can be scaled to learning directly on real-world robots, using
occasional, asynchronous feedback from human supervisors. Project website at
https://human-guided-exploration.github.io/HuGE/.

1

Introduction
Pick & place

Drawing

Figure 1: HuGE leverages noisy and asynchronous feedback from multiple non-expert humans to train robot
control policies directly on the real world.

How should we teach agents a new task? A general method is to provide agents with a reward
function and employ reinforcement learning. This may appear to be a straightforward plug-and-play
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

