Rethinking Gauss-Newton for learning
over-parameterized models

Michael Arbel, Romain Menegaux∗, and Pierre Wolinski∗†
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK,38000 Grenoble, France
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
This work studies the global convergence and implicit bias of Gauss Newton’s
(GN) when optimizing over-parameterized one-hidden layer networks in the
mean-field regime. We first establish a global convergence result for GN in the
continuous-time limit exhibiting a faster convergence rate compared to GD due to
improved conditioning. We then perform an empirical study on a synthetic regression task to investigate the implicit bias of GN’s method. While GN is consistently
faster than GD in finding a global optimum, the learned model generalizes well
on test data when starting from random initial weights with a small variance and
using a small step size to slow down convergence. Specifically, our study shows
that such a setting results in a hidden learning phenomenon, where the dynamics
are able to recover features with good generalization properties despite the model
having sub-optimal training and test performances due to an under-optimized linear layer. This study exhibits a trade-off between the convergence speed of GN
and the generalization ability of the learned solution.

1

Introduction

Gauss-Newton (GN) and related methods, like the Natural Gradient (NG) can offer faster convergence rates compared to gradient descent due to the improved dependence on the conditioning of
the problem [9, 21, 30, 31]. For these reasons, these methods have attracted attention in machine
learning as an alternative to gradient descent when optimizing ill-conditioned problems arising from
the use of vastly over-parameterized networks and large training sets [29, 45]. Unfortunately, GN’s
high computational cost per iteration, which involves solving an expensive linear system, restricts
its applicability in large-scale deep learning optimization. Addressing this challenge has been a
primary focus, with extensive efforts dedicated to crafting computationally efficient approximations
for GN/NG methods where the aim is to strike a delicate balance between computational cost and
optimization speed, thereby enhancing scalability [4, 9, 11, 21, 31, 42].
While substantial effort has been put into making GN scalable, little is known about the global
convergence of these methods and their generalization properties when optimizing neural networks,
notably compared to gradient descent. Understanding these properties is particularly relevant knowing that state-of-the-art machine learning methods rely on over-parameterized networks for which
infinitely many solutions interpolating the data exist albeit exhibit varying generalization properties that depend on implicit bias of the optimization procedure [7, 39]. To date, the majority of
studies on generalization in over-parameterized networks have primarily focused on analyzing the
dynamics of gradient descent and gradient flows – their continuous-time limit –, making important progress in understanding the implicit bias of these optimization procedures. Specifically, [15]
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Now affiliated with the LMO, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

