Hypothesis Selection with Memory Constraints

Mark Bun
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
mbun@bu.edu

Maryam Aliakbarpour
Department of Computer Science
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
maryama@rice.edu

Adam Smith
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
ads22@bu.edu

Abstract
Hypothesis selection is a fundamental problem in learning theory and statistics.
Given a dataset and a finite set of candidate distributions, the goal is to select a
distribution that matches the data as well as possible. More specifically, suppose
that we have sample access to an unknown distribution P over a domain X that we
know is well-approximated by one of a class of n distributions (a.k.a. hypotheses),
H := {H1 , H2 , . . . , Hn }. The goal is to design an algorithm that outputs a
distribution Ĥ ∈ H whose total variation distance from P is nearly minimal. In
this work, we study the hypothesis selection problem under memory constraints.
We consider a model where samples from P are presented in a stream and we
access each sample x via “PDF-comparison” queries that allow us to compare
the probability densities of any pair of hypotheses at the domain point x (i.e., is
Hi (x) < Hj (x)?). This model allows us to study how much needs to be stored, at
any point in time, about the portion of the stream seen so far. Our main result is
an algorithm that achieves a nearly optimal tradeoff between memory usage and
sample complexity. In particular, given b bits of memory (for b roughly between
log n and n), our algorithm solves the hypothesis selection problem with s samples,
where b · s = O(n log n). This result is optimal up to an O(log n) factor, for all b.

1

Introduction

Learning the probability density function of observed data is a fundamental question in statistics
with numerous applications in machine learning.Variants of this problem have been studied for
nearly a century. Hypothesis selection is a classic version of this problem where the goal is to
learn a distribution within a pre-specified class. Let H := {H1 , H2 , . . . , Hn } be a class of n
known distributions over the same domain X . Suppose that we have sample access to an unknown
distribution P over X which is in, or a very close to, a member of H. The goal is to design an
algorithm that outputs a distribution Ĥ ∈ H whose total variation distance to P is close to that of
the closest distribution in H. A great deal of effort has been dedicated to solving this problem using
a number of samples that does not depend on the domain size |X |. Perhaps surprisingly, one can
learn an unknown distribution P ∈ H with O(log n) samples, independent of the domain size. In
contrast, learning an arbitrary distribution P over X requires Ω(|X |) samples. Refined guarantees
for this problem have been studied extensively, building an understanding of the accuracy, sample
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

