S UGAR C REPE: Fixing Hackable Benchmarks for
Vision-Language Compositionality

Cheng-Yu Hsieh1∗, Jieyu Zhang1∗, Zixian Ma1 , Aniruddha Kembhavi2 , Ranjay Krishna1,2
1
University of Washington, 2 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
{cydhsieh,jieyuz2,zixianma,ranjay}@cs.washington.edu, anik@allenai.org

Abstract
In the last year alone, a surge of new benchmarks to measure compositional
understanding of vision-language models have permeated the machine learning
ecosystem. Given an image, these benchmarks probe a model’s ability to identify
its associated caption amongst a set of compositional distractors. Surprisingly,
we find significant biases in all these benchmarks rendering them hackable. This
hackability is so dire that blind models with no access to the image outperform
state-of-the-art vision-language models. To remedy this rampant vulnerability, we
introduce S UGAR C REPE, a new benchmark for vision-language compositionality
evaluation. We employ large language models, instead of rule-based templates used
in previous benchmarks, to generate fluent and sensical hard negatives, and utilize
an adversarial refinement mechanism to maximally reduce biases. We re-evaluate
state-of-the-art models and recently proposed compositionality inducing strategies,
and find that their improvements were hugely overestimated, suggesting that more
innovation is needed in this important direction. We release S UGAR C REPE and the
code for evaluation at: https://github.com/RAIVNLab/sugar-crepe.

1

Introduction

Scholars today herald compositionality as a fundamental presupposition characterizing both human
perception and linguistic processing [10]. Through compositional reasoning, humans can comprehend
new scenes and describe those scenes by composing known atoms [19, 17, 3, 9]. For instance,
compositionality allows people to differentiate between a photo of “a girl in white facing a man
in black” and “a girl in black facing a man in white”. For a while now, vision-language research
has sought to develop models that can similarly comprehend scenes and express them through
compositional language [22, 20, 29, 15].
Given its importance, a surge of new benchmarks have been proposed to evaluate whether visionlanguage models exhibit compositionality. Recently, Winoground [45], VL-CheckList [53], ARO [49],
CREPE [30], and Cola [38] have entered the machine learning zeitgeist. Evaluation is mostly done
through an image-to-text retrieval task formulation [53, 49, 30]: by measuring how often models pick
the description, “a girl in white facing a man in black” when presented with an image of it, and avoid
choosing the incorrect hard negative description, “a girl in black facing a man in white”.
In this work, we uncover a crucial vulnerability in not just one but all these image-to-text compositionality benchmarks: We find that a blind model that never looks at the image, can identify the
correct caption and avoid choosing the supposed “hard negatives”. This blind model outperforms
a wide array of pretrained vision-language models across the suite of benchmarks [36, 18, 14]. We
explain this undesired hackability in existing benchmarks by showcasing that there exists a significant
distributional gap between the positive and hard negative captions. For instance, in the ARO bench∗

The authors contribute equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

