Language Model Alignment with Elastic Reset

Michael Noukhovitch∗
Mila, Université de Montréal

Samuel Lavoie
Mila, Université de Montréal

Florian Strub
Google Deepmind

Aaron Courville
Mila, Université de Montréal
CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Finetuning language models with reinforcement learning (RL), e.g. from human
feedback (HF), is a prominent method for alignment. But optimizing against a
reward model can improve on reward while degrading performance in other areas,
a phenomenon known as reward hacking, alignment tax, or language drift. First,
we argue that commonly-used test metrics are insufficient and instead measure
how different algorithms tradeoff between reward and drift. The standard method
modified the reward with a Kullback-Lieber (KL) penalty between the online and
initial model. We propose Elastic Reset, a new algorithm that achieves higher
reward with less drift without explicitly modifying the training objective. We
periodically reset the online model to an exponentially moving average (EMA) of
itself, then reset the EMA model to the initial model. Through the use of an EMA,
our model recovers quickly after resets and achieves higher reward with less drift in
the same number of steps. We demonstrate that fine-tuning language models with
Elastic Reset leads to state-of-the-art performance on a small scale pivot-translation
benchmark, outperforms all baselines in a medium-scale RLHF-like IMDB mock
sentiment task and leads to a more performant and more aligned technical QA
chatbot with LLaMA-7B. Code available at github.com/mnoukhov/elastic-reset.

1

Introduction

Dialogue agents that can effectively interpret and use language are a long-term challenge for NLP. The
rise of large pretrained language models (LMs) [Brown et al., 2020] made language model finetuning
one of the most promising research directions to achieving capable dialogue agents [Bender and
Koller, 2020]. Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) has become a key ingredient of finetuning large
LMs for interaction with humans [Ziegler et al., 2019, Ouyang et al., 2022, Bai et al., 2022], notably
shown in ChatGPT [OpenAI, 2022]. A reward model is learned on the alignment objective, such as
learned human preferences [RLHF; Christiano et al., 2017, Stiennon et al., 2020], and the language
model is finetuned to optimize the reward. But training on the RL objective moves the model away
from its pretraining and can reduce performance on important benchmarks [Ouyang et al., 2022] and
even drifting away from natural language syntax and semantics [Lazaridou et al., 2020].
“Language drift” [Lee et al., 2019, Lazaridou et al., 2020], “alignment tax” [Askell et al., 2021],
“reward model overoptimization” [Gao et al., 2022], or LM-specific “reward-hacking” [Clark and
Amodei, 2016] is inherent to RLHF. In the extreme case, models learn to achieve high reward by
generating nonsense text that is unintelligible to humans [Lewis et al., 2017]. Methods to mitigate this
issue range from re-running pretraining [Lowe* et al., 2021], grounding in other modalities [Lee et al.,
∗

Correspondance to michael.noukhovitch@umontreal.ca

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

