Constrained Policy Optimization with Explicit
Behavior Density for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Jing Zhang
HKUST
jzhanggy@connect.ust.hk

Chi Zhang
Kuaishou Technologies
zhangchi08@kuaishou.com

Wenjia Wang∗
HKUST (GZ) and HKUST
wenjiawang@ust.hk
Bing-Yi Jing∗
SUSTech
jingby@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to the inability to interact with the environment, offline reinforcement learning
(RL) methods face the challenge of estimating the Out-of-Distribution (OOD)
points. Existing methods for addressing this issue either control policy to exclude
the OOD action or make the Q function pessimistic. However, these methods can
be overly conservative or fail to identify OOD areas accurately. To overcome this
problem, we propose a Constrained Policy optimization with Explicit Behavior
density (CPED) method that utilizes a flow-GAN model to explicitly estimate the
density of behavior policy. By estimating the explicit density, CPED can accurately
identify the safe region and enable optimization within the region, resulting in less
conservative learning policies. We further provide theoretical results for both the
flow-GAN estimator and performance guarantee for CPED by showing that CPED
can find the optimal Q-function value. Empirically, CPED outperforms existing
alternatives on various standard offline reinforcement learning tasks, yielding
higher expected returns.

1

Introduction

As a form of active learning, reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved great empirical success in
both simulation tasks and industrial applications [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. The great success of RL is
largely due to sufficient information exploration and the online training paradigm that the agent has
plenty of interactions with the environment. However, the merits of RL methods are limited when
it is difficult or costly to sequentially interact with the environment. In many real-world scenarios
such as driverless or intelligent diagnostics [8], online interaction is unacceptable. Thus, vanilla RL
methods may possibly fail under such circumstances.
One recently developed approach to mitigating the constrained online-interaction is offline RL
[8, 9, 10]. Motivated by various data-driven techniques, the offline RL leverages prior experiences
to train a policy without interacting with the environment. In offline RL, a critical challenge is
distribution shift (also called “extrapolation error“ in literature). Specifically, vanilla RL methods
∗

Corresponding authors: Bing-Yi Jing and Wenjia Wang.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

