Sorting with Predictions

Xingjian Bai
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
xingjian.bai@sjc.ox.ac.uk

Christian Coester
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
christian.coester@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We explore the fundamental problem of sorting through the lens of learningaugmented algorithms, where algorithms can leverage possibly erroneous predictions to improve their efficiency. We consider two different settings: In the
first setting, each item is provided a prediction of its position in the sorted list.
In the second setting, we assume there is a “quick-and-dirty” way of comparing
items, in addition to slow-and-exact comparisons.
For both settings, we design new
P
and simple algorithms using only O( i log ηi ) exact comparisons, where ηi is a
suitably defined prediction error for the ith element. In particular, as the quality of
predictions deteriorates, the number of comparisons degrades smoothly from O(n)
to O(n log n). We prove that this comparison complexity is theoretically optimal
with respect to the examined error measures. An experimental evaluation against
existing adaptive and non-adaptive sorting algorithms demonstrates the potential
of applying learning-augmented algorithms in sorting tasks.

1

Introduction

Sorting is one of the most basic algorithmic problems, commonly featured as one of the initial topics
in computer science education, and with a vast array of applications spanning various domains. In
recent years, the emerging field of algorithms with predictions (Lykouris and Vassilvitskii, 2021,
Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii, 2022), also known as learning-augmented algorithms, has opened
up new possibilities for algorithmic improvement, where algorithms aim to leverage predictions
(possibly generated through machine learning, or otherwise) to improve their performance. However,
the classical sorting problem with predictions, along with the discussion of different types of predictors
for sorting, appears to have been largely overlooked by this recent movement. This paper explores
the problem of sorting through the lens of algorithms with predictions in two settings, aiming to
overcome the classical Ω(n log n) barrier with the aid of various types of predictors.
The first setting involves each item having a prediction of its position in the sorted list. This type of
predictor is commonly found in real-world scenarios. For instance, empirical estimations of element
distribution can generate positional predictions. Another example is that a fixed set of items has their
ranking evolve over time, with minor changes at each timestep. Here, an outdated ranking can serve
as a natural prediction for the current ranking. As re-evaluating the true relation between items can be
costly, the provided positional predictions offer useful information. The positional prediction setting
is closely related to adaptive sorting of inputs with existing presortedness (Estivill-Castro and Wood,
1992), but we consider different measures of error on the predictor, resulting in algorithms with a
more fine-grained complexity.
In the second setting, a “dirty” comparison function is provided to assist sorting. In biological
experiments, for instance, some “indicating factors” might be used to approximately compare two
molecules or drugs. Despite potential errors due to the oversight of minor factors, these comparisons
can still offer preliminary insights into the properties of the subjects. More broadly, in experimental
science, researchers often carry out costly experiments to compare subject behaviours. By utilizing a
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

