Macro Placement
by Wire-Mask-Guided Black-Box Optimization

Yunqi Shi, Ke Xue, Lei Song, Chao Qian∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{shiyq, xuek, songl, qianc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
The development of very large-scale integration (VLSI) technology has posed new
challenges for electronic design automation (EDA) techniques in chip floorplanning.
During this process, macro placement is an important subproblem, which tries to
determine the positions of all macros with the aim of minimizing half-perimeter
wirelength (HPWL) and avoiding overlapping. Previous methods include packingbased, analytical and reinforcement learning methods. In this paper, we propose a
new black-box optimization (BBO) framework (called WireMask-BBO) for macro
placement, by using a wire-mask-guided greedy procedure for objective evaluation.
Equipped with different BBO algorithms, WireMask-BBO empirically achieves
significant improvements over previous methods, i.e., achieves significantly shorter
HPWL by using much less time. Furthermore, it can fine-tune existing placements
by treating them as initial solutions, which can bring up to 50% improvement
in HPWL. WireMask-BBO has the potential to significantly improve the quality
and efficiency of chip floorplanning, which makes it appealing to researchers and
practitioners in EDA and will also promote the application of BBO. Our code is
available at https://github.com/lamda-bbo/WireMask-BBO.

1

Introduction

EDA techniques have been widely employed to assist engineers in designing chips [30, 31], while
the rapid advancement of VLSI technology has led to an exponential growth in chip scale, posing
significant challenges. Particularly, for the important chip floorplanning stage in EDA, which strives
to optimize power, performance, and area metrics while adhering to constraints such as congestion
and density [45], the number of cells to be placed on the chip canvas increases rapidly and their
routing relationships also become more complex, requiring innovative and efficient methods.
During the floorplanning placement stage, the position of each cell on the chip canvas is established.
A modern chip typically comprises thousands of macros (i.e., individual building blocks such as
memories) and millions of standard cells (i.e., smaller basic components like logic gates). The
designer provides a netlist, which outlines the design requirements and serves as a large-scale hypergraph containing numerous hyper-edges (also called nets) that represent the routing relationships
among macros and standard cells. Traditionally, the placement problem is divided into two successive
stages [4]: macro placement, which is usually addressed by heuristic or learning methods [42, 44],
and standard cell placement, which is usually addressed by analytical solvers [13, 28]. After placing
all the cells (including macros and standard cells), a routing stage is performed. The general flow
of chip floorplanning and routing is illustrated in Figure 1. In this work, we concentrate on macro
placement due to its greater impact on placement quality: Macros are often larger and more crucial
for achieving optimal placement [4, 47].
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

