Kernel Quadrature with Randomly Pivoted Cholesky

Ethan N. Epperly and Elvira Moreno∗
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
{eepperly,emoreno2}@caltech.edu

Abstract
This paper presents new quadrature rules for functions in a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space using nodes drawn by a sampling algorithm known as randomly
pivoted Cholesky. The resulting computational procedure compares favorably
to previous kernel quadrature methods, which either achieve low accuracy or
require solving a computationally challenging sampling problem. Theoretical
and numerical results show that randomly pivoted Cholesky is fast and achieves
comparable quadrature error rates to more computationally expensive quadrature
schemes based on continuous volume sampling, thinning, and recombination.
Randomly pivoted Cholesky is easily adapted to complicated geometries with
arbitrary kernels, unlocking new potential for kernel quadrature.

1

Introduction

Quadrature is one of the fundamental problems in computational mathematics, with applications
in Bayesian statistics [35], probabilistic ODE solvers [27], reinforcement learning [32], and modelbased machine learning [30]. The task is to approximate an integral of a function f by the weighted
sum of f ’s values at judiciously chosen quadrature points s1 , . . . , sn :
Z
f (x)g(x) dµ(x) ≈
X

n
X

wi f (si ).

(1)

i=1

Here, and throughout, X denotes a topological space equipped with a Borel measure µ, and g ∈ L2 (µ)
denotes a square-integrable function. The goal of kernel quadrature is to select quadrature weights
w1 , . . . , wn ∈ R and nodes s1 , . . . , sn ∈ X which minimize the error in the approximation (1) for all
f drawn from a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) H of candidate functions.
The ideal kernel quadrature scheme would satisfy three properties:
1. Spectral accuracy. The error of the approximation (1) decreases at a rate governed by the
eigenvalues of the reproducing kernel k of H, with rapidly decaying eigenvalues guaranteeing rapidly decaying quadrature error.
2. Efficiency. The nodes s1 , . . . , sn and weights w1 , . . . , wn can be computed by an algorithm
which is efficient in both theory and practice.
∗

ENE acknowledges support by NSF FRG 1952777, Carver Mead New Horizons Fund, and the U.S.
Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research, Department of
Energy Computational Science Graduate Fellowship under Award Number DE-SC0021110. EM was supported
in part by Air Force Office of Scientific Research grant FA9550-22-1-0225.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

