Geodesic Multi-Modal Mixup for Robust Fine-Tuning

Changdae Oh∗
University of Seoul
Hoyoon Byun
University of Seoul

Junhyuk So∗
POSTECH

YongTaek Lim
University of Seoul

Minchul Shin
KAIST

Jong-June Jeon
University of Seoul

Kyungwoo Song+
Yonsei University

Abstract
Pre-trained multi-modal models, such as CLIP, provide transferable embeddings
and show promising results in diverse applications. However, the analysis of learned
multi-modal embeddings is relatively unexplored, and the embedding transferability can be improved. In this work, we observe that CLIP holds separated embedding
subspaces for two different modalities, and then we investigate it through the lens
of uniformity-alignment to measure the quality of learned representation. Both
theoretically and empirically, we show that CLIP retains poor uniformity and alignment even after fine-tuning. Such a lack of alignment and uniformity might restrict
the transferability and robustness of embeddings. To this end, we devise a new finetuning method for robust representation equipping better alignment and uniformity.
First, we propose a Geodesic Multi-Modal Mixup that mixes the embeddings of
image and text to generate hard negative samples on the hypersphere. Then, we
fine-tune the model on hard negatives as well as original negatives and positives
with contrastive loss. Based on the theoretical analysis about hardness guarantee
and limiting behavior, we justify the use of our method. Extensive experiments
on retrieval, calibration, few- or zero-shot classification (under distribution shift),
embedding arithmetic, and image captioning further show that our method provides
transferable representations, enabling robust model adaptation on diverse tasks.
Code: https://github.com/changdaeoh/multimodal-mixup

1

Introduction

Witnessing the remarkable success of large-scale pre-training approaches, there have been numerous
attempts to build a single general-purpose model (so-called foundation model [1]) rather than casting
multiple task-specific models from scratch. Once built, it can be adapted (e.g., fine-tuned) to a
wide variety of downstream tasks by leveraging its transferable representation. To construct such
a general-purpose model, besides architectural design [2, 3, 4] and datasets [5, 6, 7], learning
methods [8, 9, 10, 11, 12] have been known to be crucial for inducing transferable representation and
for adapting the model robustly.
Contrastive Learning (CL) [13, 14, 15] is one of the most popular learning methods that constructs a
discriminative embedding space by minimizing distances between positive pairs while maximizing
them between negative pairs. Based on its versatility, CL has been widely adopted to (pre-) train
models on various domains [15, 16, 17, 18]. Beyond CL on a single modality, CLIP [19] popularized
*

Equal contribution (changdae.oh@uos.ac.kr; junhyukso@postech.ac.kr), + Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

