Practical Sharpness-Aware Minimization
Cannot Converge All the Way to Optima

Dongkuk Si
Chulhee Yun
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{dongkuksi, chulhee.yun}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) is an optimizer that takes a descent step
∇f (xt )
based on the gradient at a perturbation yt = xt + ρ ∥∇f
(xt )∥ of the current point xt .
Existing studies prove convergence of SAM for smooth functions, but they do
so by assuming decaying perturbation size ρ and/or no gradient normalization in
yt , which is detached from practice. To address this gap, we study deterministic/stochastic versions of SAM with practical configurations (i.e., constant ρ and
gradient normalization in yt ) and explore their convergence properties on smooth
functions with (non)convexity assumptions. Perhaps surprisingly, in many scenarios, we find out that SAM has limited capability to converge to global minima or
stationary points. For smooth strongly convex functions, we show that while deterministic SAM enjoys tight global convergence rates of Θ̃( T12 ), the convergence
bound of stochastic SAM suffers an inevitable additive term O(ρ2 ), indicating
convergence only up to neighborhoods of optima. In fact, such O(ρ2 ) factors
arise for stochastic SAM in all the settings we consider, and also for deterministic
SAM in nonconvex cases; importantly, we prove by examples that such terms are
unavoidable. Our results highlight vastly different characteristics of SAM with vs.
without decaying perturbation size or gradient normalization, and suggest that the
intuitions gained from one version may not apply to the other.

1

Introduction

Modern neural networks are armed with a large number of layers and parameters, having a risk
to overfit to training data. In order to make accurate predictions on unseen data, generalization
performance has been considered as the most important factor in deep learning models. Based on the
widely accepted belief that geometric properties of loss landscape are correlated with generalization
performance, studies have proved theoretical and empirical results regarding the relation between
sharpness measures and generalization [14, 17, 19, 21, 29]. Here, sharpness of a loss at a point
generally refers to the degree to which the loss varies in the small neighborhood of the point.
Motivated by prior studies that show flat minima have better generalization performance [19, 21],
Foret et al. [16] propose an optimization method referred to as Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM).
A single iteration of SAM consists of one ascent step (perturbation) and one descent step. Starting
∇f (xt )
from the current iterate xt , SAM first takes an ascent step yt = xt + ρ ∥∇f
(xt )∥ to (approximately)
maximize the loss value in the ρ-neighborhood of xt , and then uses the gradient at yt to update xt
to xt+1 . This two-step procedure gives SAM a special characteristic: the tendency to search for
a flat minimum, i.e., a minimum whose neighboring points also return low loss value. Empirical
results [3, 9, 16, 20, 25] show that SAM demonstrates an exceptional ability to perform well on
different models and tasks with high generalization performance. Following the success of SAM,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

