When Does Confidence-Based Cascade Deferral
Suffice?
Wittawat Jitkrittum
Harikrishna Narasimhan

Neha Gupta

Aditya Krishna Menon

Ankit Singh Rawat

Sanjiv Kumar

Google Research, New York
{wittawat, nehagup, adityakmenon, hnarasimhan, ankitsrawat, sanjivk}@google.com

Abstract
Cascades are a classical strategy to enable inference cost to vary adaptively across
samples, wherein a sequence of classifiers are invoked in turn. A deferral rule
determines whether to invoke the next classifier in the sequence, or to terminate
prediction. One simple deferral rule employs the confidence of the current classifier,
e.g., based on the maximum predicted softmax probability. Despite being oblivious
to the structure of the cascade — e.g., not modelling the errors of downstream
models — such confidence-based deferral often works remarkably well in practice.
In this paper, we seek to better understand the conditions under which confidencebased deferral may fail, and when alternate deferral strategies can perform better.
We first present a theoretical characterisation of the optimal deferral rule, which
precisely characterises settings under which confidence-based deferral may suffer.
We then study post-hoc deferral mechanisms, and demonstrate they can significantly
improve upon confidence-based deferral in settings where (i) downstream models
are specialists that only work well on a subset of inputs, (ii) samples are subject to
label noise, and (iii) there is distribution shift between the train and test set.

1

Introduction

Large neural models with several billions of parameters have shown considerable promise in challenging real-world problems, such as language modelling [57, 58, 3, 59] and image classification [15, 20].
While the quality gains of these models are impressive, they are typically accompanied with a sharp
increase in inference time [6, 67], thus limiting their applicability. Cascades offer one strategy to
mitigate this [77, 75, 62, 24], by allowing for faster predictions on “easy” samples. In a nutshell,
cascades involve arranging multiple models in a sequence of increasing complexities. For any test
input, one iteratively applies the following recipe, starting with the first model in the sequence:
execute the current model, and employ a deferral rule to determine whether to invoke the next model,
or terminate with the current model’s prediction. One may further combine cascades with ensembles
to significantly improve accuracy-compute trade-offs [22, 80].
A key ingredient of cascades is the choice of deferral rule. The simplest candidate is to defer when
the current model’s confidence in its prediction is sufficiently low. Popular confidence measures
include the maximum predictive probability over all classes [80], and the entropy of the predictive
distribution [31]. Despite being oblivious to the nature of the cascade — e.g., not modelling the
errors of downstream models — such confidence-based deferral works remarkably well in practice
[81, 23, 21, 80, 47, 49]. Indeed, it has often been noted that such deferral can perform on-par with
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

