arXiv:2311.04937v1 [cs.LG] 7 Nov 2023

Multimodal Clinical Benchmark for Emergency Care
(MC-BEC): A Comprehensive Benchmark for
Evaluating Foundation Models in Emergency Medicine

Emma Chen1,4∗ Aman Kansal2∗ Julie Chen2 Boyang Tom Jin2
Julia Rachel Reisler2 David A Kim3† Pranav Rajpurkar1†
1
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School
2
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
3
Department of Emergency Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine
4
Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
yingchen@g.harvard.edu
{amkansal, jchen80, tomjin, jreisler, davidak}@stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose the Multimodal Clinical Benchmark for Emergency Care (MC-BEC),
a comprehensive benchmark for evaluating foundation models in Emergency
Medicine using a dataset of 100K+ continuously monitored Emergency Department
visits from 2020-2022. MC-BEC focuses on clinically relevant prediction tasks
at timescales from minutes to days, including predicting patient decompensation,
disposition, and emergency department (ED) revisit, and includes a standardized
evaluation framework with train-test splits and evaluation metrics. The multimodal
dataset includes a wide range of detailed clinical data, including triage information,
prior diagnoses and medications, continuously measured vital signs, electrocardiogram and photoplethysmograph waveforms, orders placed and medications
administered throughout the visit, free-text reports of imaging studies, and information on ED diagnosis, disposition, and subsequent revisits. We provide performance
baselines for each prediction task to enable the evaluation of multimodal, multitask
models. We believe that MC-BEC will encourage researchers to develop more
effective, generalizable, and accessible foundation models for multimodal clinical
data.

1

Introduction

Emergency Medicine is a critical area of healthcare in which timely and accurate decisions, drawing
appropriately on a wide variety of data sources, have a significant impact on patient outcomes
[1]. However, developing effective foundation models for electronic health record (EHR) data in
Emergency Medicine requires addressing several challenges. EHR data in Emergency Medicine
is heterogeneous, including clinical notes, orders, lab results, imaging studies, and physiological
waveforms. This heterogeneity can make it difficult to extract meaningful features from the data and
integrate them into a single model. Data quality and missingness can also be a significant issue, due
to the fast-paced and high-pressure nature of emergency care. Inaccurate or incomplete data can
limit the reliability of model results. Clinical interpretability is also critical. Clinicians must be able
to understand the model’s predictions to make informed decisions. Therefore, models developed
for EHR analysis in Emergency Medicine must be transparent and explainable. Finally, the limited
scope and standardization of existing datasets are significant challenges to developing foundation
models for Emergency Medicine. Many datasets focus on specific patient populations, such as trauma
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

