Incomplete Multimodality-Diffused Emotion
Recognition

Yuanzhi Wang, Yong Li, Zhen Cui
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
{yuanzhiwang, yong.li, zhen.cui}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Human multimodal emotion recognition (MER) aims to perceive and understand
human emotions via various heterogeneous modalities, such as language, vision,
and acoustic. Compared with unimodality, the complementary information in
the multimodalities facilitates robust emotion understanding. Nevertheless, in
real-world scenarios, the missing modalities hinder multimodal understanding
and result in degraded MER performance. In this paper, we propose an Incomplete Multimodality-Diffused emotion recognition (IMDer) method to mitigate
the challenge of MER under incomplete multimodalities. To recover the missing
modalities, IMDer exploits the score-based diffusion model that maps the input
Gaussian noise into the desired distribution space of the missing modalities and
recovers missing data abided by their original distributions. Specially, to reduce
semantic ambiguity between the missing and the recovered modalities, the available
modalities are embedded as the condition to guide and refine the diffusion-based
recovering process. In contrast to previous work, the diffusion-based modality
recovery mechanism in IMDer allows to simultaneously reach both distribution
consistency and semantic disambiguation. Feature visualization of the recovered
modalities illustrates the consistent modality-specific distribution and semantic
alignment. Besides, quantitative experimental results verify that IMDer obtains
state-of-the-art MER accuracy under various missing modality patterns. Codes are
released at https://github.com/mdswyz/IMDer.

1

Introduction

Benefiting from the intrinsic heterogeneity of multimodal data, various modalities are exploited
for multimodal emotion recognition (MER) to understand human behaviors and intents from a
collaborative perspective [27, 13, 36]. Recently, MER has become one of the most active research
topics of affective computing with many applications, such as healthcare [3, 18] and robotics [11, 12].
Robust MER relies on learning and combining representations from diverse modalities [27]. In
previous studies, Zadeh et al. [31] designed a Tensor Fusion Network that takes as input paired
modalities to encode the bimodal representation, which are further fused to generate the trimodal
representation. Tsai et al. [27] proposed a multimodal transformer to learn the potential adaptation
and correlations between modalities. Subsequently, various advanced approaches [17, 15, 13] have
explored different variants of multimodal transformers to construct robust MER frameworks.
However, in real-world scenarios, not all modalities are consistently available, e.g., language data
may be missing due to speech recognition errors; video data may be inaccessible due to privacy
Corresponding authors: Yong Li, Zhen Cui
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

