A Unified Framework for Rank-based Loss
Minimization
Rufeng Xiao∗
Yuze Ge∗
Rujun Jiang†
Yifan Yan
School of Data Science, Fudan University
{rfxiao21,yzge23}@m.fudan.edu.cn
rjjiang@fudan.edu.cn
yanyf21@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
The empirical loss, commonly referred to as the average loss, is extensively utilized
for training machine learning models. However, in order to address the diverse
performance requirements of machine learning models, the use of the rank-based
loss is prevalent, replacing the empirical loss in many cases. The rank-based loss
comprises a weighted sum of sorted individual losses, encompassing both convex
losses like the spectral risk, which includes the empirical risk and conditional
value-at-risk, and nonconvex losses such as the human-aligned risk and the sum
of the ranked range loss. In this paper, we introduce a unified framework for the
optimization of the rank-based loss through the utilization of a proximal alternating
direction method of multipliers. We demonstrate the convergence and convergence
rate of the proposed algorithm under mild conditions. Experiments conducted on
synthetic and real datasets illustrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed
algorithm.

1

Introduction

The empirical risk function is the cornerstone of machine learning. By minimizing this function,
machine learning models typically achieve commendable average performance. However, as these
models find applications across a diverse spectrum of real-world scenarios, the evaluation standards
for machine learning performance have evolved to include factors such as risk aversion and fairness
[49, 9]. This has led to the empirical loss function often being supplanted by other loss functions,
many of which fall under the category of the rank-based loss, which consists of a weighted sum
of sorted individual losses. We consider the following optimization problem in this paper, which
minimizes the rank-based loss plus a regularizer:
min

w∈Rd

n
X

σi l[i] (−y ⊙ (Xw)) + g(w).

(1)

i=1

⊤

Here, l(u) ≜ [l(u1 ), . . . , l(un )] : Rn → Rn represents a vector-valued mapping where l : R → R
denotes an individual loss function and ui is the i-th element of u, l[1] (·) ⩽ · · · ⩽ l[n] (·) denotes the
order statistics of the empirical loss distribution, g : Rd → R is a regularizer that induces desired
structures, w ∈ Rd represents the parameters of the linear model, X ∈ Rn×d is the data matrix,
and y ∈ {±1}n is the label vector. The subscript [i] denotes the i-th smallest element, σi ∈ [0, 1]
is the weight corresponding to the i-th smallest element, and “⊙" represents the Hadamard product.
Depending on the values of σi , the rank-based loss can encompass a significant range of losses often
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

