DreamSparse: Escaping from Plato’s Cave with 2D
Diffusion Model Given Sparse Views

Jiaxian Guo∗
Yutaka Matsuo
Shixiang Shane Gu
The University of Tokyo
{paulyoo, jiaxian.guo}@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

GT

Synthesized

GT

Synthesized

Paul Yoo

Figure 1: Qualitative results on novel view synthesis of real-world objects from the CO3D dataset.

Abstract
Synthesizing novel view images from a few views is a challenging but practical
problem. Existing methods often struggle with producing high-quality results or
necessitate per-object optimization in such few-view settings due to the insufficient
information provided. In this work, we explore leveraging the strong 2D priors
in pre-trained diffusion models for synthesizing novel view images. 2D diffusion
models, nevertheless, lack 3D awareness, leading to distorted image synthesis and
compromising the identity. To address these problems, we propose DreamSparse, a
framework that enables the frozen pre-trained diffusion model to generate geometry
and identity-consistent novel view images. Specifically, DreamSparse incorporates
a geometry module designed to capture features about spatial information from
sparse views as a 3D prior. Subsequently, a spatial guidance model is introduced
to convert rendered feature maps as spatial information for the generative process.
This information is then used to guide the pre-trained diffusion model to encourage
the synthesis of geometrically consistent images without further tuning. Leveraging
the strong image priors in the pre-trained diffusion models, DreamSparse is capable
of synthesizing high-quality novel views for both object and object-centric scenelevel images and generalising to open-set images. Experimental results demonstrate
that our framework can effectively synthesize novel view images from sparse views
and outperforms baselines in both trained and open-set category images. More
results can be found on our project page: https://sites.google.com/view/
dreamsparse-webpage.

∗

Correspondence to Jiaxian Guo <jiaxian.guo@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp>

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

