Precise Asymptotic Generalization for Multiclass
Classification with Overparameterized Linear Models

David X. Wu
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
david_wu@berkeley.edu

Anant Sahai
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
sahai@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study the asymptotic generalization of an overparameterized linear model for
multiclass classification under the Gaussian covariates bi-level model introduced in
Subramanian et al. (2022), where the number of data points, features, and classes all
grow together. We fully resolve the conjecture posed in Subramanian et al. (2022),
matching the predicted regimes for generalization. Furthermore, our new lower
bounds are akin to an information-theoretic strong converse: they establish that the
misclassification rate goes to 0 or 1 asymptotically. One surprising consequence of
our tight results is that the min-norm interpolating classifier can be asymptotically
suboptimal relative to noninterpolating classifiers in the regime where the min-norm
interpolating regressor is known to be optimal.
The key to our tight analysis is a new variant of the Hanson-Wright inequality which
is broadly useful for multiclass problems with sparse labels. As an application, we
show that the same type of analysis can be used to analyze the related multilabel
classification problem under the same bi-level ensemble.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we directly follow up on a specific line of work initiated by Subramanian et al. (2022);
Wu and Sahai (2023). For the sake of self-containedness, we briefly reiterate the context, directing
the reader to Subramanian et al. (2022) and the references cited therein for more. A broader story can
be found in Bartlett et al. (2021); Belkin (2021); Dar et al. (2021); Oneto et al. (2023).
Classical statistical learning theory intuition predicts that highly expressive models, which can
interpolate random labels (Zhang et al., 2016; 2021), ought not to generalize well. However, deep
learning practice has seen such models performing well when trained with good labels. Resolving
this apparent contradiction has recently been the focus of a multitude of works, and this paper builds
on one particular thread of investigation that can be rooted in Bartlett et al. (2020); Muthukumar
et al. (2020) where the concept of benign/harmless interpolation was crystallized in the context of
overparameterized linear regression problems and conditions given for when this can happen. In
Muthukumar et al. (2021), a specific toy "bi-level model" with Gaussian features was introduced to
study overparameterized binary classification and show that successful generalization could happen
even beyond the conditions for benign interpolation for regression. Following the introduction of
the corresponding multi-class problem in Wang et al. (2021) with a constant number of classes, an
asymptotic setting where the number of classes can grow with the number of training examples was
introduced in Subramanian et al. (2022) where a conjecture was presented for when minimum-norm
interpolating classifiers will generalize. We are now in a position to state our main contributions;
afterwards, we expand on the related works.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

