Asymptotics of Bayesian Uncertainty Estimation in
Random Features Regression

Youngsoo Baek
Department of Statistical Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
youngsoo.baek@duke.edu

Samuel I. Berchuck
Department of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
sib2@duke.edu

Sayan Mukherjee∗†
Center for Scalable Data Analysis and Artificial Intelligence
Universität Leipzig
Leipzig 04105
sayan.mukherjee@mis.mpg.de

Abstract
In this paper, we compare and contrast the behavior of the posterior predictive
distribution to the risk of the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimator for the random
features regression model in the overparameterized regime. We will focus on the
variance of the posterior predictive distribution (Bayesian model average) and
compare its asymptotics to that of the risk of the MAP estimator. In the regime
where the model dimensions grow faster than any constant multiple of the number
of samples, asymptotic agreement between these two quantities is governed by
the phase transition in the signal-to-noise ratio. They also asymptotically agree
with each other when the number of samples grows faster than any constant
multiple of model dimensions. Numerical simulations illustrate finer distributional
properties of the two quantities for finite dimensions. We conjecture they have
Gaussian fluctuations and exhibit similar properties as found by previous authors
in a Gaussian sequence model, which is of independent theoretical interest.

1

Introduction

One of the most surprising empirical observations in deep learning is the generalization of overparameterized models that can perfectly interpolate the data. The “double descent” curve, referring to
the test error first increasing then decreasing with model complexity, has been both empirically and
theoretically validated for linear [Hastie et al., 2022] and nonlinear models [Ghorbani et al., 2021, Mei
and Montanari, 2022, Hu and Lu, 2022]. Mei and Montanari [2022] showed that the generalization
error of the random features (RF) model proposed by Rahimi and Recht [2007] does demonstrate
double descent. Perhaps more surprisingly, they also showed that vanishingly small regularization can
yield optimal generalization in a nearly noiseless learning task. These findings highlight the recent
trend of explaining the success of machine learning through the prism of beneficial interpolation and
overparameterization [Belkin, 2021].
There exists, however, another approach to overparameterized learning problems, which is the
Bayesian posterior predictive distribution. In Bayesian practice, one can define the training objective
∗
†

Deparments of Mathematics, Computer Science, Biostatistics & Bioinformatics, Duke University, NC
Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Leipzig

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

