Parallel Sampling of Diffusion Models

Andy Shih, Suneel Belkhale, Stefano Ermon, Dorsa Sadigh, Nima Anari
Computer Science, Stanford University
{andyshih,belkhale,ermon,dorsa,anari}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models are powerful generative models but suffer from slow sampling,
often taking 1000 sequential denoising steps for one sample. As a result, considerable efforts have been directed toward reducing the number of denoising steps, but
these methods hurt sample quality. Instead of reducing the number of denoising
steps (trading quality for speed), in this paper we explore an orthogonal approach:
can we run the denoising steps in parallel (trading compute for speed)? In spite
of the sequential nature of the denoising steps, we show that surprisingly it is
possible to parallelize sampling via Picard iterations, by guessing the solution
of future denoising steps and iteratively refining until convergence. With this
insight, we present ParaDiGMS, a novel method to accelerate the sampling of
pretrained diffusion models by denoising multiple steps in parallel. ParaDiGMS is
the first diffusion sampling method that enables trading compute for speed and is
even compatible with existing fast sampling techniques such as DDIM and DPMSolver. Using ParaDiGMS, we improve sampling speed by 2-4x across a range of
robotics and image generation models, giving state-of-the-art sampling speeds of
0.2s on 100-step DiffusionPolicy and 14.6s on 1000-step StableDiffusion-v2 with
no measurable degradation of task reward, FID score, or CLIP score.1

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [28, 9, 32] have demonstrated powerful modeling capabilities for image generation [34, 15, 24], molecular generation [38], robotic policies [12, 4], and other applications. The main
limitation of diffusion models, however, is that sampling can be inconveniently slow. For example,
the widely-used Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) [9] can take 1000 denoising
steps to generate one sample. In light of this, many works like DDIM [29] and DPMSolver [18]
have proposed to improve sampling speed by reducing the number of denoising steps. Unfortunately,
reducing the number of steps can come at the cost of sample quality.
We are interested in accelerating sampling of pretrained diffusion models without sacrificing sample
quality. We ask the following question: rather than trading quality for speed, can we instead trade
compute for speed? That is, could we leverage additional (parallel) compute to perform the same
number of denoising steps faster? At first, this proposal seems unlikely to work, since denoising
proceeds sequentially. Indeed, naïve parallelization can let us generate multiple samples at once
(improve throughput), but generating a single sample with faster wall-clock time (improving latency)
appears much more difficult.
We show that, surprisingly, it is possible to improve the sample latency of diffusion models by
computing denoising steps in parallel. Our method builds on the idea of Picard iterations to guess the
full denoising trajectory and iteratively refine until convergence. Empirically, we find that the number
of iterations for convergence is much smaller than the number of steps. Therefore, by computing
each iteration quickly via parallelization, we sample from the diffusion model much faster.
1

Code for our paper can be found at https://github.com/AndyShih12/paradigms

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

