SODA: Robust Training of Test-Time Data Adaptors
Zige Wang1,2

Yonggang Zhang2 Zhen Fang3 Long Lan4
Wenjing Yang4∗ Bo Han2
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 Hong Kong Baptist University
3
University of Technology Sydney 4 National University of Defense Technology

Abstract
Adapting models deployed to test distributions can mitigate the performance degradation caused by distribution shifts. However, privacy concerns may render model
parameters inaccessible. One promising approach involves utilizing zeroth-order
optimization (ZOO) to train a data adaptor to adapt the test data to fit the deployed
models. Nevertheless, the data adaptor trained with ZOO typically brings restricted
improvements due to the potential corruption of data features caused by the data
adaptor. To address this issue, we revisit ZOO in the context of test-time data
adaptation. We find that the issue directly stems from the unreliable estimation
of the gradients used to optimize the data adaptor, which is inherently due to the
unreliable nature of the pseudo-labels assigned to the test data. Based on this
observation, we propose pseudo-label-robust data adaptation (SODA) to improve
the performance of data adaptation. Specifically, SODA leverages high-confidence
predicted labels as reliable labels to optimize the data adaptor with ZOO for label prediction. For data with low-confidence predictions, SODA encourages the
adaptor to preserve data information to mitigate data corruption. Empirical results
indicate that SODA can significantly enhance the performance of deployed models
in the presence of distribution shifts without requiring access to model parameters.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have emerged as a dominant tool in solving artificial intelligence problems due
to their exceptional performance across various tasks [19, 20, 42], thus being deployed to various
environments. However, in practice, these models typically suffer performance degradation due to
distribution discrepancies between training and test data [1, 13, 47, 35]. To mitigate this issue, TestTime Adaptation (TTA) is proposed as a promising solution, where unlabeled test data are leveraged
to modify the parameters of deployed models to alleviate performance degradation [7, 21, 39].
In practice, the parameters of deployed models may be unmodifiable and inaccessible in many applications due to intellectual property protection, misuse prevention, or privacy concerns in healthcare
and finance [22, 46]. The difficulty in modifying model parameters has hindered previous efforts
aimed at adapting deployed models to the test distribution [15, 23, 29]. It is shown that training a
data adaptor to modify test data offers an alternative solution to mitigate the performance degradation
caused by distribution discrepancy [18, 37]. However, the difficulty in accessing model parameters
makes gradient computation a challenging task, hindering these data adaptation methods.
One straightforward approach involves utilizing zeroth-order optimization (ZOO) [25] to train the
data adaptor to adapt test data to fit deployed models. In particular, ZOO can be employed to estimate
gradients for the optimization of data adaptors without modifying and accessing the parameters of
deployed models. Therefore, test-time data adaptation with ZOO makes it possible to improve the
performance of deployed models in many practical scenarios. However, introducing data adaptors
∗

Corresponding Author: Wenjing Yang(wenjing.yang@nudt.edu.cn)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

