Turbulence in Focus:
Benchmarking Scaling Behavior of 3D Volumetric
Super-Resolution with BLASTNet 2.0 Data
Wai Tong Chung∗,1 , Bassem Akoush1 , Pushan Sharma1 , Alex Tamkin1 ,
Ki Sung Jung2 , Jacqueline H. Chen2 , Jack Guo1 , Davy Brouzet1 ,
Mohsen Talei3 , Bruno Savard4 , Alexei Y. Poludnenko5 , Matthias Ihme∗,1,6
1
Stanford University, 2 Sandia National Laboratory, 3 University of Melbourne,
4
Polytechnique Montréal, 5 University of Connecticut, 6 SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory

Abstract
Analysis of compressible turbulent flows is essential for applications related to
propulsion, energy generation, and the environment. Here, we present BLASTNet
2.0, a 2.2 TB network-of-datasets containing 744 full-domain samples from 34
high-fidelity direct numerical simulations, which addresses the current limited
availability of 3D high-fidelity reacting and non-reacting compressible turbulent
flow simulation data. With this data, we benchmark a total of 49 variations of
five deep learning approaches for 3D super-resolution – which can be applied for
improving scientific imaging, simulations, turbulence models, as well as in computer vision applications. We perform neural scaling analysis on these models to
examine the performance of different machine learning (ML) approaches, including
two scientific ML techniques. We demonstrate that (i) predictive performance can
scale with model size and cost, (ii) architecture matters significantly, especially
for smaller models, and (iii) the benefits of physics-based losses can persist with
increasing model size. The outcomes of this benchmark study are anticipated to
offer insights that can aid the design of 3D super-resolution models, especially for
turbulence models, while this data is expected to foster ML methods for a broad
range of flow physics applications. This data is publicly available with download
links and browsing tools consolidated at https://blastnet.github.io.

1

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning (ML) has offered new modeling approaches for natural and
engineering sciences. For example, 5 PB of ERA5 data [1] was employed towards GraphCast [2],
an ML model that outperformed conventional weather modeling techniques. As such, efforts in
curating large datasets for scientific ML have been growing across numerous domains including
agricultural science [3], geophysics [4], and biology [5]. In many of these examples, the volume of
data can significantly exceed the free limit of open-source repositories such as Kaggle (100 GB) –
typically used to store and share language and image data – due to potentially high dimensions within
scientific data. As such, significant resources are required for building and maintaining data storage
capabilities, either through institutional collaborations [3, 5, 6] or cloud service providers [7].
In previous work [8, 9], we proposed the Bearable Large Accessible Scientific Training Networkof-datasets (BLASTNet), a cost-effective community-driven weakly centralized framework (see
Section 3.1) that utilizes Kaggle for increasing access to scientific data, which provided access to
110 full-domain samples from 10 configurations (225 GB) of 3D high-fidelity flow physics direct
∗

Corresponding authors: {wtchung,mihme}@stanford.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

