Optimal Treatment Allocation for Efficient Policy
Evaluation in Sequential Decision Making

Ting Li1
Chengchun Shi2
Jianing Wang1 Fan Zhou1 Hongtu Zhu3 ∗
School of Statistics and Management, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
2
Department of Statistics, London School of Economics and Political Science
3
Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
tingli@mail.shufe.edu.cn, c.shi7@lse.ac.uk, jianing.wang@163.sufe.edu.cn
zhoufan@mail.shufe.edu.cn,htzhu@email.unc.edu
1

Abstract
A/B testing is critical for modern technological companies to evaluate the effectiveness of newly developed products against standard baselines. This paper studies
optimal designs that aim to maximize the amount of information obtained from
online experiments to estimate treatment effects accurately. We propose three
optimal allocation strategies in a dynamic setting where treatments are sequentially
assigned over time. These strategies are designed to minimize the variance of the
treatment effect estimator when data follow a non-Markov decision process or a
(time-varying) Markov decision process. We further develop estimation procedures
based on existing off-policy evaluation (OPE) methods and conduct extensive
experiments in various environments to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methodologies. In theory, we prove the optimality of the proposed treatment
allocation design and establish upper bounds for the mean squared errors of the
resulting treatment effect estimators.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Prior to the full-scale deployment of any product in practical applications, an accurate
evaluation of its potential impact is crucial. Modern technology companies, including Amazon,
Google, Netflix, Uber, and Didi, commonly employ online experimentation or A/B testing as a means
of evaluating the effectiveness of new products or policies (treatment) in comparison to their existing
counterparts (control). Often, in these experiments, policies are assigned sequentially over time,
impacting both current and future responses. Such a dynamic can invalidate the Stable Unit Treatment
Value Assumption (SUTVA), as outlined by (Imbens and Rubin, 2015). Failure to consider these
temporal carryover effects can lead to a biased estimation of the treatment effect. Additionally, the
limited duration of the experiment and the typically small size of the treatment effect pose significant
challenges to consistently detecting the treatment effect.
A substantial body of literature has been dedicated to developing policy evaluation or A/B testing
algorithms using data from online experiments. However, there has been limited focus on the
generation of the experimental dataset itself. This factor is critical as it can substantially influence the
precision of the subsequent treatment effect estimator. This paper’s primary focus is to study optimal
experimental designs in the context of sequential decision making. In clinical trials, a carefully
designed experiment can significantly improve the accuracy of the treatment effect estimator and the
statistical power of the associated test, as noted by (Sverdlov et al., 2020). However, most existing
∗

The first two authors contribute equally to this paper. Address for correspondence: Hongtu Zhu, Ph.D.,
E-mail: htzhu@email.unc.edu.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

