CAPro: Webly Supervised Learning with
Cross-Modality Aligned Prototypes

Yulei Qin1

Xingyu Chen2

Yun Gu3

Ke Li1

Yunhang Shen1
Xing Sun1

Chaoyou Fu1

Rongrong Ji4

1

3

Tencent YouTu Lab 2 ByteDance
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Xiamen University
yuleiqin@tencent.com

Abstract
Webly supervised learning has attracted increasing attention for its effectiveness in
exploring publicly accessible data at scale without manual annotation. However,
most existing methods of learning with web datasets are faced with challenges from
label noise, and they have limited assumptions on clean samples under various noise.
For instance, web images retrieved with queries of “tiger cat” (a cat species) and
“drumstick” (a musical instrument) are almost dominated by images of tigers and
chickens, which exacerbates the challenge of fine-grained visual concept learning.
In this case, exploiting both web images and their associated texts is a requisite
solution to combat real-world noise. In this paper, we propose Cross-modality
Aligned Prototypes (CAPro), a unified prototypical contrastive learning framework
to learn visual representations with correct semantics. For one thing, we leverage
textual prototypes, which stem from the distinct concept definition of classes,
to select clean images by text matching and thus disambiguate the formation of
visual prototypes. For another, to handle missing and mismatched noisy texts, we
resort to the visual feature space to complete and enhance individual texts and
thereafter improve text matching. Such semantically aligned visual prototypes
are further polished up with high-quality samples, and engaged in both cluster
regularization and noise removal. Besides, we propose collective bootstrapping to
encourage smoother and wiser label reference from appearance-similar instances
in a manner of dictionary look-up. Extensive experiments on WebVision1k and
NUS-WIDE (Web) demonstrate that CAPro well handles realistic noise under
both single-label and multi-label scenarios. CAPro achieves new state-of-the-art
performance and exhibits robustness to open-set recognition. Codes are available
at https://github.com/yuleiqin/capro.

1

Introduction

Large-scale annotated datasets (e.g., ImageNet [1]) were the driving force behind the revolution of
computer vision in the past decade, but the expensive and time-consuming collection process now
becomes the bottleneck of model scaling. Consequently, researchers seek to crawl web images, where
search queries and user tags are directly used as labels. However, the large proportion of noise in
web datasets (e.g., 20% in JMT-300M [2], 34% in WebVision1k [3], and 32% in WebFG496 [4])
impedes learning visual concepts. Many studies on Webly Supervised Learning (WSL) are conducted
to reduce the negative impact of noise and effectively explore web data [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

