Unexpected Improvements to Expected Improvement
for Bayesian Optimization

Sebastian Ament
Meta
ament@meta.com
David Eriksson
Meta
deriksson@meta.com

Samuel Daulton
Meta
sdaulton@meta.com
Maximilian Balandat
Meta
balandat@meta.com

Eytan Bakshy
Meta
ebakshy@meta.com

Abstract
Expected Improvement (EI) is arguably the most popular acquisition function in
Bayesian optimization and has found countless successful applications, but its
performance is often exceeded by that of more recent methods. Notably, EI and its
variants, including for the parallel and multi-objective settings, are challenging to
optimize because their acquisition values vanish numerically in many regions. This
difficulty generally increases as the number of observations, dimensionality of the
search space, or the number of constraints grow, resulting in performance that is
inconsistent across the literature and most often sub-optimal. Herein, we propose
LogEI, a new family of acquisition functions whose members either have identical
or approximately equal optima as their canonical counterparts, but are substantially
easier to optimize numerically. We demonstrate that numerical pathologies manifest
themselves in “classic” analytic EI, Expected Hypervolume Improvement (EHVI),
as well as their constrained, noisy, and parallel variants, and propose corresponding
reformulations that remedy these pathologies. Our empirical results show that
members of the LogEI family of acquisition functions substantially improve on the
optimization performance of their canonical counterparts and surprisingly, are on
par with or exceed the performance of recent state-of-the-art acquisition functions,
highlighting the understated role of numerical optimization in the literature.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a widely used and effective approach for sample-efficient optimization
of expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions [25, 28], with applications ranging widely between
aerospace engineering [48], biology and medicine [49], materials science [3], civil engineering [4],
and machine learning hyperparameter optimization [66, 72]. BO leverages a probabilistic surrogate
model in conjunction with an acquisition function to determine where to query the underlying
objective function. Improvement-based acquisition functions, such as Expected Improvement (EI)
and Probability of Improvement (PI), are among the earliest and most widely used acquisition
functions for efficient global optimization of non-convex functions [42, 58]. EI has been extended
to the constrained [27, 29], noisy [52], and multi-objective [20] setting, as well as their respective
batch variants [6, 13, 77], and is a standard baseline in the BO literature [25, 66]. While much
of the literature has focused on developing new sophisticated acquisition functions, subtle yet
critical implementation details of foundational BO methods are often overlooked. Importantly, the
performance of EI and its variants is inconsistent even for mathematically identical formulations and,
as we show in this work, most often sub-optimal.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

