Combinatorial Optimization with Policy Adaptation
using Latent Space Search

Felix Chalumeau∗
InstaDeep
f.chalumeau@instadeep.com
Clément Bonnet
InstaDeep
c.bonnet@instadeep.com

Shikha Surana∗
InstaDeep
s.surana@instadeep.com
Nathan Grinsztajn
InstaDeep
n.grinsztajn@instadeep.com

Arnu Pretorius
InstaDeep
a.pretorius@instadeep.com

Alexandre Laterre
InstaDeep
a.laterre@instadeep.com

Thomas D. Barrett
InstaDeep
t.barrett@instadeep.com

Abstract
Combinatorial Optimization underpins many real-world applications and yet, designing performant algorithms to solve these complex, typically NP-hard, problems
remains a significant research challenge. Reinforcement Learning (RL) provides a
versatile framework for designing heuristics across a broad spectrum of problem
domains. However, despite notable progress, RL has not yet supplanted industrial
solvers as the go-to solution. Current approaches emphasize pre-training heuristics
that construct solutions but often rely on search procedures with limited variance,
such as stochastically sampling numerous solutions from a single policy or employing computationally expensive fine-tuning of the policy on individual problem
instances. Building on the intuition that performant search at inference time should
be anticipated during pre-training, we propose COMPASS, a novel RL approach
that parameterizes a distribution of diverse and specialized policies conditioned on
a continuous latent space. We evaluate COMPASS across three canonical problems
- Travelling Salesman, Capacitated Vehicle Routing, and Job-Shop Scheduling and demonstrate that our search strategy (i) outperforms state-of-the-art approaches
in 9 out of 11 standard benchmarking tasks and (ii) generalizes better, surpassing
all other approaches on a set of 18 procedurally transformed instance distributions.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial Optimization (CO) has a wide range of real-world applications, from transportation (Contardo et al., 2012) and logistics (Laterre et al., 2018), to energy (Froger et al., 2016). Solving
a CO problem consists of finding an ordering, labelling or subset of elements from a finite, discrete
set that maximizes (or minimizes) a given objective function. As the number of feasible solutions
typically grows exponentially with the problem size, CO problems are challenging (often NP-hard)
to solve. As such, significant work goes into designing problem-specific heuristic approaches that,
*

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

