A Simple Yet Effective Strategy to Robustify the Meta
Learning Paradigm
†

Qi Wang1∗ Yiqin Lv1∗ Yanghe Feng2 Zheng Xie1
Jincai Huang2†
1
College of Science, National University of Defense Technology
2
College of Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology
{wangqi15,lvyiqin98,fengyanghe,xiezheng81,huangjincai}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Meta learning is a promising paradigm to enable skill transfer across tasks. Most
previous methods employ the empirical risk minimization principle in optimization.
However, the resulting worst fast adaptation to a subset of tasks can be catastrophic
in risk-sensitive scenarios. To robustify fast adaptation, this paper optimizes meta
learning pipelines from a distributionally robust perspective and meta trains models
with the measure of expected tail risk. We take the two-stage strategy as heuristics
to solve the robust meta learning problem, controlling the worst fast adaptation
cases at a certain probabilistic level. Experimental results show that our simple
method can improve the robustness of meta learning to task distributions and reduce
the conditional expectation of the worst fast adaptation risk.

1

Introduction

Frequencies

Frequencies

The past decade has witnessed the remarkable
progress of deep learning in real-world appliProbability
Probability
cations (LeCun et al., 2015). However, training deep learning models requires an enormous
dataset and intensive computational power. At
the same time, these pre-trained models can frequently encounter deployment difficulties when
the dataset’s distribution drifts in testing time
(Lesort et al., 2021).
Figure 1: Illustrations of Distributionally Robust
are histograms of meta risk
As a result, the paradigm of meta learning or Fast Adaptation. Shown
T
C
function
values
ℓ(D
,
D
; ϑ) in the task distribution
τ
τ
learning to learn is proposed and impacts the machine learning scheme (Finn et al., 2017), which p(τ ). Given a probability α, we optimize meta learning model parameters ϑ to decrease the risk quantity
leverages past experiences to enable fast adapta- CVaR in Definition (3).
α
tion to unseen tasks. Moreover, in the past few
years, there has grown a large body of meta learning methods to find plausible strategies to distill
common knowledge into separate tasks (Finn et al., 2017; Duan et al., 2016; Garnelo et al., 2018a).
Notably, most previous work concentrates merely on the fast adaptation strategies and employs the
standard risk minimization principle, e.g. the empirical risk minimization, ignoring the difference
between tasks in fast adaptation. Given the sampled batch from the task distribution, the standard meta
learning methods weight tasks equally in fast adaptation. Such an implementation raises concerns
in some real-world scenarios, when worst fast adaptation is catastrophic in a range of risk-sensitive
applications (Johannsmeier et al., 2019; Jaafra et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2023b). For example, in
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Zheng Xie and Jincai Huang are corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

