Agnostically Learning Single-Index Models using
Omnipredictors

Aravind Gollakota
Apple

Parikshit Gopalan
Apple

Adam R. Klivans
UT Austin

Konstantinos Stavropoulos
UT Austin

Abstract
We give the first result for agnostically learning Single-Index Models (SIMs) with
arbitrary monotone and Lipschitz activations. All prior work either held only in the
realizable setting or required the activation to be known. Moreover, we only require
the marginal to have bounded second moments, whereas all prior work required
stronger distributional assumptions (such as anticoncentration or boundedness).
Our algorithm is based on recent work by Gopalan et al. [2023] on omniprediction
using predictors satisfying calibrated multiaccuracy. Our analysis is simple and
relies on the relationship between Bregman divergences (or matching losses) and ℓp
distances. We also provide new guarantees for standard algorithms like GLMtron
and logistic regression in the agnostic setting.

1

Introduction

Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) and Single-Index Models (SIMs) constitute fundamental frameworks in statistics and supervised learning [McCullagh, 1984, Agresti, 2015], capturing and generalizing basic models such as linear and logistic regression. In the GLM framework, labeled examples
(x, y) are assumed to satisfy u(E[y|x]) = w · x (or E[y|x] = u−1 (w · x)), where u is a known
monotone function (called the link function) and w is an unknown vector. Single-Index Models
(SIMs) are a generalization in which the monotone link function u is also unknown.
In the realizable setting where the labels are indeed generated according to a GLM with a known
Lipschitz link function, the GLMtron algorithm of Kakade et al. [2011] is a simple and efficient
learning algorithm. When the ground truth is only assumed to be a SIM (i.e. the link function is
unknown), it can be learned efficiently by the Isotron algorithm [Kalai and Sastry, 2009, Kakade
et al., 2011].
In this work, we consider the significantly more challenging agnostic setting, where the labels are
arbitrary and not necessarily realizable by any SIM. Importantly, we do not fix a link function in
advance; our goal is to output a predictor that has squared error comparable to that of the optimal SIM
with an arbitrary monotone and Lipschitz link function. We can equivalently view this as a natural
squared-error regression problem in which the final optimality guarantee must hold with respect to
all SIMs with bounded weights and monotone, Lipschitz link functions.1
Formally, consider a distribution D over Rd × [0, 1] and denote the squared error of a function
h : Rd → R by err2 (h) = E(x,y)∼D [(y − h(x))2 ]. Let opt(SIM) denote optimal value of err2 (h)
over all SIMs h with bounded weights and arbitrary 1-Lipschitz monotone activations (we call the
inverse u−1 of a link function u the activation function). Given access to samples from D, the goal
of an agnostic learning algorithm is to compute a predictor p : Rd → [0, 1] with error err2 (p) that,
with high probability over the samples, is comparable to the error of the optimal SIM:
err2 (p) ≤ opt(SIM) + ε.
1
In this context, in recent times it has also been common to refer to the class of GLMs (resp. SIMs) as the
class of single neurons with known (resp. unknown) activation functions.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

