Counterfactually Fair Representation

Zhiqun Zuo1 Mohammad Mahdi Khalili1,2 Xueru Zhang1
zuo.167@osu.edu
khalili.17@osu.edu
zhang.12807@osu.edu
1

CSE Department, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210
2
Yahoo Research, New York, NY, 10003

Abstract
The use of machine learning models in high-stake applications (e.g., healthcare,
lending, college admission) has raised growing concerns due to potential biases
against protected social groups. Various fairness notions and methods have been
proposed to mitigate such biases. In this work, we focus on Counterfactual Fairness
(CF), a fairness notion that is dependent on an underlying causal graph and first
proposed by Kusner et al. [26]; it requires that the outcome an individual perceives
is the same in the real world as it would be in a "counterfactual" world, in which the
individual belongs to another social group. Learning fair models satisfying CF can
be challenging. It was shown in [26] that a sufficient condition for satisfying CF is
to not use features that are descendants of sensitive attributes in the causal graph.
This implies a simple method that learns CF models only using non-descendants of
sensitive attributes while eliminating all descendants. Although several subsequent
works proposed methods that use all features for training CF models, there is no
theoretical guarantee that they can satisfy CF. In contrast, this work proposes a new
algorithm that trains models using all the available features. We theoretically and
empirically show that models trained with this method can satisfy CF1 .

1

Introduction

While machine learning (ML) has had significant impacts on human-involved applications (e.g.,
lending, hiring, healthcare, criminal justice, college admission), it also poses significant risks,
particularly regarding unfairness against protected social groups. For example, it has been shown
that computer-aided clinical diagnostic systems can exhibit discrimination against people of color
[9]; face recognition surveillance technology used by police may have racial bias [1]; a decision
support tool COMPAS used for predicting the recidivism risk of defendants is biased against African
Americans [5]. Various fairness notions have been proposed to mathematically measure the biases
in ML based on observational data. Examples include: i) unawareness which prohibits the use of
sensitive attribute in model training process; ii) parity-based fairness that requires certain statistical
measures to be equalized across different groups, e.g., equalized odds [20], equal opportunity [20],
statistical parity [13], predictive parity [20]; iii) preference-based fairness that is inspired by the
fair-division and envy-freeness literature in economics, it ensures that given the choice between
various decision outcomes, every group of users would collectively prefer its perceived outcomes,
regardless of the (dis)parity compared to the other groups [43, 12].
However, the fairness notions mentioned above do not take into account the causal structure and
relations among different features/variables. Recently, Kusner et al. [26] proposed a fairness notion
called Counterfactual Fairness (CF) based on the causal model and counterfactual inference; it
1
The code repository for this work can be found in https://github.com/osu-srml/CF_
Representation_Learning

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

