Certified Robustness via Dynamic Margin
Maximization and Improved Lipschitz Regularization

Mahyar Fazlyab∗ , Taha Entesari∗, Aniket Roy, Rama Chellappa
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Johns Hopkins University
{mahyarfazlyab, tentesa1, aroy28, rchella4}@jhu.edu

Abstract
To improve the robustness of deep classifiers against adversarial perturbations,
many approaches have been proposed, such as designing new architectures with
better robustness properties (e.g., Lipschitz-capped networks), or modifying the
training process itself (e.g., min-max optimization, constrained learning, or regularization). These approaches, however, might not be effective at increasing the
margin in the input (feature) space. In this paper, we propose a differentiable regularizer that is a lower bound on the distance of the data points to the classification
boundary. The proposed regularizer requires knowledge of the model’s Lipschitz
constant along certain directions. To this end, we develop a scalable method for
calculating guaranteed differentiable upper bounds on the Lipschitz constant of
neural networks accurately and efficiently. The relative accuracy of the bounds
prevents excessive regularization and allows for more direct manipulation of the
decision boundary. Furthermore, our Lipschitz bounding algorithm exploits the
monotonicity and Lipschitz continuity of the activation layers, and the resulting
bounds can be used to design new layers with controllable bounds on their Lipschitz constant. Experiments on the MNIST, CIFAR-10, and Tiny-ImageNet data
sets verify that our proposed algorithm obtains competitively improved results
compared to the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Motivated by the vulnerability of deep neural networks to adversarial attacks [1], i.e., imperceptible perturbations that can drastically change a model’s prediction, researchers and practitioners
have proposed various approaches to enhance the robustness of deep neural networks, including
adversarial training [2–4], regularization [5, 6], constrained learning [7], randomized smoothing [8–
10], relaxation-based defenses [11, 12], and model ensembles [13, 14]. These approaches modify
the model architecture, the optimization procedure (loss function and algorithm), the inference
mechanism, or the dataset itself [15] to enhance accuracy on both natural and adversarial examples.
However, most of these methods typically do not directly operate on input margins and rather target
the output margin or its surrogates. For example, it is an established property that deep models trained
with the cross-entropy loss, which is a surrogate for maximizing the output margin (see Appendix
A.2), are prone to adversarial attacks [1]. From this perspective, it is critical to design regularized
loss functions that can explicitly and effectively target the margin in the input space [16–18].
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

