Squared Neural Families:
A New Class of Tractable Density Models

Russell Tsuchida∗
Data61-CSIRO

Cheng Soon Ong
Data61-CSIRO &
Australian National University

Dino Sejdinovic
School of CMS & AIML,
The University of Adelaide

Abstract
Flexible models for probability distributions are an essential ingredient in many
machine learning tasks. We develop and investigate a new class of probability distributions, which we call a Squared Neural Family (SNEFY), formed by squaring the
2-norm of a neural network and normalising it with respect to a base measure. Following the reasoning similar to the well established connections between infinitely
wide neural networks and Gaussian processes, we show that SNEFYs admit closed
form normalising constants in many cases of interest, thereby resulting in flexible
yet fully tractable density models. SNEFYs strictly generalise classical exponential
families, are closed under conditioning, and have tractable marginal distributions.
Their utility is illustrated on a variety of density estimation, conditional density
estimation, and density estimation with missing data tasks.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic modelling lies at the heart of machine learning. In both traditional and contemporary
settings, ensuring the probability model is appropriately normalised (or otherwise bypassing the
need to compute normalising constants) is of central interest for maximum likelihood estimation and
related statistical inference procedures. Tractable normalising constants allow the use of probability
models in a variety of applications, such as anomaly detection, denoising and generative modelling.
Traditional statistical approaches [27, 5] rely on mathematically convenient models such as exponential families [50]. Such models can often be normalised in closed form, but are often only suitable for
relatively low-dimensional and simple data. Early approaches in deep learning use neural networks
as energy functions inside Gibbs distributions [21, Equation 2]. Such distributions typically have
very intractable normalising constants, and so either surrogate losses for the negative log likelihood
involving the energy function are used or MCMC, score matching [16], variational or sampling
methods [15, 30] are used to approximate the normalising constant. See [35, §2.6.1, §2.2] for more
energy-based and other methods.
Modern computer technology and power allows us more flexible models [8, page 68], by partially or
completely relaxing the requirement for mathematical tractability. Contemporary high-dimensional
modelling, such as generative image models, rely primarily on neural network models [18, 11, 35, 34].
For example, normalising flows [40] use constrained neural network layers to transform random
variables from base measures with tractable Jacobian determinants associated with appropriately
constrained but flexible pushforward maps. Similarly to normalising flows, we use neural networks
to define expressive densities, but we model the densities directly without using constrained transformations of random variables. Moreover, our approach can be readily applied in conjunction with
normalising flows and other deep learning devices such as deep feature extractors.
∗

Software available at https://github.com/RussellTsuchida/snefy.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

