Non-adversarial training of Neural SDEs with
signature kernel scores

Zacharia Issa∗1

Blanka Horvath2,3,4

Maud Lemercier2,4

Cristopher Salvi4,5

Abstract
Neural SDEs are continuous-time generative models for sequential data. Stateof-the-art performance for irregular time series generation has been previously
obtained by training these models adversarially as GANs. However, as typical
for GAN architectures, training is notoriously unstable, often suffers from mode
collapse, and requires specialised techniques such as weight clipping and gradient
penalty to mitigate these issues. In this paper, we introduce a novel class of scoring
rules on pathspace based on signature kernels and use them as objective for training
Neural SDEs non-adversarially. By showing strict properness of such kernel
scores and consistency of the corresponding estimators, we provide existence and
uniqueness guarantees for the minimiser. With this formulation, evaluating the
generator-discriminator pair amounts to solving a system of linear path-dependent
PDEs which allows for memory-efficient adjoint-based backpropagation. Moreover,
because the proposed kernel scores are well-defined for paths with values in infinite
dimensional spaces of functions, our framework can be easily extended to generate
spatiotemporal data. Our procedure permits conditioning on a rich variety of
market conditions and significantly outperforms alternative ways of training Neural
SDEs on a variety of tasks including the simulation of rough volatility models, the
conditional probabilistic forecasts of real-world forex pairs where the conditioning
variable is an observed past trajectory, and the mesh-free generation of limit order
book dynamics.

1

Introduction

Stochastic differential equations (SDEs) are a dominant modelling framework in many areas of
science and engineering. They naturally extend ordinary differential equations (ODEs) for modelling
dynamical systems that evolve under the influence of randomness.
A neural stochastic differential equation (Neural SDE) is a continuous-time generative model
for irregular time series where the drift and diffusion functions of an SDE are parametrised by
neural networks [TR19, JB19, HvdHRM20, LWCD20, KFL+ 21, MSKF21]. These models have
become increasingly popular among financial practitioners for pricing and hedging of derivatives and
overall risk management [ASS20, GSVŠ+ 20, CJB23, HFH+ 23]. Training a Neural SDE amounts to
minimising over model parameters an appropriate notion of distance between the law on pathspace
generated by the SDE and the empirical law supported on observed data sample paths.
∗

Corresponding author: zacharia.issa@kcl.ac.uk
Department of Mathematics, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom.
2
Department of Mathematics, Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom.
3
The Oxford Man Institute, Oxford, United Kingdom.
4
The Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom.
5
Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

