Label-Retrieval-Augmented Diffusion Models for
Learning from Noisy Labels

Jian Chen1 Ruiyi Zhang2 Tong Yu2 Rohan Sharma1
Zhiqiang Xu3 Tong Sun2 Changyou Chen1
1
University at Buffalo 2 Adobe Research 3 MBZUAI
{jchen378,rohanjag,changyou}@buffalo.edu
{ruizhang,tyu,tsun}@adobe.com zhiqiang.xu@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Learning from noisy labels is a long-standing problem in machine learning for real
applications. One of the main research lines focuses on learning a label corrector
to purify potential noisy labels. However, these methods typically rely on strict
assumptions and are limited to certain types of label noise. In this paper, we
reformulate the label-noise problem from a generative-model perspective, i.e.,
labels are generated by gradually refining an initial random guess. This new
perspective immediately enables existing powerful diffusion models to seamlessly
learn the stochastic generative process. Once the generative uncertainty is modeled,
we can perform classification inference using maximum likelihood estimation
of labels. To mitigate the impact of noisy labels, we propose Label-RetrievalAugmented (LRA) diffusion model 1 , which leverages neighbor consistency to
effectively construct pseudo-clean labels for diffusion training. Our model is
flexible and general, allowing easy incorporation of different types of conditional
information, e.g., use of pre-trained models, to further boost model performance.
Extensive experiments are conducted for evaluation. Our model achieves new
state-of-the-art (SOTA) results on all standard real-world benchmark datasets.
Remarkably, by incorporating conditional information from the powerful CLIP
model, our method can boost the current SOTA accuracy by 10-20 absolute points
in many cases.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved extraordinary accuracy on various classification tasks. These
models are typically trained through supervised learning using large amounts of labeled data. However,
large-scale data labeling could cost huge amount of time and effort, and is prone to errors caused by
human mistakes or automatic labeling algorithms [1]. In addition, research has shown that the ability
of deep neural network models to fit random labels can result in reduced generalization ability when
learning with corrupted labels [2]. Therefore, robust learning methods using noisy labels are essential
for applying deep learning models to cheap yet imperfect datasets for supervised learning tasks.
There are multiple types of label noise investigated by previous research. More recent research
has focused on studying the more realistic feature-dependent label noise, where the probability of
mislabeling a given instance depends on its characteristics. This type of noise is more consistent with
label noise in real-world datasets [3, 4, 1, 5, 6, 7]. To address this type of noise, a model is expected
to be able to estimate the uncertainty of each training label. Many state-of-the-art methods have
primarily relied on the observation that deep neural networks tend to learn simple patterns before
1

Code is available at https://github.com/puar-playground/LRA-diffusion

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

