3D-IntPhys: Towards More Generalized 3D-grounded
Visual Intuitive Physics under Challenging Scenes

Haotian Xue1

Antonio Torralba 2

Joshua Tenenbaum2

Yunzhu Li 3, 4∗
1

Georgia Tech

2

MIT

Daniel Yamins3

Hsiao-Yu Tung2∗
3

Stanford Univeristy

4

UIUC

Abstract
Given a visual scene, humans have strong intuitions about how a scene can evolve
over time under given actions. The intuition, often termed visual intuitive physics,
is a critical ability that allows us to make effective plans to manipulate the scene to
achieve desired outcomes without relying on extensive trial and error. In this paper,
we present a framework capable of learning 3D-grounded visual intuitive physics
models from videos of complex scenes. Our method is composed of a conditional
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)-style visual frontend and a 3D point-based dynamics
prediction backend, using which we can impose strong relational and structural
inductive bias to capture the structure of the underlying environment. Unlike
existing intuitive point-based dynamics works that rely on the supervision of dense
point trajectory from simulators, we relax the requirements and only assume access
to multi-view RGB images and (imperfect) instance masks acquired using color
prior. This enables the proposed model to handle scenarios where accurate point
estimation and tracking are hard or impossible. We generate datasets including
three challenging scenarios involving fluid, granular materials, and rigid objects
in the simulation. The datasets do not include any dense particle information so
most previous 3D-based intuitive physics pipelines can barely deal with that. We
show our model can make long-horizon future predictions by learning from raw
images and significantly outperforms models that do not employ an explicit 3D
representation space. We also show that once trained, our model can achieve strong
generalization in complex scenarios under extrapolate settings. The code is released
in https://github.com/xavihart/3D-IntPhys.

1

Introduction

Humans can achieve a strong intuitive understanding of the 3D physical world around us simply
from visual perception [5, 8, 52, 51, 46, 11]. As we constantly make physical interactions with the
environment, the intuitive physical understanding applies to objects of a wide variety of materials [6,
56]. For example, after watching videos of water pouring and doing the task ourselves, we can
develop a mental model of the interaction process and predict how the water will move when we
apply actions like tilting or shaking the cup (Figure 1). The ability to predict the future evolution of
the physical environment is extremely useful for humans to plan our behavior and perform everyday
manipulation tasks. It is thus desirable to develop computational tools that learn 3D-grounded models
of the world purely from visual observations that can generalize to objects with complicated physical
properties like fluid and granular materials.
∗
This work was done when Haotian Xue was a visiting student advised by Joshua Tenenbaum in MIT CSAIL
and he was directly mentored by Yunzhu Li and Hsiao-Yu Tung.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

