Adversarial Training for Graph Neural Networks:
Pitfalls, Solutions, and New Directions

Lukas Gosch1∗ , Simon Geisler1∗ , Daniel Sturm1∗ , Bertrand Charpentier1 ,
Daniel Zügner1,2 , Stephan Günnemann1
1
Department of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute
Technical University of Munich
2
Microsoft Research
{l.gosch, s.geisler, da.sturm, s.guennemann}@tum.de | dzuegner@microsoft.com

Abstract
Despite its success in the image domain, adversarial training did not (yet) stand
out as an effective defense for Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) against graph
structure perturbations. In the pursuit of fixing adversarial training (1) we show and
overcome fundamental theoretical as well as practical limitations of the adopted
graph learning setting in prior work; (2) we reveal that flexible GNNs based on
learnable graph diffusion are able to adjust to adversarial perturbations, while
the learned message passing scheme is naturally interpretable; (3) we introduce
the first attack for structure perturbations that, while targeting multiple nodes at
once, is capable of handling global (graph-level) as well as local (node-level)
constraints. Including these contributions, we demonstrate that adversarial training
is a state-of-the-art defense against adversarial structure perturbations.1

1

Introduction

Although previous work reported some robustness
gains by using adversarial training in GNNs [2, 3],
closer inspection highlights two main shortcomings:
(i) their learning setting leads to a biased evaluation
and (ii) the studied architectures seem to struggle to
learn robust representations.

Test Accuracy [%]

Adversarial training has weathered the test of time and stands out as one of the few effective measures
against adversarial perturbations. While this is particularly true for numerical input data like images
[1], it is not yet established as an effective method to defend predictions of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) against graph structure perturbations.
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50

0

1

5

10

25

Perturbed Edges (global) [%]

MLP
GCN
w/ adv. trn.
GCN
w/o adv. trn.
GPRGNN
w/ adv. trn.
GPRGNN
w/o adv. trn.

(i) Learning setting. In the previously studied transFigure 1: Robust diffusion (GPRGNN) vs.
ductive learning settings (see Table 3), clean validaGCN on (inductive) Cora-ML. We report adtion and test nodes are known during training. Thus,
versarial training and standard training.
perfect robustness can be achieved by memorizing
the training graph. This can lead to a false impression of robustness. Indeed, we find that the gains of
the adversarial training approach from Xu et al. [2] largely stem from exploiting this flaw. Motivated
by this finding, we revisit adversarial training for node classification under structure perturbations in
a fully inductive setting (i.e., validation/test nodes are excluded during training). Thus, our results do
not suffer from the same evaluation pitfall and pertain to a more challenging and realistic scenario.
*
1

Equal contribution.
Project page: https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/daml/adversarial-training/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

