REx: Data-Free Residual Quantization Error
Expansion
Edouard Yvinec1,2 , Arnaud Dapogny2 , Matthieu Cord1 , Kevin Bailly1,2
Sorbonne Université1 , CNRS, ISIR, f-75005, 4 Place Jussieu 75005 Paris, France
Datakalab2 , 114 boulevard Malesherbes, 75017 Paris, France
ey@datakalab.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are ubiquitous in computer vision and natural
language processing, but suffer from high inference cost. This problem can be
addressed by quantization, which consists in converting floating point operations
into a lower bit-width format. With the growing concerns on privacy rights, we
focus our efforts on data-free methods. However, such techniques suffer from their
lack of adaptability to the target devices, as a hardware typically only supports
specific bit widths. Thus, to adapt to a variety of devices, a quantization method
shall be flexible enough to find good accuracy v.s. speed trade-offs for every
bit width and target device. To achieve this, we propose REx, a quantization
method that leverages residual error expansion, along with group sparsity. We show
experimentally that REx enables better trade-offs (in terms of accuracy given any
target bit-width) on both convnets and transformers for computer vision, as well as
NLP models. In particular, when applied to large language models, we show that
REx elegantly solves the outlier problem that hinders state-of-the-art quantization
methods. In addition, REx is backed off by strong theoretical guarantees on the
preservation of the predictive function of the original model. Lastly, we show that
REx is agnostic to the quantization operator and can be used in combination with
previous quantization work.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) achieve outstanding performance on several challenging computer
vision tasks such as image classification [1], object detection [2] and semantic segmentation [3]
as well as natural language processing benchmarks such as text classification [4]. However, their
accuracy comes at a high computational inference cost which limits their deployment, moreso on edge
devices when real-time treatment as well as energy consumption are a concern. This problem can be
tackled via DNN quantization, i.e. by reducing the bit-width representation of the computations from
floating point operations (FP) to e.g. int8 (8-bits integer representation), int4, int3 or even lower-bit
representation such as ternary (where weights values are either 1, 0 or +1) quantization. Because
DNN inference principally relies on matrix multiplication, such quantization dramatically diminishes
the number of bit-wise operations (as defined by [5]), thus limiting the DNN latency and energy
consumption. However, DNN quantization usually comes at the expense of the network accuracy. As
a consequence, DNN quantization is an active field of research [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] that aims at
limiting this accuracy drop while reducing the number of bit-wise operations.
All the aforementioned methods are data-driven as they either involve training a network from scratch
or fine-tune an already trained and quantized one. However, while such approaches usually allow
lower quantization errors using low bit-wise representations, due to the growing concerns on privacy
rights and data privacy, there is an ever-increasing number of real-case scenarios (e.g. health and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

