Hyperbolic Space with Hierarchical Margin Boosts
Fine-Grained Learning from Coarse Labels

Shu-Lin Xu1 , Yifan Sun2 , Faen Zhang3 , Anqi Xu4 , Xiu-Shen Wei1∗, Yi Yang5
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, and Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial
Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications, Southeast University
2
3
4
Baidu Inc.
AInnovation Technology Group Co., Ltd
University of Toronto
5
CCAI, College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Learning fine-grained embeddings from coarse labels is a challenging task due to
limited label granularity supervision, i.e., lacking the detailed distinctions required
for fine-grained tasks. The task becomes even more demanding when attempting
few-shot fine-grained recognition, which holds practical significance in various
applications. To address these challenges, we propose a novel method that embeds
visual embeddings into a hyperbolic space and enhances their discriminative ability
with a hierarchical cosine margins manner. Specifically, the hyperbolic space offers
distinct advantages, including the ability to capture hierarchical relationships and
increased expressive power, which favors modeling fine-grained objects. Based on
the hyperbolic space, we further enforce relatively large/small similarity margins
between coarse/fine classes, respectively, yielding the so-called hierarchical cosine
margins manner. While enforcing similarity margins in the regular Euclidean space
has become popular for deep embedding learning, applying it to the hyperbolic
space is non-trivial and validating the benefit for coarse-to-fine generalization
is valuable. Extensive experiments conducted on five benchmark datasets showcase the effectiveness of our proposed method, yielding state-of-the-art results
surpassing competing methods.

1

Introduction

In deep learning, rich supervised information is crucial for the generalization ability of deep models.
Fine-grained visual recognition [36] is a fundamental problem in computer vision, which requires
accurately identifying subordinate (fine-grained) categories within the same meta (coarse-grained)
category. However, in many domains, annotating fine-grained data requires the involvement of
domain experts, such as in pipeline failure detection [1], biodiversity recognition [30] and medicine
analyses [25], leading to high annotation costs or even infeasibility. In contrast, obtaining the coarse
labels, e.g., the meta category of a species in biodiversity recognition, is much easier. In such cases,
we attempt to use coarse-grained labels to train models and apply them to finer-grained recognition
tasks. Such a task is challenging as it lacks the detailed supervisory information required for finegrained tasks, preventing us from obtaining sufficiently detailed label information to train models
to recognize fine-grained features and distinctions. In this paper, we attempt to train models using
coarse-grained labels and apply them to challenging few-shot fine-grained recognition tasks, which
are highly demanding and have practical significance.
∗
Corresponding author.
This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China
(2021YFA1001100), National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant (62272231), Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China under Grant (BK20210340), the Fundamental Research Funds for
the Central Universities (NJ2022028), and CAAI-Huawei MindSpore Open Fund.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

