Knowledge Distillation for High Dimensional
Search Index
Zepu Lu1,2 , Jin Chen3 , Defu Lian1,2∗, Zaixi Zhang1,2 , Yong Ge4 , Enhong Chen1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, Hefei, Anhui, China
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
University of Arizona
zplu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chenjin@std.uestc.edu.cn, liandefu@ustc.edu.cn, zaixi@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
yongge@arizona.edu, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Lightweight compressed indexes are prevalent in Approximate Nearest Neighbor
Search (ANNS) and Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) owing to their superiority of retrieval efficiency in large-scale datasets. However, results given by
compressed indexes are less accurate due to the curse of dimension and limitation of
optimization objectives (e.g., lacking interactions between queries and documents).
Thus, we are encouraged to design a new learning algorithm for the compressed
search index in high dimensions to improve retrieval performance. In this paper,
we propose a novel Knowledge Distillation for high dimensional search index
framework (KDindex), with the aim of efficiently learning lightweight indexes
by distilling knowledge from high-precision ANNS and MIPS models such as
graph-based indexes. Specifically, the student is guided to keep the same ranking
order of the top-k relevant results yielded by the teacher model, which acts as
the additional supervision signals between queries and documents to learn the
similarities between documents. Furthermore, to avoid the trivial solutions that
all candidates are partitioned to the same post list, the reconstruction loss that
minimizes the compressed error, and the posting list balance strategy that equally
allocates the candidates, are integrated into the learning objective. Experiment results demonstrate that KDindex outperforms existing learnable quantization-based
indexes and is 40× lighter than the state-of-the-art non-exhaustive methods while
achieving comparable recall quality.

1

Introduction

Vector nearest neighbor search, which retrieves the most relevant vectors with the maximum similarity
given the query vector, is a fundamental task in information retrieval, such as image retrieval [13, 55],
web search [51, 52, 53], and item recommendation [32, 5, 33, 35, 48]. With a significant number of
candidate vectors and vector dimensions, the exact nearest neighbor search becomes intractable due
to the substantial computation costs and high query latency [42], resulting in a growing interest in
Approximate Nearest Neighbors Search (ANNS).
Among the various indexes, the lightweight compressed indexes, especially those based on quantization, are notable for their substantial advantages in terms of low storage costs and efficient parallel
processing. As a result, these indexes draw the attention from both academics and industries and
are present in well-known open repositories such as FAISS [26]. Existing learning methods for
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

