Comparing Causal Frameworks: Potential Outcomes,
Structural Models, Graphs, and Abstractions

Duligur Ibeling
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
duligur@stanford.edu

Thomas Icard
Department of Philosophy
Stanford University
icard@stanford.edu

Abstract
The aim of this paper is to make clear and precise the relationship between the
Rubin causal model (RCM) and structural causal model (SCM) frameworks for
causal inference. Adopting a neutral logical perspective, and drawing on previous
work, we show what is required for an RCM to be representable by an SCM. A key
result then shows that every RCM—including those that violate algebraic principles
implied by the SCM framework—emerges as an abstraction of some representable
RCM. Finally, we illustrate the power of this conciliatory perspective by pinpointing
an important role for SCM principles in classic applications of RCMs; conversely,
we offer a characterization of the algebraic constraints implied by a graph, helping
to substantiate further comparisons between the two frameworks.
Toward the end of the twentieth century several frameworks arose for formalizing and analyzing
problems of causal inference. One of these, associated with Rubin [34] and others (see [16]), takes
the potential outcome—formalizing the effect of one variable on another—as a fundamental target of
analysis. Causal assumptions in the Rubin causal model (RCM) are naturally encoded as algebraic
constraints on potential outcomes, and research in this area has spawned a remarkable body of
theoretical and applied work especially in social and biomedical sciences (see [14] for a review).
A second approach, associated with Pearl [26] and collaborators (see [27] for a textbook treatment;
see also [37]), focuses instead on assumptions that can be encoded qualitatively, or more specifically,
graphically, arising from a fundamental object known as a structural causal model (SCM). The docalculus is one of the crowning achievements of this approach, and it has been shown derivationally
complete with respect to a wide range of canonical estimation and inference problems [35, 2, 19].
Both frameworks have enjoyed considerable influence within recent causal machine learning in
particular. As just one example, concern in reinforcement learning about the possibility of unobserved
confounders—variables impacting both decisions and their outcomes—has generated a number of
important advances, some employing tools and concepts from the RCM approach (e.g., [18, 25, 17]),
others grounded in the SCM approach and typically involving graphs (e.g., [3, 38, 42]).
Despite the remarkable successes that both of these frameworks have engendered in machine learning
and beyond, there remains substantial controversy over how to understand their relationship. In the
literature it has been claimed, on the one hand, that the two are equivalent, that “a theorem in one is
a theorem in the other” [27, p. 98]. On the other hand, some authors suggest that the two are only
equivalent in a weak sense, one that “builds the limitations of SCM into the resulting comparison and
likewise filters out aspects of the rival theory that do not readily translate to SCM” [21, p. 443].
At issue are two separable questions. The first is one of practical significance. Some argue that
graphs give greater “conceptual clarity” [27, p. 103] and that SCMs more generally offer a “a flexible
formalism for data-generating models” that helps ground causal inquiry [4, p. 514]; others argue that
work in the RCM framework provides “transparent definitions of causal effects and encourages the
analyst to consider individual-level heterogeneity as a first principle” [23, p. 91] as well as “guidance
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

