Accelerating Exploration with Unlabeled Prior Data

Qiyang Liαγ∗ , Jason Zhangα∗, Dibya Ghoshα , Amy Zhangβγ , Sergey Levineα
UC Berkeleyα , UT Austinβ , Metaγ
{qcli,jason.z,dibya.ghosh}@berkeley.edu
amy.zhang@austin.utexas.edu, svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Learning to solve tasks from a sparse reward signal is a major challenge for standard reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. However, in the real world, agents
rarely need to solve sparse reward tasks entirely from scratch. More often, we
might possess prior experience to draw on that provides considerable guidance
about which actions and outcomes are possible in the world, which we can use
to explore more effectively for new tasks. In this work, we study how prior data
without reward labels may be used to guide and accelerate exploration for an agent
solving a new sparse reward task. We propose a simple approach that learns a reward model from online experience, labels the unlabeled prior data with optimistic
rewards, and then uses it concurrently alongside the online data for downstream
policy and critic optimization. This general formula leads to rapid exploration in
several challenging sparse-reward domains where tabula rasa exploration is insufficient, including the AntMaze domain, Adroit hand manipulation domain, and
a visual simulated robotic manipulation domain. Our results highlight the ease
of incorporating unlabeled prior data into existing online RL algorithms, and the
(perhaps surprising) effectiveness of doing so.

1

Introduction

Exploration, particularly in sparse reward environments, presents a major challenge for reinforcement
Interaction Data
learning, and standard exploration methods typically
(𝒔, 𝒂, 𝒔 , 𝒓)
Unlabeled
Online Replay
Prior
Data
Buffer
need to seek out all potentially novel states to cover
(𝒔, 𝒂, 𝒔 )
all the places where high rewards may be located.
(𝒔, 𝒂, 𝒔 , 𝒓)
Luckily, in many real-world RL settings, it is straightupdate
forward to obtain prior data that can help the agent
Optimistic
Reward Bonus
understand how the world works. For example, if
𝒔 ~ 𝑷(𝒔 ∣ 𝒔, 𝒂)
(𝒔, 𝒂, 𝒔 , ො𝒓)
we are trying to find where we left our keys, we
𝒂 ~ 𝝅(𝒂 ∣ 𝒔)
Train
would not relearn how to navigate our environment,
Batch
but rather might revisit locations that we recall from
Agent
memory. If the data has reward annotations, pretraining with offline RL provides one solution to ac- Figure 1: How to leverage unlabeled prior
celerate online finetuning. However, in many do- data for efficient online exploration? We label
mains of interest, it is more likely for prior datasets to the prior data with an optimistic reward estimate
be task-agnostic, and not be labeled with the reward and run RL on both the online and offline data.
This allows more efficient exploration around the
for the new task we hope to solve. Despite not hav- trajectories in the prior data, improving sample
ing reward labels, such prior data can be useful for an efficiency especially for hard exploration tasks.
agent exploring for a new task since it describes the
environment dynamics and indicates regions of the state space that may be interesting to explore.
′

′

′

∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

′

′

′

