CrossGNN: Confronting Noisy Multivariate Time
Series Via Cross Interaction Refinement
Qihe Huang†,§ , Lei Shen§ , Ruixin Zhang§ , Shouhong Ding§ , Binwu Wang† ,
Zhengyang Zhou†,‡, , Yang Wang†,‡,
†

University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China
‡
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC, Suzhou, China
§
Youtu Laboratory, Tencent, Shanghai, China
Email: {hqh, wbw1995}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zzy0929, angyan}@ustc.edu.cn,
shenlei1996@gmail.com, {ruixinzhang, ericshding}@tencent.com

Abstract
Recently, multivariate time series (MTS) forecasting techniques have seen rapid
development and widespread applications across various fields. Transformer-based
and GNN-based methods have shown promising potential due to their strong ability
to model interaction of time and variables. However, by conducting a comprehensive analysis of the real-world data, we observe that the temporal fluctuations
and heterogeneity between variables are not well handled by existing methods.
To address the above issues, we propose CrossGNN, a linear complexity GNN
model to refine the cross-scale and cross-variable interaction for MTS. To deal
with the unexpected noise in time dimension, an adaptive multi-scale identifier
(AMSI) is leveraged to construct multi-scale time series with reduced noise. A
Cross-Scale GNN is proposed to extract the scales with clearer trend and weaker
noise. Cross-Variable GNN is proposed to utilize the homogeneity and heterogeneity between different variables. By simultaneously focusing on edges with higher
saliency scores and constraining those edges with lower scores, the time and space
complexity (i.e., O(L)) of CrossGNN can be linear with the input sequence length
L. Extensive experimental results on 8 real-world MTS datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of CrossGNN compared with state-of-the-art methods. The code is
available at https://github.com/hqh0728/CrossGNN.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting has been widely used in many fields (i.e., climate [1], traffic [31], energy [3],
finance [13], etc) [8, 29, 20, 10]. Multivariate time series (MTS) consists of time series with multiple
variables and MTS forecasting aims at predicting future values based on historical time series. Deep
learning models [26, 24, 17, 4, 21] have demonstrated superior performance in MTS forecasting.
In particular, Transformer-based models [34, 27, 35] have achieved great power in MTS, benefiting
from its attention mechanism which can model the long-term interaction between different time
points of sequences (cross-time). Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [28, 16, 2, 19, 7] have also shown
promising results for MTS forecasting, which can extract pre-defined or adaptive interaction between
different variables (cross-variable).
However, a recent study [33] shows that a simple linear model dramatically outperformed many stateof-the-art (SOTA) models, and it inspires us to investigate the reasons why the existing cross-time
This work is done when Qihe Huang was an intern at YouTu Lab.
Yang Wang and Zhengyang Zhou are corresponding authors.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

