ReContrast: Domain-Specific Anomaly Detection via
Contrastive Reconstruction

1

Jia Guo1 Shuai Lu2 Lize Jia2 Weihang Zhang2 Huiqi Li1,2 ∗
School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
School of Medical Technoloy, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
guojia.jeremy@gmail.com, lushuaie@163.com
{3220212096, zhangweihang, huiqili}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Most advanced unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD) methods rely on modeling feature representations of frozen encoder networks pre-trained on large-scale
datasets, e.g. ImageNet. However, the features extracted from the encoders that
are borrowed from natural image domains coincide little with the features required
in the target UAD domain, such as industrial inspection and medical imaging. In
this paper, we propose a novel epistemic UAD method, namely ReContrast, which
optimizes the entire network to reduce biases towards the pre-trained image domain
and orients the network in the target domain. We start with a feature reconstruction
approach that detects anomalies from errors. Essentially, the elements of contrastive learning are elegantly embedded in feature reconstruction to prevent the
network from training instability, pattern collapse, and identical shortcut, while
simultaneously optimizing both the encoder and decoder on the target domain. To
demonstrate our transfer ability on various image domains, we conduct extensive
experiments across two popular industrial defect detection benchmarks and three
medical image UAD tasks, which shows our superiority over current state-of-the-art
methods. Code is available at: https://github.com/guojiajeremy/ReContrast

1

Introduction

Unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD) aims to recognize and localize anomalies based on the
training set that contains only normal images. UAD has a wide range of applications, e.g., industrial
defect detection and medical disease screening, addressing the difficulty of collection and labeling of
all possible anomalies.
Efforts on UAD attempt to learn the distribution of available normal samples. Most state-of-the-arts
utilize networks pre-trained on large-scale datasets, e.g. ImageNet [1], for extracting discriminative
and informative feature representations. Feature reconstruction [2; 3; 4] and feature distillation
methods [5; 6] are proposed to reconstruct features of pre-trained encoders as alternatives to pixel
reconstruction [7; 8], because learned features provide more informative representations than raw
pixels [2; 3; 9]. The above approaches can be categorized as epistemic methods, under the hypothesis
that the networks trained on normal images can only construct normal regions, but fail for unseen
anomalous regions. Feature memory & modeling methods [10; 11; 12; 13; 14] memorize and
model all anomaly-free features extracted from pre-trained networks in training, and compare them
with test features during inference. In feature reconstruction, the parameters of encoders should be
frozen to prevent the networks from converging to a trivial solution, i.e., pattern collapse [2; 3]. In
feature distillation and feature memory & modeling methods, there are no gradients for optimizing
*Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

