Improving Graph Matching with Positional
Reconstruction Encoder-Decoder Network
Yixiao Zhou
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology
Peking University

Ruiqi Jia
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology
Peking University

Hongxiang Lin
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology
Peking University

Hefeng Quan
School of computer science and engineering
Nanjing University of Technology

Yumeng Zhao
School of Artificial Intelligence
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Xiaoqing Lyu∗
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Beijing Institute of Big Data Research
Peking University

Abstract
Deriving from image matching and understanding, semantic keypoint matching
aims at establishing correspondence between keypoint sets in images. As graphs
are powerful tools to represent points and their complex relationships, graph matching provides an effective way to find desired semantic keypoint correspondences.
Recent deep graph matching methods have shown excellent performance, but there
is still a lack of exploration and utilization of spatial information of keypoints as
nodes in graphs. More specifically, existing methods are insufficient to capture
the relative spatial relations through current graph construction approaches from
the locations of semantic keypoints. To address these issues, we introduce a positional reconstruction encoder-decoder (PR-EnDec) to model intrinsic graph spatial
structure, and present an end-to-end graph matching network PREGM based on PREnDec. Our PR-EnDec consists of a positional encoder that learns effective node
spatial embedding with the affine transformation invariance, and a spatial relation
decoder that further utilizes the high-order spatial information by reconstructing
the locational structure of graphs contained in the node coordinates. Extensive
experimental results on four public keypoint matching datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed PREGM.

1

Introduction

Image matching is a common and basic matching problem in multimedia and visual applications. The
goal of image matching is to find a dense semantic content correspondence between two images, while
feature-based matching is a typical strategy to solve the above problems, and in feature matching,
∗

Correspondence: lvxiaoqing@pku.edu.cn. Author emails: {chnzyx,jiaruiqi}@pku.edu.cn,
linhongxiang@stu.pku.edu.cn, 920106840131@njust.edu.cn, zhaoyumeng_311@bupt.edu.cn,
lvxiaoqing@pku.edu.cn
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

