Implicit Bias of Gradient Descent for Two-layer ReLU
and Leaky ReLU Networks on Nearly-orthogonal Data

Yiwen Kou∗ Zixiang Chen∗ Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
{evankou,chenzx19,qgu}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
The implicit bias towards solutions with favorable properties is believed to be
a key reason why neural networks trained by gradient-based optimization can
generalize well. While the implicit bias of gradient flow has been widely studied
for homogeneous neural networks (including ReLU and leaky ReLU networks),
the implicit bias of gradient descent is currently only understood for smooth neural
networks. Therefore, implicit bias in non-smooth neural networks trained by
gradient descent remains an open question. In this paper, we aim to answer this
question by studying the implicit bias of gradient descent for training two-layer
fully connected (leaky) ReLU neural networks. We showed that when the training
data are nearly-orthogonal, for leaky ReLU activation function, gradient descent
will find a network with a stable rank that converges to 1, whereas for ReLU
activation function, gradient descent will find a neural network with a stable rank
that is upper bounded by a constant. Additionally, we show that gradient descent
will find a neural network such that all the training data points have the same
normalized margin asymptotically. Experiments on both synthetic and real data
backup our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have achieved remarkable success in a variety of applications, such as image and
speech recognition, natural language processing, and many others. Recent studies have revealed that
the effectiveness of neural networks is attributed to their implicit bias towards particular solutions
which enjoy favorable properties. Understanding how this bias is affected by factors such as network
architecture, optimization algorithms and data used for training, has become an active research area
in the field of deep learning theory.
The literature on the implicit bias in neural networks has expanded rapidly in recent years (Vardi,
2022), with numerous studies shedding light on the implicit bias of gradient flow (GF) with a wide
range of neural network architecture, including deep linear networks (Ji and Telgarsky, 2018, 2020;
Gunasekar et al., 2018), homogeneous networks (Lyu and Li, 2019; Vardi et al., 2022a) and more
specific cases (Chizat and Bach, 2020; Lyu et al., 2021; Frei et al., 2022b; Safran et al., 2022). The
implicit bias of gradient descent (GD), on the other hand, is better understood for linear predictors
(Soudry et al., 2018) and smoothed neural networks (Lyu and Li, 2019; Frei et al., 2022b). Therefore,
an open question still remains:
What is the implicit bias of leaky ReLU and ReLU networks trained by gradient descent?
In this paper, we will answer this question by investigating gradient descent for both two-layer leaky
ReLU and ReLU neural networks on specific training data, where {xi }ni=1 are nearly-orthogonal
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

