Non-Stationary Bandits with Auto-Regressive
Temporal Dependency

Qinyi Chen
Operations Research Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
qinyic@mit.edu

Negin Golrezaei
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
golrezae@mit.edu

Djallel Bouneffouf
IBM Research
djallel.bouneffouf@ibm.com

Abstract
Traditional multi-armed bandit (MAB) frameworks, predominantly examined under
stochastic or adversarial settings, often overlook the temporal dynamics inherent in
many real-world applications such as recommendation systems and online advertising. This paper introduces a novel non-stationary MAB framework that captures
the temporal structure of these real-world dynamics through an auto-regressive
(AR) reward structure. We propose an algorithm that integrates two key mechanisms: (i) an alternation mechanism adept at leveraging temporal dependencies to
dynamically balance exploration and exploitation, and (ii) a restarting mechanism
designed to discard out-of-date information. Our algorithm achieves a regret upper
bound that nearly matches the lower bound, with regret measured against a robust
dynamic benchmark. Finally, via a real-world case study on tourism demand
prediction, we demonstrate both the efficacy of our algorithm and the broader
applicability of our techniques to more complex, rapidly evolving time series.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) framework [51, 46] is commonly used to study online decisionmaking under uncertainty. It is primarily examined under either the stochastic setting [51, 6], where
arms have fixed unknown reward distributions, or the adversarial setting [7, 5, 31, 16], where an
adversary determines the reward distributions that can change arbitrarily over time. However, neither
setting accurately represents real-world decision-making problems (see examples in dynamic pricing
[30], online advertising [42], and online auctions [33]), where reward distributions change over
time following intrinsic temporal structures. These structures often exhibit frequent variations and
temporal dependencies, making them challenging to approximate using stationary distributions.
This motivates us to consider a non-stationary bandits setting involving certain temporal structure,
which captures the real-world characteristics. Specifically, we are interested in temporal structures
with linear amount of changes, which are distinct from the infrequent, limited changes typically
handled by change-point detection [25] or seasonality analysis [15]. Such frequent changes are
commonly observed in applications such as financial data [14] and click-through rates in online
advertising [2], where the data experience lots of volatility within a short time. Traditional bandits
algorithms, such as Thompson sampling or UCB, may explore too aggressively in response to these
drastic changes, leading to suboptimal performance [39]. That being said, the observed time series in
these scenarios typically exhibit certain temporal dependencies between past and present, which can
be leveraged to improve decision-making.
To encapsulate the main characteristics of real-world time series, we relax the previously restrictive
assumptions on the reward distributions and study a non-stationary MAB problem, where the reward
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

