Data-driven Optimal Filtering for
Linear Systems with Unknown Noise Covariances

Shahriar Talebi1,2
Amirhossein Taghvaei1
Mehran Mesbahi1
1
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98105
2
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 02138
talebi@seas.harvard.edu amirtag@uw.edu mesbahi@uw.edu

Abstract
This paper examines learning the optimal filtering policy, known as the Kalman
gain, for a linear system with unknown noise covariance matrices using noisy
output data. The learning problem is formulated as a stochastic policy optimization problem, aiming to minimize the output prediction error. This formulation
provides a direct bridge between data-driven optimal control and, its dual, optimal filtering. Our contributions are twofold. Firstly, we conduct a thorough
convergence analysis of the stochastic gradient descent algorithm, adopted for
the filtering problem, accounting for biased gradients and stability constraints.
Secondly, we carefully leverage a combination of tools from linear system theory
and high-dimensional statistics to derive bias-variance error bounds that scale
logarithmically with problem dimension, and, in contrast to subspace methods, the
length of output trajectories only affects the bias term.

1

Introduction

The duality of control and estimation plays a crucial role in system theory, linking two distinct
synthesis problems [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. This duality is an effective bridge between two distinct
disciplines, facilitating development of theoretical and computational techniques in one domain
and then adopting them for use in the other. For example, the stability proof of the Kalman filter
relies on the stabilizing characteristic of the optimal feedback gain in the dual Linear Quadratic
Regulator (LQR) optimal control problem [7, Ch. 9]. In this paper, we leverage this duality to learn
optimal filtering policies using recent advances in data-driven algorithms for optimal control.
We consider the estimation problem for a system with a known linear dynamic and observation model,
but unknown process and measurement noise covariances. Our objective is to learn the optimal steadystate Kalman gain using a training dataset comprising independent realizations of the observation
signal. This problem has a rich history in system theory, often explored within the context of adaptive
Kalman filtering [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. A comprehensive summary of four solution approaches
to this problem can be found in the classical reference [9]. These approaches include Bayesian
inference [14, 15, 16], Maximum likelihood [17, 18], covariance matching [12], and innovation
correlation methods [8, 10]. While Bayesian and maximum likelihood approaches are computationally
intensive, and covariance matching introduces biases in practice, the innovation correlation-based
approaches have gained popularity and have been the subject of recent research [19, 20, 21]. For an
excellent survey on this topic, refer to the article [22]. However, it is important to note that these
approaches often lack non-asymptotic guarantees and heavily depend on statistical assumptions about
the underlying model.
In the realm of optimal control, significant progress has been made in the development of data-driven
synthesis methods. Notably, recent advances have focused on the adoption of first-order methods for
state-feedback LQR problems [23, 24]. The direct optimization of policies from a gradient-dominant
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

