Statistical Insights into HSIC in High Dimensions

Tao Zhang
School of Information Management and Engineering
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
Shanghai 200433, China
dalizhangt@163.com
Yaowu Zhang∗
School of Information Management and Engineering
MoE Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
Shanghai 200433, China
zhang.yaowu@mail.shufe.edu.cn
Tingyou Zhou
School of Data Sciences
Zhejiang University of Finance and Economics
Hangzhou 310018, China
zhoutingyou@zufe.edu.cn

Abstract
Measuring the nonlinear dependence between random vectors and testing for their
statistical independence is a fundamental problem in statistics. One of the most popular dependence measures is the Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion (HSIC),
which has attracted increasing attention in recent years. However, most existing
works have focused on either fixed or very high-dimensional covariates. In this
work, we bridge the gap between these two scenarios and provide statistical insights
into the performance of HSIC when the dimensions grow at different rates. We first
show that, under the null hypothesis, the rescaled HSIC converges in distribution to
a standard normal distribution. Then we provide a general condition for the HSIC
based tests to have nontrivial power in high dimensions. By decomposing this
condition, we illustrate how the ability of HSIC to measure nonlinear dependence
changes with increasing dimensions. Moreover, we demonstrate that, depending
on the sample size, the covariate dimensions and the dependence structures within
covariates, the HSIC can capture different types of associations between random
vectors. We also conduct extensive numerical studies to validate our theoretical
results.

1

Introduction

Let x = (X1 , . . . , Xp )T ∈ Rp and y = (Y1 , . . . , Yq )T ∈ Rq be two random vectors. The problems of
measuring nonlinear dependence between x and y and testing for their independence are fundamental
and have a wide range of applications in statistics and machine learning. For example, dependence
measures can be applied in feature screening (Fan et al., 2020b), model checking (Clarke et al., 2018),
graphical models (Maathuis et al., 2018), and causal inference (Imbens & Rubin, 2015).
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

