Multi-Task Learning with Summary Statistics

Rui Duan
Department of Biostatistics
Harvard University
Boston, MA
rduan@hsph.harvard.edu

Parker Knight
Department of Biostatistics
Harvard University
Boston, MA
pknight@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
Multi-task learning has emerged as a powerful machine learning paradigm for
integrating data from multiple sources, leveraging similarities between tasks to
improve overall model performance. However, the application of multi-task learning to real-world settings is hindered by data-sharing constraints, especially in
healthcare settings. To address this challenge, we propose a flexible multi-task
learning framework utilizing summary statistics from various sources. Additionally,
we present an adaptive parameter selection approach based on a variant of Lepski’s
method, allowing for data-driven tuning parameter selection when only summary
statistics are available. Our systematic non-asymptotic analysis characterizes the
performance of the proposed methods under various regimes of the sample complexity and overlap. We demonstrate our theoretical findings and the performance
of the method through extensive simulations. This work offers a more flexible tool
for training related models across various domains, with practical implications in
genetic risk prediction and many other fields.

1

Introduction

The growing availability of extensive and intricate datasets presents an opportunity to integrate data
from multiple sources. Multi-task learning has emerged as a promising machine learning approach
that enables the simultaneous learning of multiple related models, leveraging shared structure between
tasks to enhance the performance on each task individually [36, 35]. In healthcare and biomedical
research, the practical application of multi-task learning is often hindered by data-sharing constraints,
which stem from concerns about the ownership and privacy of individual-level data [32, 8]. Patient
data in these domains is typically sensitive and less likely to be publicly available or shared across
study sites, limiting researchers’ access to individual-level data from different domains.
To overcome this limitation, researchers have increasingly integrated summary statistics into analysis
pipelines as a substitute for individual-level data [22, 13, 12]. Summary statistics are straightforward,
interpretable measures derived from raw data that can offer insights into data distribution, variability,
and relationships among variables. Furthermore, they can be aggregated across studies to facilitate
data integration and reused in various research projects. Recently, the use of summary statistics has
garnered interest in healthcare and biomedical research. For example, many genetic risk prediction
methods rely on summary-level statistics such as associations from Genome-wide Association Studies
(GWAS), Linkage Disequilibrium estimations (LD), and minor allele frequencies (MAFs) [6]. These
summary statistics can help predict an individual’s likelihood of developing specific diseases based
on their genetic profile.
Inspired by a potential use case in genetic risk prediction, we propose a multi-task learning framework
that enables simultaneous learning of multiple genetic risk prediction models using only publicly
available summary statistics. Our proposed framework can be used in the context of predicting
genetic risks for multiple traits leveraging potentially shared genetic pathways, and can also be used
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

