GPT4Tools: Teaching Large Language Model to Use
Tools via Self-instruction
Rui Yang1∗‡, Lin Song2∗†, Yanwei Li3 , Sijie Zhao2 , Yixiao Ge2 , Xiu Li1 , Ying Shan2
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Tencent AI Lab 3 Chinese University of Hong Kong
rayyang0116@gmail.com

ronnysong@tencent.com

The essential difference between humans and animals is that humans are capable of making and
using tools.
—Friedrich Engels

Abstract
This paper aims to efficiently enable Large Language Models (LLMs) to use multimodal tools. Advanced proprietary LLMs, such as ChatGPT and GPT-4, have
shown great potential for tool usage through sophisticated prompt engineering.
Nevertheless, these models typically rely on prohibitive computational costs and
publicly inaccessible data. To address these challenges, we propose the GPT4Tools
based on self-instruct to enable open-source LLMs, such as LLaMA and OPT, to
use tools. We generate an instruction-following dataset by prompting an advanced
teacher with various multi-modal contexts. By using the Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) optimization, our approach facilitates the open-source LLMs to solve a
range of visual problems, including visual comprehension and image generation.
Moreover, we provide a benchmark to evaluate the ability of LLMs to use tools,
which is performed in both zero-shot and fine-tuning ways. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on various language models, which
not only significantly improves the accuracy of invoking seen tools but also enables
the zero-shot capacity for unseen tools. The code and demo have been available at
https://github.com/AILab-CVC/GPT4Tools.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs), such as GPT-3 [1], InstructGPT [2], and GPT3.5 [3], have demonstrated substantial potential in the area of zero-shot learning and logical reasoning.
These models are typically trained on a large volume of text-only data, primarily sourced from the
internet. However, as promising as they may seem, these advanced proprietary LLMs [3, 4] have
significant limitations. One of the major hindrances is the high computational cost associated with
these models, which may not be affordable or accessible to many scenarios. Additionally, these
models typically depend on specialized data, such as source code and conversation history, which are
not easily available to the public.
Instead of solely focusing on language processing, many recent researches [5, 6] attempt to bridge the
gap between language models and multi-modal models. Intelligent agents like Visual ChatGPT [5]
and MMREACT [6] have made efforts to meet this goal by sophisticated prompt engineering. These
agents utilize a pre-defined template to create instructions that vision-language foundation models can
execute. Although these approaches have led to impressive results, the primary process of instruction
* Equal contribution. ‡ Work done during an internship at Tencent.
†

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

