CL-NeRF: Continual Learning of Neural Radiance
Fields for Evolving Scene Representation
Xiuzhe Wu⋄
Yang Wu†
†

Peng Dai⋄∗
Yan-Pei Cao‡

Weipeng Deng⋄∗ Handi Chen⋄
Ying Shan‡
Xiaojuan Qi⋄

⋄
The University of Hong Kong
Tencent AI Lab ‡ ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

Abstract
Existing methods for adapting Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) to scene changes
require extensive data capture and model retraining, which is both time-consuming
and labor-intensive. In this paper, we tackle the challenge of efficiently adapting
NeRFs to real-world scene changes over time using a few new images while retaining the memory of unaltered areas, focusing on the continual learning aspect
of NeRFs. To this end, we propose CL-NeRF, which consists of two key components: a lightweight expert adaptor for adapting to new changes and evolving
scene representations and a conflict-aware knowledge distillation learning objective
for memorizing unchanged parts. We also present a new benchmark for evaluating Continual Learning of NeRFs with comprehensive metrics. Our extensive
experiments demonstrate that CL-NeRF can synthesize high-quality novel views
of both changed and unchanged regions with high training efficiency, surpassing
existing methods in terms of reducing forgetting and adapting to changes. Code
and benchmark will be made available.

1

Introduction

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs), powerful models capable of synthesizing high-fidelity novel views
from multi-view images [2, 26, 7], play crucial roles in various applications including AR/VR and
autonomous driving simulators. However, real-world scenes constantly evolve over time, such as
a chair being removed from a room. To handle such changes, it is essential to develop adaptable
representations that can be continuously updated to reflect these changes accurately with minimal
data and computational cost. However, existing NeRF methods [2, 26, 7, 43, 41, 40] often require
a lot of new data and full retraining of the model to adapt to even minor local changes, which is
impractical and costly, especially for large-scale scenes e.g., city-scale scene.
In this paper, we study a novel efficient continual learning task for NeRF, where we aim to update a
scene’s NeRF using only a few new images (i.e., 10-20 images) that capture the scene changes over
time while preserving the memory of the unchanged areas (see Figure 1). A simple approach is to
fine-tune the NeRF with the new images, but this suffers from catastrophic forgetting of the unaltered
areas (see Figure 1). One might argue that using explicit 3D representations, [9, 22, 27], such as
Plenoxels [9], could mitigate this problem since the explicit 3D representation might not change for the
unchanged regions during fine-tuning. Nonetheless, our initial experiments suggest that forgetting still
occurs (refer to Figure 1). This is because the ray-based volumetric rendering formula [2, 26, 9, 22, 27]
propagates supervision signals to all voxels along a ray, which may affect other regions that share
voxels with the same ray. The most related work is dynamic NeRFs [17, 16, 30], which also model
dynamic changes using time-aware latent codes [17] or scene flows [19]. But it focuses on changes
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

