Performance Bounds for Policy-Based Average
Reward Reinforcement Learning Algorithms

Yashaswini Murthy
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
ymurthy2@illinois.edu

Mehrdad Moharrami
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
moharami@illinois.edu

R. Srikant
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
rsrikant@illinois.edu

Abstract
Many policy-based reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms can be viewed as
instantiations of approximate policy iteration (PI), i.e., where policy improvement
and policy evaluation are both performed approximately. In applications where the
average reward objective is the meaningful performance metric, discounted reward
formulations are often used with the discount factor being close to 1, which is
equivalent to making the expected horizon very large. However, the corresponding
theoretical bounds for error performance scale with the square of the horizon. Thus,
even after dividing the total reward by the length of the horizon, the corresponding
performance bounds for average reward problems go to infinity. Therefore, an open
problem has been to obtain meaningful performance bounds for approximate PI
and RL algorithms for the average-reward setting. In this paper, we solve this open
problem by obtaining the first finite-time error bounds for average-reward MDPs,
and show that the asymptotic error goes to zero in the limit as policy evaluation
and policy improvement errors go to zero.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning algorithms can be broadly classified into value-based methods and policybased methods. In the case of discounted-reward Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), value-based
methods such as Q-learning [WD92, Tsi94, JJS93, SB18, BT96], fitted value iteration [MS08] and
target network Q-learning [CCM22] can be viewed as approximately solving the fixed point of
the Bellman optimality equation to find the value function and an approximately optimal control
policy. In other words value iteration is approximately implemented for discounted reward MDPs
[Ber11, Ber12, Put14]. In policy-gradient methods [AKLM21], a gradient step is used to improve
the policy, somewhat similar to the policy improvement step in policy iteration for discounted-reward
MDPs. In a recent paper [CM22], it has been shown that many policy-based methods for discountedreward MDPs can be viewed as special cases of approximate policy iteration. The classical results on
approximate policy iteration [BT96] assume that the error in the policy evaluation and improvement
steps are constant, independent of the iteration. The key idea in [CM22] is to show that a simple
modification of the proof in [BT96] can be used to allow for iteration-dependent policy evaluation
and improvement errors, which is then used to make the connection to policy-based methods. Our
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

