Adaptive Algorithms for Relaxed
Pareto Set Identification
Cyrille Kone1
cyrille.kone@inria.fr

Emilie Kaufmann1
emilie.kaufmann@univ-lille.fr

Laura Richert2
laura.richert@u-bordeaux.fr
1

Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9198-CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
2
Univ. Bordeaux, Inserm, Inria, BPH, U1219, Sistm, F-33000 Bordeaux, France

Abstract
In this paper we revisit the fixed-confidence identification of the Pareto optimal
set in a multi-objective multi-armed bandit model. As the sample complexity to
identify the exact Pareto set can be very large, a relaxation allowing to output
some additional near-optimal arms has been studied. In this work we also tackle
alternative relaxations that allow instead to identify a relevant subset of the Pareto
set. Notably, we propose a single sampling strategy, called Adaptive Pareto Exploration, that can be used in conjunction with different stopping rules to take into
account different relaxations of the Pareto Set Identification problem. We analyze
the sample complexity of these different combinations, quantifying in particular
the reduction in sample complexity that occurs when one seeks to identify at most
k Pareto optimal arms. We showcase the good practical performance of Adaptive
Pareto Exploration on a real-world scenario, in which we adaptively explore several
vaccination strategies against Covid-19 in order to find the optimal ones when
multiple immunogenicity criteria are taken into account.

1

Introduction

In a multi-armed bandit model, an agent sequentially collects samples from several unknown distributions, called arms, in order to learn about these distributions (pure exploration), possibly under
the constraint to maximize the samples collected, viewed as rewards (regret minimization). These
objectives have been extensively studied for different types of univariate arms distributions [21]. In
this paper, we consider the less common setting in which arms are multi-variate distributions. We
are interested in the Pareto Set Identification (PSI) problem. In this pure exploration problem, the
agent seeks to identify the arms that are (Pareto) optimal, i.e. such that their expected values for all
objectives are not uniformly worse than those of another arm.
We formalize this as a fixed-confidence identification problem: in each round t the agent selects an arm
At using an adaptive sampling rule and observes a sample Xt 2 RD from the associated distribution.
It further uses an adaptive stopping rule ⌧ to decide when to stop sampling and output a set of arms Sb⌧
which is her guess for (an approximation of) the true Pareto set S ? . Given a risk parameter 2 (0, 1),
this guess should be correct with high probability, e.g. satisfy P(Sb⌧ = S ? ) 1
for exact Pareto
set identification, while requiring a small sample complexity ⌧ . This generalizes the well-studied
fixed-confidence Best Arm Identification (BAI) problem [8, 15, 10] to multiple objectives.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

