Dense and Aligned Captions (DAC) Promote
Compositional Reasoning in VL Models

Sivan Doveh1,2
Amit Alfassy1,5

Assaf Arbelle1
Roei Herzig1,3

Rameswar Panda4

Sivan Harary1

Donghyun Kim4,6

Paola Cascante-Bonilla7
Raja Giryes3

Shimon Ullman2

Rogerio Feris4

Leonid Karlinsky4

1

4

IBM Research, 2 Weizmann Institute of Science, 3 Tel-Aviv University,
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 5 Technion, 6 Korea University, 7 Rice University

Abstract
Vision and Language (VL) models offer an effective method for aligning representation spaces of images and text, leading to numerous applications such as
cross-modal retrieval, visual question answering, captioning, and more. However,
the aligned image-text spaces learned by all the popular VL models are still suffering from the so-called ‘object bias’ - their representations behave as ‘bags of
nouns’, mostly ignoring or downsizing the attributes, relations, and states of objects
described/appearing in texts/images. Although some great attempts at fixing these
‘compositional reasoning’ issues were proposed in the recent literature, the problem
is still far from being solved. In this paper, we uncover two factors limiting the VL
models’ compositional reasoning performance. These two factors are properties
of the paired VL dataset used for finetuning and pre-training the VL model: (i)
the caption quality, or in other words ‘image-alignment’, of the texts; and (ii) the
‘density’ of the captions in the sense of mentioning all the details appearing on the
image. We propose a fine-tuning approach for automatically treating these factors
leveraging a standard VL dataset (CC3M). Applied to CLIP, we demonstrate its
significant compositional reasoning performance increase of up to ∼ 27% over the
base model, up to ∼ 20% over the strongest baseline, and by 6.7% on average.

1

Introduction

Recently, with major discoveries in generative language [1–5] and vision [6, 7] modeling, and Vision
& Language (VL) alignment techniques [2, 8–12], we are getting closer than ever to attaining models
capable of complete understanding and knowledge of the surrounding world, as well as being capable
of acting w.r.t. this knowledge. The ‘eyes’ of these emerging systems are the VL models that
have been shown to exhibit strong performance in a wide range of applications, such as recognition
[8, 13], detection [14–16], segmentation [17–19], visual question-answering [9, 10], captioning
[9, 10] and many more. However, despite these great advances, the VL models are still known
to suffer from significant drawbacks in compositional reasoning - the ability to understand (and
properly reflect in the aligned VL representations) the non-object notions appearing on the images
and in the text captions, such as object attributes, states, and inter-object relations. This has been
publicized and extensively studied in several recent works that also propose metrics for analyzing this
phenomenon [20–22]. This drawback of VL models may lead to undesired biases and misconceptions
when using them as the ‘eyes’ of SOTA Large Language Models (LLMs) [23] to build the pinnacle
of today’s AI systems - multi-modal conversational AI [11, 12]. For example, Figure 1a, illustrates
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

