Most Neural Networks Are Almost Learnable
Amit Daniely
Hebrew University and Google
amit.daniely@mail.huji.ac.il

Nathan Srebro
TTI-Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Gal Vardi
TTI-Chicago and Hebrew University
galvardi@ttic.edu

Abstract
We present a PTAS for learning random constant-depth networks. We show that for
any√fixed ϵ > 0 and depth i, there is a poly-time algorithm that for any distribution
on d · Sd−1 learns random Xavier networks of depth i, up to an additive error of
¯ poly(ϵ−1 ) , where d¯ is
ϵ. The algorithm runs in time and sample complexity of (d)
the size of the network. For some cases of sigmoid and ReLU-like activations the
¯ polylog(ϵ−1 ) , resulting in a quasi-poly-time algorithm
bound can be improved to (d)
for learning constant depth random networks.

1

Introduction

One of the greatest mysteries surrounding deep learning is the discrepancy between its phenomenal
capabilities in practice and the fact that despite a great deal of research, polynomial-time algorithms
for learning deep models are known only for very restrictive cases. Indeed, state of the art results
are only capable of dealing with two-layer networks under assumptions on the input distribution and
the network’s weights. Furthermore, theoretical study shows that even with very naive architectures,
learning neural networks is worst-case computationally intractable.
In this paper, we contrast the aforementioned theoretical state of affairs, and show that, perhaps
surprisingly, even though constant-depth networks are completely out of reach from a worst-case
perspective, most of them are not as hard as one would imagine. That is, they are distribution-free
learnable in polynomial time up to any desired constant accuracy. This is the first polynomial-time
approximation scheme (PTAS) for learning neural networks of depth greater than 2 (see the related
work section for more details). Moreover, we show that the standard SGD algorithm on a ReLU
network can be used as a PTAS for learning random networks. The question of whether learning
random networks can be done efficiently was posed by Daniely et al. [15], and our work provides a
positive result in that respect.
In a bit more detail, we consider constant-depth random networks obtained using the √
standard Xavier
initialization scheme [22, 26], and any input distribution supported on the sphere d · Sd−1 . For
¯ poly(ϵ−1 ) , where d¯ is the network’s size
Lipschitz activation functions, our algorithm runs in time (d)
including the d input components, and ϵ is the desired accuracy. While this complexity is polynomial
for constant ϵ, we also consider the special cases of sigmoid and ReLU-like activations, where the
−1
bound can be improved to ( ¯
d)polylog(ϵ ) .
The main technical idea in our work is that constant-depth random neural networks with Lipschitz
activations can be approximated sufficiently well by low-degree polynomials. This result follows by
analyzing the network obtained by replacing each activation function with its polynomial approximation using Hermite polynomials. It implies that efficient algorithms for learning polynomials can be
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

