Higher-Order Uncoupled Dynamics Do Not Lead to
Nash Equilibrium — Except When They Do

Sarah A. Toonsi
Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois, USA
stoonsi2@illinois.edu

Jeff S. Shamma
Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois, USA
jshamma@illinois.edu

Abstract
The framework of multi-agent learning explores the dynamics of how an agent’s
strategies evolve in response to the evolving strategies of other agents. Of particular
interest is whether or not agent strategies converge to well-known solution concepts such as Nash Equilibrium (NE). In “higher-order” learning, agent dynamics
include auxiliary states that can capture phenomena such as path dependencies. We
introduce higher-order gradient play dynamics that resemble projected gradient
ascent with auxiliary states. The dynamics are “payoff-based” and “uncoupled” in
that each agent’s dynamics depend on its own evolving payoff and has no explicit
dependence on the utilities of other agents. We first show that for any polymatrix
game with an isolated completely mixed-strategy NE, there exist higher-order
gradient play dynamics that lead (locally) to that NE, both for the specific game
and nearby games with perturbed utility functions. Conversely, we show that for
any higher-order gradient play dynamics, there exists a game with a unique isolated
completely mixed-strategy NE for which the dynamics do not lead to NE. Finally,
we show that convergence to the mixed-strategy equilibrium in coordination games
can come at the expense of the dynamics being inherently internally unstable.

1

Introduction

The field of learning in games explores how game-theoretic solution concepts emerge as the outcome
of dynamic processes where agents adapt their strategies in response to the evolving strategies of other
agents (1; 2; 3; 4). There is a multitude of specific cases of learning dynamics/game combinations that
result in a range of outcomes, including convergence, limit cycles, chaotic behavior, and stochastic
stability (5; 6; 7; 8; 9; 10; 11; 12; 13). The emphasis in the literature is on simple adaptive procedures,
called "natural" dynamics in (14), that can result in various solution concepts (e.g., Nash equilibrium,
correlated equilibrium, and coarse correlated equilibrium). (A separate concern is the complexity
associated with such computations (e.g. (15; 16)).)
One “natural” restriction for learning is that the dynamics of one agent should not depend explicitly
on the utility functions of other agents. This restriction was referred to as “uncoupled” dynamics in
(17), where the authors constructed a specific anti-coordination matrix game for which no uncoupled
learning dynamics could converge to the unique mixed-strategy NE. The dynamics considered in
that setting were of fixed order, i.e., the order of the learning dynamics was restricted to match the
dimension of the strategy space. More recent work showed that specific instances of fixed order
uncoupled learning dynamics can never lead to mixed-strategy NE (18). Furthermore, there exist
games for which any fixed order learning dynamics are bound to have an initial condition starting
from which the dynamics do not converge to NE (19).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

