PoET: A generative model of protein families as
sequences-of-sequences

Timothy F. Truong Jr
OpenProtein.AI
NY, USA
ttruong@openprotein.ai

Tristan Bepler
OpenProtein.AI
NY, USA
tbepler@openprotein.ai

Abstract
Generative protein language models are a natural way to design new proteins
with desired functions. However, current models are either difficult to direct to
produce a protein from a specific family of interest, or must be trained on a large
multiple sequence alignment (MSA) from the specific family of interest, making
them unable to benefit from transfer learning across families. To address this, we
propose Protein Evolutionary Transformer (PoET), an autoregressive generative
model of whole protein families that learns to generate sets of related proteins as
sequences-of-sequences across tens of millions of natural protein sequence clusters.
PoET can be used as a retrieval-augmented language model to generate and score
arbitrary modifications conditioned on any protein family of interest, and can
extrapolate from short context lengths to generalize well even for small families.
This is enabled by a unique Transformer layer; we model tokens sequentially
within sequences while attending between sequences order invariantly, allowing
PoET to scale to context lengths beyond those used during training. In extensive
experiments on deep mutational scanning datasets, we show that PoET outperforms
existing protein language models and evolutionary sequence models for variant
function prediction across proteins of all MSA depths. We also demonstrate PoET’s
ability to controllably generate new protein sequences. 1

1

Introduction

Proteins carry out most of the biological functions at the molecular level of life. The function of
a protein is encoded by its specific amino acid sequence and the three-dimensional structure that
the sequence folds into. Engineering proteins for novel and enhanced function is a key problem in
pharmaceuticals and biotechnology and involves designing novel sequences or modifying existing
natural proteins for these purposes. Deep mutational scans and directed evolution experiments have
been used to successfully design novel proteins [1–3], but can be costly and difficult to implement,
which makes these experimental methods inapplicable for many proteins and functions of interest.
Accurate computational models of sequence-function relationships can narrow down the protein
sequence search space, reduce the need for expensive experiments, and enable the design of more
novel proteins and functions.
Protein language models have emerged as promising methods for understanding and designing
protein sequences [4–7]. In particular, generative models offer a natural way to produce new protein
designs. By training on large corpuses of natural protein sequences, these models learn evolutionary
constraints on sequence space. They can then be used either to generate realistic sequences directly
by sampling [8, 9], or to identify promising protein sequence variants by predicting the relative fitness
of the variants of interest using the sequence likelihoods as a proxy [4, 10, 11].
1

Code and pre-trained model weights are available at https://github.com/OpenProteinAI/PoET.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

