Generalization bounds for neural ordinary differential
equations and deep residual networks

Pierre Marion
Sorbonne Université, CNRS,
Laboratoire de Probabilités, Statistique et Modélisation, LPSM,
F-75005 Paris, France
pierre.marion@sorbonne-universite.fr

Abstract
Neural ordinary differential equations (neural ODEs) are a popular family of
continuous-depth deep learning models. In this work, we consider a large family
of parameterized ODEs with continuous-in-time parameters, which include timedependent neural ODEs. We derive a generalization bound for this class by a
Lipschitz-based argument. By leveraging the analogy between neural ODEs and
deep residual networks, our approach yields in particular a generalization bound
for a class of deep residual networks. The bound involves the magnitude of the
difference between successive weight matrices. We illustrate numerically how this
quantity affects the generalization capability of neural networks.

1

Introduction

Neural ordinary differential equations (neural ODEs, Chen et al., 2018) are a flexible family of
neural networks used in particular to model continuous-time phenomena. Along with variants such
as neural stochastic differential equations (neural SDEs, Tzen and Raginsky, 2019) and neural
controlled differential equations (Kidger et al., 2020), they have been used in diverse fields such
as pharmokinetics (Lu et al., 2021; Qian et al., 2021), finance (Gierjatowicz et al., 2020), and
transportation (Zhou et al., 2021). We refer to Massaroli et al. (2020) for a self-contained introduction
to this class of models.
Despite their empirical success, the statistical properties of neural ODEs have not yet been fully
investigated. What is more, neural ODEs can be thought of as the infinite-depth limit of (properly
scaled) residual neural networks (He et al., 2016a), a connection made by, e.g., E (2017); Haber
and Ruthotto (2017); Lu et al. (2017). Since standard measures of statistical complexity of neural
networks grow with depth (see, e.g., Bartlett et al., 2019), it is unclear why infinite-depth models,
including neural ODEs, should enjoy favorable generalization properties.
To better understand this phenomenon, our goal in this paper is to study the statistical properties of a
class of time-dependent neural ODEs that write
dHt = Wt σ(Ht )dt,

(1)

where Wt ∈ Rd×d is a weight matrix that depends on the time index t, and σ : R → R is an activation
function applied component-wise. Time-dependent neural ODEs were first introduced by Massaroli
et al. (2020) and generalize time-independent neural ODEs
dHt = W σ(Ht )dt,

(2)

as formulated in Chen et al. (2018), where W ∈ Rd×d now denotes a weight matrix independent
of t. There are two crucial reasons to consider time-dependent neural ODEs rather than the more
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

