E2PNet: Event to Point Cloud Registration with
Spatio-Temporal Representation Learning

Xiuhong Linab , Changjie Qiuab∗, Zhipeng Caic , Siqi Shenab†, Yu Zangab ,
Weiquan Liuab , Xuesheng Bianae , Matthias Müllerd , Cheng Wangab
a
Fujian Key Lab of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University (XMU), China.
b
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, XMU, China.
c
Intel Labs. d Apple Inc. e Yancheng Institute Of Technology, China.
{siqishen,cwang}@xmu.edu.cn, zhipeng.cai@intel.com
{xhlinxm,qiuchangjie,xsbian}@stu.xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Event cameras have emerged as a promising vision sensor in recent years due to
their unparalleled temporal resolution and dynamic range. While registration of 2D
RGB images to 3D point clouds is a long-standing problem in computer vision, no
prior work studies 2D-3D registration for event cameras. To this end, we propose
E2PNet, the first learning-based method for event-to-point cloud registration. The
core of E2PNet is a novel feature representation network called Event-Points-toTensor (EP2T), which encodes event data into a 2D grid-shaped feature tensor.
This grid-shaped feature enables matured RGB-based frameworks to be easily used
for event-to-point cloud registration, without changing hyper-parameters and the
training procedure. EP2T treats the event input as spatio-temporal point clouds.
Unlike standard 3D learning architectures that treat all dimensions of point clouds
equally, the novel sampling and information aggregation modules in EP2T are
designed to handle the inhomogeneity of the spatial and temporal dimensions.
Experiments on the MVSEC and VECtor datasets demonstrate the superiority
of E2PNet over hand-crafted and other learning-based methods. Compared to
RGB-based registration, E2PNet is more robust to extreme illumination or fast
motion due to the use of event data. Beyond 2D-3D registration, we also show the
potential of EP2T for other vision tasks such as flow estimation, event-to-image
reconstruction and object recognition. The source code can be found at: E2PNet.

1

Introduction

Computer vision aims to understand and reconstruct the world from 2D observations [2]. Establishing
the relationship (pose or correspondences) between 2D data and the 3D world is an important step
toward this goal. Conventional 2D-3D registration mostly relies on multi-view geometry [3, 4, 5].
Specifically, 3D (key) points are first triangulated [6, 5] using multiple images with proper disparity.
Subsequently, the corresponding 2D features [7, 8, 9] are attached to 3D points for subsequent 2D-3D
registration. This framework is by design image-based, which limits the use of other sensors that
obtain 3D point clouds directly (e.g., LiDAR, depth cameras).
Recently, learning-based methods for direct 2D-3D registration have been proposed [10, 1, 11, 12].
However, these methods require high-quality RGB or grayscale images which are not always feasible
∗
†

Xiuhong Lin and Changjie Qiu contribute equally to this work.
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

