AmadeusGPT: a natural language interface for
interactive animal behavioral analysis

Shaokai Ye
EPFL
Geneva, CH

Jessy Lauer
EPFL
Geneva, CH

Mu Zhou
EPFL
Geneva, CH

Alexander Mathis
EPFL
Geneva, CH

Mackenzie W. Mathis
EPFL
Geneva, CH
mackenzie.mathis@epfl.ch

Abstract
The process of quantifying and analyzing animal behavior involves translating the
naturally occurring descriptive language of their actions into machine-readable code.
Yet, codifying behavior analysis is often challenging without deep understanding of
animal behavior and technical machine learning knowledge. To limit this gap, we
introduce AmadeusGPT: a natural language interface that turns natural language
descriptions of behaviors into machine-executable code. Large-language models
(LLMs) such as GPT3.5 and GPT4 allow for interactive language-based queries
that are potentially well suited for making interactive behavior analysis. However,
the comprehension capability of these LLMs is limited by the context window
size, which prevents it from remembering distant conversations. To overcome the
context window limitation, we implement a novel dual-memory mechanism to
allow communication between short-term and long-term memory using symbols as
context pointers for retrieval and saving. Concretely, users directly use languagebased definitions of behavior and our augmented GPT develops code based on
the core AmadeusGPT API, which contains machine learning, computer vision,
spatio-temporal reasoning, and visualization modules. Users then can interactively
refine results, and seamlessly add new behavioral modules as needed. We used
the MABe 2022 behavior challenge tasks to benchmark AmadeusGPT and show
excellent performance. Note, an end-user would not need to write any code to
achieve this. Thus, collectively AmadeusGPT presents a novel way to merge
deep biological knowledge, large-language models, and core computer vision
modules into a more naturally intelligent system. Code and demos can be found at:
https://github.com/AdaptiveMotorControlLab/AmadeusGPT.

1

Introduction

Efficiently describing and analyzing animal behavior offers valuable insights into their motivations
and underlying neural circuits, making it a critical aspect of modern ethology, neuroscience, medicine,
and technology [1, 2, 3, 4]. Yet behavior is complex, often multi-faceted, and context-dependent,
making it challenging to quantify and analyze [5, 6]. The process of translating animal behavior into
machine-readable code often involves handcrafted features, unsupervised pre-processing, or neural
network training, which may not be intuitive to develop for life scientists.
To understand animal behavior one needs to complete a series of sub-tasks, such as obtaining animal
poses and identities, object locations and segmentation masks, and then specifying events or actions
the animal performs. Significant progress has been made in automating sub-tasks of behavioral
analysis such as animal tracking [7, 8, 9], object segmentation [10, 11], and behavior classification [3,
12, 13, 14, 4], yet behavioral phenotyping requires additional analysis and reasoning [2, 15, 16, 13,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

