Initialization-Dependent Sample Complexity
of Linear Predictors and Neural Networks
Roey Magen
Weizmann Institute of Science
roey.magen@weizmann.ac.il

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
We provide several new results on the sample complexity of vector-valued linear
predictors (parameterized by a matrix), and more generally neural networks. Focusing on size-independent bounds, where only the Frobenius norm distance of
the parameters from some fixed reference matrix W0 is controlled, we show that
the sample complexity behavior can be surprisingly different than what we may
expect considering the well-studied setting of scalar-valued linear predictors. This
also leads to new sample complexity bounds for feed-forward neural networks,
tackling some open questions in the literature, and establishing a new convex linear
prediction problem that is provably learnable without uniform convergence.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the sample complexity of learning function classes, where each function is
a composition of one or more transformations given by
x → f (W x) ,
where x is a vector, W is a parameter matrix, and f is some fixed Lipschitz function. A natural
example is vanilla feed-forward neural networks, where each such transformation corresponds to a
layer with weight matrix W and some activation function f . A second natural example are vectorvalued linear predictors (e.g., for multi-class problems), where W is the predictor matrix and f
corresponds to some loss function. A special case of the above are scalar-valued linear predictors
(composed with some scalar loss or nonlinearity f ), namely x → f (w⊤ x), whose sample complexity
is extremely well-studied. However, we are interested in the more general case of matrix-valued W ,
which (as we shall see) is far less understood.
Clearly, in order for learning to be possible, we must impose some constraints on the size of the
function class. One possibility is to bound the number of parameters (i.e., the dimensions of the
matrix W), in which case learnability follows from standard VC-dimension or covering number
arguments (see Anthony and Bartlett [1999]). However, an important thread in statistical learning
theory is understanding whether bounds on the number of parameters can be replaced by bounds on
the magnitude of the weights – say, a bound on some norm of W . For example, consider the class of
scalar-valued linear predictors of the form
{x → w⊤ x : w, x ∈ Rd , ∥w∥ ≤ B}
and inputs ||x|| ≤ 1, where || · || is the Euclidean norm. For this class, it is well-known that the
sample complexity required to achieve excess error ϵ (w.r.t. Lipschitz losses) scales as O(B 2 /ϵ2 ),
independent of the number of parameters d (e.g., Bartlett and Mendelson [2002], Shalev-Shwartz and
Ben-David [2014]). Moreover, the same bound holds when we replace w⊤ x by f (w⊤ x) for some
1-Lipschitz function f . Therefore, it is natural to ask whether similar size-independent bounds can be
obtained when W is a matrix, as described above. This question is the focus of our paper.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

