EDGI: Equivariant Diffusion for Planning with
Embodied Agents

Johann Brehmer∗
Qualcomm AI Research†
jbrehmer@qti.qualcomm.com
Pim de Haan
Qualcomm AI Research

Joey Bose∗ ‡
Qualcomm AI Research
Mila, McGill University
Taco Cohen
Qualcomm AI Research

Abstract
Embodied agents operate in a structured world, often solving tasks with spatial,
temporal, and permutation symmetries. Most algorithms for planning and modelbased reinforcement learning (MBRL) do not take this rich geometric structure
into account, leading to sample inefficiency and poor generalization. We introduce
the Equivariant Diffuser for Generating Interactions (EDGI), an algorithm for
MBRL and planning that is equivariant with respect to the product of the spatial
symmetry group SE(3), the discrete-time translation group Z, and the object
permutation group Sn . EDGI follows the Diffuser framework by Janner et al.
[2022] in treating both learning a world model and planning in it as a conditional
generative modeling problem, training a diffusion model on an offline trajectory
dataset. We introduce a new SE(3) × Z × Sn -equivariant diffusion model that
supports multiple representations. We integrate this model in a planning loop,
where conditioning and classifier guidance let us softly break the symmetry for
specific tasks as needed. On object manipulation and navigation tasks, EDGI is
substantially more sample efficient and generalizes better across the symmetry
group than non-equivariant models.

1

Introduction

Our world is awash with symmetries. The laws of physics are the same everywhere in space and
time—they are symmetric under translations and rotations of spatial coordinates as well as under
time shifts.4 In addition, whenever multiple identical or equivalent objects are labeled with numbers,
the system is symmetric with respect to a permutation of the labels. Embodied agents are exposed to
this structure, and many common robotic tasks exhibit spatial, temporal, or permutation symmetries.
The gaits of a quadruped are independent of whether it is moving East or North, and a robotic
gripper would interact with multiple identical objects independently of their labeling. However, most
reinforcement learning (RL) and planning algorithms do not take this rich structure into account.
While they have achieved remarkable success on well-defined problems after sufficient training, they
are often sample-inefficient [Holland et al., 2018] and lack robustness to changes in the environment.
To improve the sample efficiency and robustness of RL algorithms, we believe it is paramount
∗

Equal contribution, order determined through a game of table tennis
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
‡
Work done during an internship at Qualcomm AI Research
4
This is true in the approximately flat spacetime on Earth, as long as all velocities are much smaller than the
speed of light. A machine learning researcher who finds herself close to a black hole may disagree.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

