Probabilistic inverse optimal control for non-linear
partially observable systems disentangles perceptual
uncertainty and behavioral costs

Dominik Straub ∗
Centre for Cognitive Science
Technische Universität Darmstadt
dominik.straub@tu-darmstadt.de

Matthias Schultheis ∗
Centre for Cognitive Science
Technische Universität Darmstadt
matthias.schultheis@tu-darmstadt.de

Heinz Koeppl
Centre for Cognitive Science
Technische Universität Darmstadt
heinz.koeppl@tu-darmstadt.de

Constantin A. Rothkopf
Centre for Cognitive Science
Technische Universität Darmstadt
constantin.rothkopf@tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Inverse optimal control can be used to characterize behavior in sequential decisionmaking tasks. Most existing work, however, is limited to fully observable or linear
systems, or requires the action signals to be known. Here, we introduce a probabilistic approach to inverse optimal control for partially observable stochastic
non-linear systems with unobserved action signals, which unifies previous approaches to inverse optimal control with maximum causal entropy formulations.
Using an explicit model of the noise characteristics of the sensory and motor systems of the agent in conjunction with local linearization techniques, we derive an
approximate likelihood function for the model parameters, which can be computed
within a single forward pass. We present quantitative evaluations on stochastic
and partially observable versions of two classic control tasks and two human behavioral tasks. Importantly, we show that our method can disentangle perceptual
factors and behavioral costs despite the fact that epistemic and pragmatic actions
are intertwined in sequential decision-making under uncertainty, such as in active
sensing and active learning. The proposed method has broad applicability, ranging
from imitation learning to sensorimotor neuroscience.

1

Introduction

Inverse optimal control (IOC) is the problem of inferring an agent’s cost function and other properties
of their internal model from behavior. While IOC has been a fundamental task in artificial intelligence
and machine learning, particularly reinforcement learning (RL) and robotics, it has widespread
applicability in several scientific fields including behavioral economics, psychology, and neuroscience. For example, in cognitive science and sensorimotor neuroscience, optimal control models
have explained key properties of behavior, such as speed-accuracy trade-offs [1] or the minimum
intervention principle [2]. But, while researchers usually build an optimal control model and compare
its predictions to behavior, certain parameters of the agent’s internal processes are typically unknown.
For example, an agent might have uncertainty about their perception or experience intrinsic costs
of behavior. These parameters are different between individuals and inferring them from observed
behavior can help to understand internal tradeoffs between behavioral goals, perceptual and cognitive
∗

equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

