Scale-Space Hypernetworks for
Efficient Biomedical Imaging

Jose Javier Gonzalez Ortiz∗
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, MA
josejg@mit.edu

John Guttag
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, MA
guttag@mit.edu

Adrian V. Dalca
MIT CSAIL & MGH, HMS
Cambridge, MA
adalca@mit.edu

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are the predominant model used for a
variety of medical image analysis tasks. At inference time, these models are computationally intensive, especially with volumetric data. In principle, it is possible
to trade accuracy for computational efficiency by manipulating the rescaling factor
in the downsample and upsample layers of CNN architectures. However, properly
exploring the accuracy-efficiency trade-off is prohibitively expensive with existing
models. To address this, we introduce Scale-Space HyperNetworks (SSHN), a
method that learns a spectrum of CNNs with varying internal rescaling factors. A
single SSHN characterizes an entire Pareto accuracy-efficiency curve of models
that match, and occasionally surpass, the outcomes of training many separate
networks with fixed rescaling factors. We demonstrate the proposed approach in
several medical image analysis applications, comparing SSHN against strategies
with both fixed and dynamic rescaling factors. We find that SSHN consistently
provides a better accuracy-efficiency trade-off at a fraction of the training cost.
Trained SSHNs enable the user to quickly choose a rescaling factor that appropriately balances accuracy and computational efficiency for their particular needs at
inference.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are a widely-used and fundamental tool in medical image
analysis [2, 29, 37, 52, 58]. However, their practical deployment is hindered by their high computational requirements, especially in resource-constrained environments often encountered in medical
applications [65, 71]. This has led to techniques to lower computational demands while preserving
model accuracy. Popular strategies to address this issue encompass quantization [28, 33, 56], pruning [5, 19, 22, 35], and factoring [10, 34, 70], which focus on reducing the parameter count and the
size of the convolutional kernels. These techniques invariably introduce a trade-off between model
accuracy and computational efficiency. To understand this trade-off, developers need to train many
models and select the best performing one based on a balance of the aforementioned metrics.
In this work, we propose an alternative approach aimed at improving the computational efficiency of
prevalent medical imaging models, such as U-Net networks, which internally resize image features at
different scales [58]. While existing convolutional architectures usually reduce the spatial scale by
a fixed factor of two [24, 27, 40, 66], we study more general architectures that enable this factor to
vary continuously. By reducing the spatial dimensions of intermediate features, we can reduce the
computational cost at both training and inference stages, as the convolutional cost is directly linked
to the size of the intermediate spatial feature maps.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

