Video Timeline Modeling For News Story
Understanding
Meng Liu1 , Mingda Zhang2 , Jialu Liu2 , Hanjun Dai2 , Ming-Hsuan Yang2 , Shuiwang Ji1 ,
Zheyun Feng2 , Boqing Gong2
1

Texas A&M University
2
Google
{mengliu,sji}@tamu.edu,
{mingdaz,jialu,hadai,minghsuan,zfeng,bgong}@google.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel problem, namely video timeline modeling. Our
objective is to create a video-associated timeline from a set of videos related to
a specific topic, thereby facilitating the content and structure understanding of
the story being told. This problem has significant potential in various real-world
applications, for instance, news story summarization. To bootstrap research in
this area, we curate a realistic benchmark dataset, YouTube-News-Timeline, consisting of over 12k timelines and 300k YouTube news videos. Additionally, we
propose a set of quantitative metrics to comprehensively evaluate and compare
methodologies. With such a testbed, we further develop and benchmark several deep learning approaches to tackling this problem. We anticipate that this
exploratory work will pave the way for further research in video timeline modeling. The assets are available via https://github.com/google-research/
google-research/tree/master/video_timeline_modeling.

1

Introduction

As the amount of online video content continues to grow rapidly, organizing and browsing through
this massive collection of videos become increasingly challenging, especially for news videos. In the
modern world, the news is not just delivered through text and images, but also through videos. With
the increasing use of video streaming platforms and emerging short video applications, the number
of news videos is growing at an unprecedented pace. However, such a vast number of news videos
are usually unstructured. For example, there are tens of thousands of news videos about the topic
“COVID-19 Developments in 2020” on YouTube, and their relationships are not well presented. It
would be nearly impossible for users to watch such numerous unstructured videos, thereby hardly
obtaining an in-depth understanding of the news story.
In this work, we propose a video timeline modeling problem to help analyze and comprehend news
videos. In particular, as illustrated in Figure 1, our goal in this problem is to construct a videoassociated timeline that represents the critical events and their evolutionary order in a news story.
This is of great importance for a better, user-friendly understanding of news stories. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work to define and formulate this problem.
To facilitate research into this problem, we present a benchmark dataset, namely YouTube-NewsTimeline, by crawling timelines from the web and sourcing videos from the YouTube news video
corpus. YouTube-News-Timeline has over 12k timelines and covers over 300k YouTube news videos
in total. To quantitatively evaluate methods on the proposed dataset, we further design several metrics
to assess the complex prediction results. Aside from our contributions of the standard benchmark, we
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

