Paraphrasing evades detectors of AI-generated text,
but retrieval is an effective defense
Kalpesh Krishna♠♥∗ Yixiao Song♠ Marzena Karpinska♠
John Wieting♦ † Mohit Iyyer♠†
♠

University of Massachusetts Amherst, ♥ Google, ♦ Google DeepMind

{kalpeshk,jwieting}@google.com
yixiaosong@umass.edu {mkarpinska,miyyer}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
The rise in malicious usage of large language models, such as fake content creation and academic plagiarism, has motivated the development of approaches that
identify AI-generated text, including those based on watermarking or outlier detection. However, the robustness of these detection algorithms to paraphrases of
AI-generated text remains unclear. To stress test these detectors, we build a 11B
parameter paraphrase generation model (DIPPER) that can paraphrase paragraphs,
condition on surrounding context, and control lexical diversity and content reordering. Using DIPPER to paraphrase text generated by three large language models
(including GPT3.5-davinci-003) successfully evades several detectors, including
watermarking, GPTZero, DetectGPT, and OpenAI’s text classifier. For example,
DIPPER drops detection accuracy of DetectGPT from 70.3% to 4.6% (at a constant
false positive rate of 1%), without appreciably modifying the input semantics.
To increase the robustness of AI-generated text detection to paraphrase attacks, we
introduce a simple defense that relies on retrieving semantically-similar generations
and must be maintained by a language model API provider. Given a candidate
text, our algorithm searches a database of sequences previously generated by the
API, looking for sequences that match the candidate text within a certain threshold.
We empirically verify our defense using a database of 15M generations from a
fine-tuned T5-XXL model and find that it can detect 80% to 97% of paraphrased
generations across different settings while only classifying 1% of human-written
sequences as AI-generated. We open-source our models, code and data.1

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT [Schulman et al., 2022] exhibit an unprecedented
ability to write coherent and relevant long-form text in response to user-specified prompts. These abilities have sparked fears of malicious applications such as automatically generating fake news articles
or homework answers [Stokel-Walker, 2022]. To defend against these use cases, several algorithms
have recently been proposed to detect AI-generated text, including watermarking [Kirchenbauer
et al., 2023a], GPTZero [Tian, 2023], DetectGPT [Mitchell et al., 2023], and OpenAI’s text classifier [OpenAI, 2023a]. However, it remains unclear how robust these algorithms are to paraphrase
attacks, in which AI-generated text from an LLM is rewritten by another (smaller) model to convey
approximately2 the same meaning but using different word choice and syntax.
∗

Work done as a PhD student at UMass, and partially as a student researcher in Google Research.
John Wieting and Mohit Iyyer contributed equally as advisors.
1
https://github.com/martiansideofthemoon/ai-detection-paraphrases
2
We use the quasi-paraphrase definition of semantic equivalence [Bhagat and Hovy, 2013] in this paper.

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

