Can You Rely on Your Model Evaluation? Improving
Model Evaluation with Synthetic Test Data

Boris van Breugel∗
University of Cambridge
bv292@cam.ac.uk

Nabeel Seedat∗
University of Cambridge
ns741@cam.ac.uk

Fergus Imrie
UCLA
imrie@g.ucla.edu

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Evaluating the performance of machine learning models on diverse and underrepresented subgroups is essential for ensuring fairness and reliability in real-world
applications. However, accurately assessing model performance becomes challenging due to two main issues: (1) a scarcity of test data, especially for small
subgroups, and (2) possible distributional shifts in the model’s deployment setting, which may not align with the available test data. In this work, we introduce
3S Testing, a deep generative modeling framework to facilitate model evaluation
by generating synthetic test sets for small subgroups and simulating distributional
shifts. Our experiments demonstrate that 3S Testing outperforms traditional
baselines—including real test data alone—in estimating model performance on
minority subgroups and under plausible distributional shifts. In addition, 3S offers
intervals around its performance estimates, exhibiting superior coverage of the
ground truth compared to existing approaches. Overall, these results raise the
question of whether we need a paradigm shift away from limited real test data
towards synthetic test data.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Machine learning (ML) models are increasingly deployed in high-stakes and safetycritical areas, e.g. medicine or finance—settings that demand reliable and measurable performance
[1]. Failure to rigorously test systems could result in models at best failing unpredictably and at
worst leading to silent failures. Regrettably, such failures of ML are all too common [2–9]. Many
mature industries involve standardized processes to evaluate performance under various testing and
operating conditions [10]. For instance, automobiles use wind tunnels and crash tests to assess specific
components, whilst electronic component data sheets outline conditions where reliable operation is
guaranteed. Unfortunately, current evaluation approaches of supervised ML models do not have the
same level of detail and rigor.
The prevailing testing approach in ML is to evaluate only using average prediction performance
on a held-out test set. This can hide undesirable performance differences on a more granular level,
e.g. for small subgroups [2, 4, 5, 11, 12], low-density regions [13–15], and individuals [16–18].
Standard ML testing also ignores distributional shifts. In an ever-evolving world where ML models
are employed across borders, failing to anticipate shifts between train and deployment data can lead
to overestimated real-world performance [6–8, 19, 20].
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

