Augmentation-Free Dense Contrastive Knowledge
Distillation for Efficient Semantic Segmentation

Jiawei Fan∗
Intel Labs China
jiawei.fan@intel.com
Xiaolong Liu
HoloMatic Technology Co. Ltd.
liuxiaolong@holomatic.com

Chao Li
Intel Labs China
chao3.li@intel.com

Meina Song
BUPT
mnsong@bupt.edu.cn

Anbang Yao†
Intel Labs China
anbang.yao@intel.com

Abstract
In recent years, knowledge distillation methods based on contrastive learning
have achieved promising results on image classification and object detection
tasks. However, in this line of research, we note that less attention is paid to
semantic segmentation. Existing methods heavily rely on data augmentation
and memory buffer, which entail high computational resource demands when
applying them to handle semantic segmentation that requires to preserve highresolution feature maps for making dense pixel-wise predictions. In order to
address this problem, we present Augmentation-free Dense Contrastive Knowledge
Distillation (Af-DCD), a new contrastive distillation learning paradigm to train
compact and accurate deep neural networks for semantic segmentation applications. Af-DCD leverages a masked feature mimicking strategy, and formulates a
novel contrastive learning loss via taking advantage of tactful feature partitions
across both channel and spatial dimensions, allowing to effectively transfer dense
and structured local knowledge learnt by the teacher model to a target student
model while maintaining training efficiency. Extensive experiments on five mainstream benchmarks with various teacher-student network pairs demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach. For instance, the DeepLabV3-Res18|DeepLabV3MBV2 model trained by Af-DCD reaches 77.03%|76.38% mIOU on Cityscapes
dataset when choosing DeepLabV3-Res101 as the teacher, setting new performance records. Besides that, Af-DCD achieves an absolute mIOU improvement of
3.26%|3.04%|2.75%|2.30%|1.42% compared with individually trained counterpart
on Cityscapes|Pascal VOC|Camvid|ADE20K|COCO-Stuff-164K. Code is available
at https://github.com/OSVAI/Af-DCD.

1

Introduction

In computer vision, semantic segmentation is a mainstream dense prediction task aiming to assign the
corresponding class to every pixel of input images. Although fundamental models in this task have
achieved remarkable progress [1–3], the heavy computational burden and latency of these models
severely prohibit their deployment on resource-constrained devices. As a popular solution to this
bottleneck, Knowledge Distillation (KD) [4] aims to transfer the knowledge from large models to
light-weight ones. Considering KD in supervised semantic segmentation, teachers usually have
∗

This work was done when the first two authors were interns at Intel Labs China, supervised by Anbang Yao
who proposed the original idea and led the project.
†
Corresponding author.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

