Optimal Block-wise Asymmetric Graph Construction
for Graph-based Semi-supervised Learning

Zixing Song
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
New Territories, Hong Kong SAR
zxsong@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Yifei Zhang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
New Territories, Hong Kong SAR
yfzhang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Irwin King
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
New Territories, Hong Kong SAR
king@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Graph-based semi-supervised learning (GSSL) serves as a powerful tool to model
the underlying manifold structures of samples in high-dimensional spaces. It
involves two phases: constructing an affinity graph from available data and inferring
labels for unlabeled nodes on this graph. While numerous algorithms have been
developed for label inference, the crucial graph construction phase has received
comparatively less attention, despite its significant influence on the subsequent
phase. In this paper, we present an optimal asymmetric graph structure for the label
inference phase with theoretical motivations. Unlike existing graph construction
methods, we differentiate the distinct roles that labeled nodes and unlabeled nodes
could play. Accordingly, we design an efficient block-wise graph learning algorithm
with a global convergence guarantee. Other benefits induced by our method, such
as enhanced robustness to noisy node features, are explored as well. Finally, we
perform extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets to demonstrate
its superiority to the state-of-the-art graph construction methods in GSSL.

1

Introduction

Graph-based semi-supervised learning (GSSL) is a burgeoning research field [52, 9, 14, 63, 65, 62].
As a subclass of semi-supervised learning (SSL), GSSL exhibits promise since it encapsulates
the smoothness or manifold assumption, where samples with similar features are likely to share
the same label. GSSL methods begin by constructing an affinity graph, wherein nodes represent
samples, and weighted edges denote similarity between pairs of nodes. This process aligns with
the manifold assumption, implying that nodes connected by edges with large weights tend to have
the same label. Upon obtaining the affinity graph, various label inference algorithms such as label
propagation [85, 82, 25, 65] can be executed to predict labels for the unlabeled nodes.
Preliminary empirical studies [16] suggest that the quality of the affinity graph significantly influences
label prediction performance. However, the graph construction phase in GSSL has received less
scrutiny compared to the subsequent label inference phase. Constructing a high-quality graph presents
a challenge as its quality can only be assessed indirectly through postmortem verification via label
inference performance. Classic solutions such as the Radial Basis Function (RBF) Kernel [85] , kNN
graph [17], and b-matching [26], while simple, may exhibit low robustness against noise due to their
simplicity. More recent and complex methods, typically framed as optimization problems to find
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

