Ordering-based Conditions for Global Convergence
of Policy Gradient Methods

Jincheng Mei
Google DeepMind
jcmei@google.com

Bo Dai
Google DeepMind
bodai@google.com

Mohammad Ghavamzadeh
Amazon∗
ghavamza@amazon.com

Alekh Agarwal
Google Research
alekhagarwal@google.com

Csaba Szepesvári
Google DeepMind
University of Alberta
szepi@google.com

Dale Schuurmans
Google DeepMind
University of Alberta
daes@ualberta.ca

Abstract
We prove that, for finite-arm bandits with linear function approximation, the global
convergence of policy gradient (PG) methods depends on inter-related properties
between the policy update and the representation. First, we establish a few key
observations that frame the study: (i) Global convergence can be achieved under
linear function approximation without policy or reward realizability, both for the
standard Softmax PG and natural policy gradient (NPG). (ii) Approximation error
is not a key quantity for characterizing global convergence in either algorithm.
(iii) The conditions on the representation that imply global convergence are different between these two algorithms. Overall, these observations call into question
approximation error as an appropriate quantity for characterizing the global convergence of PG methods under linear function approximation. Second, motivated by
these observations, we establish new general results: (i) NPG with linear function
approximation achieves global convergence if and only if the projection of the
reward onto the representable space preserves the optimal action’s rank, a quantity
that is not strongly related to approximation error. (ii) The global convergence
of Softmax PG occurs if the representation satisfies a non-domination condition
and can preserve the ranking of rewards, which goes well beyond policy or reward
realizability. We provide experimental results to support these theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Policy gradient (PG) is a foundational concept in reinforcement learning (RL), centrally used in both
policy-based and actor-critic methods [25]. Despite the non-convexity of the policy optimization
objective [4], global convergence of PG methods has been recently established in the tabular case
for standard configurations such as the softmax parameterization [4, 22] and stochastic on-policy
sampling [20]. In practice, when an RL agent is faced with a problem with large state and/or action
spaces, function approximation is needed to generalize across related states and actions. The behavior
of PG methods in these settings is relatively under-explored. In this paper, we study this question for
the case of linear function approximation, and establish a surprising result that
the classical Softmax PG method converges whenever there exists an adequate linear function that
ranks actions in the same order as the ground-truth reward function.
∗

The work was done prior to joining Amazon, while the author was at Google Research.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

