Structured Semidefinite Programming
for Recovering Structured Preconditioners

Arun Jambulapati
Simons Institute∗
jmblpati@berkeley.edu

Christopher Musco
New York University
cmusco@nyu.edu

Kirankumar Shiragur
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard†
shiragur@stanford.edu

Jerry Li
Microsoft Research
jerrl@microsoft.com

Aaron Sidford
Stanford University
sidford@stanford.edu

Kevin Tian
University of Texas at Austin‡
kjtian@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We develop a general framework for finding approximately-optimal preconditioners
for solving linear systems. Leveraging this framework we obtain improved runtimes
for fundamental preconditioning and linear system solving problems including:
• Diagonal preconditioning. We give an algorithm which, given positive
definite K ∈ Rd×d with nnz(K) nonzero entries, computes an -optimal
e
diagonal preconditioner in time O(nnz(K)
· poly(κ? , −1 )), where κ? is the
optimal condition number of the rescaled matrix.
• Structured linear systems. We give an algorithm which, given M ∈ Rd×d
that is either the pseudoinverse of a graph Laplacian matrix or a constant
e 2 ) time.
spectral approximation of one, solves linear systems in M in O(d
Our diagonal preconditioning results improve state-of-the-art runtimes of Ω(d3.5 )
attained by general-purpose semidefinite programming, and our solvers improve
state-of-the-art runtimes of Ω(dω ) where ω > 2.3 is the current matrix multiplication constant. We attain our results via new algorithms for a class of semidefinite
programs (SDPs) we call matrix-dictionary approximation SDPs, which we leverage to solve an associated problem we call matrix-dictionary recovery.

1

Introduction

Preconditioning is a fundamental primitive in the theory and practice of numerical linear algebra,
optimization, and data science. Broadly, its goal is to improve conditioning properties (e.g., the range
of eigenvalues) of a matrix M by finding another matrix N which approximates the inverse of M
and is more efficient to construct and apply than computing M−1 . This strategy underpins a variety
of popular recently-developed tools, such as adaptive gradient methods for machine learning (e.g.,
Adagrad and Adam [DHS11, KB15]), and near-linear time solvers for combinatorially-structured
∗

Work completed at Stanford and the University of Washington.
Work completed at Stanford.
‡
Work completed at Stanford and Microsoft Research.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

