Uniform-in-Time Wasserstein Stability Bounds
for (Noisy) Stochastic Gradient Descent

Lingjiong Zhu1 , Mert Gürbüzbalaban2,3 , Anant Raj4,5 , Umut Şimşekli5
1: Dept. of Mathematics, Florida State University
2: Dept. of Management Science and Information Systems, Rutgers Business School
3: Center for Statistics and Machine Learning, Princeton University
4: Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
5: Inria Paris, CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University

Abstract
Algorithmic stability is an important notion that has proven powerful for deriving
generalization bounds for practical algorithms. The last decade has witnessed an
increasing number of stability bounds for different algorithms applied on different
classes of loss functions. While these bounds have illuminated various properties
of optimization algorithms, the analysis of each case typically required a different
proof technique with significantly different mathematical tools. In this study, we
make a novel connection between learning theory and applied probability and
introduce a unified guideline for proving Wasserstein stability bounds for stochastic
optimization algorithms. We illustrate our approach on stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) and we obtain time-uniform stability bounds (i.e., the bound does not
increase with the number of iterations) for strongly convex losses and non-convex
losses with additive noise, where we recover similar results to the prior art or extend
them to more general cases by using a single proof technique. Our approach is
flexible and can be generalizable to other popular optimizers, as it mainly requires
developing Lyapunov functions, which are often readily available in the literature.
It also illustrates that ergodicity is an important component for obtaining timeuniform bounds – which might not be achieved for convex or non-convex losses
unless additional noise is injected to the iterates. Finally, we slightly stretch our
analysis technique and prove time-uniform bounds for SGD under convex and
non-convex losses (without additional additive noise), which, to our knowledge, is
novel.

1

Introduction

With the development of modern machine learning applications, understanding the generalization
properties of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has become a major challenge in statistical learning
theory. In this context, the main goal is to obtain computable upper-bounds on the population risk
associated with the output of the SGD algorithm that is given as follows: F (θ) := Ex∼D [f (θ, x)],
where x ∈ X denotes a random data point, D is the (unknown) data distribution defined on the data
space X , θ denotes the parameter vector, and f : Rd × X → R is an instantaneous loss function.
In a practical setting, directly minimizing F (θ) is not typically possible as D is unknown; yet one
typically has access to a finite data set Xn = {x1 , . . . , xn } ∈ X n , where we assume each xi is
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) with the common distribution D. Hence, given Xn ,
Pn
one can then attempt to minimize the empirical risk F̂ (θ, Xn ) := n1 i=1 f (θ, xi ) as a proxy for
F (θ). In this setting, SGD has been one of the most popular optimization algorithms for minimizing
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

