Regret Minimization via Saddle Point Optimization

Johannes Kirschner
Department of Computer Science
University of Alberta
jkirschn@ualberta.ca

Seyed Alireza Bakhtiari
Department of Computer Science
University of Alberta
sbakhtia@ualberta.ca

Kushagra Chandak
Department of Computer Science
University of Alberta
kchandak@ualberta.ca

Volodymyr Tkachuk
Department of Computer Science
University of Alberta
vtkachuk@ualberta.ca

Csaba Szepesvári
Department of Computer Science
University of Alberta
szepesva@ualberta.ca

Abstract
A long line of works characterizes the sample complexity of regret minimization in sequential decision-making by min-max programs. In the corresponding
saddle-point game, the min-player optimizes the sampling distribution against
an adversarial max-player that chooses confusing models leading to large regret.
The most recent instantiation of this idea is the decision-estimation coefficient
(DEC), which was shown to provide nearly tight lower and upper bounds on the
worst-case expected regret in structured bandits and reinforcement learning. By reparametrizing the offset DEC with the confidence radius and solving the corresponding min-max program, we derive an anytime variant of the Estimation-To-Decisions
algorithm (A NYTIME -E2D). Importantly, the algorithm optimizes the explorationexploitation trade-off online instead of via the analysis. Our formulation leads
to a practical algorithm for finite model classes and linear feedback models. We
further point out connections to the information ratio, decoupling coefficient and
PAC-DEC, and numerically evaluate the performance of E2D on simple examples.

1

Introduction

Regret minimization is a widely studied objective in bandits and reinforcement learning theory [Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020a] that has inspired practical algorithms, for example, in noisy zero-order
optimization[e.g., Srinivas et al., 2010] and deep reinforcement learning [e.g., Osband et al., 2016].
Cumulative regret measures the online performance of the algorithm by the total loss suffered due to
choosing suboptimal decisions. Regret is unavoidable to a certain extent as the learner collects information to reduce uncertainty about the environment. In other words, a learner will inevitably face the
exploration-exploitation trade-off where it must balance collecting rewards and collecting information.
Finding the right balance is the central challenge of sequential decision-making under uncertainty.
More formally, denote by Π a decision space and O an observation space. Let M be a class of
models, where f = (rf , Mf ) ∈ M associated with a reward function rf : Π → R and observation
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

