Latent SDEs on Homogeneous Spaces

Sebastian Zeng, Florian Graf, Roland Kwitt
University of Salzburg, Austria
{sebastian.zeng, florian.graf, roland.kwitt}@plus.ac.at

Abstract
We consider the problem of variational Bayesian inference in a latent variable
model where a (possibly complex) observed stochastic process is governed by
the solution of a latent stochastic differential equation (SDE). Motivated by the
challenges that arise when trying to learn an (almost arbitrary) latent neural SDE
from data, such as efficient gradient computation, we take a step back and study a
specific subclass instead. In our case, the SDE evolves on a homogeneous latent
space and is induced by stochastic dynamics of the corresponding (matrix) Lie
group. In learning problems, SDEs on the unit n-sphere are arguably the most
relevant incarnation of this setup. Notably, for variational inference, the sphere not
only facilitates using a truly uninformative prior, but we also obtain a particularly
simple and intuitive expression for the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the
approximate posterior and prior process in the evidence lower bound. Experiments
demonstrate that a latent SDE of the proposed type can be learned efficiently
by means of an existing one-step geometric Euler-Maruyama scheme. Despite
restricting ourselves to a less rich class of SDEs, we achieve competitive or even
state-of-the-art results on various time series interpolation/classification problems.

1

Introduction

Learning models for the dynamic behavior of a system from a collection of recorded observation
sequences over time is of great interest in science and engineering. Applications can be found, e.g.,
in finance [5], physics [46] or population dynamics [2]. While the traditional approach of adjusting a
prescribed differential equation (with typically a few parameters) to an observed system has a long
history, the advent of neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs) [10] has opened the possibility
for learning (almost) arbitrary dynamics by parameterizing the vector field of an ODE by a neural
network. This has not only led to multiple works, e.g., [16; 27; 37; 60], elucidating various aspects of
this class of models, but also to extensions towards stochastic differential equations (SDEs) [26; 30;
34; 58; 59], where one parametrizes the drift and diffusion vector fields. Such neural SDEs can, by
construction, account for potential stochasticity in a system and offer increased flexibility, but also
come at the price of numerical instabilities, high computational/storage costs, or technical difficulties
when backpropagating gradients through the typically more involved numerical integration schemes.
While several recent developments to address these challenges exist, such as [30] or [26], it is important to note
that neural ODEs or SDEs are most often used in settings where they serve as a model for some sort of (unobserved) latent dynamics. Such latent ODE or latent SDE
models, cf. [10; 30; 48], hinge on the premise that the
available observations are determined by an underlying
continuous-time latent state (that might be subject to uncertainty). If one postulates that the observed dynamics Figure 1: Sample paths from a prior (left) and
are indeed governed by simpler latent dynamics that are posterior (right) process on the sphere. Initial
easier to model, the question naturally arises whether values are marked by .
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

