Convex and Non-convex Optimization Under
Generalized Smoothness
Haochuan Li∗
MIT
haochuan@mit.edu

Jian Qian*
MIT
jianqian@mit.edu

Alexander Rakhlin
MIT
rakhlin@mit.edu

Yi Tian
MIT
yitian@mit.edu

Ali Jadbabaie
MIT
jadbabai@mit.edu

Abstract
Classical analysis of convex and non-convex optimization methods often requires
the Lipschitz continuity of the gradient, which limits the analysis to functions
bounded by quadratics. Recent work relaxed this requirement to a non-uniform
smoothness condition with the Hessian norm bounded by an affine function of the
gradient norm, and proved convergence in the non-convex setting via gradient
clipping, assuming bounded noise. In this paper, we further generalize this
non-uniform smoothness condition and develop a simple, yet powerful analysis
technique that bounds the gradients along the trajectory, thereby leading to stronger
results for both convex and non-convex optimization problems. In particular,
we obtain the classical convergence rates for (stochastic) gradient descent and
Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method in the convex and/or non-convex setting
under this general smoothness condition. The new analysis approach does not
require gradient clipping and allows heavy-tailed noise with bounded variance in
the stochastic setting.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the following unconstrained optimization problem
minx∈X f (x),

(1)

where X ⊆ Rd is the domain of f . Classical textbook analyses [Nemirovskij and Yudin, 1983,
Nesterov, 2003] of (1) often require the Lipschitz smoothness condition, which assumes ∇2 f (x) ≤
L almost everywhere for some L ≥ 0 called the smoothness constant. This condition, however, is
rather restrictive and only satisfied by functions that are both upper and lower bounded by quadratic
functions.
Recently, Zhang et al. [2019] proposed the more general (L0 , L1 )-smoothness condition, which
assumes ∇2 f (x) ≤ L0 + L1 ∥∇f (x)∥ for some constants L0 , L1 ≥ 0, motivated by their
extensive language model experiments. This notion generalizes the standard Lipschitz smoothness
condition and also contains e.g. univariate polynomial and exponential functions. For non-convex and
(L0 , L1 )-smooth functions, they prove convergence of gradient descent (GD) and stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) with gradient clipping and also provide a complexity lower bound for constant-stepsize
GD/SGD without clipping. Based on these results, they claim gradient clipping or other forms of
adaptivity provably accelerate the convergence for (L0 , L1 )-smooth functions. Perhaps due to the
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

