Adaptive recurrent vision performs zero-shot
computation scaling to unseen difficulty levels

Vijay Veerabadran1∗ Srinivas Ravishankar1∗
Yuan Tang1† Ritik Raina1† Virginia R. de Sa1,2
1
Department of Cognitive Science, 2 Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093
vveeraba@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Humans solving algorithmic (or) reasoning problems typically exhibit solution
times that grow as a function of problem difficulty. Adaptive recurrent neural
networks have been shown to exhibit this property for various language-processing
tasks. However, little work has been performed to assess whether such adaptive
computation can also enable vision models to extrapolate solutions beyond their
training distribution’s difficulty level, with prior work focusing on very simple tasks.
In this study, we investigate a critical functional role of such adaptive processing
using recurrent neural networks: to dynamically scale computational resources
conditional on input requirements that allow for zero-shot generalization to novel
difficulty levels not seen during training using two challenging visual reasoning
tasks: PathFinder and Mazes. We combine convolutional recurrent neural networks
(ConvRNNs) with a learnable halting mechanism based on (Graves, 2016). We
explore various implementations of such adaptive ConvRNNs (AdRNNs) ranging from tying weights across layers to more sophisticated biologically inspired
recurrent networks that possess lateral connections and gating. We show that 1)
AdRNNs learn to dynamically halt processing early (or late) to solve easier (or
harder) problems, 2) these RNNs zero-shot generalize to more difficult problem
settings not shown during training by dynamically increasing the number of recurrent iterations at test time. Our study provides modeling evidence supporting the
hypothesis that recurrent processing enables the functional advantage of adaptively
allocating compute resources conditional on input requirements and hence allowing
generalization to harder difficulty levels of a visual reasoning problem without
training.

1

Introduction

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have emerged as a powerful tool for solving machine reasoning
tasks, demonstrating impressive performance across a variety of tasks that require processing of
sequential inputs. While recurrent processing is valuable for time-varying inputs, it can also be useful
for static inputs as recurrent networks have the ability to scale computation to varying difficulty levels
by varying the number of recurrent iterations. This can be helpful when different problems from the
same task family exhibit significant variations in complexity (consider mazes, for example). However,
conventional RNNs typically struggle to automatically generalize across different difficulty levels,
requiring retraining, fine-tuning, or human intervention to pick the number of recurrent iterations
needed. This limitation hampers their practical utility in real-world scenarios, since the span of
difficulty levels seen during training is finite.
∗

Equal contribution

†

Work done while at UC San Diego

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

