Differentiable Neuro-Symbolic Reasoning on
Large-Scale Knowledge Graphs

Shengyuan Chen
Department of Computing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hung Hom, Hong Kong SAR
shengyuan.chen@connect.polyu.hk

Yunfeng Cai
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10 Xibeiwang East Rd., Beijing, China
caiyunfeng@baidu.com

Huang Fang
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10 Xibeiwang East Rd., Beijing, China
fanghuang@baidu.com

Xiao Huang
Department of Computing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hung Hom, Hong Kong SAR
xiaohuang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Mingming Sun
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10 Xibeiwang East Rd., Beijing, China
sunmingming01@baidu.com

Abstract
Knowledge graph (KG) reasoning utilizes two primary techniques, i.e., rule-based
and KG-embedding based. The former provides precise inferences, but inferring
via concrete rules is not scalable. The latter enables efficient reasoning at the cost
of ambiguous inference accuracy. Neuro-symbolic reasoning seeks to amalgamate
the advantages of both techniques. The crux of this approach is replacing the
predicted existence of all possible triples (i.e., truth scores inferred from rules)
with a suitable approximation grounded in embedding representations. However,
constructing an effective approximation of all possible triples’ truth scores is a
challenging task, because it needs to balance the tradeoff between accuracy and
efficiency, while compatible with both the rule-based and KG-embedding models.
To this end, we proposed a differentiable framework - DiffLogic. Instead of
directly approximating all possible triples, we design a tailored filter to adaptively
select essential triples based on the dynamic rules and weights. The truth scores
assessed by KG-embedding are continuous, so we employ a continuous Markov
logic network named probabilistic soft logic (PSL). It employs the truth scores of
essential triples to assess the overall agreement among rules, weights, and observed
triples. PSL enables end-to-end differentiable optimization, so we can alternately
update embedding and weighted rules. On benchmark datasets, we empirically
show that DiffLogic surpasses baselines in both effectiveness and efficiency.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graph (KG) reasoning refers to the process of using existing triples in a KG to infer new
knowledge that is not explicitly stated in the original KG (Safavi & Koutra, 2020). For instance, if
we know that (Paris, is_the_capital_of, France) and (France, is_a_country_in, Europe), we can infer
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

