Generalization in the Face of Adaptivity:
A Bayesian Perspective
Moshe Shenfeld
Department of Computer Science
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
moshe.shenfeld@mail.huji.ac.il

Katrina Ligett
Department of Computer Science
Federmann Center for the Study of Rationality
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
katrina@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Repeated use of a data sample via adaptively chosen queries can rapidly lead to
overfitting, wherein the empirical evaluation of queries on the sample significantly
deviates from their mean with respect to the underlying data distribution. It
turns out that simple noise addition algorithms suffice to prevent this issue, and
differential privacy-based analysis of these algorithms shows that they can handle
an asymptotically optimal number of queries. However, differential privacy’s
worst-case nature entails scaling such noise to the range of the queries even for
highly-concentrated queries, or introducing more complex algorithms.
In this paper, we prove that straightforward noise-addition algorithms already
provide variance-dependent guarantees that also extend to unbounded queries. This
improvement stems from a novel characterization that illuminates the core problem
of adaptive data analysis. We show that the harm of adaptivity results from the
covariance between the new query and a Bayes factor-based measure of how much
information about the data sample was encoded in the responses given to past
queries. We then leverage this characterization to introduce a new data-dependent
stability notion that can bound this covariance.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen growing recognition of the role of adaptivity in causing overfitting and thereby
reducing the accuracy of the conclusions drawn from data. Intuitively, allowing a data analyst to
adaptively choose the queries that she issues potentially leads to misleading conclusions, because the
results of prior queries might encode information that is specific to the available data sample and not
relevant to the underlying distribution from which it was drawn. As a result, future queries might
then be chosen to leverage these sample-specific properties, giving answers on the sample that differ
wildly from the values of those queries on the data distribution. Such adaptivity has been blamed, in
part, for the current reproducibility crisis in the data-driven sciences [Ioannidis, 2005, Gelman and
Loken, 2014].
A series of works catalyzed by Dwork et al. [2015] recently established a formal framework for
understanding and analyzing adaptivity in data analysis, and introduced a general toolkit for provably
preventing the harms of choosing queries adaptively—that is, as a function of the results of previous
queries. This line of work has established that enforcing that computations obey a constraint
of differential privacy [Dwork et al., 2006]—which one can interpret as a robustness or stability
requirement on computations—provably limits the extent to which adaptivity can cause overfitting.
Practically, for simple numerical computations, these results translate into adding a level of noise to
the query results that would be sufficient to ensure worst-case stability of the worst-case query on
the worst-case dataset. In particular, when analyzed using differential privacy, simple noise-addition
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

