Unsupervised Behavior Extraction via Random Intent
Priors
Hao Hu1∗, Yiqin Yang2∗, Jianing Ye1 , Ziqing Mai1 , Chongjie Zhang3
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis
{huh22, yangyiqi19, yejn21, maizq21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
chongjie@wustl.edu
1

Abstract
Reward-free data is abundant and contains rich prior knowledge of human behaviors, but it is not well exploited by offline reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms.
In this paper, we propose UBER, an unsupervised approach to extract useful behaviors from offline reward-free datasets via diversified rewards. UBER assigns
different pseudo-rewards sampled from a given prior distribution to different agents
to extract a diverse set of behaviors, and reuse them as candidate policies to facilitate the learning of new tasks. Perhaps surprisingly, we show that rewards generated
from random neural networks are sufficient to extract diverse and useful behaviors,
some even close to expert ones. We provide both empirical and theoretical evidence
to justify the use of random priors for the reward function. Experiments on multiple
benchmarks showcase UBER’s ability to learn effective and diverse behavior sets
that enhance sample efficiency for online RL, outperforming existing baselines. By
reducing reliance on human supervision, UBER broadens the applicability of RL
to real-world scenarios with abundant reward-free data.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning has made substantial advances in various areas like computer vision and
natural language processing (OpenAI, 2023; Caron et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020) since it leverages
large-scale data without the need of human supervision. Offline reinforcement learning has emerged
as a promising framework for learning sequential policies from pre-collected datasets (Kumar et al.,
2020; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Ma et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2022), but it is not able to
directly take advantage of unsupervised data, as such data lacks reward signal for learning and often
comes from different tasks and different scenarios. Nonetheless, reward-free data like experience
from human players and corpora of human conversations is abundant while containing rich behavioral
information, and incorporating them into reinforcement learning has a huge potential to help improve
data efficiency and achieve better generalization.
How can we effectively utilize the behavioral information in unsupervised offline data for rapid online
learning? In online settings, Eysenbach et al. (2018); Sharma et al. (2019) investigate the extraction of
diverse skills from reward-free online environments by maximizing diversity objectives. Meanwhile,
in offline settings, a rich body of literature exists that focuses on leveraging the dynamic information
from reward-free datasets (Yu et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2023). However, the former approach is not
directly applicable to offline datasets, while the latter approach overlooks the behavioral information
in the dataset. Ajay et al. (2020); Singh et al. (2020) employ generative models to extract behaviors
* Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

