Temporal Conditioning Spiking Latent Variable
Models of the Neural Response to Natural Visual
Scenes
Gehua Ma
College of Computer Science and Technology
Zhejiang University
gehuama@icloud.com

Runhao Jiang
College of Computer Science and Technology
Zhejiang University
RhJiang@zju.edu.cn

Rui Yan
College of Computer Science and Technology
Zhejiang University of Technology
ryan@zjut.edu.cn

Huajin Tang∗
College of Computer Science and Technology
Zhejiang University

Abstract
Developing computational models of neural response is crucial for understanding sensory processing and neural computations. Current state-of-the-art neural
network methods use temporal filters to handle temporal dependencies, resulting
in an unrealistic and inflexible processing paradigm. Meanwhile, these methods
target trial-averaged firing rates and fail to capture important features in spike
trains. This work presents the temporal conditioning spiking latent variable models
(TeCoS-LVM) to simulate the neural response to natural visual stimuli. We use
spiking neurons to produce spike outputs that directly match the recorded trains.
This approach helps to avoid losing information embedded in the original spike
trains. We exclude the temporal dimension from the model parameter space and introduce a temporal conditioning operation to allow the model to adaptively explore
and exploit temporal dependencies in stimuli sequences in a natural paradigm.
We show that TeCoS-LVM models can produce more realistic spike activities
and accurately fit spike statistics than powerful alternatives. Additionally, learned
TeCoS-LVM models can generalize well to longer time scales. Overall, while
remaining computationally tractable, our model effectively captures key features of
neural coding systems. It thus provides a useful tool for building accurate predictive
computational accounts for various sensory perception circuits.

1

Introduction

Building precise computational models of neural response to natural visual stimuli is a fundamental
scientific problem in sensory neuroscience. These models can offer insights into neural circuit
computations, reveal new mechanisms, and validate theoretical predictions [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. However,
constructing such models is challenging due to the complex nonlinear processes involved in neural
coding, such as synaptic transmission and spiking dynamics. For modeling retinal responses, early
attempts using linear-nonlinear (LN) models and generalized linear models (GLMs) were successful
with simple data such as white noise [2, 7] but fell short with more complex stimuli like natural visual
scenes [8, 9]. Artificial neural networks (ANNs), which are powerful function approximators and
loosely resemble biological neurons and architectures [10, 11], have shown promise in modeling
∗

Correspondence: htang@zju.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

