Goal-Conditioned Predictive Coding for Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Zilai Zeng
Brown University

Ce Zhang
Brown University

Shijie Wang
Brown University

Chen Sun
Brown University

Abstract
Recent work has demonstrated the effectiveness of formulating decision making as
supervised learning on offline-collected trajectories. Powerful sequence models,
such as GPT or BERT, are often employed to encode the trajectories. However, the
benefits of performing sequence modeling on trajectory data remain unclear. In
this work, we investigate whether sequence modeling has the ability to condense
trajectories into useful representations that enhance policy learning. We adopt a
two-stage framework that first leverages sequence models to encode trajectory-level
representations, and then learns a goal-conditioned policy employing the encoded
representations as its input. This formulation allows us to consider many existing
supervised offline RL methods as specific instances of our framework. Within
this framework, we introduce Goal-Conditioned Predictive Coding (GCPC), a
sequence modeling objective that yields powerful trajectory representations and
leads to performant policies. Through extensive empirical evaluations on AntMaze,
FrankaKitchen and Locomotion environments, we observe that sequence modeling
can have a significant impact on challenging decision making tasks. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that GCPC learns a goal-conditioned latent representation encoding
the future trajectory, which enables competitive performance on all three benchmarks. Our code is available at https://brown-palm.github.io/GCPC/.

1

Introduction

Goal-conditioned imitation learning [13, 15, 20] has recently emerged as a promising approach to
solve offline reinforcement learning problems. Instead of relying on value-based methods, they
directly learn a policy that maps states and goals (e.g. expected returns, or target states) to the actions.
This is achieved by supervised learning on offline collected trajectories (i.e. sequences of state, action,
and reward triplets). This learning paradigm enables the resulting framework to avoid bootstrapping
for reward propagation, a member of the “Deadly Triad” [45] of RL which is known to lead to unstable
optimization when combining with function approximation and off-policy learning, and also allows
the model to leverage large amounts of collected trajectories and demonstrations. The emergence of
RL as supervised learning on trajectory data coincides with the recent success of the Transformer
architecture [46, 20] and its applications to sequence modeling, such as GPT [8] for natural language
and VPT [3] for videos. Indeed, several recent works have demonstrated the effectiveness of sequence
modeling for offline RL [10, 27, 34, 44, 49, 9, 42]. Most of these approaches apply the Transformer
architecture to jointly learn the trajectory representation and the policy. When the sequence models
are unrolled into the future, they can also serve as “world models” [21, 22] for many RL applications.
By leveraging advanced sequence modeling objectives from language and visual domains [11, 4, 24],
such methods have shown competitive performance in various challenging tasks [16, 5].
Despite the enthusiasm and progress, the necessity of sequence modeling for offline reinforcement
learning has been questioned by recent work [15]: With a simple but properly tuned neural architecture
(e.g. a multilayer perceptron), the trained agents can achieve competitive performance on several
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

