Minimum norm interpolation by perceptra:
Explicit regularization and implicit bias

Jiyoung Park
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
wldyddl5510@tamu.edu

Ian Pelakh
Department of Mathematics
Iowa State University
ispelakh@iastate.edu

Stephan Wojtowytsch
Department of Mathematics
University of Pittsburgh
s.woj@pitt.edu

Abstract
We investigate how shallow ReLU networks interpolate between known regions.
Our analysis shows that empirical risk minimizers converge to a minimum norm
interpolant as the number of data points and parameters tends to infinity when
a weight decay regularizer is penalized with a coefficient which vanishes at a
precise rate as the network width and the number of data points grow. With and
without explicit regularization, we numerically study the implicit bias of common
optimization algorithms towards known minimum norm interpolants.

1

Introduction

Modern neural networks mostly operate in an overparametrized regime, i.e. they possess more tunable
parameters than the number of data points contributing to the loss function. Safran and Shamir
[2018a], E et al. [2019b], Du et al. [2018], Chizat and Bach [2018] associate overparametrization with
better training properties, and Belkin et al. [2019, 2020] find it to enhance statistical generalization
(see also [Loog et al., 2020] for historical context). For many architectures, overparametrization
leads to the ability to fit any values yi at a given set of data points {x1 , . . . , xn }, and Cooper [2018]
shows that generically, the set of weights for which the neural network interpolates prescribed values
is a submanifold of high dimension and co-dimension in parameter space. Which solution on the
manifold is dynamically chosen by an optimization algorithm, and which solutions have favorable
generalization properties, is an active area of research in theoretical machine learning.
Current practice is to estimate a model’s generalization to previously unseen data by assessing its
performance on a hold-out set (a posteriori error estimate) or by using uniform estimates on the
generalization of all elements of a function class (a priori estimate if the function class is encoded
ahead of time by explicit regularization, a posteriori if membership is determined after optimization).
Neither approach yields information on what a neural network does outside the support of the data
distribution, a topic of great interest for the study of distributional shift and adversarial stability.
The main contribution of this work is split between two complementary lines of investigation:
1. We prove that neural network minimizers of regularized empirical risk functionals converge
to minimum norm interpolants of a given target function in an infinite parameter limit
(Section 2). Our result improves previous works to more general settings (See Remark 2.2).
2. Training a neural network generally corresponds to solving a non-convex minimization
problem. While we provide convergence guarantees for empirical risk minimizers, in
general there is no guarantee that a training algorithm finds a global minimizer of an
empirical risk functional. Even if convergence holds, it is unclear which minimizer is
selected (in the overparametrized regime, where the set of minimizers is a high-dimensional
manifold). In settings where the minimum norm interpolant is known (Section 3), we
compare numerical solutions to theoretical predictions to better understand (1) the predictive
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

