Towards Efficient Pre-Trained Language Model via
Feature Correlation Distillation
Kun Huang1

Xin Guo1 Meng Wang1∗
Ant Group
{hunterkun.hk,darren.wm,bangzhu.gx}@antgroup.com
1

Abstract
Knowledge Distillation (KD) has emerged as a promising approach for compressing
large Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs). The performance of KD relies on
how to effectively formulate and transfer the knowledge from the teacher model
to the student model. Prior arts mainly focus on directly aligning output features
from the transformer block, which may impose overly strict constraints on the
student model’s learning process and complicate the training process by introducing
extra parameters and computational cost. Moreover, our analysis indicates that the
different relations within self-attention, as adopted in other works, involves more
computation complexities and can easily be constrained by the number of heads,
potentially leading to suboptimal solutions. To address these issues, we propose a
novel approach that builds relationships directly from output features. Specifically,
we introduce token-level and sequence-level relations concurrently to fully exploit
the knowledge from the teacher model. Furthermore, we propose a correlationbased distillation loss to alleviate the exact match properties inherent in traditional
KL divergence or MSE loss functions. Our method, dubbed FCD, presents a
simple yet effective method to compress various architectures (BERT, RoBERTa,
and GPT) and model sizes (base-size and large-size). Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that our distilled, smaller language models significantly surpass
existing KD methods across various NLP tasks.

1

Introduction

Past few years have witnessed a rapid development of pre-trained language models (PLMs) thanks to
their effectiveness across a wide range of natural language processing tasks. Pre-trained language
models, such as BERT Devlin et al. [2018], RoBERTa Liu et al. [2019], and GPT-2 Radford et al.
[2019], learn contextualized text representations by predicting words given their context using large
scale text corpora, and can be fine-tuned with additional task-specific layers to adapt to downstream
tasks. However, the excellent capability for various NLP tasks comes at demaning huge resources and
large memory footprints. For example, the BERTBASE model contains about 110M parameters and
12 Transformer Vaswani et al. [2017] layers, which prevents these transformer-based models from
being finetuned and deployed on resource-constrained devices and real-time applications. Recent
studies Kovaleva et al. [2019], Voita et al. [2019] indicate that redundancy exists in the original PLMs.
Therefore, a series of attempts Chung et al. [2020], Wu et al. [2020], Wang et al. [2020c], Gordon et al.
[2020a], Tang et al. [2019], Aguilar et al. [2019] have been made to review the techniques for effective
compression of the pre-trained heavy transformers without compromising the performance, of which
knowledge distillation is considered to be a practical paradigm, Typically, knowledge distillation
techniques aims at effectively transferring the dark knowledge embedded in a large teacher network
to boost the performance of the smaller student network during training. Once trained, this compact
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

