On skip connections and normalisation layers in deep
optimisation

Lachlan E. MacDonald∗
Mathematical Institute for Data Science
Johns Hopkins University
lemacdonald@protonmail.com
Jack Valmadre
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
University of Adelaide

Hemanth Saratchandran
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
University of Adelaide

Simon Lucey
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
University of Adelaide

Abstract
We introduce a general theoretical framework, designed for the study of gradient
optimisation of deep neural networks, that encompasses ubiquitous architecture
choices including batch normalisation, weight normalisation and skip connections.
Our framework determines the curvature and regularity properties of multilayer
loss landscapes in terms of their constituent layers, thereby elucidating the roles
played by normalisation layers and skip connections in globalising these properties.
We then demonstrate the utility of this framework in two respects. First, we give
the only proof of which we are aware that a class of deep neural networks can be
trained using gradient descent to global optima even when such optima only exist
at infinity, as is the case for the cross-entropy cost. Second, we identify a novel
causal mechanism by which skip connections accelerate training, which we verify
predictively with ResNets on MNIST, CIFAR10, CIFAR100 and ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Deep, overparameterised neural networks are efficiently trainable to global optima using simple first
order methods. That this is true is immensely surprising from a theoretical perspective: modern
datasets and deep neural network architectures are so complex and irregular that they are essentially
opaque from the perspective of classical (convex) optimisation theory. A recent surge in inspired
theoretical works [22, 14, 13, 1, 52, 51, 36, 28, 29, 33, 32] has elucidated this phenomenon, showing
linear convergence of gradient descent on certain classes of neural networks, with certain cost
functions, to global optima. The formal principles underlying these works are identical. By taking
width sufficiently large, one guarantees uniform bounds on curvature (via a Lipschitz gradientstype property) and regularity (via a Polyak-Łojasiewicz-type inequality) in a neighbourhood of
initialisation. Convergence to a global optimum in that neighbourhood then follows from a wellknown chain of estimates [23].
Despite significant progress, the theory of deep learning optimisation extant in the literature presents
at least three significant shortcomings:
∗

Most done while at the Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

