The Quantization Model of Neural Scaling

Eric J. Michaud∗, Ziming Liu, Uzay Girit, and Max Tegmark
MIT & IAIFI

Abstract
We propose the Quantization Model of neural scaling laws, explaining both the
observed power law dropoff of loss with model and data size, and also the sudden
emergence of new capabilities with scale. We derive this model from what we call
the Quantization Hypothesis, where network knowledge and skills are “quantized”
into discrete chunks (quanta). We show that when quanta are learned in order of
decreasing use frequency, then a power law in use frequencies explains observed
power law scaling of loss. We validate this prediction on toy datasets, then study
how scaling curves decompose for large language models. Using language model
gradients, we automatically decompose model behavior into a diverse set of skills
(quanta). We tentatively find that the frequency at which these quanta are used
in the training distribution roughly follows a power law corresponding with the
empirical scaling exponent for language models, a prediction of our theory.2

1

Introduction

In the aggregate, larger neural networks trained on more data perform better than smaller neural
networks trained on less data, in a predictable way. Across a range of studies, mean test loss has been
observed to decrease as a power law in both the number of network parameters (L ∝ N −αN ) and
the number of training samples (L ∝ D−αD ) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Although aggregate performance
changes smoothly with scale, when particular capabilities are examined, larger models often have
emergent abilities, i.e., qualitatively different performance than smaller models [8, 9]. Understanding
and reconciling both facets of scaling – the predictable power law decrease in loss and the emergence
of new capabilities at scale – is of both theoretical and practical interest [10]. Understanding how
scaling changes what neural networks learn is entangled with core questions: what are deep neural
networks doing internally, and will they will continue to improve with scale?
Recent studies of the internals of neural networks have found a variety of impressive algorithms
learned by gradient descent [11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. As more work is put into understanding the structures
learned by neural networks (the task of mechanistic interpretability), we may find more and more
circuits [11, 16] in models, intelligible internal algorithms for accomplishing prediction in specific
contexts. Can such analysis be scaled up to frontier models [17]? Two assumptions which, if
true, would make us more optimistic about mechanistically understanding large models include (1)
decomposability/modularity/sparsity [18, 19, 20, 21] – that large models are decomposable into parts,
and only a small number of these parts are relevant to the model’s behavior on any given sample
and (2) universality [22, 11, 23, 24] – that similar structures recur across models of increasing size.
Recently, Olsson et al. [25] found encouraging evidence for universality of “induction heads” across
LLMs and found that these emerge in a discrete transition during training.
In this paper, we articulate the Quantization Hypothesis, a set of informal conjectures about the
decomposability of networks into smaller parts, the universality of computations performed across
model scales, the discreteness of what models learn, and about how properties of the data distribution
∗
2

ericjm@mit.edu
Project code can be found at: https://github.com/ejmichaud/quantization-model.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

