Nash Regret Guarantees for Linear Bandits

Ayush Sawarni
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore
sawarniayush@gmail.com

Soumyabrata Pal
Google Research
Bangalore
soumyabrata@google.com

Siddharth Barman
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore
barman@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
We obtain essentially tight upper bounds for a strengthened notion of regret in
the stochastic linear bandits framework. The strengthening—referred to as Nash
regret—is defined as the difference between the (a priori unknown) optimum and
the geometric mean of expected rewards accumulated by the linear bandit algorithm.
Since the geometric mean corresponds to the well-studied Nash social welfare
(NSW) function, this formulation quantifies the performance of a bandit algorithm
as the collective welfare it generates across rounds. NSW is known to satisfy
fairness axioms and, hence, an upper bound on Nash regret provides a principled
fairness guarantee.
We consider the stochastic linear bandits problem over a horizon of T rounds and
with set of arms X in ambient dimension d. Furthermore, we focus on settings in
which the stochastic reward—associated with each arm in X —is a non-negative,
ν-sub-Poisson random variable.
q For this setting,
 we develop an algorithm that
dν
achieves a Nash regret of O
T log(T|X |) . In addition, addressing linear
bandit instances in which the set
 of arms X isnot necessarily finite, we obtain a
5

Nash regret upper bound of O

1

d4
√ν 2 log(T)
T

. Since bounded random variables

are sub-Poisson, these results hold for bounded, positive rewards. Our linear bandit
algorithm is built upon the successive elimination method with novel technical
insights, including tailored concentration bounds and the use of sampling via John
ellipsoid in conjunction with the Kiefer-Wolfowitz optimal design.

1

Introduction

Bandit optimization is a prominent framework for sequential decision making and has several
applications across multiple domains, such as healthcare [26, 23, 27] and advertising [22]. In this
framework, we have a set of arms (possible actions) with unknown means and a time horizon. The
goal is to sequentially pull the arms such that the regret—which is a notion of loss defined over the
bandit instance—is minimized.
We consider settings wherein the stochastic rewards generated by a sequential algorithm induces
welfare across a population of agents. Specifically, there are T agents, arriving one per round; in
particular, the reward accrued at each round t ∈ [T] corresponds to the value accrued by the tth
agent. Indeed, such a welfarist connection exists in various applications of the bandit framework.
Consider, for instance, the classic context of drug trials [24]: Suppose there are T patients and several
available drugs. In each round t ∈ [T], one of the available drugs is administered to the tth patient.
Subsequently, the reward accrued at the tth round corresponds to the efficacy of the administered
drug to the tth patient. In such a setting, fairness is a fundamental consideration. That is, in addition
to cumulative efficacy, individual effectiveness of the drugs is quite important.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

