Generator Born from Classifier
Runpeng Yu Xinchao Wang:
National University of Singapore
r.yu@u.nus.edu

xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we make a bold attempt toward an ambitious task: given a pre-trained
classifier, we aim to reconstruct an image generator, without relying on any data
samples. From a black-box perspective, this challenge seems intractable, since it
inevitably involves identifying the inverse function for a classifier, which is, by
nature, an information extraction process. As such, we resort to leveraging the
knowledge encapsulated within the parameters of the neural network. Grounded
on the theory of Maximum-Margin Bias of gradient descent, we propose a novel
learning paradigm, in which the generator is trained to ensure that the convergence
conditions of the network parameters are satisfied over the generated distribution of
the samples. Empirical validation from various image generation tasks substantiates
the efficacy of our strategy.

1

Introduction

The majority of machine learning research bifurcates into two distinct branches of study: the predictive
task and the generative task. Given the input x and the label y, the former one focuses on the training
of a high-performing classifier or regressor, which approximates ppy|xq [Vaswani et al., 2023,
Dosovitskiy et al., 2021, Jing et al., 2023], whereas the latter one aims to train a generative model
capable of sampling from ppx|yq or ppx, yq [Goodfellow et al., 2014]. The gap between the predictive
and the generative models, as a result, predominantly arises from the lack of information in the
predictive models about the marginal distribution ppxq. In the realm of deep neural networks, however,
the over-parameterization leads to the overfitting on the training distribution and the memorization of
the training samples [Feldman and Zhang, 2020, Daniely, 2020, Arpit et al., 2017], which, in turn,
make the network implicitly retain information about ppxq. With this component in hand, it prompts
the question of whether it is feasible to derive a generative model from a predictive one.
In this paper, we explore this novel task, which attempts to learn a generator directly from a pretrained classifier, without the assistance of any training data. Unarguably, this is a highly ambitious
task with substantial difficulty, as either explicitly extracting information about ppxq from a pretrained classifier or directly solving this inverse problem from classifier to generator poses significant
challenges. Despite these challenges, the value of this task lies in its potential to offer a new approach
to training generators that mitigates the direct dependence on large volumes of training data. This
provides a possible solution for learning tasks in scenarios where data is scarce or unavailable.
Moreover, this task presents a novel way to utilize and analyze the pre-trained predictive models,
facilitating our understanding of the encoded information within the parameters.
To this end, we propose a novel learning scheme. Our approach is grounded in the theory of
Maximum-Margin Bias of gradient descent, which demonstrates that the parameters of a neural
network trained via gradient descent will converge to the solution of a specific optimization problem.
This optimization problem minimizes the norm of the neural network parameters while maximizing
the classification margin on the training dataset. The necessary condition for the solution of this
:

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

