Latent Graph Inference with Limited Supervision

1

Jianglin Lu1∗ Yi Xu1 Huan Wang1 Yue Bai1 Yun Fu1,2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
2
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University
Project Page: https://jianglin954.github.io/LGI-LS/

Abstract
Latent graph inference (LGI) aims to jointly learn the underlying graph structure
and node representations from data features. However, existing LGI methods commonly suffer from the issue of supervision starvation, where massive edge weights
are learned without semantic supervision and do not contribute to the training
loss. Consequently, these supervision-starved weights, which may determine the
predictions of testing samples, cannot be semantically optimal, resulting in poor
generalization. In this paper, we observe that this issue is actually caused by the
graph sparsification operation, which severely destroys the important connections
established between pivotal nodes and labeled ones. To address this, we propose
to restore the corrupted affinities and replenish the missed supervision for better
LGI. The key challenge then lies in identifying the critical nodes and recovering
the corrupted affinities. We begin by defining the pivotal nodes as k-hop starved
nodes, which can be identified based on a given adjacency matrix. Considering the
high computational burden, we further present a more efficient alternative inspired
by CUR matrix decomposition. Subsequently, we eliminate the starved nodes by
reconstructing the destroyed connections. Extensive experiments on representative
benchmarks demonstrate that reducing the starved nodes consistently improves the
performance of state-of-the-art LGI methods, especially under extremely limited
supervision (6.12% improvement on Pubmed with a labeling rate of only 0.3%).

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) [8, 12, 23, 33] have recently received considerable attention due to
their strong ability to handle complex graph-structured data. GNNs consider each data sample as a
node and model the affinities between nodes as the weights of edges. The edges as a whole constitute
the graph structure or topology of the data. By integrating the graph topology into the training process
of representation learning, GNNs have achieved remarkable performance across a wide range of
tasks, such as classification [19, 37], clustering [31, 40], retrieval [5, 43], and recognition [35, 44].
Although effective, existing GNNs typically require a prior graph to learn node representations, which
poses a major challenge when encountering incomplete or even missing graphs. This limitation has
spurred the development of latent graph inference (LGI) [7, 10, 17, 22, 32], also known as graph
structure learning [9, 24, 39, 42]. LGI aims to jointly learn the underlying graph and discriminative
node representations solely from the features of nodes in an end-to-end fashion. By adaptively
learning the graph topology, LGI models are empowered with great ability to remove noise and
capture more complex structure of the data [13,26,27,47]. Consequently, LGI emerges as a promising
research topic with a broad range of applications, such as point cloud segmentation [41], disease
prediction [6], multi-view clustering [31], and brain connectome representation [18].
∗

Corresponding author: JianglinLu@outlook.com.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

