Training Energy-Based Normalizing Flow with
Score-Matching Objectives

Chen-Hao Chao1 , Wei-Fang Sun1,2 , Yen-Chang Hsu3 , Zsolt Kira4 , and Chun-Yi Lee1∗
1
Elsa Lab, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu City, Taiwan
2
NVIDIA AI Technology Center, NVIDIA Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, USA
3
Samsung Research America, Mountain View, CA, USA
4
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA

Abstract
In this paper, we establish a connection between the parameterization of flow-based
and energy-based generative models, and present a new flow-based modeling approach called energy-based normalizing flow (EBFlow). We demonstrate that by
optimizing EBFlow with score-matching objectives, the computation of Jacobian
determinants for linear transformations can be entirely bypassed. This feature
enables the use of arbitrary linear layers in the construction of flow-based models
without increasing the computational time complexity of each training iteration
from O(D2 L) to O(D3 L) for an L-layered model that accepts D-dimensional inputs. This makes the training of EBFlow more efficient than the commonly-adopted
maximum likelihood training method. In addition to the reduction in runtime, we
enhance the training stability and empirical performance of EBFlow through a
number of techniques developed based on our analysis of the score-matching methods. The experimental results demonstrate that our approach achieves a significant
speedup compared to maximum likelihood estimation while outperforming prior
methods with a noticeable margin in terms of negative log-likelihood (NLL).

1

Introduction

Parameter estimation for probability density functions (pdf) has been a major interest in the research
fields of machine learning and statistics. Given a D-dimensional random data vector x ∈ RD , the goal
of such a task is to estimate the true pdf px (·) of x with a function p(· ; θ) parameterized by θ. In the
studies of unsupervised learning, flow-based modeling methods (e.g., [1–4]) are commonly-adopted
for estimating px due to their expressiveness and broad applicability in generative tasks.
Flow-based models represent p(· ; θ) using a sequence of invertible transformations based on the
change of variable theorem, through which the intermediate unnormalized densities are re-normalized
by multiplying the Jacobian determinant associated with each transformation. In maximum likelihood
estimation, however, the explicit computation of the normalizing term may pose computational
challenges for model architectures that use linear transformations, such as convolutions [4, 5] and
fully-connected layers [6, 7]. To address this issue, several methods have been proposed in the
recent literature, which includes constructing linear transformations with special structures [8–12]
and exploiting special optimization processes [7]. Despite their success in reducing the training
complexity, these methods either require additional constraints on the linear transformations or biased
estimation on the gradients of the objective.
Motivated by the limitations of the previous studies, this paper introduces an approach that reinterprets
flow-based models as energy-based models [13], and leverages score-matching methods [14–17] to
∗

Corresponding author. Email: cylee@cs.nthu.edu.tw

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

