Learning Unseen Modality Interaction
Yunhua Zhang, Hazel Doughty, Cees G.M. Snoek
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
Multimodal learning assumes all modality combinations of interest are available
during training to learn cross-modal correspondences. In this paper, we challenge
this modality-complete assumption for multimodal learning and instead strive for
generalization to unseen modality combinations during inference. We pose the
problem of unseen modality interaction and introduce a first solution. It exploits
a module that projects the multidimensional features of different modalities into
a common space with rich information preserved. This allows the information to
be accumulated with a simple summation operation across available modalities.
To reduce overfitting to less discriminative modality combinations during training, we further improve the model learning with pseudo-supervision indicating
the reliability of a modality’s prediction. We demonstrate that our approach is
effective for diverse tasks and modalities by evaluating it for multimodal video
classification, robot state regression, and multimedia retrieval. Project website:
https://xiaobai1217.github.io/Unseen-Modality-Interaction/.

1

Introduction

Real-world machine learning models must operate on a wide variety of platforms ranging from
autonomous vehicles to wearable devices. This requires effective combination of data from the
diverse suite of sensors available. Multimodal learning, which learns how to combine multiple
different data sources to make a prediction, has therefore become a central problem in machine
learning [3]. Learning correspondences between modalities is a challenging problem as modalities
differ in their input representations, learning dynamics, and discriminability for a target task. Recent
multimodal learning methods [16, 28, 36, 32, 22] thus require the training data to have all modalities
available for every sample. We call this modality-complete learning. However, this constraint will not
always hold in the real world as it may be infeasible to collect sufficient training data which jointly
measures data across all sensors. Similarly, sensors could be added or removed at any time. It is
thus important to make multimodal learning methods able to handle the mismatch between modality
combinations at training and inference, which is the topic of this paper.
We propose the multimodal learning problem that is able to infer predictions over modality combinations unseen during training. Several previous works [45, 23, 26, 32, 22] have increased robustness
to the data with missing modalities, i.e., modality-incomplete data. For example, Miech et al. [26]
predict a weighting to combine unimodal predictions, while Shvetsova et al. [32] utilize cross-modal
attention for multiple modality combinations to obtain the prediction. Albeit successful, these methods still require a portion of the data to have all modalities of interest to learn the relative importance
of different modalities [26] or the cross-modal correspondences [32, 22, 45, 23]. Thus, they cannot
handle unseen modality combinations at inference. Different from previous works, we propose to
relieve the need for modality-complete training data and generalize to unseen modality combinations.
In this paper, our main contribution is to establish the problem of unseen modality interaction, where
we strive to learn a multimodal model from only modality-incomplete data that can handle unseen
modality combinations at test time. The challenge is to effectively combine modalities without any
training data of the modality combinations that will be seen in inference. We propose to address
this problem by effectively collecting information from available modalities while not explicitly
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

