Is This Loss Informative?
Faster Text-to-Image Customization
by Tracking Objective Dynamics

Anton Voronov∗
MIPT, Yandex

Mikhail Khoroshikh∗
HSE University, Yandex
Max Ryabinin∗
HSE University, Yandex

Artem Babenko
HSE University, Yandex

Abstract
Text-to-image generation models represent the next step of evolution in image
synthesis, offering a natural way to achieve flexible yet fine-grained control over
the result. One emerging area of research is the fast adaptation of large text-toimage models to smaller datasets or new visual concepts. However, many efficient
methods of adaptation have a long training time, which limits their practical
applications, slows down experiments, and spends excessive GPU resources. In
this work, we study the training dynamics of popular text-to-image personalization
methods (such as Textual Inversion or DreamBooth), aiming to speed them up. We
observe that most concepts are learned at early stages and do not improve in quality
later, but standard training convergence metrics fail to indicate that. Instead, we
propose a simple drop-in early stopping criterion that only requires computing the
regular training objective on a fixed set of inputs for all training iterations. Our
experiments on Stable Diffusion for 48 different concepts and three personalization
methods demonstrate the competitive performance of our approach, which makes
adaptation up to 8 times faster with no significant drops in quality.

1

Introduction

Large text-to-image synthesis models have recently attracted the attention of the research community
due to their ability to generate high-quality and diverse images that correspond to the user’s prompt
in natural language [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The success of these models has driven the development of new
problem settings that leverage their ability to draw objects in novel environments. One particularly
interesting task is personalization (or adaptation) of text-to-image models to a small dataset of images
provided by the user. The goal of this task is to learn the precise details of a specific object or visual
style captured in these images: after personalization, the model should be able to generate novel
renditions of this object in different contexts or imitate the style that was provided as an input.
Several recent methods, such as Textual Inversion [6], DreamBooth [7], and Custom Diffusion [8],
offer easy and parameter-efficient personalization of text-to-image models. Still, a major obstacle on
the path to broader use of such methods is their computational inefficiency. Ideally, models should
adapt to user’s images in real or close to real time. However, as noted by the authors of the first two
papers, the training time of these methods can be prohibitively long, taking up to two hours for a
single concept. The reported training time for Custom Diffusion is 12 minutes per concept on a single
GPU, which is much faster but still outside the limits of many practical applications.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to mryabinin0@gmail.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

