SOL: Sampling-based Optimal Linear bounding of
arbitrary scalar functions

Yuriy Biktairov Jyotirmoy Deshmukh
University of Southern California
{biktairo, jdeshmuk}@usc.edu

Abstract
Finding tight linear bounds for activation functions in neural networks is an essential part of several state of the art neural network robustness certification tools. An
activation function is an arbitrary, nonlinear, scalar function f : Rd → R. In the
existing work on robustness certification, such bounds have been computed using
human ingenuity for a handful of the most popular activation functions. While
a number of heuristics have been proposed for bounding arbitrary functions, no
analysis of the tightness optimality for general scalar functions has been offered yet,
to the best of our knowledge. We fill this gap by formulating a concise optimality
criterion for tightness of the approximation which allows us to build optimal bounds
for any function convex in the region of interest R. For a more general class of
functions Lipschitz-continuous in R we propose a sampling-based approach (SOL)
which, given an instance of the bounding problem, efficiently computes the tightest
linear bounds within a given ε > 0 threshold. We leverage an adaptive sampling
technique to iteratively build a set of sample points suitable for representing the
target activation function. While the theoretical worst case time complexity of
our approach is O(ε−2d ), it typically only takes O(logβ 1ε ) time for some β ≥ 1
and is thus sufficiently fast in practice. We provide empirical evidence of SOL’s
practicality by incorporating it into a robustness certifier and observing that it
produces similar or higher certification rates while taking as low as quarter of the
time compared to the other methods.

1

Introduction

Neural networks (NNs) have become the pervasive machine learning model for various tasks including
classification, function approximation, and generative modeling. In a typical classification task using
supervised learning, the NN is given as input a high-dimensional data object (such as an image or a
large piece of text) and its corresponding class label (from a finite set of labels). The NN classifier
is deemed robust if for reasonable perturbations to a given input, the predicted label for the input
does not change. It has been previously shown that NNs are susceptible to adversarial perturbations
in inputs. These approaches take advantage of the non-robustness of a trained NN; for example, in
image classification, by injecting a small amount of noise imperceptible to a human, the predicted
label for an input image can be changed. In safety-critical applications where object detection and
classification may be used as input for decision-making (e.g., in an autonomous mobile robot), such
misclassifications can have safety implications. Similarly, when used in a function approximation
task (e.g., for regression), it is important that small changes to the NN input do not lead to large
changes in the predicted output. Checking the robustness of neural networks has thus emerged as an
important problem in recent years [28, 3, 9, 1, 13, 23].
A number of different approaches have been developed for certifying the robustness of the neural
networks with popular architectures. The majority of these approaches fall into one of three overar37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

