Understanding and Addressing the Pitfalls of
Bisimulation-based Representations in Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Hongyu Zang1 , Xin Li1∗, Leiji Zhang1 , Yang Liu2 , Baigui Sun2 , Riashat Islam3 ,
Rémi Tachet des Combes4 , Romain Laroche
1
2
Beijing Institute of Technology, China
Alibaba Group, China
3
McGill University, Mila, Quebec AI Institute, Canada 4 Wayve, UK
{zanghyu,xinli,ljzhang}@bit.edu.cn
{ly261666,baigui.sbg}@alibaba-inc.com
riashat.islam@mail.mcgill.ca
{remi.tachet,romain.laroche}@gmail.com

Abstract
While bisimulation-based approaches hold promise for learning robust state representations for Reinforcement Learning (RL) tasks, their efficacy in offline RL tasks
has not been up to par. In some instances, their performance has even significantly
underperformed alternative methods. We aim to understand why bisimulation
methods succeed in online settings, but falter in offline tasks. Our analysis reveals
that missing transitions in the dataset are particularly harmful to the bisimulation
principle, leading to ineffective estimation. We also shed light on the critical
role of reward scaling in bounding the scale of bisimulation measurements and
of the value error they induce. Based on these findings, we propose to apply the
expectile operator for representation learning to our offline RL setting, which
helps to prevent overfitting to incomplete data. Meanwhile, by introducing an
appropriate reward scaling strategy, we avoid the risk of feature collapse in representation space. We implement these recommendations on two state-of-the-art
bisimulation-based algorithms, MICo and SimSR, and demonstrate performance
gains on two benchmark suites: D4RL and Visual D4RL. Codes are provided at
https://github.com/zanghyu/Offline_Bisimulation.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms often require a significant amount of data to achieve optimal
performance [40, 48, 22]. In scenarios where collecting data is costly or impractical, Offline RL
methods offer an attractive alternative by learning effective policies from previously collected data [29,
43, 32, 35, 16, 24]. However, capturing the complex structure of the environment from limited data
remains a challenge for Offline RL [4]. This involves pre-training the state representation on offline
data and then learning the policy upon the fixed representations [51, 47, 41, 53]. Though driven
by various motivations, previous methods can be mainly categorized into two classes: i) implicitly
shaping the agent’s representation of the environment via prediction and control of some aspects of
the environment through auxiliary tasks , e.g., maximizing the diversity of visited states [34, 10],
exploring attentive contrastive learning on sub-trajectories [51], or capturing temporal information
about the environment [47]; ii) utilizing behavioral metrics, such as bisimulation metrics [11, 13, 5],
to capture complex structure in the environment by measuring the similarity of behavior on the
∗

Correspondence to Xin Li.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

