Large Language Models Are Latent Variable Models:
Explaining and Finding Good Demonstrations for
In-Context Learning

Xinyi Wang1 , Wanrong Zhu1 , Michael Saxon1 , Mark Steyvers2 , William Yang Wang1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Santa Barbara
2
Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine
{xinyi_wang, wanrongzhu, saxon}@ucsb.edu,
msteyver@uci.edu, william@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
In recent years, pre-trained large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated
remarkable efficiency in achieving an inference-time few-shot learning capability
known as in-context learning. However, existing literature has highlighted the
sensitivity of this capability to the selection of few-shot demonstrations. Current
understandings of the underlying mechanisms by which this capability arises from
regular language model pretraining objectives remain disconnected from the realworld LLMs. This study aims to examine the in-context learning phenomenon
through a Bayesian lens, viewing real-world LLMs as latent variable models. On
this premise, we propose an algorithm to select optimal demonstrations from a set
of annotated data with a small LM, and then directly generalize the selected demonstrations to larger LMs. We demonstrate significant improvement over baselines,
averaged over eight GPT models on eight real-world text classification datasets.
We also demonstrate the real-world usefulness of our algorithm on GSM8K, a math
word problem dataset. Our empirical findings support our hypothesis that LLMs
implicitly infer a latent variable containing task information. 1

1

Introduction

Transformer-based [41] pre-trained large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant
advancements in a variety of natural language processing (NLP) tasks. As the size of these LLMs
increases, they gain “in-context learning” capabilities, whereby the models achieve state-of-the-art
(SOTA) or near-SOTA performance by conditioning on a small number of demonstration examples
at inference time, without any need for updating model parameters [4]. Below is an example input
sequence for semantic analysis with in-context learning:
Great movie. Positive.\n The worst movie ever.
see the second movie!

Negative.\n Can’t wait to

The first two lines are two demonstrations, and the third line is a test input. We expect an LLM to
output the correct label Positive as a continuation.
In-context learning has been demonstrated to be an effective technique for a wide range of NLP tasks.
However, it is sensitive to the choice, format, and even the order of the demonstrations used [29, 20].
This makes achieving optimal performance with in-context learning a significant challenge, requiring
real human effort to adjust the format and selection of demonstration examples. Heuristic solutions,
such as selecting demonstrations based on the similarity between the demonstrations and test input
1

Code: https://github.com/WANGXinyiLinda/concept-based-demonstration-selection.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

