Mathematical Capabilities of ChatGPT
Simon Frieder∗,1 , Luca Pinchetti1 , Alexis Chevalier3 , Ryan-Rhys Griffiths4 ,
Tommaso Salvatori2,8 , Thomas Lukasiewicz8,1 , Philipp Petersen6,7 , Julius Berner5
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
2
VERSES AI Research Lab, Los Angeles, US
3
School of Mathematics, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, US
4
Department of Physics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
5
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Caltech, Pasadena, US
6
Faculty of Mathematics, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
7
Research Network Data Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
8
Institute of Logic and Computation, Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria
https://ghosts.friederrr.org

Abstract
We investigate the mathematical capabilities of two versions of ChatGPT
(released 9-January-2023 and 30-January-2023) and of GPT-4 by testing
them on publicly available datasets, as well as hand-crafted ones, using a
novel evaluation scheme. In contrast to formal mathematics, where large
databases of formal proofs are available (e.g., mathlib, the Lean Mathematical Library), current datasets of natural-language mathematics used to
benchmark language models either cover only elementary mathematics or are
very small. We address this by publicly releasing two new datasets: GHOSTS
and miniGHOSTS. These are the first natural-language datasets curated
by working researchers in mathematics that (1) aim to cover graduate-level
mathematics, (2) provide a holistic overview of the mathematical capabilities
of language models, and (3) distinguish multiple dimensions of mathematical
reasoning. These datasets test, by using 1636 human expert evaluations,
whether ChatGPT and GPT-4 can be helpful assistants to professional
mathematicians by emulating use cases that arise in the daily professional
activities of mathematicians. We benchmark the models on a range of
fine-grained performance metrics. For advanced mathematics, this is the
most detailed evaluation effort to date. We find that ChatGPT and GPT-4
can be used most successfully as mathematical assistants for querying facts,
acting as mathematical search engines and knowledge base interfaces. GPT4 can additionally be used for undergraduate-level mathematics but fails on
graduate-level difficulty. Contrary to many positive reports in the media
about GPT-4 and ChatGPT’s exam-solving abilities (a potential case of
selection bias), their overall mathematical performance is well below the
level of a graduate student. Hence, if you aim to use ChatGPT to pass
a graduate-level math exam, you would be better off copying from your
average peer!

∗

Corresponding author: simon.frieder@cs.ox.ac.uk.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and
Benchmarks.

