Multi-Modal Inverse Constrained Reinforcement
Learning from a Mixture of Demonstrations

Guanren Qiao1 , Guiliang Liu∗ 1 , Pascal Poupart2,3 , Zhiqiang Xu4
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
2
University of Waterloo, 3 Vector Institute, 4 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
223040241@link.cuhk.edu.cn, liuguiliang@cuhk.edu.cn,
ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca,zhiqiang.xu@mbzuai.ac.ae
1

Abstract
Inverse Constraint Reinforcement Learning (ICRL) aims to recover the underlying
constraints respected by expert agents in a data-driven manner. Existing ICRL
algorithms typically assume that the demonstration data is generated by a single
type of expert. However, in practice, demonstrations often comprise a mixture of
trajectories collected from various expert agents respecting different constraints,
making it challenging to explain expert behaviors with a unified constraint function.
To tackle this issue, we propose a Multi-Modal Inverse Constrained Reinforcement
Learning (MMICRL) algorithm for simultaneously estimating multiple constraints
corresponding to different types of experts. MMICRL constructs a flow-based density estimator that enables unsupervised expert identification from demonstrations,
so as to infer the agent-specific constraints. Following these constraints, MMICRL imitates expert policies with a novel multi-modal constrained policy optimization objective that minimizes the agent-conditioned policy entropy and maximizes
the unconditioned one. To enhance robustness, we incorporate this objective into
the contrastive learning framework. This approach enables imitation policies to capture the diversity of behaviors among expert agents. Extensive experiments in both
discrete and continuous environments show that MMICRL outperforms other baselines in terms of constraint recovery and control performance. Our implementation
is available at: https://github.com/qiaoguanren/Multi-Modal-Inverse-ConstrainedReinforcement-Learning.

1

Introduction

A fundamental prerequisite for achieving safe
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is that the agents’
policies must adhere to the underlying constraints in the environment [1, 2]. However, in
many real-world applications (e.g., robot control
and autonomous driving), the ideal constraints
are time-varying, context-dependent, and inherent to experts’ own experience. These constraints are hard to specify mathematically and
may not be readily available to RL agents in
policy updates.
Figure 1: The flowchart of MMICRL.
A promising approach for learning latent constraints is Inverse Constraint Reinforcement
Learning (ICRL) [3, 4, 5]. As a data-driven technique, ICRL recovers the underlying constraints
∗

Corresponding author: Guiliang Liu, email: liuguiliang@cuhk.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

