Asynchrony-Robust Collaborative Perception via
Bird’s Eye View Flow

Sizhe Wei1† Yuxi Wei1† Yue Hu1 Yifan Lu1
Yiqi Zhong2 Siheng Chen1,3∗ Ya Zhang1,3∗
1

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
University of Southern California 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
1
{sizhewei, wyx3590236732, 18671129361, yifan_lu}@sjtu.edu.cn
{sihengc, ya_zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn
2
yiqizhon@usc.edu

Abstract
Collaborative perception can substantially boost each agent’s perception ability
by facilitating communication among multiple agents. However, temporal asynchrony among agents is inevitable in the real world due to communication delays,
interruptions, and clock misalignments. This issue causes information mismatch
during multi-agent fusion, seriously shaking the foundation of collaboration. To
address this issue, we propose CoBEVFlow, an asynchrony-robust collaborative
perception system based on bird’s eye view (BEV) flow. The key intuition of
CoBEVFlow is to compensate motions to align asynchronous collaboration messages sent by multiple agents. To model the motion in a scene, we propose BEV
flow, which is a collection of the motion vector corresponding to each spatial
location. Based on BEV flow, asynchronous perceptual features can be reassigned
to appropriate positions, mitigating the impact of asynchrony. CoBEVFlow has two
advantages: (i) CoBEVFlow can handle asynchronous collaboration messages sent
at irregular, continuous time stamps without discretization; and (ii) with BEV flow,
CoBEVFlow only transports the original perceptual features, instead of generating
new perceptual features, avoiding additional noises. To validate CoBEVFlow’s
efficacy, we create IRregular V2V(IRV2V), the first synthetic collaborative perception dataset with various temporal asynchronies that simulate different real-world
scenarios. Extensive experiments conducted on both IRV2V and the real-world
dataset DAIR-V2X show that CoBEVFlow consistently outperforms other baselines and is robust in extremely asynchronous settings. The code is available at
https://github.com/MediaBrain-SJTU/CoBEVFlow.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent collaborative perception allows agents to exchange complementary perceptual information through communication. This can overcome inherent limitations of single-agent perception, such
as occlusion and long-range issues. Recent studies have shown that collaborative perception can
substantially boost the performance of perception systems [1–5] and has great potential for a wide
range of real-world applications, such as multi-robot automation system [6, 7], vehicle-to-everythingcommunication-aided autonomous driving[8, 9] and multi-UAVs (unmanned aerial vehicles) [10–12].
As an emerging area, the study of collaborative perception has many challenges to be tackled, such as
high-quality datasets [13–15], model-agnostic and task-agnostic formulation [16] and the robustness
to pose errors [17] and adversarial attacks [18, 19].
†

Equal contribution.

* Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

