Efficient Adversarial Attacks on Online Multi-agent
Reinforcement Learning

Guanlin Liu Lifeng Lai
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616
{glnliu, lflai}@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Due to the broad range of applications of multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL), understanding the effects of adversarial attacks against MARL model is
essential for the safe applications of this model. Motivated by this, we investigate
the impact of adversarial attacks on MARL. In the considered setup, there is an
exogenous attacker who is able to modify the rewards before the agents receive
them or manipulate the actions before the environment receives them. The attacker
aims to guide each agent into a target policy or maximize the cumulative rewards
under some specific reward function chosen by the attacker, while minimizing the
amount of manipulation on feedback and action. We first show the limitations
of the action poisoning only attacks and the reward poisoning only attacks. We
then introduce a mixed attack strategy with both the action poisoning and the
reward poisoning. We show that the mixed attack strategy can efficiently attack
MARL agents even if the attacker has no prior information about the underlying
environment and the agents’ algorithms.

1

Introduction

Recently reinforcement learning (RL), including single agent RL and multi-agent RL (MARL), has
received significant research interests, partly due to its many applications in a variety of scenarios
such as the autonomous driving, traffic signal control, cooperative robotics, economic policy-making,
and video games [Silver et al., 2016, Brown and Sandholm, 2019, Vinyals et al., 2019, Berner et al.,
2019, Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016, OroojlooyJadid and Hajinezhad, 2019, Baker et al., 2020, Zhang
et al., 2021a]. In MARL, at each state, each agent takes its own action, and these actions jointly
determine the next state of the environment and the reward of each agent. The rewards may vary for
different agents. In this paper, we focus on the model of Markov Games (MG) [Shapley, 1953]. In this
class of problems, researchers typically consider learning objectives such as Nash equilibrium (NE),
correlated equilibrium (CE) and coarse correlated equilibrium (CCE) etc. A recent line of works
provide non-asymptotic guarantees for learning NE, CCE or CE under different assumptions [Sidford
et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2020a, Bai and Jin, 2020, Xie et al., 2020, Liu et al., 2021, Jin et al., 2021,
Mao and Başar, 2022].
As RL models, including single agent RL and MARL, are being increasingly used in safety critical
and security related applications, it is critical to developing trustworthy RL systems. As a first step
towards this important goal, it is essential to understand the effects of adversarial attacks on RL
systems. Motivated by this, there have been many recent works that investigate adversarial attacks on
single agent RL under various settings [Behzadan and Munir, 2017, Huang and Zhu, 2019, Ma et al.,
2019, Zhang et al., 2020b, Sun et al., 2021, Rakhsha et al., 2020, 2021].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

