Computational Complexity of Learning Neural
Networks: Smoothness and Degeneracy

Amit Daniely
Hebrew University and Google
amit.daniely@mail.huji.ac.il

Nathan Srebro
TTI-Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Gal Vardi
TTI-Chicago and Hebrew University
galvardi@ttic.edu

Abstract
Understanding when neural networks can be learned efficiently is a fundamental
question in learning theory. Existing hardness results suggest that assumptions on
both the input distribution and the network’s weights are necessary for obtaining
efficient algorithms. Moreover, it was previously shown that depth-2 networks
can be efficiently learned under the assumptions that the input distribution is
Gaussian, and the weight matrix is non-degenerate. In this work, we study whether
such assumptions may suffice for learning deeper networks and prove negative
results. We show that learning depth-3 ReLU networks under the Gaussian input
distribution is hard even in the smoothed-analysis framework, where a random
noise is added to the network’s parameters. It implies that learning depth-3 ReLU
networks under the Gaussian distribution is hard even if the weight matrices are
non-degenerate. Moreover, we consider depth-2 networks, and show hardness of
learning in the smoothed-analysis framework, where both the network parameters
and the input distribution are smoothed. Our hardness results are under a wellstudied assumption on the existence of local pseudorandom generators.

1

Introduction

The computational complexity of learning neural networks has been extensively studied in recent
years, and there has been much effort in obtaining both upper bounds and hardness results. Nevertheless, it is still unclear when neural networks can be learned in polynomial time, namely, under what
assumptions provably efficient algorithms exist.
Existing results imply hardness already for learning depth-2 ReLU networks in the standard PAC
learning framework (e.g., [31, 14]). Thus, without any assumptions on the input distribution or the
network’s weights, efficient learning algorithms might not be achievable. Even when assuming that
the input distribution is Gaussian, strong hardness results were obtained for depth-3 ReLU networks
[16, 11], suggesting that assumptions merely on the input distribution might not suffice. Also, a
hardness result by Daniely and Vardi [15] shows that strong assumptions merely on the network’s
weights (without restricting the input distribution) might not suffice even for efficiently learning
depth-2 networks. The aforementioned hardness results hold already for improper learning, namely,
where the learning algorithm is allowed to return a hypothesis that does not belong to the considered
hypothesis class. Thus, a combination of assumptions on the input distribution and the network’s
weights seems to be necessary for obtaining efficient algorithms.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

