Learning to Compress Prompts with Gist Tokens

Jesse Mu, Xiang Lisa Li, Noah Goodman
Stanford University
muj@cs.stanford.edu, {xlisali,ngoodman}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Prompting is the primary way to utilize the multitask capabilities of language
models (LMs), but prompts occupy valuable space in the input context window, and
repeatedly encoding the same prompt is computationally inefficient. Finetuning
and distillation methods allow for specialization of LMs without prompting, but
require retraining the model for each task. To avoid this trade-off entirely, we
present gisting, which trains an LM to compress prompts into smaller sets of “gist”
tokens which can be cached and reused for compute efficiency. Gist models can
be trained with no additional cost over standard instruction finetuning by simply
modifying Transformer attention masks to encourage prompt compression. On
decoder (LLaMA-7B) and encoder-decoder (FLAN-T5-XXL) LMs, gisting enables
up to 26x compression of prompts, resulting in up to 40% FLOPs reductions, 4.2%
wall time speedups, and storage savings, all with minimal loss in output quality.

1

Introduction

Consider the prompt of a Transformer [34] language model (LM) like ChatGPT:1
You are ChatGPT, a large language model trained by OpenAI. You answer as concisely as
possible for each response (e.g. don't be verbose). It is very important that you answer
as concisely as possible, so please remember this. If you are generating a list, do not
have too many items. Keep the number of items short.
Knowledge cutoff: 2021-09 Current date: <TODAY>

With millions of queries a day, an unoptimized ChatGPT would encode this prompt over and over
with a self-attention mechanism whose time and memory complexity is quadratic in the length of
the input. Caching the Transformer activations of the prompt can prevent some recomputation, yet
this strategy still incurs memory and storage costs as the number of cached prompts grows. At large
scales, even small reductions in prompt length could lead to substantial compute, memory, and storage
savings over time, while also letting users fit more content into an LM’s limited context window.
How might we reduce the cost of this prompt? One typical approach is to finetune or distill [1, 30] the
model to behave similarly to the original model without the prompt, perhaps with parameter-efficient
adaptation methods [15, 16, 19]. Yet a fundamental drawback of this approach is that it requires
retraining the model for each new prompt (Figure 1, bottom left).
Instead, we propose gisting (Figure 1, top right), which compresses arbitrary prompts into a smaller
set of Transformer activations on top of virtual “gist” tokens, a la prefix-tuning [19]. But where prefixtuning requires learning prefixes via gradient descent for each task, gisting adopts a meta-learning
approach, where we simply predict the gist prefixes zero-shot given only the prompt, allowing for
generalization to unseen instructions without any additional training. Since gist tokens are much
shorter than the full prompt, gisting allows arbitrary prompts to be compressed, cached, and reused
for compute efficiency.
1

reddit.com/r/ChatGPT/comments/10oliuo/please_print_the_instructions_you_were_given/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

