Switching Autoregressive Low-rank Tensor Models

Andrew Warrington
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
awarring@stanford.edu

Hyun Dong Lee
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
hdlee@stanford.edu
Joshua I. Glaser
Department of Neurology
Northwestern University
j-glaser@northwestern.edu

Scott W. Linderman
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
scott.linderman@stanford.edu

Abstract
An important problem in time-series analysis is modeling systems with timevarying dynamics. Probabilistic models with joint continuous and discrete latent
states offer interpretable, efficient, and experimentally useful descriptions of such
data. Commonly used models include autoregressive hidden Markov models
(ARHMMs) and switching linear dynamical systems (SLDSs), each with its own
advantages and disadvantages. ARHMMs permit exact inference and easy parameter estimation, but are parameter intensive when modeling long dependencies,
and hence are prone to overfitting. In contrast, SLDSs can capture long-range
dependencies in a parameter efficient way through Markovian latent dynamics, but
present an intractable likelihood and a challenging parameter estimation task. In
this paper, we propose switching autoregressive low-rank tensor (SALT) models,
which retain the advantages of both approaches while ameliorating the weaknesses.
SALT parameterizes the tensor of an ARHMM with a low-rank factorization to
control the number of parameters and allow longer range dependencies without
overfitting. We prove theoretical and discuss practical connections between SALT,
linear dynamical systems, and SLDSs. We empirically demonstrate quantitative
advantages of SALT models on a range of simulated and real prediction tasks,
including behavioral and neural datasets. Furthermore, the learned low-rank tensor
provides novel insights into temporal dependencies within each discrete state.

1

Introduction

Many time series analysis problems involve jointly segmenting data and modeling the time-evolution
of the system within each segment. For example, a common task in computational ethology [Datta
et al., 2019] — the study of natural behavior — is segmenting videos of freely moving animals into
states that represent distinct behaviors, while also quantifying the differences in dynamics between
states [Wiltschko et al., 2015, Costacurta et al., 2022]. Similarly, discrete shifts in the dynamics of
neural activity may reflect changes in underlying brain state [Saravani et al., 2019, Recanatesi et al.,
2022]. Model-based segmentations are experimentally valuable, providing an unsupervised grouping
of neural or behavioral states together with a model of the dynamics within each state.
One common probabilistic state space model for such analyses is the autoregressive hidden Markov
model (ARHMM) [Ephraim et al., 1989]. For example, MoSeq [Wiltschko et al., 2015] uses
ARHMMs for unsupervised behavioral analysis of freely moving animals. ARHMMs learn a set
of linear autoregressive models, indexed by a discrete state, to predict the next observation as a
function of previous observations. Inference in ARHMMs then reduces to inferring which AR
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

