Model-Free Reinforcement Learning with
the Decision-Estimation Coefficient
Dylan J. Foster

Noah Golowich

Jian Qian

Alexander Rakhlin

dylanfoster@microsoft.com

nzg@mit.edu

jianqian@mit.edu

rakhlin@mit.edu

Ayush Sekhari
sekhari@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of interactive decision making, encompassing structured
bandits and reinforcement learning with general function approximation. Recently,
Foster et al. [12] introduced the Decision-Estimation Coefficient, a measure of
statistical complexity that lower bounds the optimal regret for interactive decision
making, as well as a meta-algorithm, Estimation-to-Decisions, which achieves
upper bounds in terms of the same quantity. Estimation-to-Decisions is a reduction,
which lifts algorithms for (supervised) online estimation into algorithms for decision making. In this paper, we show that by combining Estimation-to-Decisions
with a specialized form of optimistic estimation introduced by Zhang [31], it is
possible to obtain guarantees that improve upon those of Foster et al. [12] by
accommodating more lenient notions of estimation error. We use this approach
to derive regret bounds for model-free reinforcement learning with value function
approximation, and give structural results showing when it can and cannot help
more generally.

1

Introduction

The theory of interactive decision making—ranging from bandits to reinforcement learning with
function approximation—contains a variety of sufficient conditions for sample-efficient learning, [25,
17, 26, 11, 19, 7, 29, 18, 23, 3, 20, 10, 22, 9, 33], but necessary conditions have been comparatively
unexplored. Recently, however, Foster et al. [12] introduced the Decision-Estimation Coefficient
(DEC), a measure of statistical complexity which leads to upper and lower bounds on the optimal
sample complexity for interactive decision making.
Regret bounds based on the Decision-Estimation Coefficient are achieved by Estimation-to-Decisions
(E2D), a meta-algorithm which reduces the problem of interactive decision making to supervised
online estimation. While the Decision-Estimation Coefficient leads to tight lower bounds on regret
for many problem settings, the upper bounds in Foster et al. [12] can be suboptimal in certain
situations due to the need to perform estimation with respect to Hellinger distance, a stringent notion
of estimation error. When specialized to reinforcement learning, the guarantees for the E2D metaalgorithm in Foster et al. [12] are only tight for model-based settings (where function approximation
is employed to model and estimate transition probabilities), and do not lead to meaningful guarantees
for model-free settings with value function approximation. In this paper, we explore the prospect of
developing tighter regret bounds suitable for model-free settings.
Contributions. We show that by combining Estimation-to-Decisions with optimistic online estimation, an elegant technique recently introduced by Zhang [31], it is possible to obtain regret bounds
that improve upon Foster et al. [12] by accommodating weaker notions of estimation error. Our main
contributions are:
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

