Greedy Pruning with Group Lasso Provably
Generalizes for Matrix Sensing

Nived Rajaraman
EECS Department
University of California, Berkeley
nived.rajaraman@eecs.berkeley.edu
Aryan Mokhtari
ECE Department
The University of Texas at Austin
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Devvrit
CS Department
The University of Texas at Austin
devvrit.03@gmail.com
Kannan Ramchandran
EECS Department
University of California, Berkeley
kannanr@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Pruning schemes have been widely used in practice to reduce the complexity of
trained models with a massive number of parameters. In fact, several practical
studies have shown that if a pruned model is fine-tuned with some gradient-based
updates it generalizes well to new samples. Although the above pipeline, which
we refer to as pruning + fine-tuning, has been extremely successful in lowering the
complexity of trained models, there is very little known about the theory behind
this success. In this paper, we address this issue by investigating the pruning +
fine-tuning framework on the overparameterized matrix sensing problem with the
ground truth U⋆ ∈ Rd×r and the overparameterized model U ∈ Rd×k with k ≫ r.
We study the approximate local minima of the mean square error, augmented
Pk
with a smooth version of a group Lasso regularizer, i=1 ∥U ei ∥2 . In particular,
we provably show that pruning all the columns below a certain explicit ℓ2 -norm
threshold results in a solution Uprune which has the minimum number of columns
r, yet close to the ground truth in training loss. Moreover, in the subsequent finetuning phase, gradient descent initialized at Uprune converges at a linear rate to its
limit. While our analysis provides insights into the role of regularization in pruning,
we also show that running gradient descent in the absence of regularization results
in models which are not suitable for greedy pruning, i.e., many columns could have
their ℓ2 norm comparable to that of the maximum. To the best of our knowledge,
our results provide the first rigorous insights on why greedy pruning + fine-tuning
leads to smaller models which also generalize well.

1

Introduction

Training overparameterized models with a massive number of parameters has become the norm in
almost all machine learning applications. While these massive models are successful in achieving
low training error and in some cases good generalization performance, they are hard to store or
communicate. Moreover, inference with such large models is computationally prohibitive. To
address these issues, a large effort has gone into compressing these overparameterized models via
different approaches, such as quantization schemes [1, 2], unstructured [3] and structured [4–6]
pruning mechanisms, and distillation techniques using student-teacher models [7, 8]. Among these
approaches, greedy pruning, in which we greedily eliminate the parameters of the trained model
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

