Prompt Pre-Training with Twenty-Thousand Classes
for Open-Vocabulary Visual Recognition

Shuhuai Ren‡† , Aston Zhang†∗, Yi Zhu† , Shuai Zhang† , Shuai Zheng† ,
Mu Li† , Alex Smola† , Xu Sun‡
‡
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
†
Amazon Web Services

Abstract
This work proposes POMP, a prompt pre-training method for vision-language
models. Being memory and computation efficient, POMP enables the learned
prompt to condense semantic information for a rich set of visual concepts with over
twenty-thousand classes. Once pre-trained, the prompt with a strong transferable
ability can be directly plugged into a variety of visual recognition tasks including
image classification, semantic segmentation, and object detection, to boost recognition performances in a zero-shot manner. Empirical evaluation shows that POMP
achieves state-of-the-art performances on 21 datasets, e.g., 67.0% average accuracy
on 10 classification datasets (+3.1% compared to CoOp) and 84.4 hIoU on openvocabulary Pascal VOC segmentation (+6.9 compared to ZSSeg). Our code is
available at https://github.com/amazon-science/prompt-pretraining.

1

Introduction

It has been a new norm to formulate visual recognition tasks (e.g., image classification, object
detection, and semantic segmentation) as language-guided visual recognition or vision-and-language
problems [42, 19, 61]. In language-guided visual recognition, categories of images are represented
by natural language rather than discrete label IDs, and the semantics between images and their
corresponding textual descriptions are often aligned via a constrastive loss during training [42]. Model
inference also becomes an image-to-text matching problem, where text prompts like “a photo of a
[CLASSNAME]" are curated as text descriptions of images. By varying the [CLASSNAME] placeholder
and computing the similarity between text descriptions and images, we can identify the most suitable
class name and consider it as the predicted target class. A significant benefit of this language-guided
paradigm is that it supports open-vocabulary inference, that is, zero-shot recognition for arbitrary
categories that may not even have been seen during training, thanks to the flexibility in modifying the
class names in the textual prompt [42, 45].
As the context for class names, the text prompt plays a critical role in language-guided visual
recognition models. A good prompt should holistically express the semantics of visual categories to
better elicit the knowledge learned by vision-language models (VLMs) during pre-training. There are
two popular types of prompts: hard prompts (e.g., a photo of a [CLASSNAME]) and soft prompts.
Soft prompts are learnable token embeddings that can be fine-tuned given some input data, and have
been demonstrated to be more effective and stable on downstream tasks than hard prompts [65, 35, 63].
However, traditional prompt tuning methods usually fine-tune the soft prompt on task-specific datasets
with a limited number of class labels, making it difficult to generalize to novel classes and across
tasks [45, 2]. For example, when transferred between the two downstream datasets of Flowers102 [40]
∗

Correspondence to Aston Zhang <az@astonzhang.com>

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

