Data Market Design through Deep Learning

Sai Srivatsa Ravindranath∗
Yanchen Jiang∗
David C. Parkes
Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
{saisr, yanchen_jiang, parkes} @g.harvard.edu

Abstract
The data market design problem is a problem in economic theory to find a set
of signaling schemes (statistical experiments) to maximize expected revenue to
the information seller, where each experiment reveals some of the information
known to a seller and has a corresponding price [7]. Each buyer has their own
decision to make in a world environment, and their subjective expected value for the
information associated with a particular experiment comes from the improvement
in this decision and depends on their prior and value for different outcomes. In
a setting with multiple buyers, a buyer’s expected value for an experiment may
also depend on the information sold to others [12]. We introduce the application of
deep learning for the design of revenue-optimal data markets, looking to expand
the frontiers of what can be understood and achieved. Relative to earlier work on
deep learning for auction design [32], we must learn signaling schemes rather than
allocation rules and handle obedience constraints—these arising from modeling
the downstream actions of buyers—in addition to incentive constraints on bids.
Our experiments demonstrate that this new deep learning framework can almost
precisely replicate all known solutions from theory, expand to more complex
settings, and be used to establish the optimality of new designs for data markets
and make conjectures in regard to the structure of optimal designs.

1

Introduction

Many characterize the current era as the Information Age. Companies such as Google and Meta
(search and social media), Experian and TransUnion (credit agencies), and Amazon and American
Express (commerce) hold vast quantities of data about individuals. In turn, this has led to data
markets, where information about an individual can be purchased in real-time to guide decisionmaking (e.g., LiveRamp, Segment, Bloomreach). In this paper, we advance the design of market
rules that govern the structuring and sale of this kind of information. Using machine learning, we
leverage existing theoretical frameworks [7, 12] to replicate all known solutions from theory, expand
to more complex settings, establish the optimality of new designs, and make conjectures in regard
to the structure of optimal designs. Although this is not our focus, there are also important ethical
questions in regard to data markets, in regard to privacy, ownership, informed consent, and the use of
data [2, 11, 8, 5, 19, 33, 1].
In settings with a single buyer, Bergemann et al. [7] introduce a framework in which there is a data
buyer who faces a decision problem under uncertainty, and has a payoff depending on their choice
of action and the underlying state of the world. There is a data seller who knows the world state,
and can disclose information through a menu of statistical experiments, each experiment offering a
stochastic signal that reveals some (or all) of the seller’s information and each of which is associated
with a price. The buyer’s willingness to pay for information is determined by their type, which defines
their prior belief and their value for different outcomes in the world (these arising from the action
that the buyer will choose to take).
∗

Equal Contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

