DropPos: Pre-Training Vision Transformers by
Reconstructing Dropped Positions

Haochen Wang1,3 Junsong Fan1,4 Yuxi Wang1,4 Kaiyou Song2
Tong Wang2 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,3,4∗
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
Megvii Technology 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI_CAS
{wanghaochen2022, junsong.fan, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn
yuxiwang93@gmail.com {songkaiyou, wangtong}@megvii.com

Abstract
As it is empirically observed that Vision Transformers (ViTs) are quite insensitive
to the order of input tokens, the need for an appropriate self-supervised pretext
task that enhances the location awareness of ViTs is becoming evident. To address
this, we present DropPos, a novel pretext task designed to reconstruct Dropped
Positions. The formulation of DropPos is simple: we first drop a large random
subset of positional embeddings and then the model classifies the actual position
for each non-overlapping patch among all possible positions solely based on their
visual appearance. To avoid trivial solutions, we increase the difficulty of this task
by keeping only a subset of patches visible. Additionally, considering there may be
different patches with similar visual appearances, we propose position smoothing
and attentive reconstruction strategies to relax this classification problem, since
it is not necessary to reconstruct their exact positions in these cases. Empirical
evaluations of DropPos show strong capabilities. DropPos outperforms supervised
pre-training and achieves competitive results compared with state-of-the-art selfsupervised alternatives on a wide range of downstream benchmarks. This suggests
that explicitly encouraging spatial reasoning abilities, as DropPos does, indeed
contributes to the improved location awareness of ViTs. The code is publicly
available at https://github.com/Haochen-Wang409/DropPos.

1

Introduction

Learning extensible visual representations without any human annotations, known as self-supervised
learning (SSL), has become a research hotspot in the field of computer vision [7,9,26,27,29,47,59,62]
since it enables efficient transfer to various downstream benchmarks. To achieve this goal, researchers
carefully design visual pretext tasks to produce appropriate supervision using only images [3, 18, 46,
52, 62, 69, 70]. Two popular approaches among these are contrastive learning (CL) [62] and masked
image modeling (MIM) [3], both of which have demonstrated promising scaling behavior of vision
models, particularly Vision Transformers (ViTs) [21]. Despite the success of these methods, ViTs are
found to be relatively insensitive to the order of input tokens [13, 43, 67], leading to the hypothesis
that they tend to model the relationship between a set of unordered input tokens. Therefore, a natural
question arises: beyond the current CL and MIM paradigms, whether a pretext task that explicitly
enhances the positional awareness of ViTs can further improve their representation learning abilities?
∗

Correponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

