Deep Stochastic Processes
via Functional Markov Transition Operators

Jin Xu1∗

Emilien Dupont1†
1

Kaspar Märtens2

Tom Rainforth1

Yee Whye Teh1‡

Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK.
2
Big Data Institute, University of Oxford, UK.

Abstract
We introduce Markov Neural Processes (MNPs), a new class of Stochastic Processes
(SPs) which are constructed by stacking sequences of neural parameterised Markov
transition operators in function space. We prove that these Markov transition
operators can preserve the exchangeability and consistency of SPs. Therefore, the
proposed iterative construction adds substantial flexibility and expressivity to the
original framework of Neural Processes (NPs) without compromising consistency
or adding restrictions. Our experiments demonstrate clear advantages of MNPs over
baseline models on a variety of tasks.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Processes (SPs) are widely used in many scientific disciplines, including biology [3],
chemistry [57], neuroscience [34], physics [45] and control theory [1]. They are formed by a
(typically infinite) collection of random variables and can be used to model data by considering the
conditional distribution of target variables given observed context variables. In machine learning, SPs
in the form of Bayesian nonparametric models—such as Gaussian Processes (GPs) [47] and Dirichlet
processes [56]—are used in tasks such as regression, classification, and clustering. SPs parameterised
by neural networks have also been used for meta-learning [21, 60] and generative modelling [15, 39].
With the increasing amount of data available, and the complex patterns arising in many applications,
more flexible and scalable SP models with greater learning capacity are required. The Neural Process
(NP) family [18, 21, 22, 25, 30] meets this demand by parameterising SPs with neural networks, and
enjoys greater flexibility and computational efficiency compared to traditional nonparametric models.
Unfortunately, the original version of NPs [22] lacks expressivity and often underfits the data in
practice [30]. Various extensions have therefore been proposed—such as Attentive Neural Processes
(ANPs) [30], Convolutional Neural Processes (CONVNPs) [18, 25] and Gaussian Neural Processes
(GNPs) [4]—to improve expressivity. However, these models—which we refer to as predictive
SP s—are based around directly constructing mappings from contexts to predictive distributions, and
therefore forgo the fully generative nature of the original NP formulation. This can be problematic as
it means that they are no longer consistent under conditioning: their predictive distributions no longer
correspond to the conditional distribution of an underlying SP prior. In turn, this can cause a variety
of issues, such as conflicts or inconsistencies between predictions and miscalibrated uncertainties.
To address these issues, we propose an alternative mechanism to extend the NP family and provide
increased expressivity while maintaining their original fully generative nature and consistency. We
∗

Corresponding author: <jin.xu@stats.ox.ac.uk>
ED is now at Google DeepMind; this work was done while ED was at Oxford.
‡
YWT is at both Google DeepMind and Oxford; this work was done at Oxford.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

