Graph Denoising Diffusion for Inverse Protein Folding

Kai Yi ∗
University of New South Wales
kai.yi@unsw.edu.au

Bingxin Zhou ∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
bingxin.zhou@sjtu.edu.cn

Pietro Liò
University of Cambridge
pl219@cam.ac.uk

Yiqing Shen
Johns Hopkins University
yshen92@jhu.edu

Yu Guang Wang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
University of New South Wales
yuguang.wang@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Inverse protein folding is challenging due to its inherent one-to-many mapping
characteristic, where numerous possible amino acid sequences can fold into a
single, identical protein backbone. This task involves not only identifying viable
sequences but also representing the sheer diversity of potential solutions. However,
existing discriminative models, such as transformer-based auto-regressive models,
struggle to encapsulate the diverse range of plausible solutions. In contrast,
diffusion probabilistic models, as an emerging genre of generative approaches,
offer the potential to generate a diverse set of sequence candidates for determined
protein backbones. We propose a novel graph denoising diffusion model for
inverse protein folding, where a given protein backbone guides the diffusion
process on the corresponding amino acid residue types. The model infers the joint
distribution of amino acids conditioned on the nodes’ physiochemical properties
and local environment. Moreover, we utilize amino acid replacement matrices
for the diffusion forward process, encoding the biologically meaningful prior
knowledge of amino acids from their spatial and sequential neighbors as well as
themselves, which reduces the sampling space of the generative process. Our
model achieves state-of-the-art performance over a set of popular baseline methods
in sequence recovery and exhibits great potential in generating diverse protein
sequences for a determined protein backbone structure. The code is available on
https://github.com/ykiiiiii/GraDe_IF.

1

Introduction

Inverse protein folding, or inverse folding, aims to predict feasible amino acid (AA) sequences that
can fold into a specified 3D protein structure [22]. The results from inverse folding can facilitate the
design of novel proteins with desired structural and functional characteristics. These proteins can
serve numerous applications, ranging from targeted drug delivery to enzyme design for both academic
and industrial purposes [25, 31, 37, 52]. In this paper, we develop a diffusion model tailored for
graph node denoising to obtain new AA sequences given a protein backbone.
Despite its importance, inverse folding remains challenging due to the immense sequence space to
explore, coupled with the complexity of protein folding. On top of energy-based physical reasoning of
a protein’s folded state [1], recent advancements in deep learning yield significant progress in learning
the mapping from protein structures to AA sequences directly. For example, discriminative models
∗

equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

