DIFFER: Decomposing Individual Reward for Fair
Experience Replay in Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning
Xunhan Hu1 , Jian Zhao1 , Wengang Zhou1,2 † , Ruili Feng3,1 , Houqiang Li1,2 †
1

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, 3 Alibaba Group
{cathyhxh,zj140}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhwg@ustc.edu.cn,
ruilifengustc@gmail.com, lihq@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is a challenging task, as
agents must learn complex and diverse individual strategies from a shared team
reward. However, existing methods struggle to distinguish and exploit important
individual experiences, as they lack an effective way to decompose the team
reward into individual rewards. To address this challenge, we propose DIFFER,
a powerful theoretical framework for decomposing individual rewards to enable
fair experience replay in MARL. By enforcing the invariance of network gradients,
we establish a partial differential equation whose solution yields the underlying
individual reward function. The individual TD-error can then be computed from
the solved closed-form individual rewards, indicating the importance of each
piece of experience in the learning task and guiding the training process. Our
method elegantly achieves an equivalence to the original learning framework
when individual experiences are homogeneous, while also adapting to achieve
more muscular efficiency and fairness when diversity is observed. Our extensive
experiments on popular benchmarks validate the effectiveness of our theory and
method, demonstrating significant improvements in learning efficiency and fairness.
The code is available in https://github.com/cathyhxh/DIFFER.

1

Introduction

In widely adopted cooperative multi-agent systems [1–4], a team of agents typically operates under
the constraint of individual local observations and limited communication capabilities. In each
time step, all agents collectively interact with the environment by taking team actions, leading to
a transition to the subsequent global state and the provision of a team reward. Consequently, the
agents must acquire the ability to effectively coordinate their actions and maximize the cumulative
team return. Over the past few years, cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has
demonstrated remarkable achievements in addressing such challenges and has exhibited promising
potential across diverse domains, including multi-player games[5–9], autonomous cars [10, 11],
traffic light control [12, 13], economy pricing [14] and robot networks [15, 16].
In recent years, value factorization methods [17–20] have emerged as leading approaches for addressing cooperative multi-agent tasks [21–23]. These methods are rooted in the centralized training and
decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm [24–26]. Specifically, each agent’s network models the
†

Corresponding authors: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

