Posterior Sampling with Delayed Feedback for
Reinforcement Learning with Linear Function
Approximation

Nikki Lijing Kuang ∗
University of California, San Diego
l1kuang@ucsd.edu

Ming Yin ∗
Princeton University
my0049@princeton.edu

Yu-Xiang Wang
University of California, Santa Barbara
yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Mengdi Wang
Princeton University
mengdiw@princeton.edu

Yi-An Ma
University of California, San Diego
yianma@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Recent studies in reinforcement learning (RL) have made significant progress by
leveraging function approximation to alleviate the sample complexity hurdle for
better performance. Despite the success, existing provably efficient algorithms
typically rely on the accessibility of immediate feedback upon taking actions. The
failure to account for the impact of delay in observations can significantly degrade
the performance of real-world systems due to the regret blow-up. In this work,
we tackle the challenge of delayed feedback in RL with linear function approximation by employing posterior sampling, which has been shown to empirically
outperform the popular UCB algorithms in a wide range of regimes. We first introduce Delayed-PSVI, an optimistic value-based algorithm that effectively explores
the value function space via noise perturbation with posterior sampling. We provide the first analysis for posterior sampling
√ algorithms with delayed feedback in
e d3 H 3 T + d2 H 2 E[τ ]) worst-case regret
RL and show our algorithm achieves O(
in the presence of unknown stochastic delays. Here E[τ ] is the expected delay.
To further improve its computational efficiency and to expand its applicability
in high-dimensional RL problems, we incorporate a gradient-based approximate
sampling scheme via Langevin dynamics for Delayed-LPSVI, which maintains
the same order-optimal regret guarantee with e
O(dHK) computational cost. Empirical evaluations are performed to demonstrate the statistical and computational
efficacy of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is the main workhorse for sequential decision-making problems where
an agent needs to balance the trade-off between exploitation and exploration in the unknown environment. The flexible and powerful function approximation endowed by deep neural networks greatly
contributes to the empirical success of RL in domains such as Large Language Models (LLMs)
[50, 59], robotics [51], and AI for Science [37]. In general, collecting real-world training data from
such practical systems can be expensive, which requires algorithms to be both sample efficient and
computationally efficient. Recently, there have been growing efforts towards studying provably efficient RL algorithms in settings ranging from tabular Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) [29, 45, 69]
to large-scale RL with function approximation [13, 35]. However, these algorithms typically rely
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

