Training Transformers with 4-bit Integers

Haocheng Xi2∗ , Changhao Li1 , Jianfei Chen1† , and Jun Zhu1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua University
2
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
{xihc20,lichangh20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {jianfeic,dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Quantizing the activation, weight, and gradient to 4-bit is promising to accelerate
neural network training. However, existing 4-bit training methods require custom
numerical formats which are not supported by contemporary hardware. In this
work, we propose a training method for transformers with all matrix multiplications
implemented with the INT4 arithmetic. Training with an ultra-low INT4 precision
is challenging. To achieve this, we carefully analyze the specific structures of activation and gradients in transformers to propose dedicated quantizers for them. For
forward propagation, we identify the challenge of outliers and propose a Hadamard
quantizer to suppress the outliers. For backpropagation, we leverage the structural sparsity of gradients by proposing bit splitting and leverage score sampling
techniques to quantize gradients accurately. Our algorithm achieves competitive accuracy on a wide range of tasks including natural language understanding, machine
translation, and image classification. Unlike previous 4-bit training methods, our
algorithm can be implemented on the current generation of GPUs. Our prototypical
linear operator implementation is up to 2.2 times faster than the FP16 counterparts
and speeds up the training by 17.8% on average for sufficiently large models. Our
code is available at https://github.com/xijiu9/Train_Transformers_with_INT4.

1

Introduction

Training neural networks is computationally demanding. Training with low-precision arithmetic
(a.k.a., fully quantized training or FQT) is promising to improve computational and memory efficiency.
FQT methods add some quantizers and dequantizers in the original full-precision computational
graph, and replace expensive floating-point operations with cheap low-precision ones.
Research in FQT aims to reduce the training numerical precision, without sacrificing much convergence speed or accuracy. The required numerical precision has been reduced from FP16 [33] to
FP8 [54, 46], INT32+INT8 [3] and INT8+INT5 [7]. FP8 training is implemented in Nvidia’s H100
GPU with Transformer Engine [35], achieving impressive speedup for the training of large-scale
transformers. Recently, the training numerical precision has been pushed down to 4 bits. Sun et
al. [47] successfully trained several modern networks with INT4 activation/weights and FP4 gradients;
and Chmiel et al. [8] propose a custom 4-bit logarithmic numerical format to further improve the
accuracy. However, these 4-bit training methods cannot be directly utilized for acceleration as they
require custom numerical formats that are not supported on contemporary hardware.
There are significant optimization challenges to train neural networks at an extremely low 4-bit level.
First, the non-differentiable quantizers in forward propagation make the loss landscape rugged, where
gradient-based optimizers can easily stuck at local optima [31]. Second, gradients are only computed
* This work was done during an internship in the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
University
†
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

