NPCL: Neural Processes for Uncertainty-Aware
Continual Learning

Dong Gong∗
UNSW Sydney
dong.gong@unsw.edu.au

Saurav Jha
UNSW Sydney
saurav.jha@unsw.edu.au
He Zhao
CSIRO’s Data61
he.zhao@ieee.org

Lina Yao
CSIRO’s Data61, UNSW Sydney
lina.yao@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) aims to train deep neural networks efficiently on streaming
data while limiting the forgetting caused by new tasks. However, learning transferable knowledge with less interference between tasks is difficult, and real-world
deployment of CL models is limited by their inability to measure predictive uncertainties. To address these issues, we propose handling CL tasks with neural
processes (NPs), a class of meta-learners that encode different tasks into probabilistic distributions over functions all while providing reliable uncertainty estimates.
Specifically, we propose an NP-based CL approach (NPCL) with task-specific
modules arranged in a hierarchical latent variable model. We tailor regularizers on
the learned latent distributions to alleviate forgetting. The uncertainty estimation
capabilities of the NPCL can also be used to handle the task head/module inference
challenge in CL. Our experiments show that the NPCL outperforms previous CL
approaches. We validate the effectiveness of uncertainty estimation in the NPCL
for identifying novel data and evaluating instance-level model confidence. Code is
available at https://github.com/srvCodes/NPCL.

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) aims to help deep neural networks (DNNs) learn from a stream of nonstationary tasks by retaining the previously acquired knowledge [54, 35]. To achieve this, CL agents
target alleviating the catastrophic forgetting issue with restricted computational and memory costs
[42]. This requires balancing the plasticity for new knowledge with the stability for old [37].
To handle forgetting in CL, experience replay (ER) methods [30, 6] are one effective way to train
DNNs on a memory buffer with a subset of the past tasks’ experiences. Other than the ER methods,
many regularization-based approaches have been proposed to penalize the forgetting on the DNNs’
parametric [30] or representation spaces [5, 4]. However, these may still suffer from interference due
to the regularization on the entire parameter space [7]. To address this, parameter isolation methods
[53, 33] define task-specific training components but are usually confined to task incremental CL
setups requiring task ID during testing [47]. It is thus challenging for CL agents to maintain
transferable and shareable knowledge. Lastly, a hurdle to the real-world deployment of CL agents
is their inability to measure predictive uncertainties, which impacts the potential utilization of CL
across various practical applications, particularly those with critical safety considerations [31].
∗

D. Gong is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

