SubseasonalClimateUSA: A Dataset for
Subseasonal Forecasting and Benchmarking

Soukayna Mouatadid1 , Paulo Orenstein2 , Genevieve Flaspohler3 , Miruna Oprescu4 ,
Judah Cohen3 , Franklyn Wang5 , Sean Knight3 , Maria Geogdzhayeva3 ,
Sam Levang6 , Ernest Fraenkel3 , Lester Mackey4
1
University of Toronto, 2 IMPA, 3 MIT, 4 Microsoft Research, 5 Harvard, 6 Salient Predictions

Abstract
Subseasonal forecasting of the weather two to six weeks in advance is critical
for resource allocation and advance disaster notice but poses many challenges
for the forecasting community. At this forecast horizon, physics-based dynamical models have limited skill, and the targets for prediction depend in a complex
manner on both local weather and global climate variables. Recently, machine
learning methods have shown promise in advancing the state of the art but only
at the cost of complex data curation, integrating expert knowledge with aggregation across multiple relevant data sources, file formats, and temporal and spatial
resolutions. To streamline this process and accelerate future development, we
introduce SubseasonalClimateUSA, a curated dataset for training and benchmarking subseasonal forecasting models in the United States. We use this dataset to
benchmark a diverse suite of subseasonal models, including operational dynamical
models, classical meteorological baselines, and ten state-of-the-art machine learning and deep learning-based methods from the literature. Overall, our benchmarks
suggest simple and effective ways to extend the accuracy of current operational
models. SubseasonalClimateUSA is regularly updated and accessible via the
https://github.com/microsoft/subseasonal_data/ Python package.

1

Introduction

Weather and climate forecasting are fundamental scientific problems with many applications, including agriculture, energy grids, transportation and disaster prevention [36, 71, 55]. Indeed, short-term
and long-term operational forecasts are critically employed in many sectors of our society and the
world economy. However, skillful forecasts for the subseasonal regime—that is, 2 to 6 weeks ahead—
still present operational challenges due to the chaotic nature of the weather [32] and to the interaction
of weather and climate variables operating at different spatial and temporal scales [66].
In recent years, these challenges have spurred intense activity from both the meteorological and
machine learning communities. On the one hand, steady advances have extended the reach of physicsbased dynamical models of the atmosphere and oceans into the subseasonal realm [64, 50, 29]. On
the other, parallel efforts from the machine learning community have led to improved predictive
skill through new models trained on historical observational data and dynamical model forecasts
[31, 8, 23, 2, 19, 78, 67–69, 60, 39].
Nevertheless, developing and benchmarking new subseasonal models remains challenging due to
a lack of standardized, curated datasets targeting this forecast horizon. The data necessary for
subseasonal predictions are often collected from multiple data sources, each with its own data
processing pipeline, and then standardized into a common spatial and temporal resolution. Because
there is uncertainty regarding the main drivers of subseasonal phenomena, domain experts are
typically needed to determine which features are likely to carry signal, and different developers
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

