Refined Mechanism Design for Approximately
Structured Priors via Active Regression

Christos Boutsikas
Purdue University
cboutsik@purdue.edu

Petros Drineas
Purdue University
pdrineas@purdue.edu

Alexandros Psomas
Purdue University
apsomas@cs.purdue.edu

Marios Mertzanidis
Purdue University
mmertzan@purdue.edu

Paritosh Verma
Purdue University
verma136@purdue.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of a revenue-maximizing seller with a large number of
items m for sale to n strategic bidders, whose valuations are drawn independently
from high-dimensional, unknown prior distributions. It is well-known that optimal
and even approximately-optimal mechanisms for this setting are notoriously difficult to characterize or compute, and, even when they can be found, are often rife
with various counter-intuitive properties. In this paper, following a model introduced recently by Cai and Daskalakis [CD22], we consider the case that bidders’
prior distributions can be well-approximated by a topic model. We design an active
learning component, responsible for interacting with the bidders and outputting
low-dimensional approximations of their types, and a mechanism design component, responsible for robustifying mechanisms for the low-dimensional model to
work for the approximate types of the former component. On the active learning
front, we cast our problem in the framework of Randomized Linear Algebra (RLA)
for regression problems, allowing us to import several breakthrough results from
that line of research, and adapt them to our setting. On the mechanism design front,
we remove many restrictive assumptions of prior work on the type of access needed
to the underlying distributions and the associated mechanisms. To the best of our
knowledge, our work is the first to formulate connections between mechanism
design, and RLA for active learning of regression problems, opening the door for
further applications of randomized linear algebra primitives to mechanism design.

1

Introduction

The design of revenue-optimal auctions is a central problem in Economics and Computer Science.
In this problem, a revenue-maximizing seller has m heterogeneous items for sale to n strategic
bidders. Each bidder i has a type ti ∈ Rd which contains enough information to encode the bidder’s
willingness to pay for every subset of items. Bidders’ types are private information, and thus, in order
to provide meaningful guarantees on the seller’s revenue, the standard approach in Economics is to
make a Bayesian assumption: types are drawn from a joint distribution D.
Assuming a single item for sale and bidders’ types that are drawn independently from known
distributions, Myerson’s seminal work [Mye81] provides a closed-form solution for the revenueoptimal mechanism. Beyond this single-item case, however, multi-item mechanism design remains an active research agenda, even forty years later. Optimal mechanisms are no longer
tractable, in any sense of the word, as well as exhibit various counter-intuitive properties [MV07,
DDT13, DDT15, BCKW15, HR15, HN19, PSCW22]; see [Das15] for a survey. On the other
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

