(Amplified) Banded Matrix Factorization:
A unified approach to private training

Christopher A. Choquette-Choo
Google DeepMind
cchoquette@google.com
Ryan McKenna
Google Research
mckennar@google.com

Arun Ganesh
Google Research
arunganesh@google.com

H. Brendan McMahan
Google Research
mcmahan@google.com

Abhradeep Thakurta
Google DeepMind
athakurta@google.com

Keith Rush
Google Research
krush@google.com

Zheng Xu
Google Research
xuzheng@google.com

Abstract
Matrix factorization (MF) mechanisms for differential privacy (DP) have substantially improved the state-of-the-art in privacy-utility-computation tradeoffs for ML
applications in a variety of scenarios, but in both the centralized and federated
settings there remain instances where either MF cannot be easily applied, or other
algorithms provide better tradeoffs (typically, as  becomes small). In this work,
we show how MF can subsume prior state-of-the-art algorithms in both federated
and centralized training settings, across all privacy budgets. The key technique
throughout is the construction of MF mechanisms with banded matrices (lowertriangular matrices with at most b̂ nonzero bands including the main diagonal). For
cross-device federated learning (FL), this enables multiple-participations with a
relaxed device participation schema compatible with practical FL infrastructure
(as demonstrated by a production deployment). In the centralized setting, we
prove that banded matrices enjoy the same privacy amplification results as the
ubiquitous DP - SGD algorithm, but can provide strictly better performance in most
scenarios—this lets us always at least match DP - SGD, and often outperform it.

1

Introduction

We consider machine learning (ML) with DP in the centralized (datacenter) setting and the crossdevice FL setting, extending and improving matrix factorization (MF) mechanisms1 to advance the
state-of-the-art in both. Given bounded-sensitivity batch gradients xi ∈ Rd for i ∈ [n] steps, the
MF - DP - FTRL algorithm uses a noise generation matrix C−1 ∈ Rn×n to return DP gradient estimates
x̂i = xi + [C−1 z][i,∶] where z ∈ Rn×d has IID entries N (0, σ 2 ) for suitable σ > 0. The noise
correlation induced by C−1 is key to the success of MF - DP - FTRL. Alg. 1 and Sec. 2 provide details
and intuition, and Table 1 in App. A summarizes notation and symbols.
1

We use matrix factorization for the algorithmic design of DP mechanisms, and then use these mechanisms
in general-purpose gradient-based private optimization algorithms. This use of matrix factorization is unrelated
to machine learning settings such as collaborative filtering or recommender systems where the ML problem
itself involves matrix factorization [37, 41, 51].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

