Revisiting Out-of-distribution Robustness in NLP:
Benchmark, Analysis, and LLMs Evaluations

Lifan Yuan1 , Yangyi Chen2 , Ganqu Cui1 , Hongcheng Gao3 ,
Fangyuan Zou4 , Xingyi Cheng4 , Heng Ji2 , Zhiyuan Liu1∗, Maosong Sun1∗
1
NLP Group, DCST, IAI, BNRIST, Tsinghua University, Beijing
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Tencent
lievanyuan173@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper reexamines the research on out-of-distribution (OOD) robustness in the
field of NLP. We find that the distribution shift settings in previous studies commonly lack adequate challenges, hindering the accurate evaluation of OOD robustness. To address these issues, we propose a benchmark construction protocol that
ensures clear differentiation and challenging distribution shifts. Then we introduce
BOSS, a Benchmark suite for Out-of-distribution robustneSS evaluation covering 5
tasks and 20 datasets. Based on BOSS, we conduct a series of experiments on pretrained language models for analysis and evaluation of OOD robustness. First, for
vanilla fine-tuning, we examine the relationship between in-distribution (ID) and
OOD performance. We identify three typical types that unveil the inner learning
mechanism, which could potentially facilitate the forecasting of OOD robustness,
correlating with the advancements on ID datasets. Then, we evaluate 5 classic methods on BOSS and find that, despite exhibiting some effectiveness in specific cases,
they do not offer significant improvement compared to vanilla fine-tuning. Further,
we evaluate 5 LLMs with various adaptation paradigms and find that when sufficient
ID data is available, fine-tuning domain-specific models outperform LLMs on ID
examples significantly. However, in the case of OOD instances, prioritizing LLMs
with in-context learning yields better results. We identify that both fine-tuned small
models and LLMs face challenges in effectively addressing downstream tasks. The
code is public at https://github.com/lifan-yuan/OOD_NLP.

1

Introduction

Pretrained language models (PLMs) have excelled in downstream tasks and gained widespread
adoption [24, 60]. However, existing evaluation often assumes independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d) condition [94, 92], which is often violated in real-world scenarios, highlighting the crucial
problem of out-of-distribution (OOD) robustness in NLP models. In this paper, we first revisit the
evaluation of PLMs through an examination of evaluation benchmarks. Thereafter, we delve into the
ID-OOD performance correlation of fine-tuned models by adopting various model scales, training
steps, available training samples, and tunable parameters. Finally, we conduct extensive evaluations
of current robustness-enhanced methods and large language models (LLMs).
Definition. There exist multiple definitions of OOD in literature [2, 115], and we define distribution
shifts considered in this paper from two perspectives. Firstly, [2] classifies distribution shifts into
"semantic shift" and "background shift". Our use of "out-of-distribution" aligns with the concept of
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

