Importance Weighted Actor-Critic for Optimal
Conservative Offline Reinforcement Learning

Hanlin Zhu
EECS, UC Berkeley
hanlinzhu@berkeley.edu

Paria Rashidinejad
EECS, UC Berkeley
paria.rashidinejad@berkeley.edu

Jiantao Jiao
EECS and Statistics, UC Berkeley
jiantao@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We propose A-Crab (Actor-Critic Regularized by Average Bellman error), a new
practical algorithm for offline reinforcement learning (RL) in complex environments with insufficient data coverage. Our algorithm combines the marginalized
importance sampling framework with the actor-critic paradigm, where the critic
returns evaluations of the actor (policy) that are pessimistic relative to the offline
data and have a small average (importance-weighted) Bellman error. Compared
to existing methods, our algorithm simultaneously√
offers a number of advantages:
(1) It achieves the optimal statistical rate of 1/ N —where N is the size of
offline dataset—in converging to the best policy covered in the offline dataset,
even when combined with general function approximators. (2) It relies on a
weaker average notion of policy coverage (compared to the ℓ∞ single-policy
concentrability) that exploits the structure of policy visitations. (3) It outperforms the data-collection behavior policy over a wide range of specific hyperparameters. We provide both theoretical analysis and experimental results to
validate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm. The code is available at
https://github.com/zhuhl98/ACrab.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms aim at learning a good policy based only on historical
interaction data. This paradigm allows for leveraging previously-collected data in learning policies
while avoiding possibly costly and dangerous trial and errors and finds applications in a wide range of
domains from precision medicine (Tang et al., 2022) to robotics (Sinha et al., 2022) to climate (Rolnick
et al., 2022). Despite wide applicability, offline RL has yet to achieve success stories akin to those
observed in online settings that allow for trials and errors (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2016; Ran
et al., 2019; Mirhoseini et al., 2020; Oh et al., 2020; Fawzi et al., 2022; Degrave et al., 2022).
Enabling offline RL for complex real-world problems requires developing algorithms that first,
handle complex high-dimensional observations and second, have minimal requirements on the data
coverage and “best” exploit the information available in data. Powerful function approximators such
as deep neural networks are observed to be effective in handling complex environments and deep RL
algorithms have been behind the success stories mentioned above. This motivates us to investigate
provably optimal offline RL algorithms that can be combined with general function approximators
and have minimal requirements on the coverage and size of the offline dataset.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

