Future-Dependent Value-Based
Off-Policy Evaluation in POMDPs

Masatoshi Uehara ∗
Genentech
uehara.masatoshi@gene.com

Haruka Kiyohara †
Cornell University
hk844@cornell.edu

Andrew Bennett
Morgan Stanley ‡
Andrew.Bennett@morganstanley.com
Nan Jiang
UIUC
nanjiang@illinois.edu

Victor Chernozhukov
MIT
vchern@mit.edu

Nathan Kallus
Cornell University
kallus@cornell.edu

Chengchun Shi
LSE
c.shi7@lse.ac.uk

Wen Sun
Cornell University
ws455@cornell.edu

Abstract
We study off-policy evaluation (OPE) for partially observable MDPs (POMDPs)
with general function approximation. Existing methods such as sequential importance sampling estimators suffer from the curse of horizon in POMDPs. To
circumvent this problem, we develop a novel model-free OPE method by introducing future-dependent value functions that take future proxies as inputs and perform
a similar role to that of classical value functions in fully-observable MDPs. We
derive a new off-policy Bellman equation for future-dependent value functions as
conditional moment equations that use history proxies as instrumental variables.
We further propose a minimax learning method to learn future-dependent value
functions using the new Bellman equation. We obtain the PAC result, which implies
our OPE estimator is close to the true policy value under Bellman completeness, as
long as futures and histories contain sufficient information about latent states. Our
code is available at https://github.com/aiueola/neurips2023-future-dependent-ope.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated success when it is possible to interact with the
environment and collect data in an adaptive manner. However, for domains such as healthcare,
education, robotics, and social sciences, online learning can be risky and unethical [e.g., KHS+ 15,
KL19, TDHL19, SRRH21]. To address this issue, a variety of offline RL methods have recently been
developed for policy learning and evaluation using historical data in these domains [see LKTF20, for
an overview]. In this paper, we focus on the off-policy evaluation (OPE) problem, which concerns
estimating the value of a new policy (called the evaluation policy) using offline log data that was
∗

Co-first author. This work was done at Cornell University
Co-first author. This work was done at Tokyo Institute of Technology
‡
This work was done at Cornell University
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

