LEACE: Perfect linear concept erasure in closed form

Nora Belrose1

David Schneider-Joseph1 Shauli Ravfogel2 Ryan Cotterell3
Edward Raff4 Stella Biderman1,4
1
EleutherAI 2 Bar-Ilan University 3 ETH Zürich 4 Booz Allen Hamilton
{nora,stella}@eleuther.ai david@davidsj.com

Abstract
Concept erasure aims to remove specified features from a representation. It can
improve fairness (e.g. preventing a classifier from using gender or race) and
interpretability (e.g. removing a concept to observe changes in model behavior). We
introduce LEAst-squares Concept Erasure (LEACE), a closed-form method which
provably prevents all linear classifiers from detecting a concept while changing the
representation as little as possible, as measured by a broad class of norms. We apply
LEACE to large language models with a novel procedure called concept scrubbing,
which erases target concept information from every layer in the network. We
demonstrate our method on two tasks: measuring the reliance of language models
on part-of-speech information, and reducing gender bias in BERT embeddings. Our
code is available at https://github.com/EleutherAI/concept-erasure.

1

Introduction

The ability to prevent a machine learning system from using a specified concept is important for
fairness and interpretability. Popular notions of fairness require that protected attributes should not
causally affect predictions [22, 26], and interpretability research often estimates the causal effect of a
concept by attempting to remove it from a model’s internal representations [10, 30, 25, 5, 18].
What it means for a model M to “use” a concept Z is often vague and application-specific, but
a necessary condition is that its outputs—and therefore its inputs and hidden states—should have
significant mutual information with Z.1 Concept erasure leverages this fact to limit M’s use of Z
without finetuning or inspecting its parameters. Instead, we edit the input or hidden states X used by
M to minimize the predictive V-information IV (X → Z) [43], a tractable lower bound on the mutual
information I(X; Z) which measures the degree to which classifiers from the family V can predict
Z. Intuitively, if no classifier in V can outperform a constant function at predicting Z—a condition
known as guardedness—then M can’t use Z either, at least if V is expressive enough relative to M.
In this work, we improve upon existing concept erasure techniques using a theory-driven approach.
We focus on the case where V is the set of linear classifiers, and prove a previously unnoticed
equivalence: a classification task is linearly guarded if and only if every class has exactly the same
mean feature vector (§ 3). Leveraging this equivalence, we derive a simple necessary and sufficient
condition for an affine transformation to produce linearly guarded features. We then identify the
unique surgical transformation in this family—the one that minimizes the mean squared distance
from the original features with respect to all norms induced by inner products, including the popular
Euclidean and Mahalanobis norms. We name it LEAst-squares Concept Erasure (LEACE) (§ 4).
While prior work has focused on preventing linear models from leveraging Z, we aim to erase
concepts from deep neural networks as well. Interpretability research has shown that networks
1
This follows from the fact that causal dependence is a special kind of statistical dependence [28]. By the
data processing inequality, M’s output can’t have any more information about Z than its input or hidden states.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

