Open Visual Knowledge Extraction via
Relation-Oriented Multimodality Model Prompting

Hejie Cui1∗ Xinyu Fang2∗ Zihan Zhang2 Ran Xu1 Xuan Kan1 Xin Liu3
Yue Yu4 Manling Li5 Yangqiu Song3 Carl Yang1†
1
Emory University 2 Tongji University 3 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Georgia Institute of Technology 5 Northwestern University

Abstract
Images contain rich relational knowledge that can help machines understand the
world. Existing methods on visual knowledge extraction often rely on the predefined format (e.g., sub-verb-obj tuples) or vocabulary (e.g., relation types),
restricting the expressiveness of the extracted knowledge. In this work, we take
a first exploration to a new paradigm of open visual knowledge extraction. To
achieve this, we present OpenVik which consists of an open relational region
detector to detect regions potentially containing relational knowledge and a visual
knowledge generator that generates format-free knowledge by prompting the large
multimodality model with the detected region of interest. We also explore two
data enhancement techniques for diversifying the generated format-free visual
knowledge. Extensive knowledge quality evaluations highlight the correctness and
uniqueness of the extracted open visual knowledge by OpenVik. Moreover, integrating our extracted knowledge across various visual reasoning applications shows
consistent improvements, indicating the real-world applicability of OpenVik.

1

Introduction

Knowledge extraction has been widely studied on texts [8, 1, 13, 9] for enhancing logical reasoning [45, 14, 6] and explainable AI [18, 57, 5, 55], and recent studies have explored open knowledge
extraction through categorizing seed relations [64, 40] and eliciting from language models [47].
Visual knowledge extraction, on the other hand, captures intricate details like tools, sizes, and
positional relationships, which are often difficult to express exhaustively in texts [39, 28, 48, 7].
Yet existing approaches of visual knowledge extraction are either restricted by a fixed knowledge
format [52, 63, 20, 22] or the predefined sets of objects/relations [52, 63, 21]. While efficient at
capturing interactions between objects, the produced visual knowledge is often limited in richness
and confined to a single format, falling short in representing the diverse real-world information that
can be complemented by visual data.
In this endeavor, we propose to further explore a new paradigm of open visual knowledge extraction
(OpenVik). Specifically, we propose to generate relation-oriented, but format-free knowledge that
includes a wider variety of elements, such as descriptions, insertions, and attributes, among others.
Drawing inspiration from the wealth of knowledge encapsulated in large models [49, 61, 46], we
propose to leverage pre-trained large multimodality models by eliciting open visual knowledge
through relation-oriented visual prompting. This approach allows for a more nuanced understanding
of visual data, mirroring how humans naturally emphasize certain aspects of visual scenes when
perceiving and describing visual information, leading to more flexible visual knowledge extraction.
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence to: j.carlyang@emory.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

