Characterization and Learning of Causal Graphs with
Small Conditioning Sets

Murat Kocaoglu
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
mkocaoglu@purdue.edu

Abstract
Constraint-based causal discovery algorithms learn part of the causal graph structure by systematically testing conditional independences observed in the data.
These algorithms, such as the PC algorithm and its variants, rely on graphical
characterizations of the so-called equivalence class of causal graphs proposed by
Pearl. However, constraint-based causal discovery algorithms struggle when data
is limited since conditional independence tests quickly lose their statistical power,
especially when the conditioning set is large. To address this, we propose using
conditional independence tests where the size of the conditioning set is upper
bounded by some integer k for robust causal discovery. The existing graphical characterizations of the equivalence classes of causal graphs are not applicable when
we cannot leverage all the conditional independence statements. We first define the
notion of k-Markov equivalence: Two causal graphs are k-Markov equivalent if
they entail the same conditional independence constraints where the conditioning
set size is upper bounded by k. We propose a novel representation that allows
us to graphically characterize k-Markov equivalence between two causal graphs.
We propose a sound constraint-based algorithm called the k-PC algorithm for
learning this equivalence class. Finally, we conduct synthetic, and semi-synthetic
experiments to demonstrate that the k-PC algorithm enables more robust causal
discovery in the small sample regime compared to the baseline algorithms.

1

Introduction

Causal reasoning is a critical tool for machine learning and artificial intelligence research with benefits
ranging from domain adaptation to planning, explainability and fairness [27, 12, 26]. Estimating
the effect of an action or an intervention from observational data is called causal inference. A
very rich literature of causal inference algorithms have been developed to address this task in the
literature [11, 21, 17, 1]. The function that is used to write an interventional distribution in terms
of the observational distribution is called the estimand. Estimand depends on the causal relations
between the system variables, which are represented in the form of a directed acyclic graph (DAG)
called the causal graph. Thus, causal graph is required for solving most causal inference problems.
For small and well-studied systems, it might be possible to construct a causal graph using expert
knowledge. However, in modern complex systems with changing structure, we need to learn causal
graphs from data. This is called causal discovery. In most domains, we have access to plenty of
observational data, but no interventional data. An important task then is to understand how much
causal knowledge we can extract from observational data about a system.
The classical approach for addressing this problem is to use the conditional independence (CI)
relations in the data to narrow down the space of plausible causal graphs [19, 9]. These are called
constraint-based methods. Even though the number of causal graphs that entail the same set of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

