DVSOD: RGB-D Video Salient Object Detection

Jingjing Li1 , Wei Ji1,2∗ , Size Wang1 , Wenbo Li2 , Li Cheng1
1
University of Alberta, Canada
2
Samsung Research America AI Center, USA
{jingjin1, wji3, size1, lcheng5}@ualberta.ca, wenbo.li1@samsung.com

Abstract
Salient object detection (SOD) aims to identify standout elements in a scene, with
recent advancements primarily focused on integrating depth data (RGB-D) or
temporal data from videos to enhance SOD in complex scenes. However, the
unison of two types of crucial information remains largely underexplored due to
data constraints. To bridge this gap, we in this work introduce the DViSal dataset,
fueling further research in the emerging field of RGB-D video salient object
detection (DVSOD). Our dataset features 237 diverse RGB-D videos alongside
comprehensive annotations, including object and instance-level markings, as well
as bounding boxes and scribbles. These resources enable a broad scope for potential
research directions. We also conduct benchmarking experiments using various
SOD models, affirming the efficacy of multimodal video input for salient object
detection. Lastly, we highlight some intriguing findings and promising future
research avenues. To foster growth in this field, our dataset and benchmark results
are publicly accessible at: https: // dvsod. github. io/ .

1

Introduction

Salient object detection (SOD) is a fascinating field of study that aims at identifying and distinguishing
the most eye-catching components in static images [59, 91] or dynamic videos [66, 89]. This
intriguing concept hails from cognitive science research into human visual attention behavior - our
incredible ability to swiftly direct attention to the most valuable portions of visual scenes [4]. As
such, SOD assumes an indispensable role in a myriad of real-world applications [52, 53, 30, 50, 69,
96, 24, 93, 81], such as image retrieval, video editing/analysis, medical diagnosis, object detection,
and target tracking.
This field has witnessed significant advances in recent years, particularly in RGB-image based
SOD [65, 90, 82, 72]. However, it has been observed that performance often degrades when objects
and their surroundings share similar appearances or when backgrounds are heavily cluttered. With the
growing ubiquity of 3D imaging sensors in depth cameras, such as Kinect and Intel RealSense, as well
as in mobile devices like iPhone 13 Pro, Huawei Mate 50, and Samsung Galaxy S21, the value of fully
leveraging RGB-D information for SOD has gained considerable research interest [14, 58, 94, 95].
As visualized in Fig. 1, paired depth maps contribute valuable 3D geometric information that helps
the discernment of object silhouettes against backgrounds. Consequently, augmenting RGB images
with depth maps as additional input dramatically enhances the accuracy in localizing salient objects
in complex scenes, i.e., ‘w/ RGB’ vs. ‘w/ RGBD’ in Fig. 1.
On another front, considering the dynamic nature of real-world scenes, video salient object detection
(VSOD) has been a prominent focus of research [19, 56, 71]. In contrast to static images, dynamic
video scenario presents considerable difficulties due to the diversity of motion patterns, occlusions,
blurring, large object deformations, and the inherent complexity of human visual attention behavior.
* Corresponding author.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

