Equivariant Spatio-Temporal Attentive Graph
Networks to Simulate Physical Dynamics

Liming Wu1,2∗, Zhichao Hou3∗, Jirui Yuan4 , Yu Rong5 , Wenbing Huang1,2†
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University
4
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University 5 Tencent AI Lab
{manliowu,hwenbing}@ruc.edu.cn zhou4@ncsu.edu
yu.rong@hotmail.com yuanjirui@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning to represent and simulate the dynamics of physical systems is a crucial
yet challenging task. Existing equivariant Graph Neural Network (GNN) based
methods have encapsulated the symmetry of physics, e.g., translations, rotations,
etc, leading to better generalization ability. Nevertheless, their frame-to-frame
formulation of the task overlooks the non-Markov property mainly incurred by
unobserved dynamics in the environment. In this paper, we reformulate dynamics
simulation as a spatio-temporal prediction task, by employing the trajectory in
the past period to recover the Non-Markovian interactions. We propose Equivariant Spatio-Temporal Attentive Graph Networks (ESTAG), an equivariant version
of spatio-temporal GNNs, to fulfill our purpose. At its core, we design a novel
Equivariant Discrete Fourier Transform (EDFT) to extract periodic patterns from
the history frames, and then construct an Equivariant Spatial Module (ESM) to
accomplish spatial message passing, and an Equivariant Temporal Module (ETM)
with the forward attention and equivariant pooling mechanisms to aggregate temporal message. We evaluate our model on three real datasets corresponding to the
molecular-, protein- and macro-level. Experimental results verify the effectiveness
of ESTAG compared to typical spatio-temporal GNNs and equivariant GNNs.

1

Introduction

It has been a goal to represent and simulate the dynamics of physical systems by making use of
machine learning techniques [37, 8, 12]. The related studies, once pushed forward, have great
potential to facilitate a variety of downstream scientific tasks including Molecular Dynamic (MD)
simulation [19], protein structure prediction [1], virtual screening of drugs and materials [30], modelbased robot planning/control [35], and many others.
Plenty of solutions have been proposed, amongst which the usage of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) [41] becomes one of the most desirable directions. GNNs naturally model particles or
unit elements as nodes, physical relations as edges, and the latent interactions as the message
passing thereon. More recently, a line of researches [38, 11, 21, 9, 32, 20] have been concerned
with generalizing GNNs to fit the symmetry of our physical world. These works, also known as
equivariant GNNs [18], ensure that translating/rotating/reflecting the geometric input of GNNs
results in the output transformed in the same way. By handcrafting such Euclidean equivariance, the
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

