CSM E D: Bridging the Dataset Gap in Automated
Citation Screening for Systematic Literature Reviews

Wojciech Kusa1∗, Oscar E. Mendoza2 , Matthias Samwald3 , Petr Knoth4 , Allan Hanbury1
1
TU Wien 2 University Milano-Bicocca 3 Medical University of Vienna 4 The Open University

Abstract
Systematic literature reviews (SLRs) play an essential role in summarising, synthesising and validating scientific evidence. In recent years, there has been a growing
interest in using machine learning techniques to automate the identification of relevant studies for SLRs. However, the lack of standardised evaluation datasets makes
comparing the performance of such automated literature screening systems difficult.
In this paper, we analyse the citation screening evaluation datasets, revealing that
many of the available datasets are either too small, suffer from data leakage or have
limited applicability to systems treating automated literature screening as a classification task, as opposed to, for example, a retrieval or question-answering task. To
address these challenges, we introduce CSM E D, a meta-dataset consolidating nine
publicly released collections, providing unified access to 325 SLRs from the fields
of medicine and computer science. CSM E D serves as a comprehensive resource
for training and evaluating the performance of automated citation screening models.
Additionally, we introduce CSM E D- FT, a new dataset designed explicitly for
evaluating the full text publication screening task. To demonstrate the utility of
CSM E D, we conduct experiments and establish baselines on new datasets.

1

Introduction

Systematic literature reviews (SLRs, or meta-reviews) are a critical tool in scientific research, used
for synthesising and summarising evidence from multiple studies. The SLR process involves several
stages, including citation screening (CS, or selection of primary studies) which is, in itself, a timeconsuming step [58, 10]. CS involves identifying studies relevant to the SLR based on a set of, often
complex, inclusion and exclusion criteria (e.g., the study must be examining the efficacy of Drug X
on Condition Y).
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in automating the SLR process [80, 60, 56, 22, 2],
with works often focusing on improving the CS step by (a) using machine learning (ML) [44, 45], (b)
natural language processing (NLP) [27, 36, 79], and (c) information retrieval (IR) [70, 90] techniques.
Automated CS systems have the potential to significantly reduce the time and resources required for
this critical step, thereby speeding up the SLRs production [75].
The development of standards provides invaluable resources for evaluating and comparing different
models. Benchmarks, such as BEIR [74], GLUE [85] or BLURB [20] have shown improvements in
reproducibility and progress tracking of machine learning models in various domains. Unfortunately,
in the context of SLR automation, the absence of standard benchmarks and evaluation methodologies
still hampers progress and inhibits the development of reliable and effective solutions.
With the fast-evolving landscape of machine learning, identifying state-of-the-art performance has
become especially challenging and inefficient in the context of CS. The notorious proliferation of
small custom CS datasets and single-usage evaluation approaches further exacerbates this issue.
∗

Corresponding author: wojciech.kusa@tuwien.ac.at

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

