Expressivity-Preserving GNN Simulation

Fabian Jogl
Machine Learning Research Unit
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
fabian.jogl@tuwien.ac.at
Maximilian Thiessen
Machine Learning Research Unit
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
maximilian.thiessen@tuwien.ac.at

Thomas Gärtner
Machine Learning Research Unit
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
thomas.gaertner@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
We systematically investigate graph transformations that enable standard message
passing to simulate state-of-the-art graph neural networks (GNNs) without loss of
expressivity. Using these, many state-of-the-art GNNs can be implemented with
message passing operations from standard libraries, eliminating many sources of
implementation issues and allowing for better code optimization. We distinguish
between weak and strong simulation: weak simulation achieves the same expressivity only after several message passing steps while strong simulation achieves this
after every message passing step. Our contribution leads to a direct way to translate
common operations of non-standard GNNs to graph transformations that allow for
strong or weak simulation. Our empirical evaluation shows competitive predictive
performance of message passing on transformed graphs for various molecular
benchmark datasets, in several cases surpassing the original GNNs.

1

Introduction

We systematically investigate which variants of non-standard message passing graph neural networks
can be implemented with standard message passing graph neural networks (MPNNs) on a transformed
graph without losing expressivity. While MPNNs are a very popular type of graph neural networks
(GNNs), they are not able to represent every function on the space of graphs [Xu et al., 2019, Morris
et al., 2019] due to their limited expressivity: for all MPNNs, there are pairs of non-isomorphic graphs
which always have the same embedding. A common approach to create more expressive GNNs
is to change the message passing function of MPNNs. If a GNN is more expressive than MPNNs
by adapting the message passing function, we call this non-standard message passing. Examples
of this are message passing variants that operate on subgraphs [Frasca et al., 2022, Bevilacqua
et al., 2021] or tuples of nodes [Morris et al., 2019, 2020, 2022]. It is known that some variants of
non-standard message passing can be implemented with MPNNs on a transformed graph without
losing expressivity as demonstrated by Morris et al. [2019, 2020, 2022] and Qian et al. [2022]. We
formalize this as an MPNN simulating a GNN: a GNN can be simulated if there exists a graph
transformation such that combining an MPNN with that graph transformation is at least as expressive
as the GNN. As simulation only requires graph transformations as pre-processing, it allows the use of
off-the-shelf MPNN implementations which simplifies and speeds up the implementation of GNNs.
Another advantage is that simulation is programming framework agnostic: only the graphs needs
to be transformed—independently of how the MPNN is implemented. Finally, simulation allows
to easily exchange GNNs in existing workflows without requiring changes to the model. Despite
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

