Distributional Learning of Variational AutoEncoder:
Application to Synthetic Data Generation

Seunghwan An and Jong-June Jeon∗
Department of Statistical Data Science, University of Seoul, S. Korea
{dkstmdghks79, jj.jeon}@uos.ac.kr

Abstract
The Gaussianity assumption has been consistently criticized as a main limitation of
the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) despite its efficiency in computational modeling.
In this paper, we propose a new approach that expands the model capacity (i.e.,
expressive power of distributional family) without sacrificing the computational
advantages of the VAE framework. Our VAE model’s decoder is composed of
an infinite mixture of asymmetric Laplace distribution, which possesses general
distribution fitting capabilities for continuous variables. Our model is represented
by a special form of a nonparametric M-estimator for estimating general quantile
functions, and we theoretically establish the relevance between the proposed model
and quantile estimation. We apply the proposed model to synthetic data generation,
and particularly, our model demonstrates superiority in easily adjusting the level of
data privacy.

1

Introduction

Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [31, 51] and Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [22] are
generative models that are used to estimate the underlying distribution of a given dataset. To avoid
the curse of dimensionality, VAE and GAN commonly introduce a low-dimensional latent space on
which a conditional generative model is defined. By minimizing an information divergence between
the original data and its generated data, the generative models are learned to produce synthetic data
similar to the original one. Accordingly, VAE and GAN have been applied in various applications,
such as generating realistic images, texts, and synthetic tabular data for privacy preservation purposes
[30, 60, 63, 65, 34].
However, the difference in the strength of the assumption about the generative distribution brings
significant contrasts in the VAE and GAN generation performances [30, 7, 17]. In the GAN framework, the adversarial loss enables direct minimization of the Jensen-Shannon divergence between
the ground-truth density function and the generative distribution under no distributional assumption
[13, 59]. Roughly speaking, the GAN employs a nonparametric model as its conditional generative
model defined on the latent space.
On the contrary, in the VAE framework, the Gaussianity assumption has been favored [31, 32, 15, 10,
39]. It is because Gaussianity gives us three advantages: 1) the reconstruction loss can be interpreted
as the mean squared error that is one of the most popular losses in optimization theory, 2) generating
a new sample is computationally straightforward, and 3) KL-divergence is computed in a simple
closed form. However, these benefits have led us to pay the price for the distributional capacity
of the generative model, in that the generative model of the VAE is constrained in the form of
marginalization of the product of the two Gaussian distributions. Here, the distributional capacity
means the expressive power of the distributional family. This restricted distributional capacity has
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

