Bayesian Extensive-Rank Matrix Factorization with
Rotational Invariant Priors
Farzad Pourkamali & Nicolas Macris
School of Computer and Communication Sciences,
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
{farzad.pourkamali,nicolas.macris}@epfl.ch

Abstract
We consider a statistical model for matrix factorization in a regime where the rank
of the two hidden matrix factors grows linearly with their dimension and their
product is corrupted by additive noise. Despite various approaches, statistical and
algorithmic limits of such problems have remained elusive. We study a Bayesian
setting with the assumptions that (a) one of the matrix factors is symmetric, (b)
both factors as well as the additive noise have rotational invariant priors, (c) the
priors are known to the statistician. We derive analytical formulas for Rotation
Invariant Estimators to reconstruct the two matrix factors, and conjecture that
these are optimal in the large-dimension limit, in the sense that they minimize
the average mean-square-error. We provide numerical checks which confirm the
optimality conjecture when confronted to Oracle Estimators which are optimal by
definition, but involve the ground-truth. Our derivation relies on a combination of
tools, namely random matrix theory transforms, spherical integral formulas, and
the replica method from statistical mechanics.

1

Introduction

Matrix factorization (MF) is the problem of reconstructing two matrices X and Y from the noisy
observations of their product. Applications in signal processing and machine learning abound, such as
for example dimensionality reduction [1, 2], sparse coding [3–5], representation learning [6], robust
principal components analysis [7, 8], blind source separation [9], or matrix completion [10, 11].
In this work we approach
the problem from a Bayesian perspective and assume that an observation or
√
data matrix S = κXY + W is given to a statistician who knows the prior distributions of X and
Y as well as the prior of the additive noise matrix W and the signal-to-noise ratio κ > 0. The task
of the statistician is to construct estimators ΞX (·), ΞY (·) for the matrix factors X, Y , that ideally,
minimize the average mean-square-error (MSE) E∥X − ΞX (S)∥2F and E∥Y − ΞY (S)∥2F (∥.∥F
the Frobenius norm and E the expectation w.r.t X, Y , W ). We consider priors which are rotation
invariant for all three matrices X, Y , W and for X we furthermore impose that it is square and
symmetric. These matrix ensembles are defined precisely in section 2.1, but the reader can keep in
mind the examples of Wigner or Wishart matrices for X, and general Gaussian Y and W with i.i.d
elements. We look at the asymptotic regime where all matrix dimensions and ranks tend to infinity
at the same speed. We remark that the usual "rotation ambiguity" occuring in MF is not present
because we impose that at least one of the two matrix factors is symmetric. We also remark that
MF is different (and more difficult) than matrix denoising which would consist in constructing an
estimator ΞXY (S) for the signal as a whole by minimizing E∥XY − ΞXY (S)∥2F .

The rotation invariance of the model implies that the estimators minimizing the MSE belong to
the class of rotation invariant estimators (RIE). RIEs are matrix estimators which have the same
singular vectors (or eigenvectors) as the observation or data matrix. These estimators have been
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

