NeuroGF: A Neural Representation for Fast Geodesic
Distance and Path Queries

Qijian Zhang1 , Junhui Hou1∗, Yohanes Yudhi Adikusuma2 , Wenping Wang3 , Ying He2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University, Texas, USA
qijizhang3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk
Yohanes.adikusuma@ntu.edu.sg, wenping@tamu.edu, yhe@ntu.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Geodesics play a critical role in many geometry processing applications. Traditional
algorithms for computing geodesics on 3D mesh models are often inefficient and
slow, which make them impractical for scenarios requiring extensive querying of
arbitrary point-to-point geodesics. Recently, deep implicit functions have gained
popularity for 3D geometry representation, yet there is still no research on neural
implicit representation of geodesics. To bridge this gap, we make the first attempt
to represent geodesics using implicit learning frameworks. Specifically, we propose
neural geodesic field (NeuroGF), which can be learned to encode all-pairs geodesics
of a given 3D mesh model, enabling to efficiently and accurately answer queries of
arbitrary point-to-point geodesic distances and paths. Evaluations on common 3D
object models and real-captured scene-level meshes demonstrate our exceptional
performances in terms of representation accuracy and querying efficiency. Besides,
NeuroGF also provides a convenient way of jointly encoding both 3D geometry
and geodesics in a unified representation. Moreover, the working mode of permodel overfitting is further extended to generalizable learning frameworks that can
work on various input formats such as unstructured point clouds, which also show
satisfactory performances for unseen shapes and categories. Our code and data are
available at https://github.com/keeganhk/NeuroGF.

1

Introduction

The computation of geodesic distances and paths on 3D mesh models has been extensively studied
over the past few decades and plays a critical role in many geometry processing tasks, including
texture mapping, shape description, correspondence, and deformation. Traditional computational
geometry methods, such as discrete wavefront propagation [25, 8, 39, 41, 32] and geodesic graphs
[46, 2], excel at computing exact or high-quality approximate geodesic distances and paths on meshes
with arbitrary triangulation. However, these methods often suffer from computational inefficiency
or require a pre-computation step. On the other hand, partial differential equation (PDE) methods
[17, 10, 36] are renowned for their efficiency, flexibility and ease of implementation, but the accuracy
of their results is sensitive to the quality of mesh triangulation.
It is also worth mentioning that existing geodesic algorithms are primarily designed for computing
single-source all-destination (SSAD) or multiple-sources all-destination (MSAD) geodesics on
meshes. While there are some works focused on all-pairs geodesic computations, such as [40, 4,
12], these methods are built upon relatively complex computational and optimization processes.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

