Characterizing the Impacts of Semi-supervised
Learning for Programmatic Weak Supervision

Jeffrey Li1 , Jieyu Zhang1 , Ludwig Schmidt1 , Alexander Ratner1,2
1
University of Washington, 2 Snorkel AI
{jwl2162, jieyuz2, schmidt, ajratner}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Labeling training data is a critical and expensive step in producing high accuracy
ML models, whether training from scratch or fine-tuning. To make labeling more
efficient, two major approaches are programmatic weak supervision (WS) and semisupervised learning (SSL). More recent works have either explicitly or implicitly
used techniques at their intersection, but in various complex and ad hoc ways. In this
work, we define a simple, modular design space to study the use of SSL techniques
for WS more systematically. Surprisingly, we find that fairly simple methods from
our design space match the performance of more complex state-of-the-art methods,
averaging a 3 p.p. increase in accuracy/F1-score across 8 standard WS benchmarks.
Further, we provide practical guidance on when different components are worth
their added complexity and training costs. Contrary to current understanding, we
find SSL is not necessary to obtain the best performance on most existing WS
benchmarks but is more effective when: (1) end models are smaller, and (2) WS
provides labels for only a small portion of training examples.

1

Introduction

Learning with limited labels is a fundamental challenge in machine learning (ML) applications [12,
35]. To address the significant costs of hand-labeling training sets, programmatic weak supervision
(WS) has emerged as a high impact research area [25, 31], where the aim is to learn from multiple
cheaper sources of noisy labels. Meanwhile, semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a more classical
direction with similar high-level motivations. Instead of generating larger quantities of noisy labels,
SSL aims to directly leverage additional unlabeled data. It seems natural that these two fields could
be applied productively with one another, yet their intersection has not been systematically studied.
In this work, we anchor on WS approaches and study whether they can be enhanced using techniques
from SSL. At a high-level, most WS methods consist of two steps. First, a label model aggregates
a set of weak label sources to noisily label a training set. Commonly, these sources take the form
of user-written heuristics (e.g., for sentiment analysis, a user may check for the keyword “great” to
provide the label “positive”). Second, an end model is learned on this training set. Crucially, weak
sources can often abstain (e.g., the absence of “great” may not imply “negative”), leaving certain
examples to remain unlabeled and thereby unused. This presents a natural opportunity to use SSL.
Indeed, this approach of using SSL in WS settings has motivated several recent methods [30, 26, 11, 9].
Though these works often attribute their observed improvements to their usage of unlabeled data
[33, 30, 26], they also incorporate various algorithmic components in addition to SSL. Thus, we lack
clarity about the precise contributions of SSL and whether simpler methods might also suffice. Also,
while varying the amount of unlabeled data is crucial when evaluating SSL techniques [22], previous
WS benchmarks contain little diversity along this key dimension. Here, we conduct a more systematic
study of how useful SSL is in various WS settings, as well as how and when to best employ it.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

