A Riemannian Exponential Augmented Lagrangian
Method for Computing the Projection Robust
Wasserstein Distance
Bo Jiang
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of NSLSCS
School of Mathematical Sciences, Nanjing Normal University
Nanjing 210023, China
jiangbo@njnu.edu.cn
Ya-Feng Liu ∗
State Key Laboratory of Scientific and Engineering Computing
Institute of Computational Mathematics and Scientific/Engineering Computing
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing 100190, China
yafliu@lsec.cc.ac.cn

Abstract
Projection robust Wasserstein (PRW) distance is recently proposed to efficiently
mitigate the curse of dimensionality in the classical Wasserstein distance. In this
paper, by equivalently reformulating the computation of the PRW distance as an
optimization problem over the Cartesian product of the Stiefel manifold and the
Euclidean space with additional nonlinear inequality constraints, we propose a
Riemannian exponential augmented Lagrangian method (REALM) for solving
this problem. Compared with the existing Riemannian exponential penalty-based
approaches, REALM can potentially avoid too small penalty parameters and exhibit
more stable numerical performance. To solve the subproblems in REALM efficiently, we design an inexact Riemannian Barzilai-Borwein method with Sinkhorn
iteration (iRBBS), which selects the stepsizes adaptively rather than tuning the stepsizes in efforts as done in the existing methods. We show that iRBBS can return an
-stationary point of the original PRW distance problem within O(−3 ) iterations,
which matches the best known iteration complexity result. Extensive numerical results demonstrate that our proposed methods outperform the state-of-the-art solvers
for computing the PRW distance.

1

Introduction

The optimal transport (OT) problem has found wide applications in machine learning, representation
learning, data sciences, and image sciences; see [21, 5, 42, 1, 14] and the references therein for more
details. However, its direct application in machine learning may encounter the issue of the curse of
dimensionality since the sample complexity of approximating the Wasserstein distance can grow
exponentially in dimension [22, 49]. To resolve this issue, by making an important extension to the
sliced Wasserstein distance [43], Paty and Cuturi [41], Deshpande et al. [16], and Niles-Weed and
Rigollet [40] proposed to project the distributions to a low-dimensional subspace that maximizes the
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

