Multi-Step Generalized Policy Improvement by
Leveraging Approximate Models

Lucas N. Alegre1,2 Ana L. C. Bazzan1 Ann Nowé2 Bruno C. da Silva3
1
Institute of Informatics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
2
Artificial Intelligence Lab, Vrije Universiteit Brussel 3 University of Massachusetts
{lnalegre,bazzan}@inf.ufrgs.br ann.nowe@vub.be bsilva@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
We introduce a principled method for performing zero-shot transfer in reinforcement learning (RL) by exploiting approximate models of the environment. Zeroshot transfer in RL has been investigated by leveraging methods rooted in generalized policy improvement (GPI) and successor features (SFs). Although computationally efficient, these methods are model-free: they analyze a library of
policies—each solving a particular task—and identify which action the agent
should take. We investigate the more general setting where, in addition to a library
of policies, the agent has access to an approximate environment model. Even
though model-based RL algorithms can identify near-optimal policies, they are
typically computationally intensive. We introduce h-GPI, a multi-step extension of
GPI that interpolates between these extremes—standard model-free GPI and fully
model-based planning—as a function of a parameter, h, regulating the amount of
time the agent has to reason. We prove that h-GPI’s performance lower bound
is strictly better than GPI’s, and show that h-GPI generally outperforms GPI as
h increases. Furthermore, we prove that as h increases, h-GPI’s performance
becomes arbitrarily less susceptible to sub-optimality in the agent’s policy library.
Finally, we introduce novel bounds characterizing the gains achievable by h-GPI as
a function of approximation errors in both the agent’s policy library and its (possibly learned) model. These bounds strictly generalize those known in the literature.
We evaluate h-GPI on challenging tabular and continuous-state problems under
value function approximation and show that it consistently outperforms GPI and
state-of-the-art competing methods under various levels of approximation errors.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto, 2018) algorithms have achieved remarkable performance in challenging tasks both in the model-free (Bellemare et al., 2020; Wurman et al., 2022)
and the model-based (Bryant et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022) settings. In these problems, agents are
typically trained to optimize one particular reward function (a task). However, designing agents that
can adapt their decision-making policies to solve novel tasks in a zero-shot manner—i.e., without
requiring any further learning—remains an important open problem.
Various principled and efficient policy transfer methods, which combine previously-acquired policies
to solve new tasks in a zero-shot manner, have been proposed based on the combination of successor
features (SFs) and generalized policy improvement (GPI) (Barreto et al., 2017; Borsa et al., 2019;
Barreto et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2022). On the one hand, SFs allow agents to efficiently evaluate the
performance of given policies in arbitrary sets of tasks. On the other hand, GPI extends the classic
policy improvement procedure (Sutton and Barto, 2018) by analyzing a library of previously-learned
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

