When Do Neural Nets Outperform Boosted Trees on
Tabular Data?
Duncan McElfresh∗ 1,2 , Sujay Khandagale3 , Jonathan Valverde4 , Vishak Prasad C5 ,
Ganesh Ramakrishnan5 , Micah Goldblum6 , Colin White1,7
1
Abacus.AI, 2 Stanford, 3 Pinterest, 4 University of Maryland,
5
IIT Bombay, 6 New York University, 7 Caltech

Abstract
Tabular data is one of the most commonly used types of data in machine learning.
Despite recent advances in neural nets (NNs) for tabular data, there is still an active
discussion on whether or not NNs generally outperform gradient-boosted decision
trees (GBDTs) on tabular data, with several recent works arguing either that GBDTs
consistently outperform NNs on tabular data, or vice versa. In this work, we take a
step back and question the importance of this debate. To this end, we conduct the
largest tabular data analysis to date, comparing 19 algorithms across 176 datasets,
and we find that the ‘NN vs. GBDT’ debate is overemphasized: for a surprisingly
high number of datasets, either the performance difference between GBDTs and
NNs is negligible, or light hyperparameter tuning on a GBDT is more important
than choosing between NNs and GBDTs. Next, we analyze dozens of metafeatures
to determine what properties of a dataset make NNs or GBDTs better-suited to
perform well. For example, we find that GBDTs are much better than NNs at
handling skewed or heavy-tailed feature distributions and other forms of dataset
irregularities. Our insights act as a guide for practitioners to determine which
techniques may work best on their dataset. Finally, with the goal of accelerating
tabular data research, we release the TabZilla Benchmark Suite: a collection of the
36 ‘hardest’ of the datasets we study. Our benchmark suite, codebase, and all raw
results are available at https://github.com/naszilla/tabzilla.

1

Introduction

Tabular datasets are data organized into rows and columns, consisting of distinct features that are
typically continuous, categorical, or ordinal. They are the oldest and among the most ubiquitous
dataset types in machine learning in practice [7, 55], due to their numerous applications across
medicine [36, 58], finance [5, 13], online advertising [28, 45, 50], and many other areas [9, 10, 59].
Despite recent advances in neural network (NN) architectures for tabular data [4, 47], there is still
an active debate over whether or not NNs generally outperform gradient-boosted decision trees
(GBDTs) on tabular data, with multiple works arguing either for [4, 37, 40, 47, 51] or against
[7, 26, 27, 55] NNs. This is in stark contrast to other areas such as computer vision and natural
language understanding, in which NNs have far outpaced competing methods [8, 18, 19, 39, 61].
Nearly all prior studies of tabular data use fewer than 50 datasets or do not properly tune baselines
[44, 57], putting the generalizability of these findings into question. Furthermore, the bottom line of
many prior works is to answer the question, ‘which performs better, NNs or GBDTs, in terms of the
average rank across datasets’ without searching for more fine-grained insights.
∗

Correspondence to: {duncan, colin}@abacus.ai. Work done while SK and JV were at Abacus.AI.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

