Globally solving the Gromov-Wasserstein problem for
point clouds in low dimensional Euclidean spaces
Martin Ryner
Vironova AB, Stockholm, Sweden
Division of Numerical Analysis, Optimization and Systems Theory,
Department of Mathematics,
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
martin.ryner@vironova.com, martinrr@kth.se
Jan Kronqvist
Division of Numerical Analysis, Optimization and Systems Theory,
Department of Mathematics,
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
jankr@kth.se
Johan Karlsson
Division of Numerical Analysis, Optimization and Systems Theory,
Department of Mathematics,
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
johan.karlsson@math.kth.se

Abstract
This paper presents a framework for computing the Gromov-Wasserstein problem
between two sets of points in low dimensional spaces, where the discrepancy is the
squared Euclidean norm. The Gromov-Wasserstein problem is a generalization of
the optimal transport problem that finds the assignment between two sets preserving
pairwise distances as much as possible. This can be used to quantify the similarity
between two formations or shapes, a common problem in AI and machine learning.
The problem can be formulated as a Quadratic Assignment Problem (QAP), which
is in general computationally intractable even for small problems. Our framework
addresses this challenge by reformulating the QAP as an optimization problem with
a low-dimensional domain, leveraging the fact that the problem can be expressed
as a concave quadratic optimization problem with low rank. The method scales
well with the number of points, and it can be used to find the global solution for
large-scale problems with thousands of points. We compare the computational
complexity of our approach with state-of-the-art methods on synthetic problems
and apply it to a near-symmetrical problem which is of particular interest in
computational biology.

1

Introduction

Many important applications in machine learning deal with comparing sequences, images, and
higher dimensional data, where the data is unstructured and not directly comparable. In physics,
chemistry, biology, music, and linguistics, objects with greatly different properties often appear
in symmetrical variations characterized by concepts such as isomerisms, chirality, harmonies, and
alternations. Understanding, and being able to analyze, these types of variations can be truly critical
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

