IDEA: An Invariant Perspective for Efficient Domain
Adaptive Image Retrieval

Haixin Wang1,∗, Hao Wu2,∗ , Jinan Sun1 , Shikun Zhang1 ,
Chong Chen1 , Xian-Sheng Hua3 , Xiao Luo4,†
1
Peking University, 2 University of Science and Technology of China,
3
Terminus Group, 4 University of California, Los Angeles
wang.hx@stu.pku.edu.cn, wuhao2022@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
sjn@pku.edu.cn, zhangsk@pku.edu.cn, chenchong.cz@gmail.com,
huaxiansheng@gmail.com, xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of unsupervised domain adaptive retrieval,
which transfers retrieval models from a label-rich source domain to a label-scarce
target domain. Although there exist numerous approaches that incorporate transfer
learning techniques into deep hashing frameworks, they often overlook the crucial
invariance needed for adequate alignment between these two domains. Even worse,
these methods fail to distinguish between causal and non-causal effects embedded
in images, making cross-domain retrieval ineffective. To address these challenges,
we propose an Invariance-acquired Domain Adaptive Hashing (IDEA) model.
Our IDEA first decomposes each image into a causal feature representing label
information and a non-causal feature indicating domain information. We then
generate discriminative hash codes using causal features with consistency learning
on both source and target domains. More importantly, we employ a generative
model for synthetic samples to simulate the intervention of various non-causal
effects, thereby minimizing their impact on hash codes for domain invariance.
Comprehensive experiments conducted on benchmark datasets confirm the superior
performance of our proposed IDEA compared to a variety of competitive baselines.

1

Introduction

Approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search [73, 77, 49, 29, 40] has been a pivotal research problem
within the field of deep learning for decades. Recently, learning to hash [41, 80, 68, 20] has come
to the fore in ANN search engines due to its high computational and memory efficiency. The main
objective of learning to hash is to convert high-dimensional data points into compact low-dimensional
binary codes while maintaining semantic similarity. Consequently, this approach mitigates the
requirement for computationally expensive pairwise distance computations, replacing them with
economical Hamming distance calculations using bit-wise XOR and bit-count operations [60].
Recent hashing techniques can primarily be classified into two types, namely supervised approaches [72, 44, 67, 48, 75, 8, 31, 52] and unsupervised approaches [32, 76, 46, 69, 33, 61, 10].
Supervised hashing approaches incorporate annotation data into the similarity learning algorithms,
generally leading to better performance than unsupervised ones. These supervised methods primarily
focus on minimizing a spectrum of similarity-preserving losses and quantization losses [11, 78] to
generate highly discriminative hash codes. Furthermore, several innovative proxy-based techniques
have been introduced where a proxy is constructed in the Hamming space for each class, and hash
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

