Alleviating the Semantic Gap for
Generalized fMRI-to-Image Reconstruction

Tao Fang12 , Qian Zheng12∗, and Gang Pan12
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{duolafang, qianzheng, gpan}@zju.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Although existing fMRI-to-image reconstruction methods could predict highquality images, they do not explicitly consider the semantic gap between training
and testing data, resulting in reconstruction with unstable and uncertain semantics.
This paper addresses the problem of generalized fMRI-to-image reconstruction
by explicitly alleviates the semantic gap. Specifically, we leverage the pre-trained
CLIP model to map the training data to a compact feature representation, which
essentially extends the sparse semantics of training data to dense ones, thus alleviating the semantic gap of the instances nearby known concepts (i.e., inside the
training super-classes). Inspired by the robust low-level representation in fMRI
data, which could help alleviate the semantic gap for instances that far from the
known concepts (i.e., outside the training super-classes), we leverage structural
information as a general cue to guide image reconstruction. Further, we quantify the semantic uncertainty based on probability density estimation and achieve
Generalized fMRI-to-image reconstruction by adaptively integrating Expanded
Semantics and Structural information (GESS) within a diffusion process. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed GESS model outperforms state-ofthe-art methods, and we propose a generalized scenario split strategy to evaluate
the advantage of GESS in closing the semantic gap. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/duolala1/GESS.

1

Introduction

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is a powerful tool for studying the human brain and
visual system, as it provides a non-invasive way to measure neural activity. Image reconstruction
from fMRI data is important for studying visual representation in the cortex and for developing the
vivid “reading the mind” brain-computer interface (BCI) technology [10, 19, 11].
High-quality fMRI-to-image reconstruction is a typical cross-modality problem [14, 28] and suffers
from severe ill-posedness [2]. Existing state-of-the-art methods leverage the data-driven scheme to
address such ill-posed problem by learning data prior from training data. However, training data are
often collected as a limited number of instances [19], and real-world images are distributed in a wide,
broad semantic space with a long-tail distribution[12]. This brings about the problem of the semantic
gap, the semantics of testing instances may be unknown in training stage.
Addressing the semantic gap between the training data collected from the laboratory and the testing
instances in the real world helps develop reconstructions for generalized fMRI-to-image scenarios and
significantly promote the application of BCI. However, previous methods put too much attention on
improving the image quality while less focus on the semantic accuracy of the reconstructed images,
which brings two problems. Unstable semantics: The limited samples in each super-class fails to
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

