InstructBLIP: Towards General-purpose
Vision-Language Models with Instruction Tuning
Wenliang Dai†1,2∗ Junnan Li†B,1 Dongxu Li1 Anthony Meng Huat Tiong1,3
Junqi Zhao3 Weisheng Wang3 Boyang Li3 Pascale Fung2 Steven HoiB ,1
1
Salesforce Research 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
https://github.com/salesforce/LAVIS/tree/main/projects/instructblip

Abstract
Large-scale pre-training and instruction tuning have been successful at creating
general-purpose language models with broad competence. However, building
general-purpose vision-language models is challenging due to the rich input distributions and task diversity resulting from the additional visual input. Although
vision-language pretraining has been widely studied, vision-language instruction
tuning remains under-explored. In this paper, we conduct a systematic and comprehensive study on vision-language instruction tuning based on the pretrained BLIP-2
models. We gather 26 publicly available datasets, covering a wide variety of tasks
and capabilities, and transform them into instruction tuning format. Additionally,
we introduce an instruction-aware Query Transformer, which extracts informative
features tailored to the given instruction. Trained on 13 held-in datasets, InstructBLIP attains state-of-the-art zero-shot performance across all 13 held-out datasets,
substantially outperforming BLIP-2 and larger Flamingo models. Our models
also lead to state-of-the-art performance when finetuned on individual downstream
tasks (e.g., 90.7% accuracy on ScienceQA questions with image contexts). Furthermore, we qualitatively demonstrate the advantages of InstructBLIP over concurrent
multimodal models. All InstructBLIP models are open-source.

1

Introduction

A longstanding aspiration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) research is to build a single model that
can solve arbitrary tasks specified by the user. In natural language processing (NLP), instruction
tuning [1, 2] proves to be a promising approach toward that goal. By finetuning a large language
model (LLM) on a wide range of tasks described by natural language instructions, instruction tuning
enables the model to follow arbitrary instructions. Recently, instruction-tuned LLMs have also been
leveraged for vision-language tasks. For example, BLIP-2 [3] effectively adapts frozen instructiontuned LLMs to understand visual inputs and exhibits preliminary capabilities to follow instructions in
image-to-text generation.
Compared to NLP tasks, vision-language tasks are more diverse in nature due to the additional visual
inputs from various domains. This poses a greater challenge to a unified model that is supposed to
generalize to diverse vision-language tasks, many unseen during training. Most previous work can
be grouped into two approaches. The first approach, multitask learning [4, 5], formulates various
vision-language tasks into the same input-output format. However, we empirically find multitask
learning without instructions (Table 4) does not generalize well to unseen datasets and tasks. The
∗
Work done during internship at Salesforce. † Equal contribution.
B Corresponding authors: {junnan.li,shoi}@salesforce.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

