RePo: Resilient Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
by Regularizing Posterior Predictability

Chuning Zhu
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98105
zchuning@cs.washington.edu
Siri Gadipudi
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98105
sg06@uw.edu

Max Simchowitz
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Boston, MA 02139
msimchow@mit.edu
Abhishek Gupta
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98105
abhgupta@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Visual model-based RL methods typically encode image observations into lowdimensional representations in a manner that does not eliminate redundant information. This leaves them susceptible to spurious variations – changes in
task-irrelevant components such as background distractors or lighting conditions.
In this paper, we propose a visual model-based RL method that learns a latent
representation resilient to such spurious variations. Our training objective encourages the representation to be maximally predictive of dynamics and reward, while
constraining the information flow from the observation to the latent representation.
We demonstrate that this objective significantly bolsters the resilience of visual
model-based RL methods to visual distractors, allowing them to operate in dynamic
environments. We then show that while the learned encoder is resilient to spirious
variations, it is not invariant under significant distribution shift. To address this, we
propose a simple reward-free alignment procedure that enables test time adaptation
of the encoder. This allows for quick adaptation to widely differing environments
without having to relearn the dynamics and policy. Our effort is a step towards making model-based RL a practical and useful tool for dynamic, diverse domains. We
show its effectiveness in simulation benchmarks with significant spurious variations
as well as a real-world egocentric navigation task with noisy TVs in the background.
Videos and code: https://zchuning.github.io/repo-website/.

1

Introduction

Consider the difference between training a single robot arm against a plain background with reinforcement learning (RL), and learning to operate the same arm amidst of plentiful dynamic distractors
- uncontrollable elements such as changing lighting and disturbances in the scene. The latter must
contend with spurious variations - differences in environments which are irrelevant for the task but
potentially confusing for a vision-based RL agent - resilience to which is indispensable for truly
versatile embodied agents deployed in real world settings.
Standard end-to-end techniques for visual RL struggle in the presence of spurious variations [64, 48],
in part because they fail to discard task-irrelevant elements. To improve generalization [38, 59],
self-supervised representation learning methods [23, 39, 55, 54, 17, 31] pre-train visual encoders that
compress visual observations. These methods aim for lossless compression of how image observations
evolve in time (e.g. by minimizing reconstruction error). Unaware of the demands of downstream
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

