SAMRS: Scaling-up Remote Sensing Segmentation
Dataset with Segment Anything Model

Di Wang1∗, Jing Zhang2†, Bo Du1†, Minqiang Xu3 , Lin Liu3 , Dacheng Tao2 , Liangpei Zhang4†
1
School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network
Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
3
National Engineering Research Center of Speech and Language Information Processing, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing,
Wuhan University, China
{d_wang,dubo,zlp62}@whu.edu.cn; jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au;
{mqxu7,linliu}@iflytek.com; dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
The success of the Segment Anything Model (SAM) demonstrates the significance
of data-centric machine learning. However, due to the difficulties and high costs
associated with annotating Remote Sensing (RS) images, a large amount of valuable
RS data remains unlabeled, particularly at the pixel level. In this study, we leverage
SAM and existing RS object detection datasets to develop an efficient pipeline
for generating a large-scale RS segmentation dataset, dubbed SAMRS. SAMRS
totally possesses 105,090 images and 1,668,241 instances, surpassing existing
high-resolution RS segmentation datasets in size by several orders of magnitude.
It provides object category, location, and instance information that can be used
for semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, and object detection, either
individually or in combination. We also provide a comprehensive analysis of
SAMRS from various aspects. Moreover, preliminary experiments highlight the
importance of conducting segmentation pre-training with SAMRS to address task
discrepancies and alleviate the limitations posed by limited training data during
fine-tuning. The code and dataset will be available at SAMRS.

1

Introduction

The advancement of earth observation technologies has led to the generation of abundant remote
sensing images (RSI). These images retain valuable information about the spatial distribution and
condition of extensive ground surfaces and geospatial objects, and can be conveniently accessed
in real-time. Consequently, remote sensing data has garnered the interest of various disciplines,
including agricultural monitoring, urban planning, and environmental protection. In particular, the
identification of surface targets has been a fundamental task in these fields for several years.
To our knowledge, a significant number of RSIs remain unlabeled. Unlike natural images that can be
easily comprehended by the human eye, interpreting RSI taken from an aerial perspective typically
demands specialized expertise from practitioners. Furthermore, RSI objects are often distributed
sparsely, and the images frequently contain small targets, making the labeling process less efficient.
Therefore, the annotation of RSI has traditionally required substantial labor and time costs. Among
∗
†

This work was partially done during Di Wang’s internship at iFlytek.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

