RADAR: Robust AI-Text Detection via
Adversarial Learning

Xiaomeng Hu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Sha Tin, Hong Kong
xmhu23@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Pin-Yu Chen
IBM Research
New York, USA
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Tsung-Yi Ho
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Sha Tin, Hong Kong
tyho@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) and the intensifying popularity of ChatGPT-like applications have blurred the boundary of high-quality text
generation between humans and machines. However, in addition to the anticipated
revolutionary changes to our technology and society, the difficulty of distinguishing
LLM-generated texts (AI-text) from human-generated texts poses new challenges
of misuse and fairness, such as fake content generation, plagiarism, and false
accusations of innocent writers. While existing works show that current AI-text
detectors are not robust to LLM-based paraphrasing, this paper aims to bridge
this gap by proposing a new framework called RADAR, which jointly trains a
robust AI-text detector via adversarial learning. RADAR is based on adversarial
training of a paraphraser and a detector. The paraphraser’s goal is to generate
realistic content to evade AI-text detection. RADAR uses the feedback from the
detector to update the paraphraser, and vice versa. Evaluated with 8 different
LLMs (Pythia, Dolly 2.0, Palmyra, Camel, GPT-J, Dolly 1.0, LLaMA, and Vicuna)
across 4 datasets, experimental results show that RADAR significantly outperforms
existing AI-text detection methods, especially when paraphrasing is in place. We
also identify the strong transferability of RADAR from instruction-tuned LLMs to
other LLMs, and evaluate the improved capability of RADAR via GPT-3.5-Turbo.
Project Page and Demos: https://radar.vizhub.ai
IBM demo is developed by Hendrik Strobelt and Benjamin Hoover at IBM Research
HuggingFace demo is developed by Xiaomeng Hu

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are high-capacity neural networks that are pretrained at web-scale
datasets. They are foundation models achieving state-of-the-art performance in a wide range of natural
language processing tasks (e.g. document completion, question answering, machine translation, and
content creation with text prompts) with advanced capabilities such as in-context learning and
reasoning (e.g. chain of thoughts). In particular, LLMs are the backbone of many ChatGPT-like
conversational bots that enable text generation with high fluency and accuracy. However, while LLMs
and their derived applications are expected to become ubiquitous in our future technology and society,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

