The Pursuit of Human Labeling:
A New Perspective on Unsupervised Learning

Artyom Gadetsky
EPFL
artem.gadetskii@epfl.ch

Maria Brbić
EPFL
mbrbic@epfl.ch

Abstract
We present HUME, a simple model-agnostic framework for inferring human
labeling of a given dataset without any external supervision. The key insight behind
our approach is that classes defined by many human labelings are linearly separable
regardless of the representation space used to represent a dataset. HUME utilizes
this insight to guide the search over all possible labelings of a dataset to discover
an underlying human labeling. We show that the proposed optimization objective
is strikingly well-correlated with the ground truth labeling of the dataset. In effect,
we only train linear classifiers on top of pretrained representations that remain fixed
during training, making our framework compatible with any large pretrained and
self-supervised model. Despite its simplicity, HUME outperforms a supervised
linear classifier on top of self-supervised representations on the STL-10 dataset
by a large margin and achieves comparable performance on the CIFAR-10 dataset.
Compared to the existing unsupervised baselines, HUME achieves state-of-the-art
performance on four benchmark image classification datasets including the largescale ImageNet-1000 dataset. Altogether, our work provides a fundamentally new
view to tackle unsupervised learning by searching for consistent labelings between
different representation spaces.

1

Introduction

A key aspect of human intelligence is an ability to acquire knowledge and skills without external
guidance or instruction. While recent self-supervised learning methods [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] have shown
remarkable ability to learn task-agnostic representations without any supervision, a common strategy
is to add a linear classification layer on top of these pretrained representations to solve a task of
interest. In such a scenario, neural networks achieve high performance on many downstream human
labeled tasks. Such strategy has also been widely adopted in transfer learning [7, 8] and few-shot
learning [9, 10], demonstrating that a strong feature extractor can effectively generalize to a new
task with a minimal supervision. However, a fundamental missing piece in reaching human-level
intelligence is that machines lack an ability to solve a new task without any external supervision and
guidance.
Close to such ability are recent multi-modal methods [6, 11, 12] trained on aligned text-image corpora
that show outstanding performance in the zero-shot learning setting without the need for fine-tuning.
However, zero-shot learning methods still require human instruction set to solve a new task. In a fully
unsupervised scenario, labels for a new task have been traditionally inferred by utilizing clustering
methods [13, 14, 15, 16], designed to automatically identify and group samples that are semantically
related. Compared to (weakly) supervised counterparts, the performance of clustering methods is still
lagging behind.
In this work, we propose HUME, a simple model-agnostic framework for inferring human
labeling of a given dataset without any supervision. The key insights underlying our ap37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

