Bypassing the Simulator:
Near-Optimal Adversarial Linear Contextual Bandits

Haolin Liu∗
University of Virginia
srs8rh@virginia.edu

Chen-Yu Wei∗†
University of Virginia
chenyu.wei@virginia.edu

Julian Zimmert∗
Google Research
zimmert@google.com

Abstract
We consider the adversarial linear contextual bandit problem, where the loss vectors
are selected fully adversarially and the per-round action set (i.e. the context) is
drawn from a fixed distribution. Existing methods for this problem either require
access to a simulator to generate free i.i.d. contexts, achieve a sub-optimal regret no
O(T 5/6 ), or are computationally
better than e
inefficient. We greatly improve these
√
e
results by achieving a regret of O( T ) without a simulator, while maintaining
computational efficiency when the action set in each round is small. In the special
case of sleeping bandits with adversarial loss and stochastic arm availability, our
result answers affirmatively the open question by Saha√et al. [2020] on whether
there exists a polynomial-time algorithm with poly(d) T regret. Our approach
naturally handles the case where the loss is linear up to an additive misspecification
error, and our regret shows near-optimal dependence on the magnitude of the error.

1

Introduction

Contextual bandit is a widely used model for sequential decision making. The interaction between the
learner and the environment proceeds in rounds: in each round, the environment provides a context;
based on it, the learner chooses an action and receive a reward. The goal is to maximize the total
reward across multiple rounds. This model has found extensive applications in fields such as medical
treatment [Tewari and Murphy, 2017], personalized recommendations [Beygelzimer et al., 2011],
and online advertising [Chu et al., 2011].
Algorithms for contextual bandits with provable guarantees have been developed under various
assumptions. In the linear regime, the most extensively studied model is the stochastic linear
contextual bandit, in which the context can be arbitrarily distributed in each round, while the reward
is determined by a fixed linear function of the context-action pair. Near-optimal algorithms for
this setting have been established in, e.g., [Chu et al., 2011, Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011, Li et al.,
2019, Foster et al., 2020]. Another model, which is the focus of this paper, is the adversarial
linear contextual bandit, in which the context is drawn from a fixed distribution, while the reward is
determined by a time-varying linear function of the context-action pair. 3 A computationally efficient
algorithm for this setting is first proposed by Neu and Olkhovskaya [2020]. However, existing
research for this setting still faces challenges in achieving near-optimal regret and sample complexity
when the context distribution is unknown.
∗

The authors are listed in alphabetical order.
This work was done when Chen-Yu Wei was at MIT Institute for Data, Systems, and Society.
3
Apparently, the stochastic and adversarial linear contextual bandits defined here are incomparable, and their
names do not fully capture their underlying assumptions. However, these are the terms commonly used in the
literature (e.g., [Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011, Neu and Olkhovskaya, 2020]).
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

