Towards Label Position Bias
in Graph Neural Networks

Haoyu Han1 , Xiaorui Liu2 , Feng Shi3 ,
MohamadAli Torkamani4∗, Charu C. Aggarwal5 , Jiliang Tang1
1
Michigan State University 2 North Carolina State University 3 TigerGraph
4
Amazon 5 IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
{hanhaoy1,tangjili}@msu.edu, xliu96@ncsu.edu
bill.shi@tigergraph.com, alitor@amazon.com, charu@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful tool for semisupervised node classification tasks. However, recent studies have revealed various
biases in GNNs stemming from both node features and graph topology. In this
work, we uncover a new bias - label position bias, which indicates that the node
closer to the labeled nodes tends to perform better. We introduce a new metric, the
Label Proximity Score, to quantify this bias, and find that it is closely related to
performance disparities. To address the label position bias, we propose a novel
optimization framework for learning a label position unbiased graph structure,
which can be applied to existing GNNs. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our proposed method not only outperforms backbone methods but also significantly
mitigates the issue of label position bias in GNNs.

1

Introduction

Graph is a foundational data structure, denoting pairwise relationships between entities. It finds
applications across a range of domains, such as social networks, transportation, and biology. [1, 2]
Among these diverse applications, semi-supervised node classification has emerged as a crucial and
challenging task, attracting significant attention from researchers. Given the graph structure, node
features, and a subset of labels, the semi-supervised node classification task aims to predict the labels
of unlabeled nodes. In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated remarkable
success in addressing this task due to their exceptional ability to model both the graph structure and
node features [3]. A typical GNN model usually follows the message-passing scheme [4], which
mainly contains two operators, i.e., feature transformation and feature propagation, to exploit node
features, graph structure, and label information.
Despite the great success, recent studies have shown that GNNs could introduce various biases from
the perspectives of node features and graph topology. In terms of node features, Jiang et al. [5]
demonstrated that the message-passing scheme could amplify sensitive node attribute bias. A series
of studies [6, 7, 8] have endeavored to mitigate this sensitive attribute bias in GNNs and ensure
fair classification. In terms of graph topology, Tang et al. [9] investigated the degree bias in GNNs,
signifying that high-degree nodes typically outperform low-degree nodes. This degree bias has also
been addressed by several recent studies [10, 11, 12].
In addition to node features and graph topology, the label information, especially the position of
labeled nodes, also plays a crucial role in GNNs. However, the potential bias in label information has
been largely overlooked. In practice, with an equal number of training nodes, different labeling can
result in significant discrepancies in test performance [13, 14, 15]. For instance, Ma et al. [16] study
∗

This work does not relate to the author’s position at Amazon

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

