Taylor TD-learning

Michele Garibbo
Department of Engineering Mathematics
University of Bristol
Bristol, United Kingdom
michele.garibbo@bristol.ac.uk

Maxime Robeyns
Department of Engineering Mathematics
University of Bristol
Bristol, United Kingdom
maxime.robeyns.2018@bristol.ac.uk

Laurence Aitchison
Department of Engineering Mathematics
University of Bristol
Bristol, United Kingdom
laurence.aitchison@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Many reinforcement learning approaches rely on temporal-difference (TD) learning
to learn a critic. However, TD-learning updates can be high variance. Here, we
introduce a model-based RL framework, Taylor TD, which reduces this variance in
continuous state-action settings. Taylor TD uses a first-order Taylor series expansion of TD updates. This expansion allows Taylor TD to analytically integrate over
stochasticity in the action-choice, and some stochasticity in the state distribution
for the initial state and action of each TD update. We include theoretical and
empirical evidence that Taylor TD updates are indeed lower variance than standard TD updates. Additionally, we show Taylor TD has the same stable learning
guarantees as standard TD-learning with linear function approximation under a
reasonable assumption. Next, we combine Taylor TD with the TD3 algorithm,
forming TaTD3. We show TaTD3 performs as well, if not better, than several stateof-the art model-free and model-based baseline algorithms on a set of standard
benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Actor-critic algorithms underlie many of the recent successes of deep RL [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. In
these algorithms, the actor provides the control policy while the critic estimates the policy’s expected
long-term returns [i.e. the value function; 9, 10]. The critic is typically trained using some form
of temporal-difference (TD) update [e.g. 3, 7, 1, 2, 6]. These TD updates need to be computed
in expectation over a large distribution of visited states and actions, induced by the policy and
the environment dynamics [11, 12]. Since this expectation is analytically intractable, TD updates
are typically performed based on individually sampled state-action pairs from real environmental
transitions (i.e. sample-based estimates). However, the variance of (sample-based) TD updates can
be quite large, meaning that we need to average over many TD updates for different initial states and
actions to get a good estimate of the expected updates [13].
Model-based strategies provide a promising candidate to tackle this high variance [14]. For instance, Dyna methods, among the most popular model-based strategies, use a learned model of the
environment transitions to generate additional imaginary transitions. These imaginary transitions
can be used as extra training samples for TD methods [e.g. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. Although the
additional (imaginary) transitions help in reducing the variance of performing TD-updates over a
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

