PANO G EN: Text-Conditioned Panoramic Environment
Generation for Vision-and-Language Navigation

Jialu Li
Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill
{jialuli, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu
https://pano-gen.github.io

Abstract
Vision-and-Language Navigation requires the agent to follow language instructions
to navigate through 3D environments. One main challenge in Vision-and-Language
Navigation is the limited availability of photorealistic training environments, which
makes it hard to generalize to new and unseen environments. To address this
problem, we propose PANO G EN, a generation method that can potentially create an infinite number of diverse panoramic environments conditioned on text.
Specifically, we collect room descriptions by captioning the room images in existing Matterport3D environments, and leverage a state-of-the-art text-to-image
diffusion model to generate the new panoramic environments. We use recursive
outpainting over the generated images to create consistent 360-degree panorama
views. Our new panoramic environments share similar semantic information with
the original environments by conditioning on text descriptions, which ensures the
co-occurrence of objects in the panorama follows human intuition, and creates
enough diversity in room appearance and layout with image outpainting. Lastly, we
explore two ways of utilizing PANO G EN in VLN pre-training and fine-tuning. We
generate instructions for paths in our PANO G EN environments with a speaker built
on a pre-trained vision-and-language model for VLN pre-training, and augment the
visual observation with our panoramic environments during agents’ fine-tuning to
avoid overfitting to seen environments. Empirically, learning with our PANO G EN
environments achieves the new state-of-the-art on the Room-to-Room, Room-forRoom, and CVDN datasets. Besides, we find that pre-training with our PANO G EN
speaker data is especially effective for CVDN, which has under-specified instructions and needs commonsense knowledge to reach the target. Lastly, we show that
the agent can benefit from training with more generated panoramic environments,
suggesting promising results for scaling up the PANO G EN environments to enhance
agents’ generalization to unseen environments.

1

Introduction

Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) requires an agent to make sequential decisions based on
both language instructions and visual environments. In indoor instruction-guided navigation, many
datasets have been proposed. These datasets aim to enhance agents’ ability to understand detailed
navigation instructions [2], dialogue style instructions [52], instructions in different languages [26],
and high-level object-finding instructions [43]. Though many efforts have been proposed to help the
agent learn diverse instruction inputs, all these datasets are built on the same 3D room environments
from Matterport3D, which only contains 60 different room environments for agents’ training. This is
because diverse photorealistic 3D room environments with a large number of sampled human-height
viewpoints are very hard to collect. This limited availability of training environments poses challenges
for the agent to learn the navigation policy well, and generalize to unseen new room environments.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

