Sparse Deep Learning for Time Series Data:
Theory and Applications

Mingxuan Zhang
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
zhan3692@purdue.edu
Yan Sun
Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics
University of Pennsylvania
yan.sun@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Faming Liang
Department of Statistics
fmliang@purdue.edu

Abstract
Sparse deep learning has become a popular technique for improving the
performance of deep neural networks in areas such as uncertainty quantification, variable selection, and large-scale network compression. However,
most existing research has focused on problems where the observations are
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.), and there has been little
work on the problems where the observations are dependent, such as time
series data and sequential data in natural language processing. This paper
aims to address this gap by studying the theory for sparse deep learning with
dependent data. We show that sparse recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
can be consistently estimated, and their predictions are asymptotically normally distributed under appropriate assumptions, enabling the prediction
uncertainty to be correctly quantified. Our numerical results show that
sparse deep learning outperforms state-of-the-art methods, such as conformal predictions, in prediction uncertainty quantification for time series data.
Furthermore, our results indicate that the proposed method can consistently
identify the autoregressive order for time series data and outperform existing methods in large-scale model compression. Our proposed method
has important practical implications in fields such as finance, healthcare,
and energy, where both accurate point estimates and prediction uncertainty
quantification are of concern.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, deep learning has experienced unparalleled triumphs across a multitude
of domains, such as time series forecasting [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], natural language processing [6, 7],
and computer vision [8, 9]. However, challenges like generalization and miscalibration [10]
persist, posing potential risks in critical applications like medical diagnosis and autonomous
vehicles.
In order to enhance the performance of deep neural networks (DNNs), significant research
efforts have been dedicated to exploring optimization methods and the loss surface of the
DNNs, see, e.g., [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16], which have aimed to expedite and direct the convergence of DNNs towards regions that exhibit strong generalization capabilities. While
these investigations are valuable, effectively addressing both the challenges of generalization
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

