PromptIR: Prompting for All-in-One Blind Image
Restoration
Vaishnav Potlapalli⋆ , Syed Waqas Zamir† , Salman Khan⋆ , Fahad Shahbaz Khan⋆‡
⋆
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, † Core42, ‡ Linköping University
firstname.lastname@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Image restoration involves recovering a high-quality clean image from its degraded
version. Deep learning-based methods have significantly improved image restoration performance, however, they have limited generalization ability to different
degradation types and levels. This restricts their real-world application since it
requires training individual models for each specific degradation and knowing the
input degradation type to apply the relevant model. We present a prompt-based
learning approach, PromptIR, for All-In-One image restoration that can effectively
restore images from various types and levels of degradation. In particular, our
method uses prompts to encode degradation-specific information, which is then
used to dynamically guide the restoration network. This allows our method to
generalize to different degradation types and levels, while still achieving state-ofthe-art results on image denoising, deraining, and dehazing. Overall, PromptIR
offers a generic and efficient plugin module with few lightweight prompts that can
be used to restore images of various types and levels of degradation with no prior
information on the corruptions present in the image. Our code and pre-trained
models are available here: https://github.com/va1shn9v/PromptIR.

1

Introduction

During image acquisition, degradations (such as noise, blur, haze, rain, etc.) are often introduced
either due to the physical limitations of cameras or unsuitable ambient conditions. Image restoration
refers to the process of recovering a high-quality clean image from its degraded version. It is a highly
challenging problem due to its ill-posed nature as there exists many feasible solutions, both natural and
unnatural. Recently, deep learning based restoration approaches [47, 12, 69, 45, 76, 55, 43, 74] have
emerged as more effective choice in comparison to conventional methods [19, 36, 13, 53, 27, 42, 28].
Deep neural network-based methods broadly differ in their approach to addressing the image restoration problem. Some works incorporate explicit task-specific knowledge in the network to deal
with the corresponding restoration task, such as denoising [45, 76], deblurring [43, 74], and dehazing [47, 12, 36]. However, these methods lack generalization beyond the specific degradation type and
level. On the other hand, some works [56, 68, 59, 71, 70, 8] focus on developing a robust architecture
design and learn image priors from data implicitly. These methods train separate copies of the same
network for different degradation types, degradation levels, and in more extreme cases on different
datasets. However, replicating the same restoration model for different degradation types, levels,
and data distributions is a compute-intensive and tedious process, and oftentimes impractical for
resource-constrained platforms like mobile and edge devices. Furthermore, to select an appropriate
restoration model during testing, these approaches require prior knowledge regarding the degradation
present in the input image.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

