Does Graph Distillation See Like Vision Dataset
Counterpart?

Beining Yang1,2∗, Kai Wang3∗, Qingyun Sun1,2†, Cheng Ji1,2 , Xingcheng Fu1,2 ,
Hao Tang4 , Yang You3 , Jianxin Li1,2‡
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University
3
National University of Singapore 4 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Training on large-scale graphs has achieved remarkable results in graph representation learning, but its cost and storage have attracted increasing concerns. Existing
graph condensation methods primarily focus on optimizing the feature matrices
of condensed graphs while overlooking the impact of the structure information
from the original graphs. To investigate the impact of the structure information,
we conduct analysis from the spectral domain and empirically identify substantial Laplacian Energy Distribution (LED) shifts in previous works. Such shifts
lead to poor performance in cross-architecture generalization and specific tasks,
including anomaly detection and link prediction. In this paper, we propose a novel
Structure-broadcasting Graph Dataset Distillation (SGDD) scheme for broadcasting the original structure information to the generation of the synthetic one, which
explicitly prevents overlooking the original structure information. Theoretically,
the synthetic graphs by SGDD are expected to have smaller LED shifts than previous works, leading to superior performance in both cross-architecture settings
and specific tasks. We validate the proposed SGDD across 9 datasets and achieve
state-of-the-art results on all of them: for example, on the YelpChi dataset, our approach maintains 98.6% test accuracy of training on the original graph dataset with
1,000 times saving on the scale of the graph. Moreover, we empirically evaluate
there exist 17.6% ∼ 31.4% reductions in LED shift crossing 9 datasets. Extensive
experiments and analysis verify the effectiveness and necessity of the proposed
designs. The code is available in the https://github.com/RingBDStack/SGDD.

1

Introduction

Graphs have been applied in many research areas and achieved remarkable results, including social
networks [27, 67, 73, 79], physical [16, 3, 57, 10], and chemical interactions [2, 93, 111, 80]. Graph
neural networks (GNNs), a classical and wide-studied graph representation learning method [40, 84,
98, 63], is proposed to extract information via modeling the features and structures from the given
graph. Nevertheless, the computational and memory costs are extremely heavy when training on a
large graph [48, 89, 99]. One of the most straightforward ideas is to reduce the redundancy of the
large graph. For example, graph sparsification [66, 77] and coarsening [53, 52, 46, 75] are proposed
to achieve this goal by dropping redundant edges and grouping similar nodes. These methods have
shown promising results in reducing the size and complexity of large graphs while preserving their
essential properties.
∗

Equal contribution (yangbeining@buaa.edu.cn, kai.wang@comp.nus.edu.sg).
Project lead sunqy@buaa.edu.cn
‡
Corresponding author lijx@buaa.edu.cn.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

