Learning Provably Robust Estimators for Inverse
Problems via Jittering

Anselm Krainovic
Technical University of Munich
anselm.krainovic@tum.de

Mahdi Soltanolkotabi
University of Southern California
soltanol@usc.edu

Reinhard Heckel
Technical University of Munich
reinhard.heckel@tum.de

Abstract
Deep neural networks provide excellent performance for inverse problems such
as denoising. However, neural networks can be sensitive to adversarial or worstcase perturbations. This raises the question of whether such networks can be
trained efficiently to be worst-case robust. In this paper, we investigate whether
jittering, a simple regularization technique that adds isotropic Gaussian noise
during training, is effective for learning worst-case robust estimators for inverse
problems. While well studied for prediction in classification tasks, the effectiveness
of jittering for inverse problems has not been systematically investigated. In this
paper, we present a novel analytical characterization of the optimal ℓ2 -worst-case
robust estimator for linear denoising and show that jittering yields optimal robust
denoisers. Furthermore, we examine jittering empirically via training deep neural
networks (U-nets) for natural image denoising, deconvolution, and accelerated
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The results show that jittering significantly
enhances the worst-case robustness, but can be suboptimal for inverse problems
beyond denoising. Moreover, our results imply that training on real data which
often contains slight noise is somewhat robustness enhancing.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks achieve state-of-the-art performance for image reconstruction tasks including
compressive sensing, super-resolution, and denoising. Due to their excellent performance, deep
networks are now used in a variety of imaging technologies, for example in MRI and CT. However,
concerns have been voiced that neural networks can be sensitive to worst-case or adversarial perturbations. Those concerns are fuelled by neural networks being sensitive to small, adversarially selected
perturbations for prediction tasks such as image classification (Szegedy et al., 2014).
Recent empirical work for image reconstruction tasks (Huang et al., 2018; Antun et al., 2020; Genzel
et al., 2022; Darestani et al., 2021) found that worst-case perturbations can have a significantly larger
effect on the image quality than random perturbations. This sensitivity to worst-case perturbations is
not unique to neural networks, classical imaging methods are similarly sensitive (Darestani et al.,
2021).
This raises the question of whether networks can be designed or trained to be worst-case robust. A
successful method proposed in the context of classification is adversarial training, which optimizes
a robust or adversarial loss during training (Madry et al., 2018). However, the robust loss requires
finding worst-case perturbations during training which is difficult and computationally expensive.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

