Cross-Episodic Curriculum for Transformer Agents

Lucy Xiaoyang Shi1∗ , Yunfan Jiang1∗ , Jake Grigsby2 , Linxi “Jim” Fan3† , Yuke Zhu2 3†
1
Stanford University 2 The University of Texas at Austin 3 NVIDIA Research
∗
Equal contribution † Equal advising

Abstract
We present a new algorithm, Cross-Episodic Curriculum (CEC), to boost the learning efficiency and generalization of Transformer agents. Central to CEC is the
placement of cross-episodic experiences into a Transformer’s context, which forms
the basis of a curriculum. By sequentially structuring online learning trials and
mixed-quality demonstrations, CEC constructs curricula that encapsulate learning
progression and proficiency increase across episodes. Such synergy combined
with the potent pattern recognition capabilities of Transformer models delivers
a powerful cross-episodic attention mechanism. The effectiveness of CEC is
demonstrated under two representative scenarios: one involving multi-task reinforcement learning with discrete control, such as in DeepMind Lab, where the
curriculum captures the learning progression in both individual and progressively
complex settings, and the other involving imitation learning with mixed-quality
data for continuous control, as seen in RoboMimic, where the curriculum captures
the improvement in demonstrators’ expertise. In all instances, policies resulting
from CEC exhibit superior performance and strong generalization. Code is opensourced on the project website cec-agent.github.io to facilitate research on
Transformer agent learning.

1

Introduction

The paradigm shift driven by foundation models [8] is revolutionizing the communities who study
sequential decision-making problems [80], with innovations focusing on control [2, 45, 38, 9],
planning [76, 32, 33, 78, 17], pre-trained visual representation [57, 50, 67, 51, 82], among others.
Despite the progress, the data-hungry nature makes the application of Transformer [75] agents
extremely challenging in data-scarce domains like robotics [52, 53, 19, 38, 9]. This leads us to
the question: Can we maximize the utilization of limited data, regardless of their optimality and
construction, to foster more efficient learning?
To this end, this paper introduces a novel algorithm named Cross-Episodic Curriculum (CEC), a
method that explicitly harnesses the shifting distributions of multiple experiences when organized
into a curriculum. The key insight is that sequential cross-episodic data manifest useful learning
signals that do not easily appear in any separated training episodes.1 As illustrated in Figure 1,
CEC realizes this through two stages: 1) formulating curricular sequences to capture (a) the policy
improvement on single environments, (b) the learning progress on a series of progressively harder
environments, or (c) the increase of demonstrators’ proficiency; and 2) causally distilling policy
improvements into the model weights of Transformer agents through cross-episodic attention. When
a policy is trained to predict actions at current time steps, it can trace back beyond ongoing trials
and internalize improved behaviors encoded in curricular data, thereby achieving efficient learning
1

Following the canonical definition in Sutton and Barto [73], we refer to the sequences of agent-environment
interaction with clearly identified initial and terminal states as “episodes”. We interchangeably use “episode”,
“trial”, and “trajectory” in this work.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

