Experimental Designs for Heteroskedastic Variance

Justin Weltz∗ Tanner Fiez† Eric Laber‡ Alexander Volfovsky§
Blake Mason ¶ Houssam Nassif ∥ Lalit Jain ∗∗

Abstract
Most linear experimental design problems assume homogeneous variance, even
though heteroskedastic noise is present in many realistic settings. Let a learner have
access to a finite set of measurement vectors X ⊂ Rd that can be probed to receive
noisy linear responses of the form y = x⊤ θ∗ + η. Here θ∗ ∈ Rd is an unknown
parameter vector, and η is independent mean-zero σx2 -strictly-sub-Gaussian noise
defined by a flexible heteroskedastic variance model, σx2 = x⊤ Σ∗ x. Assuming that
Σ∗ ∈ Rd×d is an unknown matrix, we propose, analyze and empirically evaluate a
novel design for uniformly bounding estimation error of the variance parameters,
σx2 . We demonstrate the benefits of this method with two adaptive experimental
design problems under heteroskedastic noise, fixed confidence transductive bestarm identification, and level-set identification; proving the first instance-dependent
lower bounds in these settings. Lastly, we construct near-optimal algorithms and
empirically demonstrate the large improvements in sample complexity gained from
accounting for heteroskedastic variance in these designs.

1

Introduction

Accurate data analysis pipelines require decomposing observed data into signal and noise components.
To facilitate this, the noise is commonly assumed to be additive and homogeneous. However, in
applied fields this assumption is often untenable, necessitating the development of novel design and
analysis tools. Specific examples of deviations from homogeneity include the variability in sales
figures of different products in e-commerce [24, 31], the volatility of stocks across sectors [5], spatial
data [58, 43], and genomics [48, 10]. This heteroskedasticity is frequently structured as a function of
observable features. In this work, we develop two near-optimal adaptive experimental designs that
take advantage of such structure.
There are many approaches, primarily developed in the statistics and econometrics literature, for
efficient mean estimation in the presence of heteroskedastic noise (see [56, 16] for a survey). These
methods concentrate on settings where data have already been collected and do not consider sampling
to better understand the underlying heteroskedasticity. Some early work exists on experimental design
in the presence of heteroskedastic noise, however these methods are non-adaptive (see Section 2 for
details). Importantly, using naive data collection procedures designed for homoskedastic environments
may lead to sub-optimal inference downstream (see Section 1.2 for examples). A scientist may fail
to take samples that allow them to observe the effect of interest with a fixed sampling budget, thus
wasting time and money. This work demonstrates how to efficiently and adaptively collect data
∗

Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, justin.weltz@duke.edu, work conducted at Amazon
Amazon.com, USA, fieztann@amazon.com
‡
Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, eric.laber@duke.edu
§
Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, alexander.volfovsky@duke.edu
¶
Amazon.com, USA, bjmason@amazon.com
∥
Meta, USA, houssamn@meta.com
∗∗
Michael G. Foster School of Business, University of Washington, lalitj@uw.edu, work conducted at Amazon
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

