Real-World Image Variation by Aligning Diffusion
Inversion Chain
Yuechen Zhang1 Jinbo Xing1 Eric Lo1 Jiaya Jia1, 2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SmartMore
{yczhang21, jbxing, ericlo, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Image Variations

“Crown”

“Cat”

“Girl”

Generation with style condition

Figure 1: Leveraging an image exemplar, our training-free method excels in image generation tasks
such as generating (a) image variations, (b) images of a similar style (with conditions).

Abstract
Recent diffusion model advancements have enabled high-fidelity images to be
generated using text prompts. However, a domain gap exists between generated
images and real-world images, which poses a challenge in generating high-quality
variations of real-world images. Our investigation uncovers that this domain gap
originates from a latents’ distribution gap in different diffusion processes. To
address this issue, we propose a novel inference pipeline called Real-world Image
Variation by ALignment (RIVAL) that utilizes diffusion models to generate image
variations from a single image exemplar. Our pipeline enhances the generation
quality of image variations by aligning the image generation process to the source
image’s inversion chain. Specifically, we demonstrate that step-wise latent distribution alignment is essential for generating high-quality variations. To attain
this, we design a cross-image self-attention injection for feature interaction and
a step-wise distribution normalization to align the latent features. Incorporating these alignment processes into a diffusion model allows RIVAL to generate
high-quality image variations without further parameter optimization. Our experimental results demonstrate that our proposed approach outperforms existing
methods concerning semantic similarity and perceptual quality. This generalized
inference pipeline can be easily applied to other diffusion-based generation tasks,
such as image-conditioned text-to-image generation and stylization. Project page:
https://rival-diff.github.io

1

Introduction

Generating real-world image variation is a crucial area of research in computer vision and machine
learning, owing to its practical applications in image editing, synthesis, and data augmentation [1, 2].
This task involves the generation of diverse variations of a given real-world image while preserving its
semantic content and visual quality. Early methods for generating image variations included texture
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

