Normalization Layers Are All That
Sharpness-Aware Minimization Needs

Maximilian Müller
University of Tübingen
and Tübingen AI Center

Tiffany Vlaar
McGill University and
Mila - Quebec AI Institute

maximilian.mueller@wsii.uni-tuebingen.de

tiffany.vlaar@mila.quebec

David Rolnick
McGill University and
Mila - Quebec AI Institute

Matthias Hein
University of Tübingen
and Tübingen AI Center

drolnick@cs.mcgill.ca

matthias.hein@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) was proposed to reduce sharpness of minima
and has been shown to enhance generalization performance in various settings.
In this work we show that perturbing only the affine normalization parameters
(typically comprising 0.1% of the total parameters) in the adversarial step of
SAM can outperform perturbing all of the parameters. This finding generalizes
to different SAM variants and both ResNet (Batch Normalization) and Vision
Transformer (Layer Normalization) architectures. We consider alternative sparse
perturbation approaches and find that these do not achieve similar performance
enhancement at such extreme sparsity levels, showing that this behaviour is unique
to the normalization layers. Although our findings reaffirm the effectiveness of
SAM in improving generalization performance, they cast doubt on whether this is
solely caused by reduced sharpness.

1

Introduction

Numerous works have been dedicated to studying the potential connection between flatness of minima
and generalization performance of deep neural networks [34, 18, 21, 45, 4]. Several aspects of training
are thought to affect sharpness, but how these interact with each other remains an ongoing area of
research. Recently, sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) has become a popular approach to actively
try to find minima with low sharpness using a min-max type algorithm [23]. SAM was found to be
remarkably effective in enhancing generalization performance for various settings [23, 14, 7, 1, 33].
Several variants of SAM have been proposed, focusing both on enhanced performance [37, 35] and
reduced computational cost [11, 20]. In particular, with the original aim of making SAM more
efficient Mi et al. [42] propose a ‘sparse’ SAM approach, which applies SAM only to a select number
of parameters. Although they do not actually succeed in reducing wall-clock time, they make the
surprising observation that using 50% (in some settings even up to 95%) sparse perturbations can
maintain or even enhance performance compared to applying SAM to all parameters. They thus
hypothesize that “complete perturbation on all parameters will result in suboptimal minima”.
Similar to the effect of SAM [23, 14], normalization layers are thought to reduce sharpness [41, 46].
Frankle et al. [24] found for ResNets that the trainable affine parameters of the normalization layers
Code is provided at https://github.com/mueller-mp/SAM-ON.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

