Optimistic Meta-Gradients

Sebastian Flennerhag
Google DeepMind
flennerhag@google.com
Hado van Hasselt
Google DeepMind

Tom Zahavy
Google DeepMind

Brendan O’Donoghue
Google DeepMind

András György
Google DeepMind

Satinder Singh
Google DeepMind

Abstract
We study the connection between gradient-based meta-learning and convex optimisation. We observe that gradient descent with momentum is a special case
of meta-gradients, and building on recent results in optimisation, we prove convergence rates for meta-learning in the single task setting. While a meta-learned
update rule can yield faster convergence up to constant factor, it is not sufficient
for acceleration. Instead, some form of optimism is required. We show that optimism in meta-learning can be captured through the recently proposed Bootstrapped
Meta-Gradient [9] method, providing deeper insight into its underlying mechanics.

1

Introduction

Top-1 Test Accuracy (%)

In meta-learning, a learner is using a param75
eterised algorithm to adapt to a given task.
The parameters of the algorithm are then metalearned by evaluating the learner’s resulting per70
formance [25, 10, 2]. As such, meta-learning
features a complex interaction between the
learner and the meta-learner. The learner’s
65
problem is to minimize the expected loss f of
a stochastic objective by adapting its parame60
ters x ∈ Rn . The learner has an update rule
ϕ at its disposal that generates new parameters
xt = xt−1 + ϕ(xt−1 , wt ); we suppress data
55
dependence to simplify notation. A simple exSGD
Standard meta-learning
ample is when ϕ represents gradient descent
Optimistic meta-learning
with wt = η its step size, that is ϕ(xt−1 , η) =
50
−η∇f (xt−1 ) [17, 26]; several works have ex0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
1e6
Training Steps
plored meta-learning other aspects of a gradientbased update rule [6, 21, 7, 30, 31, 9, 15, 22]. ϕ
need not be limited to a gradient-based update, Figure 1: ImageNet. We compare training a 50it can represent some algorithm implemented layer ResNet using SGD against variants that tune
an element-wise learning rate online using standard
within a Neural Network [25, 11, 1, 29].
meta-learning or optimistic meta-learning. ShadThe meta-learner’s problem is to optimise the ing depicts 95% confidence intervals over 3 seeds.
meta-parameters wt to yield effective updates.
In a typical (gradient-based) meta-learning setting, it does so by treating xt as a function of w. Let
ht , defined by ht (w) = f (xt−1 + ϕ(xt−1 , w)), denote the learner’s post-update performance as a
function of w. The learner and the meta-learner co-evolve according to
xt = xt−1 + ϕ(xt−1 , wt ),

wt+1 = wt − ∇ht (wt ) = wt − Dϕ(xt−1 , wt )T ∇f (xt ),

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

