Bayesian nonparametric (non-)renewal processes for
analyzing neural spike train variability

David Liu
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
dl543@cam.ac.uk

Máté Lengyel
Department of Engineering Department of Cognitive Science
University of Cambridge
Central European University
m.lengyel@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Neural spiking activity is generally variable, non-stationary, and exhibits complex
dependencies on covariates, such as sensory input or behavior. These dependencies
have been proposed to be signatures of specific computations, and so characterizing them with quantitative rigor is critical for understanding neural computations.
Approaches based on point processes provide a principled statistical framework
for modeling neural spiking activity. However, currently, they only allow the
instantaneous mean, but not the instantaneous variability, of responses to depend
on covariates. To resolve this limitation, we propose a scalable Bayesian approach
generalizing modulated renewal processes using sparse variational Gaussian processes. We leverage pathwise conditioning for computing nonparametric priors
over conditional interspike interval distributions and rely on automatic relevance
determination to detect lagging interspike interval dependencies beyond renewal
order. After systematically validating our method on synthetic data, we apply it
to two foundational datasets of animal navigation: head direction cells in freely
moving mice and hippocampal place cells in rats running along a linear track. Our
model exhibits competitive or better predictive power compared to state-of-the-art
baselines, and outperforms them in terms of capturing interspike interval statistics.
These results confirm the importance of modeling covariate-dependent spiking variability, and further analyses of our fitted models reveal rich patterns of variability
modulation beyond the temporal resolution of flexible count-based approaches.

1

Introduction

Analyses of spike time [49, 76, 86] and count [12, 26, 57] statistics have revealed neural responses in
vivo to be structured but generally variable or noisy [24, 44, 70, 78]. To model this stochastic aspect
of neural spike trains, probabilistic approaches based on temporal point processes have been widely
applied. This in turn has been a major driver of point process theory development [42] for capturing
spiking variability structure with statistical models [74]. The study of neural computation underlying
naturalistic behavior in particular involves non-stationary spike trains, which presents a significant
challenge as apparent spiking variability is a result of both irreducible “intrinsic” neural stochasticity
as well as dependencies on behavioral covariates that can themselves vary on multiple time scales.
Different approaches have been proposed for handling non-stationary spike trains, starting with
the classical log Cox Gaussian process [14, 55] to allow variations in the local intensity or firing
rate while modeling independent spikes. Dependencies on previous spikes can be captured to first
order with renewal processes, and these models have been extended to non-stationary cases through
modulation of the hazard function with some time-dependent function [43, 79] or through rescaling
interspike intervals with a covariate-dependent rate function [2, 6]. Another approach based on
Hawkes processes and spike-history filters [45, 83, 91] introduces conditional point processes that go
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

