Transitivity Recovering Decompositions:
Interpretable and Robust Fine-Grained Relationships

Abhra Chaudhuri1,5,6
Massimiliano Mancini2
Zeynep Akata3,4
Anjan Dutta5,6 ∗
1
2
3
University of Exeter
University of Trento
University of Tübingen
4
MPI for Informatics 5 The Alan Turing Institute 6 University of Surrey

Abstract
Recent advances in fine-grained representation learning leverage local-to-global
(emergent) relationships for achieving state-of-the-art results. The relational representations relied upon by such methods, however, are abstract. We aim to
deconstruct this abstraction by expressing them as interpretable graphs over image
views. We begin by theoretically showing that abstract relational representations
are nothing but a way of recovering transitive relationships among local views.
Based on this, we design Transitivity Recovering Decompositions (TRD), a graphspace search algorithm that identifies interpretable equivalents of abstract emergent
relationships at both instance and class levels, and with no post-hoc computations.
We additionally show that TRD is provably robust to noisy views, with empirical
evidence also supporting this finding. The latter allows TRD to perform at par or
even better than the state-of-the-art, while being fully interpretable. Implementation
is available at https://github.com/abhrac/trd.

1

Introduction

Identifying discriminative object parts (local views) has traditionally served as a powerful approach
for learning fine-grained representations [95, 85, 43]. Isolated local views, however, miss out on the
larger, general structure of the object, and hence, need to be considered in conjunction with the global
view for tasks like fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) [94]. Additionally, the way in which
local views combine to form the global view (local-to-global / emergent relationships [59]) has been
identified as being crucial for distinguishing between classes that share the same set of parts, but
differ only in the way the parts relate to each other [32, 97, 10, 9, 61, 12]. However, representations
produced by state-of-the-art approaches that leverage the emergent relationships are encoded in an
abstract fashion – for instance, through the summary embeddings of transformers [9, 10], or via
aggregations on outputs from a GNN [97, 27]. This makes room for the following question that
we aim to answer through this work: how can we make such abstract relational representations
more human-understandable? Although there are several existing works that generate explanations
for localized, fine-grained visual features [11, 78, 36, 63], providing interpretations for abstract
representations obtained for discriminative, emergent relationships still remains unaddressed.
Illustrated in Figure 1, we propose to make existing relational representations interpretable through
bypassing their abstractions, and expressing all computations in terms of a graph over image views,
both at the level of the image as well as that of the class (termed class proxy, a generalized representation of a class). At the class level, this takes the form of what we call a Concept Graph: a generalized
relational representation of the salient concepts across all instances of that class. We use graphs, as
they are a naturally interpretable model of relational interactions for a variety of tasks [86, 18, 1, 46],
allowing us to visualize entities (e.g., object parts, salient features), and their relationships.
∗

Abhra Chaudhuri (ac1151@exeter.ac.uk) is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

