Learning Large-Scale MTP2 Gaussian Graphical
Models via Bridge-Block Decomposition

Xiwen Wang1 , Jiaxi Ying1,2∗, Daniel P. Palomar1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology1
HKUST Shenzhen-Hong Kong Collaborative Innovation Research Institute2
{xwangew, jx.ying}@connect.ust.hk, palomar@ust.hk

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of learning the large-scale Gaussian graphical
models that are multivariate totally positive of order two (MTP2 ). By introducing
the concept of bridge, which commonly exists in large-scale sparse graphs, we show
that the entire problem can be equivalently optimized through (1) several smallerscaled sub-problems induced by a bridge-block decomposition on the thresholded
sample covariance graph and (2) a set of explicit solutions on entries corresponding
to bridges. From practical aspect, this simple and provable discipline can be applied
to break down a large problem into small tractable ones, leading to enormous
reduction on the computational complexity and substantial improvements for all
existing algorithms. The synthetic and real-world experiments demonstrate that our
proposed method presents a significant speed-up compared to the state-of-the-art
benchmarks.

1

Introduction

In recent decades, the surge in data availability has posed challenges for analyzing and understanding
large-scale datasets. A key challenge is examining pairwise relationships among numerous variables, which can be represented using Gaussian graphical models (GGMs) [1] that depict variable
connections as graphs. The precision matrix, which is the inverse of the covariance matrix, helps
determine the non-zero patterns of GGMs [2, 3]. A traditional approach to estimate the precision
matrix is the graphical lasso [4, 5], which is formulated as a regularized log-determinant program.
The solutions of graphical lasso possess an appealing property known as sparsity, which severs as a
common assumption particularly in large graphical models and has been shown to offer numerous
benefits by a significant amount of research. For example, the sparsity can reduce the model size
and improve the interpretability of the model by highlighting the most important variables and their
relationships, allowing better understanding the underlying causal structure [6–8].
In this paper, we solve the large-scale sparse precision matrix estimation problem for GGMs that follow a multivariate totally positive of order two (MTP2 ) Gaussian distribution [9, 10], or equivalently,
possess a precision matrix that is a symmetric M -matrix [11], where all off-diagonal elements are
non-positive. The so-called MTP2 property is a special form of positive dependence and plays an
essential role in applications where all interaction potentials are considered non-negative or the focus
is on emphasizing positive associations between variables [12–15]. The MTP2 property has been
applied in various fields. Here are some examples. In finance, MTP2 structures are often exploited
as the asset returns are often considered positively correlated [16–18]; In machine learning, MTP2
GGMs are recognized as attractive Markov random field and have been used in applications such
as taxonomic reasoning [19] and psychometrics [13]. The MTP2 precision matrix, also referred to
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

