Beyond Geometry: Comparing the Temporal
Structure of Computation in Neural Circuits with
Dynamical Similarity Analysis

Mitchell Ostrow, Adam Eisen, Leo Kozachkov, Ila Fiete
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
Cambridge, MA, USA
{ostrow,eisenaj,leokoz8,fiete}@mit.edu

Abstract
How can we tell whether two neural networks utilize the same internal processes
for a particular computation? This question is pertinent for multiple subfields of
neuroscience and machine learning, including neuroAI, mechanistic interpretability,
and brain-machine interfaces. Standard approaches for comparing neural networks
focus on the spatial geometry of latent states. Yet in recurrent networks, computations are implemented at the level of dynamics, and two networks performing
the same computation with equivalent dynamics need not exhibit the same geometry. To bridge this gap, we introduce a novel similarity metric that compares
two systems at the level of their dynamics, called Dynamical Similarity Analysis (DSA). Our method incorporates two components: Using recent advances in
data-driven dynamical systems theory, we learn a high-dimensional linear system
that accurately captures core features of the original nonlinear dynamics. Next, we
compare different systems passed through this embedding using a novel extension
of Procrustes Analysis that accounts for how vector fields change under orthogonal
transformation. In four case studies, we demonstrate that our method disentangles
conjugate and non-conjugate recurrent neural networks (RNNs), while geometric
methods fall short. We additionally show that our method can distinguish learning
rules in an unsupervised manner. Our method opens the door to comparative
analyses of the essential temporal structure of computation in neural circuits.

1

Introduction

Comparing neural responses between different systems or contexts plays many crucial roles in neuroscience. These include comparing a model to experimental data (as a measure of model quality,
Schrimpf et al. [2020]), determining invariant states of a neural circuit (Chaudhuri et al. [2019]),
identifying whether two individual brains are performing a computation in the same way, aligning
recordings across days for a brain-machine interface (Degenhart et al. [2020]), and comparing two
models (e.g. to probe the similarity of two solutions to a problem, Pagan et al. [2022]). Current
similarity methods include R2 via Linear Regression, Representational Similarity Analysis, Singular Vector Canonical Correlation Analysis, Centered Kernel Alignment, and Procrustes Analysis
(Schrimpf et al. [2020], Kriegeskorte et al. [2008], Raghu et al. [2017], Williams et al. [2021], Duong
et al. [2022]). Crucially, these all compare the geometry of states in the latent space of a neural
network.
Identifying shared neural computations between systems calls for methods that compare similarity at
the level of the fundamental computation. In the brain, computations are instantiated by the emergent
dynamical properties of neural circuits, such as fixed points, invariant and fixed point manifolds,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

