Beyond Deep Ensembles: A Large-Scale Evaluation of
Bayesian Deep Learning under Distribution Shift

Florian Seligmann∗
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

Philipp Becker
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
FZI Research Center for Information Technology

Michael Volpp
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence

Gerhard Neumann
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
FZI Research Center for Information Technology

Abstract
Bayesian deep learning (BDL) is a promising approach to achieve well-calibrated
predictions on distribution-shifted data. Nevertheless, there exists no large-scale
survey that evaluates recent SOTA methods on diverse, realistic, and challenging
benchmark tasks in a systematic manner. To provide a clear picture of the current
state of BDL research, we evaluate modern BDL algorithms on real-world datasets
from the WILDS collection containing challenging classification and regression
tasks, with a focus on generalization capability and calibration under distribution
shift. We compare the algorithms on a wide range of large, convolutional and
transformer-based neural network architectures. In particular, we investigate a
signed version of the expected calibration error that reveals whether the methods are
over- or underconfident, providing further insight into the behavior of the methods.
Further, we provide the first systematic evaluation of BDL for fine-tuning large
pre-trained models, where training from scratch is prohibitively expensive. Finally,
given the recent success of Deep Ensembles, we extend popular single-mode
posterior approximations to multiple modes by the use of ensembles. While we find
that ensembling single-mode approximations generally improves the generalization
capability and calibration of the models by a significant margin, we also identify
a failure mode of ensembles when finetuning large transformer-based language
models. In this setting, variational inference based approaches such as last-layer
Bayes By Backprop outperform other methods in terms of accuracy by a large
margin, while modern approximate inference algorithms such as SWAG achieve
the best calibration.

1

Introduction

Real-world applications of deep learning require accurate estimates of the model’s predictive uncertainty [2, 21, 38]. This is particularly relevant in safety-critical applications of deep learning, such as
medical applications [95] and self-driving cars [27]. Therefore, we want our models to be calibrated:
A model should be confident about its prediction if and only if the prediction will likely be correct.
Only then it is sensible to rely on high-confidence predictions, and, e.g., to contact a human expert
in the low-confidence regime [4]. Calibration is particularly relevant when models are evaluated
on out-of-distribution (o.o.d.) data, i.e. on inputs that are very different from the training data, and
hence, the model cannot always make accurate predictions. However, typical deep neural networks
are highly overconfident on o.o.d. data [28, 72].
∗

Correspondence to florian.seligmann@student.kit.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

