BuildingsBench: A Large-Scale Dataset of 900K
Buildings and Benchmark for Short-Term Load
Forecasting

Patrick Emami, Abhijeet Sahu, Peter Graf
National Renewable Energy Lab
{Patrick.Emami, Abhijeet.Sahu, Peter.Graf}@nrel.gov

Abstract
Short-term forecasting of residential and commercial building energy consumption
is widely used in power systems and continues to grow in importance. Data-driven
short-term load forecasting (STLF), although promising, has suffered from a lack of
open, large-scale datasets with high building diversity. This has hindered exploring
the pretrain-then-fine-tune paradigm for STLF. To help address this, we present
BuildingsBench, which consists of: 1) Buildings-900K, a large-scale dataset of
900K simulated buildings representing the U.S. building stock; and 2) an evaluation
platform with over 1,900 real residential and commercial buildings from 7 open
datasets. BuildingsBench benchmarks two under-explored tasks: zero-shot STLF,
where a pretrained model is evaluated on unseen buildings without fine-tuning,
and transfer learning, where a pretrained model is fine-tuned on a target building.
The main finding of our benchmark analysis is that synthetically pretrained models
generalize surprisingly well to real commercial buildings. An exploration of the
effect of increasing dataset size and diversity on zero-shot commercial building
performance reveals a power-law with diminishing returns. We also show that finetuning pretrained models on real commercial and residential buildings improves
performance for a majority of target buildings. We hope that BuildingsBench
encourages and facilitates future research on generalizable STLF. All datasets and
code can be accessed from https://github.com/NREL/BuildingsBench.

1

Introduction

Residential and commercial buildings in the United States are responsible for about 40% of energy
consumption and 35% of greenhouse gas emissions [10]. Globally, these estimates are respectively
30% and 27% [22]. Building energy demand forecasting plays a part in reducing global emissions by
helping to decarbonize the building sector.
Short-term load forecasting (STLF), which typically ranges from hour-ahead to a few days ahead,
plays a multitude of critical roles. STLF can help match shifting energy supplies with customer
demand, as well as aid energy markets with accurately setting prices based on forecasted supply/demand [19]. Accurate forecasts can be directly used by reinforcement learning [44] and model
predictive control [1, 9] for optimal building energy management.
However, STLF remains a challenging problem, as energy demand can fluctuate heavily due to a
variety of unobserved and exogenous factors. As such, data-driven methods have risen in popularity
to address STLF [2, 52]. Interest in these techniques has also been spurred by a rise in deployments
of advanced sensors (i.e., smart meters) that record building energy consumption. However, the
number of instrumented buildings with publicly released data remains low. Moreover, it is typical for
multiple years of historical data to be reserved for training and validation, with trained models tested
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

