Gradient-Based Feature Learning under
Structured Data
Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini1 , Denny Wu2 , Taiji Suzuki3 , Murat A. Erdogdu1
1
2

University of Toronto and Vector Institute,
New York University and Flatiron Institute,
3
University of Tokyo and RIKEN AIP

{mousavi,erdogdu}@cs.toronto.edu, dennywu@nyu.edu,
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Recent works have demonstrated that the sample complexity of gradient-based
learning of single index models, i.e. functions that depend on a 1-dimensional
projection of the input data, is governed by their information exponent. However,
these results are only concerned with isotropic data, while in practice the input
often contains additional structure which can implicitly guide the algorithm. In
this work, we investigate the effect of a spiked covariance structure and reveal
several interesting phenomena. First, we show that in the anisotropic setting, the
commonly used spherical gradient dynamics may fail to recover the true direction,
even when the spike is perfectly aligned with the target direction. Next, we show
that appropriate weight normalization that is reminiscent of batch normalization
can alleviate this issue. Further, by exploiting the alignment between the (spiked)
input covariance and the target, we obtain improved sample complexity compared
to the isotropic case. In particular, under the spiked model with a suitably large
spike, the sample complexity of gradient-based training can be made independent
of the information exponent while also outperforming lower bounds for rotationally
invariant kernel methods.

1

Introduction

A fundamental feature of neural networks is their adaptivity to learn unknown statistical models.
For instance, when the learning problem exhibits certain low-dimensional structure or sparsity, it is
expected that neural networks optimized by gradient-based algorithms can efficiently adapt to such
structure via feature/representation learning. A considerable amount of research has been dedicated
to understanding this phenomenon under various assumptions and to demonstrate the superiority of
neural networks over non-adaptive methods such as kernel models [GMMM19, WLLM19, BES+ 19,
LMZ20, AAM22, BES+ 22, DLS22, Tel23, MHPG+ 23].
A particular relevant problem setting for feature learning is the estimation of single index models,
where the response y ∈ R depends on the input x ∈ Rd via y = g(⟨u, x⟩) + ϵ, where g : R → R is
the nonlinear link function and u is the unit target direction. Here, learning corresponds to recovering
the unknowns u and g, which requires the model to extract and adapt to the low-dimensional target
direction. Recent works have shown that the sample complexity is determined by certain properties
of the link function g. In particular, the complexity of gradient-based optimization is captured by
the information exponent of g introduced by [BAGJ21]. Intuitively, a larger information exponent s
corresponds to a more complex g (for gradient-based learning), and it has been proven that when the
input is isotropic x ∼ N (0, Id ), gradient flow can learn the single index model with Õ(ds ) sample
complexity [BBSS22].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

