Disambiguated Attention Embedding for
Multi-Instance Partial-Label Learning

Wei Tang1,2 , Weijia Zhang3 , Min-Ling Zhang1,2∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University),
Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Information and Physical Sciences, The University of Newcastle,
Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia
tangw@seu.edu.cn, weijia.zhang@newcastle.edu.au, zhangml@seu.edu.cn

1

Abstract
In many real-world tasks, the concerned objects can be represented as a multiinstance bag associated with a candidate label set, which consists of one groundtruth label and several false positive labels. Multi-instance partial-label learning
(MIPL) is a learning paradigm to deal with such tasks and has achieved favorable
performances. Existing MIPL approach follows the instance-space paradigm by
assigning augmented candidate label sets of bags to each instance and aggregating
bag-level labels from instance-level labels. However, this scheme may be suboptimal as global bag-level information is ignored and the predicted labels of bags are
sensitive to predictions of negative instances. In this paper, we study an alternative
scheme where a multi-instance bag is embedded into a single vector representation.
Accordingly, an intuitive algorithm named D E M IPL, i.e., Disambiguated attention
Embedding for Multi-Instance Partial-Label learning, is proposed. D E M IPL employs a disambiguation attention mechanism to aggregate a multi-instance bag into
a single vector representation, followed by a momentum-based disambiguation
strategy to identify the ground-truth label from the candidate label set. Furthermore, we introduce a real-world MIPL dataset for colorectal cancer classification.
Experimental results on benchmark and real-world datasets validate the superiority
of D E M IPL against the compared MIPL and partial-label learning approaches.

1

Introduction

Significant advancements in supervised machine learning algorithms have been achieved by utilizing
large amounts of labeled training data. However, in numerous tasks, training data is weakly-supervised
due to the substantial costs associated with data labeling [1–6]. Weak supervision can be broadly
categorized into three types: incomplete, inexact, and inaccurate supervision [7]. Multi-instance
learning (MIL) and partial-label learning (PLL) are typical weakly-supervised learning frameworks
based on inexact supervision. In MIL, samples are represented by collections of features called
bags, where each bag contains multiple instances [8–19]. Only bag-level labels are accessible during
training, while instance-level labels are unknown. Consequently, the instance space in MIL contains
inexact supervision, signifying that the number and location of positive instances within a positive
bag remain undetermined. PLL associates each instance with a candidate label set that contains
one ground-truth label and several false positive labels [20–35]. As a result, the label space in PLL
embodies inexact supervision, indicating that the ground-truth label of an instance is uncertain.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

