Reversible and irreversible bracket-based dynamics
for deep graph neural networks

Anthony Gruber †
Center for Computing Research
Sandia National Laboratories
Albuquerque, NM. USA
adgrube@sandia.gov

Kookjin Lee ∗
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ. USA
kookjin.lee@asu.edu

Nathaniel Trask †
School of Engineering and Applied Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA. USA
ntrask@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Recent works have shown that physics-inspired architectures allow the training of deep graph neural networks (GNNs) without oversmoothing. The role
of these physics is unclear, however, with successful examples of both reversible (e.g., Hamiltonian) and irreversible (e.g., diffusion) phenomena producing comparable results despite diametrically opposed mechanisms, and further complications arising due to empirical departures from mathematical theory.
This work presents a series of novel GNN architectures based upon structurepreserving bracket-based dynamical systems, which are provably guaranteed to
either conserve energy or generate positive dissipation with increasing depth. It
is shown that the theoretically principled framework employed here allows for
inherently explainable constructions, which contextualize departures from theory
in current architectures and better elucidate the roles of reversibility and irreversibility in network performance. Code is available at the Github repository
https://github.com/natrask/BracketGraphs.
∗

K. Lee acknowledges the support from the U.S. National Science Foundation under grant CNS2210137.
Sandia National Laboratories is a multimission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology &
Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International Inc., for the U.S.
Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA0003525. This paper
describes objective technical results and analysis. Any subjective views or opinions that might be expressed
in the paper do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Department of Energy or the United States
Government. This article has been co-authored by an employee of National Technology & Engineering Solutions
of Sandia, LLC under Contract No. DE-NA0003525 with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). The employee
owns all right, title and interest in and to the article and is solely responsible for its contents. The United States
Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United
States Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce
the published form of this article or allow others to do so, for United States Government purposes. The DOE
will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public
Access Plan https://www.energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan. The work of N. Trask and A. Gruber is
supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Advanced Computing Research under the "Scalable and
Efficient Algorithms - Causal Reasoning, Operators and Graphs" (SEA-CROGS) project, the DoE Early Career
Research Program, and the John von Neumann fellowship at Sandia.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

