4M: Massively Multimodal Masked Modeling

David Mizrahi1,2∗ Roman Bachmann1∗ Oğuzhan Fatih Kar1
Teresa Yeo1 Mingfei Gao2 Afshin Dehghan2 Amir Zamir1
1
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL) 2 Apple
https://4m.epfl.ch

Abstract
Current machine learning models for vision are often highly specialized and limited
to a single modality and task. In contrast, recent large language models exhibit a
wide range of capabilities, hinting at a possibility for similarly versatile models
in computer vision. In this paper, we take a step in this direction and propose
a multimodal training scheme called 4M. It consists of training a single unified
Transformer encoder-decoder using a masked modeling objective across a wide
range of input/output modalities – including text, images, geometric, and semantic modalities, as well as neural network feature maps. 4M achieves scalability by
unifying the representation space of all modalities through mapping them into discrete tokens and performing multimodal masked modeling on a small randomized
subset of tokens.
4M leads to models that exhibit several key capabilities: (1) they can perform a
diverse set of vision tasks out of the box, (2) they excel when fine-tuned for unseen
downstream tasks or new input modalities, and (3) they can function as a generative
model that can be conditioned on arbitrary modalities, enabling a wide variety of
expressive multimodal editing capabilities with remarkable flexibility.
Through experimental analyses, we demonstrate the potential of 4M for training
versatile and scalable foundation models for vision tasks, setting the stage for
further exploration in multimodal learning for vision and other domains.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the field of natural language processing (NLP) has seen a shift toward training
large language models (LLMs) that are inherently capable of performing a wide range of tasks
without requiring extensive task-specific adaptations [12, 25]. While these models have demonstrated
remarkable success in NLP, there remains a need to develop similarly versatile and scalable models
for vision. A crucial aspect of scalability and versatility in vision is the ability to handle multiple
(input) modalities and (output) tasks, as vision models must deal with a diverse range of sensory
inputs, such as images, 3D, and text and solve a wide range of tasks.† Unlike NLP, where language
modeling on raw text has led to multitask capabilities [84, 86], training on only RGB images with a
single objective has not exhibited the same behavior for vision. Therefore, it is deemed important to
incorporate multiple modalities and tasks in training. It has been indeed suggested by psychophysical
studies that multimodality is one key driver behind the development of biological intelligence [104].
To create a model that exhibits the desirable properties of foundation models in vision, it is important
to consider three key aspects in terms of scalability: data, architecture, and training objective. For data,
scalability means being able to benefit from more training samples toward improving performance.
†
For clarity, “modalities" usually denote the inputs to a model (e.g. sensory signals), and “tasks" usually
denote the outputs (e.g. semantics). Our method enables a symmetric input-output structure, thus we use
“modalities” and “tasks” interchangeably in this paper.
* Equal contribution & corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

