Vocabulary-free Image Classification

Alessandro Conti1
Paolo Rota1
1

Enrico Fini1 Massimiliano Mancini1
Yiming Wang2 Elisa Ricci1,2

University of Trento

2

Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK)

Abstract
Recent advances in large vision-language models have revolutionized the image
classification paradigm. Despite showing impressive zero-shot capabilities, a
pre-defined set of categories, a.k.a. the vocabulary, is assumed at test time for
composing the textual prompts. However, such assumption can be impractical
when the semantic context is unknown and evolving. We thus formalize a novel task,
termed as Vocabulary-free Image Classification (VIC), where we aim to assign to
an input image a class that resides in an unconstrained language-induced semantic
space, without the prerequisite of a known vocabulary. VIC is a challenging task as
the semantic space is extremely large, containing millions of concepts, with hardto-discriminate fine-grained categories. In this work, we first empirically verify that
representing this semantic space by means of an external vision-language database
is the most effective way to obtain semantically relevant content for classifying the
image. We then propose Category Search from External Databases (CaSED), a
method that exploits a pre-trained vision-language model and an external visionlanguage database to address VIC in a training-free manner. CaSED first extracts a
set of candidate categories from captions retrieved from the database based on their
semantic similarity to the image, and then assigns to the image the best matching
candidate category according to the same vision-language model. Experiments
on benchmark datasets validate that CaSED outperforms other complex visionlanguage frameworks, while being efficient with much fewer parameters, paving
the way for future research in this direction1 .

1

Introduction

Large-scale Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [47, 62, 34] enabled astonishing progress in computer
vision by aligning multimodal semantics in a shared embedding space. This paper focuses on their
use for image classification, where models such as CLIP [47] demonstrated strength in zero-shot
transfer. While we witnessed advances in VLM-based classification in many directions, e.g. prompt
learning [53, 66], scaling up to larger models and datasets [25, 45, 6], or by jointly considering
captioning task [62, 34], they all assume a finite set of target categories, i.e. the vocabulary, to be
pre-defined and static (as shown in Fig. 1a). However, this assumption is fragile, as it is often violated
in practical applications (e.g. robotics, autonomous driving) where semantic categories can either
differ from the development/training to the deployment/testing or evolve dynamically over time.
In this work, we remove this assumption and study the new task of Vocabulary-free Image Classification (VIC). The objective of VIC is to assign an image to a class that belongs to an unconstrained
language-induced semantic space at test time, without a vocabulary, i.e. without a pre-defined set
of categories (as shown in Fig. 1b). The unconstrained nature of the semantic space makes VIC
a challenging problem. First, the search space is extremely large, with a cardinality on the order
1

Code and demo is available at https://github.com/altndrr/vic

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

