Recovering Simultaneously Structured Data via
Non-Convex Iteratively Reweighted Least Squares

Christian Kümmerle
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
Charlotte, NC 28223, USA
kuemmerle@uncc.edu

Johannes Maly
Department of Mathematics
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
80799 Munich, Germany and
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
maly@math.lmu.de

Abstract
We propose a new algorithm for the problem of recovering data that adheres
to multiple, heterogeneous low-dimensional structures from linear observations.
Focusing on data matrices that are simultaneously row-sparse and low-rank, we
propose and analyze an iteratively reweighted least squares (IRLS) algorithm that
is able to leverage both structures. In particular, it optimizes a combination of
non-convex surrogates for row-sparsity and rank, a balancing of which is built
into the algorithm. We prove locally quadratic convergence of the iterates to a
simultaneously structured data matrix in a regime of minimal sample complexity
(up to constants and a logarithmic factor), which is known to be impossible for a
combination of convex surrogates. In experiments, we show that the IRLS method
exhibits favorable empirical convergence, identifying simultaneously row-sparse
and low-rank matrices from fewer measurements than state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing an image from (noisy) linear observations is maybe the most relevant inverse problem
for modern image processing and appears in various applications like medical imaging and astronomy
[7]. If the latent image is n-dimensional, for n ∈ N, it is well-known that Ω(n) observations are
required for robust identification in general. In practice, imaging problems are however often illposed, i.e., the number of observations is smaller than n or the operator creating the observations
is defective [88, 93]. In such situations, the fundamental lower bound of Ω(n) can be relaxed by
leveraging structural priors of the latent image in the reconstruction process.
Of the various priors that are used for solving ill-posed inverse problems in the literature, sparsity1
and low-rankness are most prevalent. This prominent role can be explained with their competitive
performance in imaging tasks and the rigorous mathematical analysis they allow [10, 68]. For instance,
consider the recovery of an n1 × n2 -dimensional image X⋆ ∈ Rn1 ×n2 from linear observations
y = A(X⋆ ) + η ∈ Rm ,

(1)

where A : Rn1 ×n2 → Rm is a linear operator modeling the impulse response of the sensing device
and η ∈ Rm models additive noise. Whereas this problem is ill-posed for m < n1 n2 , it has been
established [38, 15, 78] that it becomes well-posed if X⋆ is sparse or of low rank. The aforementioned
works prove that m = Ω(s1 s2 ) observations suffice for robust reconstruction if X⋆ is s1 -row-sparse
A vector x ∈ Rn is called s-sparse if x has at most s non-zero entries. For a matrix X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 there
are various ways to count the level of sparsity. In this work, we use the most common definition and call X
s-row-sparse (resp. -column-sparse) if at most s rows (resp. columns) are non-zero.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

