Batchnorm Allows Unsupervised Radial Attacks

1

Amur Ghose∗ 1,2 , Apurv Gupta3 , Yaoliang Yu1,2 , Pascal Poupart1,2
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo,
2
Vector Institute, 3 Columbia University
a3ghose@uwaterloo.ca, apurvgupta1996@gmail.com,
yaoliang.yu@uwaterloo.ca,ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
The construction of adversarial examples usually requires the existence of soft or
hard labels for each instance, with respect to which a loss gradient provides the
signal for construction of the example. We show that for batch normalized deep
image recognition architectures, intermediate latents that are produced after a batch
normalization step by themselves suffice to produce adversarial examples using
an intermediate loss solely utilizing angular deviations, without relying on any
label. We motivate our loss through the geometry of batch normed representations
and their concentration of norm on a hypersphere and distributional proximity
to Gaussians. Our losses expand intermediate latent based attacks that usually
require labels. The success of our method implies that leakage of intermediate
representations may create a security breach for deployed models, which persists
even when the model is transferred to downstream usage. Removal of batch norm
weakens our attack, indicating it contributes to this vulnerability. Our attacks
also succeed against LayerNorm empirically, thus being relevant for transformer
architectures, most notably vision transformers which we analyze.

1

Introduction

Adversarial examples xadv are commonly defined as data instances which lie ϵ away in some norm
(usually L∞ ) from an actual data instance xreal . To humans, ϵ is small and xreal , xadv share labels,
yet to a classifier neural network, they do not. Since their discovery [Szegedy et al., 2013, Goodfellow
et al., 2014], adversarial examples have spurred research in both attacking (i.e., generating adversarial
data instances) [Akhtar and Mian, 2018, Tramer et al., 2020] and defending [Yuan et al., 2019]
neural networks against them. Common methods for generating adversarial images use loss gradients.
A pioneering attack is Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) [Goodfellow et al., 2014], possibly
strengthened via Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) [Madry et al., 2017] - an iterative form of FGSM.
Defenses against these attacks have been derived, including adversarial training [Shrivastava et al.,
2017], where adversarial images are fed to the network for training. Adversarial training is expensive
but powerful [Salman et al., 2019] and scalable [Wong et al., 2020, Shafahi et al., 2019]. Defenses can
give illusory security by obfuscating gradients [Athalye et al., 2018]. An unsaid aspect of defense is
hiding model parameters - changing attacks from the white-box (model parameters known) scenario
to black-box (models only accessible via outputs) scenario, which makes them harder to attack.
We consider the family of intermediate-level attacks, exemplified by members such as Intermediate
Level Attack Projection (ILAP) [Huang et al., 2019] and its variants [Li et al., 2020b]. In this, an
initial direction in the latent space of the hidden intermediate layers is determined via FGSM or
other attacks. Gradient steps then maximally perturb the intermediate hidden representation to find
a suitable xadv , unlike directly using the label. Such methods can outperform the method used for
∗

Corresponding author: Amur Ghose, email: a3ghose@uwaterloo.ca

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

