Phase diagram of early training dynamics in deep
networks: effect of the learning rate, depth, and width

Dayal Singh Kalra ∗†
dayal@umd.edu

Maissam Barkeshli ∗‡§
maissam@umd.edu

Abstract
We systematically analyze optimization dynamics in deep neural networks (DNNs)
trained with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and study the effect of learning
rate η, depth d, and width w of the neural network. By analyzing the maximum
eigenvalue λH
t of the Hessian of the loss, which is a measure of sharpness of
the loss landscape, we find that the dynamics can show four distinct regimes:
(i) an early time transient regime, (ii) an intermediate saturation regime, (iii) a
progressive sharpening regime, and (iv) a late time “edge of stability" regime. The
early and intermediate regimes (i) and (ii) exhibit a rich phase diagram depending
on η ≡ c/λH
0 , d, and w. We identify several critical values of c, which separate
qualitatively distinct phenomena in the early time dynamics of training loss and
sharpness. Notably, we discover the opening up of a “sharpness reduction" phase,
where sharpness decreases at early times, as d and 1/w are increased.

1

Introduction

The optimization dynamics of deep neural networks (DNNs) is a rich problem that is of great interest.
Basic questions about how to choose learning rates and their effect on generalization error and training
speed remain intensely studied research problems. Classical intuition from convex optimization has
lead to the often made suggestion that in stochastic gradient descent (SGD), the learning rate η should
satisfy η < 2/λH , where λH is the maximum eigenvalue of the Hessian H of the loss, in order to
ensure that the network reaches a minimum. However several recent studies have suggested that it is
both possible and potentially preferable to have the learning rate early in training reach η > 2/λH
[66, 49, 72]. The idea is that such a choice will induce a temporary training instability, causing the
network to ‘catapult’ out of a local basin into a flatter one with lower λH where training stabilizes.
Indeed, during the early training phase, the local curvature of the loss landscape changes rapidly
[42, 1, 37, 16], and the learning rate plays a crucial role in determining the convergence basin [37].
Flatter basins are believed to be preferable because they potentially lead to lower generalization error
[31, 32, 42, 12, 39, 14] and allow larger learning rates leading to potentially faster training.
From a different perspective, the major theme of deep learning is that it is beneficial to increase the
model size as much as possible. This has come into sharp focus with the discovery of scaling laws that
show power law improvement in generalization error with model and dataset size [40]. This raises
the fundamental question of how one can scale DNNs to arbitrarily large sizes while maintaining the
ability to learn; in particular, how should initialization and optimization hyperparameters be chosen
to maintain a similar quality of learning as the model size is taken to infinity [34, 47, 48, 11, 69, 58,
70, 68]?
∗

Condensed Matter Theory Center, University of Maryland, College Park
Institute for Physical Science and Technology, University of Maryland, College Park
‡
Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park
§
Joint Quantum Institute, University of Maryland, College Park
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

