Does Invariant Graph Learning via Environment
Augmentation Learn Invariance?

Yongqiang Chen1∗, Yatao Bian2 , Kaiwen Zhou1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent AI Lab
{yqchen,kwzhou}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk yatao.bian@gmail.com
1

Binghui Xie1 , Bo Han3 , James Cheng1
3
Hong Kong Baptist University
bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk {bhxie21,jcheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Invariant graph representation learning aims to learn the invariance among data
from different environments for out-of-distribution generalization on graphs. As the
graph environment partitions are usually expensive to obtain, augmenting the environment information has become the de facto approach. However, the usefulness of
the augmented environment information has never been verified. In this work, we
find that it is fundamentally impossible to learn invariant graph representations via
environment augmentation without additional assumptions. Therefore, we develop
a set of minimal assumptions, including variation sufficiency and variation consistency, for feasible invariant graph learning. We then propose a new framework
Graph invAriant Learning Assistant (GALA). GALA incorporates an assistant model
that needs to be sensitive to graph environment changes or distribution shifts. The
correctness of the proxy predictions by the assistant model hence can differentiate
the variations in spurious subgraphs. We show that extracting the maximally invariant subgraph to the proxy predictions provably identifies the underlying invariant
subgraph for successful OOD generalization under the established minimal assumptions. Extensive experiments on 12 datasets including DrugOOD with various
graph distribution shifts confirm the effectiveness of GALA1 .

1

Introduction

Graph representation learning with graph neural networks (GNNs) has proven to be highly successful
in tasks involving relational information [24, 35, 68, 74, 75]. However, it assumes that the training and
test graphs are independently drawn from the identical distribution (iid.), which can hardly hold for
many graph applications such as in Social Network, and Drug Discovery [25, 26, 37, 70, 86, 94]. The
performance of GNNs could be seriously degenerated by graph distribution shifts, i.e., mismatches
between the training and test graph distributions caused by some underlying environmental factors
during the graph data collection process [16, 21, 28, 70, 87, 94]. To overcome the Out-of-Distribution
(OOD) generalization failure, recently there has been a growing surge of interest in incorporating
the invariance principle from causality [60] into GNNs [8, 17, 41, 45, 55, 72, 73, 77, 83]. The
rationale of the invariant graph learning approaches is to identify the underlying invariant subgraph
of the input graph, which shares an invariant correlation with the target labels across multiple graph
∗
1

Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
Code is available at https://github.com/LFhase/GALA.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

