Preference-grounded Token-level Guidance for
Language Model Fine-tuning

Shentao Yang1 , Shujian Zhang1 , Congying Xia2 , Yihao Feng2 ,
Caiming Xiong2 , Mingyuan Zhou1
1
2
The University of Texas at Austin
Salesforce Research
shentao.yang@mccombs.utexas.edu, yihao.ac@gmail.com
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Aligning language models (LMs) with preferences is an important problem in
natural language generation. A key challenge is that preferences are typically
provided at the sequence level while LM training and generation both occur at the
token level. There is, therefore, a granularity mismatch between the preference
and the LM training losses, which may complicate the learning problem. In this
paper, we address this issue by developing an alternate training process, where we
iterate between grounding the sequence-level preference into token-level training
guidance, and improving the LM with the learned guidance. For guidance learning,
we design a framework that extends the pairwise-preference learning in imitation
learning to both variable-length LM generation and the utilization of the preference
among multiple generations. For LM training, based on the amount of supervised
data, we present two minimalist learning objectives that utilize the learned guidance.
In experiments, our method performs competitively on two distinct representative
LM tasks — discrete-prompt generation and text summarization. Source codes are
released at https://github.com/Shentao-YANG/Preference_Grounded_Guidance.

1

Introduction

Language models (LMs) have been successfully trained with token-level cross-entropy losses, where
each token position has a corresponding term in the overall training losses [1–11]. Recent studies have
shown that LMs can be further improved by aligning them with preferences from human feedback
[12–15] or automatic evaluation metrics [16–18]. Typically, the preferences are only provided at
the sequence level, e.g., “Which of the two generated text sequences is better?” To align LMs with
sequence-level preferences, there exist a variety of approaches, such as applying external filters to the
training texts [19], performing supervised learning on some curated/improved datasets [20–22], and
optimizing the LMs based on a learned sequence-level (pairwise-) preference predictor [14, 23–25].
While these approaches have contributed to the development of several revolutionary products [e.g.,
18, 15], a mismatch issue has emerged from the perspective of guiding LM fine-tuning. Concretely,
the sequence-level preference is not grounded into the token level, where LM training losses occur.
This means that there is a mismatch in granularity between the feedback and training losses — the
preference is coarse-grained while the training losses are fine-grained. This issue is similar to the
delayed-feedback problem in reinforcement learning (RL) [26–28], where informative feedback is
available only at the end of the trajectory (sequence) and not at any of the intermediate timesteps. Previous studies have noted that this problem could have a negative impact on the empirical performance
of the resulting LMs [29, 30], as it introduces a more challenging learning problem characterized by
higher gradient variance and lower sample efficiency to achieve the learning goal [31, 32].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

