In-Context Impersonation Reveals Large Language
Models’ Strengths and Biases

Leonard Salewski 1,2

Stephan Alaniz 1,2

Eric Schulz 2,5
1

Isabel Rio-Torto 3,4∗
Zeynep Akata 1,2

2
3
University of Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center
University of Porto
4
5
INESC TEC
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics

Abstract
In everyday conversations, humans can take on different roles and adapt their
vocabulary to their chosen roles. We explore whether LLMs can take on, that is
impersonate, different roles when they generate text in-context. We ask LLMs to
assume different personas before solving vision and language tasks. We do this by
prefixing the prompt with a persona that is associated either with a social identity or
domain expertise. In a multi-armed bandit task, we find that LLMs pretending to be
children of different ages recover human-like developmental stages of exploration.
In a language-based reasoning task, we find that LLMs impersonating domain
experts perform better than LLMs impersonating non-domain experts. Finally,
we test whether LLMs’ impersonations are complementary to visual information
when describing different categories. We find that impersonation can improve
performance: an LLM prompted to be a bird expert describes birds better than
one prompted to be a car expert. However, impersonation can also uncover LLMs’
biases: an LLM prompted to be a man describes cars better than one prompted
to be a woman. These findings demonstrate that LLMs are capable of taking on
diverse roles and that this in-context impersonation can be used to uncover their
strengths and hidden biases. Our code is available at https://github.com/
ExplainableML/in-context-impersonation.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) can not only summarize documents and converse on a large range
of topics [1], but they have also shown other emergent abilities [2, 3]. Because of their impressive
abilities, LLMs are permeating into many applications [4, 5]. This means that there is a societal need
to understand how these models “tick” [6, 7]. Traditionally, LLMs are provided with a context as
a textual prompt and are asked to provide answers via text completion, thereby solving a variety of
choice-based [8], description-based [9], and reasoning tasks [10]. Yet how in-context learning works
is not fully understood. When Min et al. [11] prompted LLMs with random labels, they found that
this did not drastically degrade performance, suggesting that the role of in-context demonstrations
is to prime the model for a particular task. This is in line with other results suggesting that LLMs
internally infer latent variables to make better predictions [12]. It has been suggested that LLMs, and
other large models, can change their behavior when asked to respond as a particular persona. When
Deshpande et al. [13] asked LLMs to respond as a hateful person, their toxicity score increased.
When Wang and colleagues [14] asked LLMs to imagine being expert systematic reviewers, the
∗

Work done during a research visit at the University of Tübingen

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

