Learning Modulated Transformation in GANs

Ceyuan Yang1

Qihang Zhang2
1

Yinghao Xu2

Shanghai AI Laboratory

2

CUHK

Jiapeng Zhu3
3

HKUST

4

Yujun Shen4

Bo Dai1

Ant Group

Abstract
The success of style-based generators largely benefits from style modulation,
which helps take care of the cross-instance variation within data. However, the
instance-wise stochasticity is typically introduced via regular convolution, where
kernels interact with features at some fixed locations, limiting its capacity for
modeling geometric variation. To alleviate this problem, we equip the generator
in generative adversarial networks (GANs) with a plug-and-play module, termed
as modulated transformation module (MTM). This module predicts spatial offsets
under the control of latent codes, based on which the convolution operation can
be applied at variable locations for different instances, and hence offers the model
an additional degree of freedom to handle geometry deformation. Extensive
experiments suggest that our approach can be faithfully generalized to various
generative tasks, including image generation, 3D-aware image synthesis, and
video generation, and get compatible with state-of-the-art frameworks without
any hyper-parameter tuning. It is noteworthy that, towards human generation on
the challenging TaiChi dataset, we improve the FID of StyleGAN3 from 21.36 to
13.60, demonstrating the efficacy of learning modulated geometry transformation.
Code and models are available at https://github.com/limbo0000/mtm.

1

Introduction

Generative models are distinguished from other vision models by creating new data. The crux of
learning a generative model is to mimic the observed data distribution through modeling as many
data variations as possible. For example, a good generative model learned on a collection of cat
images is expected to produce cats with diverse breeds, postures, hair colors, etc. Among all kinds of
generative models [27, 43, 18, 48, 47], generative adversarial networks (GAN) [13] have received
wide attention thanks to their flexibility and fast inference speed.
The recent success of GANs lies in the design of style-based generator [23]. Inspired by adaptive
instance normalization (AdaIN) [19], StyleGAN [23] introduces layer-wise style codes to modulate
the per-layer feature map from the generator. As these style codes are instance-specific, the
stochasticity manifests itself in different ways of feature modulation, which finally contributes
to diverse generation. Nevertheless, it is observed that GANs usually achieve good performance
on single-object and aligned datasets, where all instances are with similar geometry, yet struggle
in handling complex data distribution, such as ImageNet [10] that consists of various categories of
objects, or TaiChi players [41] that make irregular movements.
We argue that such an issue may get caused by style modulation failing to model large geometry
variations within data. Concretely, the operation of AdaIN equally acts on the feature map at every
spatial location, leaving the problem of geometry modeling to the convolution operation together
with its receptive field. Unfortunately, a regular convolution samples the input feature map at fixed
locations, as shown in Fig. 1a. In this way, the model applies a fixed receptive field for all instances,
limiting its capacity for learning geometry variations.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

