Epistemic Neural Networks

Ian Osband∗, Zheng Wen, Seyed Mohammad Asghari,
Vikranth Dwaracherla, Morteza Ibrahimi, Xiuyuan Lu, and Benjamin Van Roy
Google DeepMind, Efficient Agent Team, Mountain View
{ian.osband, m.ibrahimi}@gmail.com
{zhengwen,smasghari,vikranthd,lxlu,benvanroy}@google.com

Abstract
Intelligent agents need to know what they don’t know, and this capability can
be evaluated through the quality of joint predictions. In principle, ensemble
methods can produce effective joint predictions, but the compute costs are
prohibitive for large models. We introduce the epinet: an architecture that
can supplement any conventional neural network, including large pretrained
models, and can be trained with modest incremental computation to estimate
uncertainty. With an epinet, conventional neural networks outperform large
ensembles of hundreds or more particles, and use orders of magnitude less
computation. The epinet does not fit the traditional framework of Bayesian
neural networks, so we introduce the epistemic neural network (ENN) as a
general interface for models that generate joint predictions.

1

Introduction

Consider a conventional neural network trained to predict whether a random person would
classify a drawing as a ‘rabbit’ or a ‘duck’. As illustrated in Figure 1, given a single drawing,
the network outputs a marginal prediction that assigns probabilities to the two classes. If
the probabilities are each 0.5, it remains unclear whether this is because labels sampled from
random people are equally likely, or whether the neural network would learn a single class if
trained on more data. Conventional neural networks do not distinguish these cases, even
though it can be critical for decision making systems to know what they do not know. This
capability can be assessed through the quality of joint predictions (Wen et al., 2022).
The two tables to the right of Figure 1 represent possible joint predictions that are each
consistent with the network’s uniform marginal prediction. These joint predictions are over
pairs of labels for the same image, (y1 ,y2 ) ∈ {R,D} × {R,D}. For any such joint prediction,
Bayes’ rule defines a conditional prediction for y2 given y1 . The first table indicates inevitable
uncertainty that would not be resolved through training on additional data; conditioning on
the first label does not alter the prediction for the second. The second table indicates that
additional training should resolve uncertainty; conditioned on the first label, the prediction
for the second label assigns all probability to the same outcome as the first.
Figure 1 presents the toy problem of predictions across two identical images as a simple
illustration of these types of uncertainty. The observation that joint distributions express
whether uncertainty is resolvable extends more generally to practical cases, where the inputs
differ, or where there are more than two simultaneous predictions (Osband et al., 2022a).
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) offer a statistically-principled way to make effective joint
predictions, by maintaining an approximate posterior over the weights of a base neural
network. Assymptotically these can recover the exact posterior, but the computational costs
∗

Contact ian.osband@gmail.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

