Deep Recurrent Optimal Stopping

Niranjan Damera Venkata
Digital and Transformation Organization
HP Inc., Chennai, India
niranjan.damera.venkata@hp.com

Chiranjib Bhattacharyya
Dept. of CSA and RBCCPS
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
chiru@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently emerged as a powerful paradigm
for solving Markovian optimal stopping problems. However, a ready extension
of DNN-based methods to non-Markovian settings requires significant state and
parameter space expansion, manifesting the curse of dimensionality. Further, efficient state-space transformations permitting Markovian approximations, such
as those afforded by recurrent neural networks (RNNs), are either structurally
infeasible or are confounded by the curse of non-Markovianity. Considering these
issues, we introduce, for the first time, an optimal stopping policy gradient algorithm (OSPG) that can leverage RNNs effectively in non-Markovian settings by
implicitly optimizing value functions without recursion, mitigating the curse of
non-Markovianity. The OSPG algorithm is derived from an inference procedure
on a novel Bayesian network representation of discrete-time non-Markovian optimal stopping trajectories and, as a consequence, yields an offline policy gradient
algorithm that eliminates expensive Monte Carlo policy rollouts.

1

Introduction

In the classic optimal stopping setting, an agent monitors the trajectory of a stochastic process, with
the opportunity to either continue observing or stop and claim a reward (or suffer a cost), which
is generally a function of process history. Once the agent decides to stop, no further actions are
possible, and no further reward can be claimed (or cost suffered). The agent’s goal is to produce
stopping decisions based on the process observations to maximize the expected reward (or minimize
the expected cost). For example, whether to exercise a stock option or not at any time is an optimal
stopping problem where the goal is to maximize expected exercise value, as is the decision of when to
replace a degrading machine. Optimal stopping methods have a wide array of applications in finance
[5, 2], operations research [17, 24, 10], disorder/change-point detection [36, 32], early classification
of time-series [13, 1] among others.
In this paper, we are concerned with the discrete-time, finite-horizon, model-free setting, where the
process evolves over discrete time-steps, and a decision to stop must occur by a given finite horizon.
Further, the dynamics of process evolution are unknown. This setting is in contrast with classic
approaches [8, 28, 35, 14, 36] which assume that the dynamics of process evolution are known
and characterized with simplified and usually Markovian stochastic models. Note that continuoustime optimal stopping problems, including the pricing of American options, may often be reduced
to the discrete-time setting by suitable discretization [18]. Solving optimal stopping problems in
non-Markovian settings is challenging due to the following curses:
• The curse of dimensionality[3, 4, 33]: A non-Markovian process may be made Markovian by
extending state space with process history. However, such an extension significantly increases
the problem’s dimensionality, complicating function approximation. Estimating high-dimensional
value functions directly rules out conventional approaches that approximate value functions with a
linear combination of basis functions [40, 23, 39, 40, 43].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

