Diffusion-TTA: Test-time Adaptation of Discriminative
Models via Generative Feedback
Mihir Prabhudesai∗ Tsung-Wei Ke∗ Alexander C. Li Deepak Pathak Katerina Fragkiadaki
{mprabhud,tsungwek,acl2,dpathak,katef}@cs.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University

+1.4 points
34

70

+22.8 points

Top-1 Accuracy

+11.9 points
48

37

+14.0 points

ViT-B/32

Top-1 Accuracy

59

22

15

+1.8 points

26

ConvNext-Large

26

CLIP: ViT-L/14

30

+3.2 points
CLIP: ViT-B/16

18

CLIP: ViT-B/32

ResNet50

(a) ImageNet-C (online)

(b) FGVC Aircraft (single-sample)

Figure 1: Diffusion-TTA improves state-of-the-art pre-trained image classifiers and CLIP models across
various benchmarks. Our model adapts pre-trained image discriminative models using feedback from
pre-trained image generative diffusion models. Left: Image classification performance of pre-trained
image classifiers improves after online adaptation. The image classifiers are pre-trained on ImageNet
and adapted on ImageNet-C in an unsupervised manner using generative feedback. As can be seen,
we get a significant boost across various model architectures. Right: Accuracy of open-vocabulary
CLIP classifiers improves after single-sample adaptation, where we adapt to each unlabelled sample
in the test set independently. CLIP is trained on millions of image-text pairs collected from the
Internet [38], here we test it on the FGVC dataset [30].

Abstract
The advancements in generative modeling, particularly the advent of diffusion models, have sparked a fundamental question: how can these models be effectively used
for discriminative tasks? In this work, we find that generative models can be great
test-time adapters for discriminative models. Our method, Diffusion-TTA, adapts
pre-trained discriminative models such as image classifiers, segmenters and depth
predictors, to each unlabelled example in the test set using generative feedback from
a diffusion model. We achieve this by modulating the conditioning of the diffusion
model using the output of the discriminative model. We then maximize the image
likelihood objective by backpropagating the gradients to discriminative model’s
parameters. We show Diffusion-TTA significantly enhances the accuracy of various large-scale pre-trained discriminative models, such as, ImageNet classifiers,
CLIP models, image pixel labellers and image depth predictors. Diffusion-TTA
outperforms existing test-time adaptation methods, including TTT-MAE and TENT,
and particularly shines in online adaptation setups, where the discriminative model
is continually adapted to each example in the test set. We provide access to code,
results, and visualizations on our website: diffusion-tta.github.io/.
∗

Equal Technical Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

