Online Ad Allocation with Predictions
Fabian Spaeh
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
fspaeh@bu.edu

Alina Ene
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
aene@bu.edu

Abstract
Display Ads and the generalized assignment problem are two well-studied online
packing problems with important applications in ad allocation and other areas. In
both problems, ad impressions arrive online and have to be allocated immediately
to budget-constrained advertisers. Worst-case algorithms that achieve the ideal
competitive ratio are known, but might act overly conservative given the predictable
and usually tame nature of real-world input. Given this discrepancy, we develop
an algorithm for both problems that incorporate predictions and can thus improve
the performance beyond the worst-case. Our algorithm is based on the work of
Feldman et al. (2009a) and similar in nature to Mahdian et al. (2007) who were the
first to develop an algorithm with predictions for the related, but more structured
Ad Words problem. We use a novel analysis to show that our algorithm is able to
capitalize on a good prediction, while being robust against poor predictions. We
experimentally evaluate our algorithm on synthetic and real-world data on a wide
range of predictions. Our algorithm is consistently outperforming the worst-case
algorithm without predictions.

1

Introduction

Advertising on the internet is a multi-billion dollar industry with ever growing revenue, especially as
online retail gains more and more popularity. Typically, a user arrives on a website which fills an
empty advertising spot (called an impression) by allocating it instantly to one of many advertisers.
Advertisers value users differently based on search queries or demographic data and reveal their
valuations in auctions or through contracts with the website. Formulations of increasing complexity
have been studied to capture this problem, creating a hierarchy of difficulty (Mehta, 2013). The
most basic is online bipartite matching, where each vertex on one side arrives online with all its
adjacent edges and has to be matched immediately to one of the vertices on the other side, which
were supplied offline. The problem and all generalizations admit a hard lower bound of 1 − 1e due to
the uncertainty about future vertices. Motivated by online ad exchanges, where advertisers place bids
on impressions, Mehta et al. (2007) introduced the Ad Words problem, which is a generalization of
online bipartite matching where we charge each advertiser for the amount they bid. Going beyond
the Ad Words setting, Feldman et al. (2009a) considered the more expressive problems Display Ads
and the generalized assignment problem (GAP), and proposed algorithms for these settings with
worst-case guarantees.
Classic algorithms that defend against the worst case of 1 − 1e are often overly conservative given
that the real world does not behave like a contrived worst-case instance. Recently, researchers have
thus been trying to leverage a prediction about some problem parameter to go beyond the worst-case
(Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii, 2022). In the context of ad allocation, a prediction can be the
keyword distribution of users on a certain day, or simply the advertiser allocation itself. Such a
prediction is readily obtainable in practice, for example through learning on historic data. Two
opposing properties are important: The algorithm has to be consistent, meaning that its performance
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

