Handling Data Heterogeneity via Architectural Design
for Federated Visual Recognition

Sara Pieri∗ Jose Renato Restom∗ Samuel Horvath

Hisham Cholakkal

Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI)

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a promising research paradigm that enables the collaborative training of machine learning models among various parties without the need
for sensitive information exchange. Nonetheless, retaining data in individual clients
introduces fundamental challenges to achieving performance on par with centrally
trained models. Our study provides an extensive review of federated learning
applied to visual recognition. It underscores the critical role of thoughtful architectural design choices in achieving optimal performance, a factor often neglected
in the FL literature. Many existing FL solutions are tested on shallow or simple
networks, which may not accurately reflect real-world applications. This practice
restricts the transferability of research findings to large-scale visual recognition
models. Through an in-depth analysis of diverse cutting-edge architectures such
as convolutional neural networks, transformers, and MLP-mixers, we experimentally demonstrate that architectural choices can substantially enhance FL systems’
performance, particularly when handling heterogeneous data. We study 19 visual
recognition models from five different architectural families on four challenging
FL datasets. We also re-investigate the inferior performance of convolution-based
architectures in the FL setting and analyze the influence of normalization layers
on the FL performance. Our findings emphasize the importance of architectural
design for computer vision tasks in practical scenarios, effectively narrowing the
performance gap between federated and centralized learning. Our source code is
available at https://github.com/sarapieri/fed_het.git.

1

Introduction

The growing focus on data privacy and protection [37, 61] has sparked significant research interest
in federated learning (FL) as it provides an opportunity for collaborative machine learning in many
domains, such as healthcare [16, 14, 42, 55], mobile devices [47, 19], internet of things (IoTs) [53, 25]
and autonomous driving [40, 56]. In FL, data is kept separate by individual clients to learn a global
model on the server side in a decentralized way.
Despite the potential benefits of federated learning, the FL environments are highly non-trivial, as the
local datasets of the individual clients may not accurately represent the global data distribution. As
each client is a unique end user, the heterogeneity caused by uneven distributions of features, labels,
or an unequal amount of data across clients poses a serious obstacle [27]. Therefore, the setting is
inherently challenging since FL methods must accommodate both statistical diverseness and exploit
similarities in client data. Typically, the non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID) nature
of the clients drastically affects the model’s performance, resulting in lower accuracy and slower
convergence than the counterparts trained with all the data collected in a single location.
* Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

