Learning From Biased Soft Labels

Hua Yuan1,2 , Yu Shi1,2 , Ning Xu1,2 , Xu Yang1,2 , Xin Geng1,2∗ , Yong Rui3∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its
Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Lenovo Research, Beijing 100085, China
{yuanhua,seushiyu,xning,xuyang_palm,xgeng}@seu.edu.cn, yongrui@lenovo.com
1

Abstract
Since the advent of knowledge distillation, many researchers have been intrigued
by the dark knowledge hidden in the soft labels generated by the teacher model.
This prompts us to scrutinize the circumstances under which these soft labels are
effective. Predominant existing theories implicitly require that the soft labels are
close to the ground-truth labels. In this paper, however, we investigate whether
biased soft labels are still effective. Here, bias refers to the discrepancy between
the soft labels and the ground-truth labels. We present two indicators to measure
the effectiveness of the soft labels. Based on the two indicators, we propose
moderate conditions to ensure that, the biased soft label learning problem is both
classifier-consistent and Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) learnable, which
can be applicable even for large-biased soft labels. We further design a heuristic
method to train Skillful but Bad Teachers (SBTs), and these teachers with accuracy
less than 30% can teach students to achieve 90% accuracy on CIFAR-10, which
is comparable to models trained on the original data. The proposed indicators
adequately measure the effectiveness of the soft labels generated in this process.
Moreover, our theoretical framework can be adapted to elucidate the effectiveness
of soft labels in three weakly-supervised learning paradigms, namely incomplete
supervision, partial label learning and learning with additive noise. Experimental
results demonstrate that our indicators can measure the effectiveness of biased soft
labels generated by teachers or in these weakly-supervised learning paradigms.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation [2, 17, 20] has achieved remarkable achievements in a wide range of applications. It has emerged as a popular paradigm for model compression [22, 21] and transfer learning
[41, 34] by distilling knowledge from the big model (teacher) to the small model (student). Students
inherit the knowledge of the teacher by imitating the soft labels generated by the teacher model.
Many experiments show that learning from soft labels can be very effective, even surpassing learning
from ground-truth labels [2, 17, 37]. However, there are still many mysteries why these soft labels
are effective. Most existing theories do not apply to soft labels that significantly deviate from the
ground-truth labels and lack explicit indicators to evaluate the soft labels [39, 58, 7, 35]. In this paper,
we mainly focus on the effectiveness of the biased soft labels, especially large-biased soft labels.
It is significant to study the effectiveness of biased soft labels. Firstly, expert-labeled annotation
typically requires a substantial investment of manpower and time. But the soft labels in weakly
supervised learning could be cheap and biased [59, 46]. Evaluating the biased soft labels is instructive
for weakly supervised learning. Secondly, these biased soft labels can apply for privacy protection
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

