Representation Learning via Consistent Assignment of
Views over Random Partitions
Thalles Silva
Institute of Computing
University of Campinas
thalles.silva@students.ic.unicamp.br

Adín Ramírez Rivera
Department of Informatics
University of Oslo
adinr@uio.no

Abstract
We present Consistent Assignment of Views over Random Partitions (CARP), a
self-supervised clustering method for representation learning of visual features.
CARP learns prototypes in an end-to-end online fashion using gradient descent
without additional non-differentiable modules to solve the cluster assignment
problem. CARP optimizes a new pretext task based on random partitions of
prototypes that regularizes the model and enforces consistency between views’
assignments. Additionally, our method improves training stability and prevents
collapsed solutions in joint-embedding training. Through an extensive evaluation,
we demonstrate that CARP’s representations are suitable for learning downstream
tasks. We evaluate CARP’s representations capabilities in 17 datasets across many
standard protocols, including linear evaluation, few-shot classification, k-NN, kmeans, image retrieval, and copy detection. We compare CARP performance
to 11 existing self-supervised methods. We extensively ablate our method and
demonstrate that our proposed random partition pretext task improves the quality
of the learned representations by devising multiple random classification tasks. In
transfer learning tasks, CARP achieves the best performance on average against
many SSL methods trained for a longer time.

1

Introduction

Learning from unlabeled data has been one of the main challenges in computer vision. Recent
approaches based on self-supervised learning (SSL) have significantly reduced the gap between
supervised and unsupervised pre-trained representations. Nowadays, self-supervised pre-training on
vast quantities of unlabeled data, prior to learning a downstream supervised task of interest, can be
more effective than supervised pre-training for many tasks [7, 19, 22].
Current SSL methods can be divided into two classes: (1) self-supervised embedding prediction [9,
24, 39, 41] and (2) clustering [1, 5, 6, 29]. As the name suggests, embedding prediction methods work
directly in the representation space. They are trained with either contrastive or non-contrastive loss
functions. Instead of reconstructing the input signal, their loss function maximizes agreement between
embeddings of the same view and optionally pushes representations from different views apart. On
the other hand, clustering methods discretize the representation space by learning a finite set of
prototypes. These prototypes aggregate representations from different images that are similar enough
to be assigned together. Nevertheless, recent SSL methods build a joint-embedding architecture that
can be pure siamese [4] or use different encoders.
Code at https://sthalles.github.io/carp/.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

