Kernel-Based Tests for
Likelihood-Free Hypothesis Testing

Patrik Róbert Gerber∗
Department of Mathematics, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
prgerber@mit.edu
Yury Polyanskiy∗
Department of EECS, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
yp@mit.edu

Tianze Jiang∗
Department of Mathematics, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
tjiang@mit.edu
Rui Sun∗
Department of Mathematics, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
eruisun@mit.edu

Abstract
Given n observations from two balanced classes, consider the task of labeling
an additional m inputs that are known to all belong to one of the two classes.
Special cases of this problem are well-known: with complete knowledge of class
distributions (n = ∞) the problem is solved optimally by the likelihood-ratio
test; when m = 1 it corresponds to binary classification; and when m ≈ n it is
equivalent to two-sample testing. The intermediate settings occur in the field of
likelihood-free inference, where labeled samples are obtained by running forward
simulations and the unlabeled sample is collected experimentally. In recent work it
was discovered that there is a fundamental trade-off between m and n: increasing
the data sample m reduces the amount n of training/simulation data needed. In
this work we (a) introduce a generalization where unlabeled samples come from
a mixture of the two classes – a case often encountered in practice; (b) study
the minimax sample complexity for non-parametric classes of densities under
maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) separation; and (c) investigate the empirical
performance of kernels parameterized by neural networks on two tasks: detection
of the Higgs boson and detection of planted DDPM generated images amidst
CIFAR-10 images. For both problems we confirm the existence of the theoretically
predicted asymmetric m vs n trade-off.

1

Likelihood-Free Inference

The goal of likelihood-free inference (LFI) [8; 12; 17; 24], also called simulation-based inference
(SBI), is to perform statistical inference in a setting where the data generating process is a black-box,
but can be simulated. Given the ability to generate samples Xθ ∼ Pθ⊗n for any parameter θ, and
given real-world data Z ∼ Pθ⊗m
, we want to use our simulations to learn about the truth θ⋆ . LFI is
⋆
particularly relevant in areas of science where we have precise but complex laws of nature, for which
we can do (stochastic) forward simulations, but can not directly compute the (distribution) density
Pθ . The Bayesian community approached the problem under the name of Approximate Bayesian
Computation (ABC) [6; 13; 47]. More recent ML-based methods where regressors and classifiers
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

