Reproducibility in Multiple Instance Learning:
A Case For Algorithmic Unit Tests

Edward Raff
Booz Allen Hamilton
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
raff_edward@bah.com

Jim Holt
Laboratory for Physical Sciences
holt@lps.umd.edu

Abstract
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) is a sub-domain of classification problems with
positive and negative labels and a “bag” of inputs, where the label is positive if and
only if a positive element is contained within the bag, and otherwise is negative.
Training in this context requires associating the bag-wide label to instance-level
information, and implicitly contains a causal assumption and asymmetry to the task
(i.e., you can’t swap the labels without changing the semantics). MIL problems
occur in healthcare (one malignant cell indicates cancer), cyber security (one
malicious executable makes an infected computer), and many other tasks. In this
work, we examine five of the most prominent deep-MIL models and find that
none of them respects the standard MIL assumption. They are able to learn anticorrelated instances, i.e., defaulting to “positive” labels until seeing a negative
counter-example, which should not be possible for a correct MIL model. We
suspect that enhancements and other works derived from these models will share
the same issue. In any context in which these models are being used, this creates
the potential for learning incorrect models, which creates risk of operational failure.
We identify and demonstrate this problem via a proposed “algorithmic unit test”,
where we create synthetic datasets that can be solved by a MIL respecting model,
and which clearly reveal learning that violates MIL assumptions. The five evaluated
methods each fail one or more of these tests. This provides a model-agnostic way
to identify violations of modeling assumptions, which we hope will be useful for
future development and evaluation of MIL models.

1

Introduction

In Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) we have a dataset of N labeled points, which we will represent as
X with associated labels y ∈ {−1, 1} for the negative and positive labels respectively. As originally
described, the MIL problem involves each datum Xi ∈ X being a bag of multiple instances, where
Xi = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xni } is a bag of ni instances. Each instance xj ∈ Xi is a D-dimensional vector,
and every bag Xi may have a different total number of items ni . Given instant level classifier h(·),
most MIL algorithms work by predicting ŷi = max∀xj ∈Xi h(xj ).
As originally described, the positive/negative label of each bag Xi has a special meaning. By default,
a bag’s label is negative (y = −1). The label of a bag will become positive (y = 1) if and only if a
positive instance xj is present inside the bag, at which point the entire bag’s label becomes positive.
Because instance-level labels mapping each xj → y ∈ {−1, 1} are not given, the MIL problem is to
infer the instance-level labels from the whole-bag level labeling. This implies a critical asymmetric
nature to the given labels and how they must be handled. A value of y = −1 tells us that all instances
are negative in the given bag, whereas a label of y = 1 tells us that one or more instances have a
positive label. For this reason, swapping the positive and negative labels in a MIL problem is not
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

