Actively Testing Your Model While It Learns:
Realizing Label-Efficient Learning in Practice

Dayou Yu1
Weishi Shi2
Qi Yu1∗
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 146231
University of North Texas, Denton, TX 762032
{dy2507,qi.yu}@rit.edu1
weishi.shi@unt.edu2

Abstract
In active learning (AL), we focus on reducing the data annotation cost from the
model training perspective. However, “testing”, which often refers to the model
evaluation process of using empirical risk to estimate the intractable true generalization risk, also requires data annotations. The annotation cost for “testing” (model
evaluation) is under-explored. Even in works that study active model evaluation or
active testing (AT), the learning and testing ends are disconnected. In this paper,
we propose a novel active testing while learning (ATL) framework that integrates
active learning with active testing. ATL provides an unbiased sample-efficient
estimation of the model risk during active learning. It leverages test samples annotated from different periods of a dynamic active learning process to achieve
fair model evaluations based on a theoretically guaranteed optimal integration of
different test samples. Periodic testing also enables effective early-stopping to
further save the total annotation cost. ATL further integrates an “active feedback”
mechanism, which is inspired by human learning, where the teacher (active tester)
provides immediate guidance given by the prior performance of the student (active
learner). Our theoretical result reveals that active feedback maintains the label complexity of the integrated learning-testing objective, while improving the model’s
generalization capability. We study the realistic setting where we maximize the
performance gain from choosing “testing” samples for feedback without sacrificing
the risk estimation accuracy. An agnostic-style analysis and empirical evaluations
on real-world datasets demonstrate that the ATL framework can effectively improve
the annotation efficiency of both active learning and evaluation tasks.

1

Introduction

Labeled data are essential for supervised learning in both model training and evaluation. Active
learning (AL) provides a promising direction to reduce the human annotation cost by constructing
a smaller but more effective labeled dataset for training purposes [24, 27, 12, 5, 1, 8]. However,
AL only partially addresses the human annotation cost as the cost of constructing a labeled dataset
for model testing has been overlooked. In reality, the annotation budget could easily be drained by
building large test datasets that most modern AL methods rely on to evaluate the model performance
and determine the stopping criterion for learning. In contrast to AL, active model evaluation or active
testing (AT) focuses on actively selecting the testing data. Few existing efforts develop unbiased
risk estimation techniques for label-efficient model evaluation [20, 14]. However, these methods are
designed to evaluate fixed models that have been fully trained, making them ill-suited for evaluating
an actively learned model, which is constantly updated and inadequately trained during most parts of
the learning process. To address these fundamental challenges and realize label-efficient learning in
practice, we propose to integrate AT with AL in a novel and efficient learning framework, referred to
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

