Demystifying the Optimal Performance
of Multi-Class Classification
Minoh Jeong
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
jeong316@umn.edu

Martina Cardone
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
mcardone@umn.edu

Alex Dytso
Qualcomm Flarion Technology, Inc.
Bridgewater, NJ 08807
odytso2@gmail.com

Abstract
Classification is a fundamental task in science and engineering on which machine
learning methods have shown outstanding performances. However, it is challenging
to determine whether such methods have achieved the Bayes error rate, that is,
the lowest error rate attained by any classifier. This is mainly due to the fact that
the Bayes error rate is not known in general and hence, effectively estimating it is
paramount. Inspired by the work by Ishida et al. (2023), we propose an estimator
for the Bayes error rate of supervised multi-class classification problems. We
analyze several theoretical aspects of such estimator, including its consistency,
unbiasedness, convergence rate, variance, and robustness. We also propose a
denoising method that reduces the noise that potentially corrupts the data labels, and
we improve the robustness of the proposed estimator to outliers by incorporating the
median-of-means estimator. Our analysis demonstrates the consistency, asymptotic
unbiasedness, convergence rate, and robustness of the proposed estimators. Finally,
we validate the effectiveness of our theoretical results via experiments both on
synthetic data under various noise settings and on real data.

1

Introduction

Supervised classification problems are typical tasks in various fields of science and engineering,
such as machine learning, statistical signal processing, estimation, and detection. In supervised
classification, a dataset consisting of several input feature-label pairs is given. The goal of a supervised
classification task is to design effective classifiers, by leveraging the given dataset, to suitably label
future input features, or equivalently, to classify future input features into one of the classes.
As the dataset is the only available resource on the data distribution, the performance of a classifier
is typically measured by its empirical misclassification rate on the test dataset (which is a subset of
the given dataset). The best performance of an existing classifier, that is, the so-called state-of-theart (SOTA) performance, tends to be the point of reference to measure the improvement of a new
classifier. However, there are no guarantees that the SOTA performance is close to the theoretical
minimum misclassification rate, namely the Bayes error rate (BER). Thus, comparing the empirical
misclassification rate with the SOTA error rate provides only a relative improvement.
Having the knowledge of the BER is essential in theory and practice. The BER indeed provides
a fundamental limit on the misclassification rate, which is critical for designing high-performing
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

