Understanding Multi-phase Optimization Dynamics
and Rich Nonlinear Behaviors of ReLU Networks
Mingze Wang
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
Beijing, 100081, P.R. China
mingzewang@stu.pku.edu.cn

Chao Ma
Department of Mathematics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
chaoma@stanford.edu

Abstract
The training process of ReLU neural networks often exhibits complicated nonlinear
phenomena. The nonlinearity of models and non-convexity of loss pose significant
challenges for theoretical analysis. Therefore, most previous theoretical works on
the optimization dynamics of neural networks focus either on local analysis (like the
end of training) or approximate linear models (like Neural Tangent Kernel). In this
work, we conduct a complete theoretical characterization of the training process
of a two-layer ReLU network trained by Gradient Flow on a linearly separable
data. In this specific setting, our analysis captures the whole optimization process
starting from random initialization to final convergence. Despite the relatively
simple model and data that we studied, we reveal four different phases from the
whole training process showing a general simplifying-to-complicating learning
trend. Specific nonlinear behaviors can also be precisely identified and captured
theoretically, such as initial condensation, saddle-to-plateau dynamics, plateau
escape, changes of activation patterns, learning with increasing complexity, etc.

1

Introduction

Deep learning shows its remarkable capabilities across various fields of applications. However, the
theoretical understanding of its great success still has a long way to go. Among all theoretical topics,
one of the most crucial aspect is the understanding of the optimization dynamics of deep neural
network (NN), particularly the dynamics produced by Gradient Descent (GD) and its variants. This
topic is highly challenging due to the highly non-convex loss landscape and existing works usually
work with settings that do not align well with realistic practices. For instance, the extensived studied
Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) theory (Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al., 2018; 2019; Zou et al., 2018;
Allen-Zhu et al., 2019) proves the global convergence of Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to zero
training error for highly over-parameterized neural networks; however, the optimization behaviors
are similar to kernel methods and do not exhibit nonlinear behaviors, because neurons remain close
to their initialization throughout training.
In reality, however, the training of practical networks can exhibit plenty of nonlinear behaviors (Chizat
and Bach, 2018; Mei et al., 2019; Woodworth et al., 2020). In the initial stage of the training, a
prevalent nonlinear phenomenon induced by small initialization is initial condensation (Maennel
et al., 2018; Luo et al., 2021), where neurons condense onto a few isolated orientations. At the end
of training, NNs trained by GD can directionally converge to the KKT points of some constrained
max-margin problem (Nacson et al., 2019; Lyu and Li, 2019; Ji and Telgarsky, 2020). However, KKT
points are not generally unique, and determining which direction GD converges to can be challenging.
Nonlinear training behaviors besides initial and terminating stages of optimization are also numerous.
For example, for square loss, Jacot et al. (2021) investigates the saddle-to-saddle dynamics where
GD traverses a sequence of saddles during training, but it is unclear whether similar behavior can
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

