Boosting with Tempered Exponential Measures

Richard Nock
Google Research
richardnock@google.com

Ehsan Amid
Google DeepMind
eamid@google.com

Manfred K. Warmuth
Google Research
manfred@google.com

Abstract
One of the most popular ML algorithms, A DA B OOST, can be derived from the
dual of a relative entropy minimization problem subject to the fact that the positive
weights on the examples sum to one. Essentially, harder examples receive higher
probabilities. We generalize this setup to the recently introduced tempered exponential measures (TEMs) where normalization is enforced on a specific power of
the measure and not the measure itself. TEMs are indexed by a parameter t and
generalize exponential families (t “ 1). Our algorithm, t-A DA B OOST, recovers
A DA B OOST as a special case (t “ 1). We show that t-A DA B OOST retains A D A B OOST ’s celebrated exponential convergence rate on margins when t P r0, 1q
while allowing a slight improvement of the rate’s hidden constant compared to
t “ 1. t-A DA B OOST partially computes on a generalization of classical arithmetic
over the reals and brings notable properties like guaranteed bounded leveraging
coefficients for t P r0, 1q. From the loss that t-A DA B OOST minimizes (a generalization of the exponential loss), we show how to derive a new family of tempered
losses for the induction of domain-partitioning classifiers like decision trees. Crucially, strict properness is ensured for all while their boosting rates span the full
known spectrum of boosting rates. Experiments using t-A DA B OOST+trees display
that significant leverage can be achieved by tuning t.

1

Introduction

A DA B OOST is one of the most popular ML algorithms [8, 30]. It efficiently aggregates weak
hypotheses into a highly accurate linear combination [10]. The common motivations of boosting
algorithms focus on choosing good linear weights (the leveraging coefficients) for combining the
weak hypotheses. A dual view of boosting highlights the dual parameters, which are the weights on
the examples. These weights define a distribution, and A DA B OOST can be viewed as minimizing
a relative entropy to the last distribution subject to a linear constraint introduced by the current
hypothesis [12]. For this reason (more in § 2), A DA B OOST’s weights define an exponential family.

In this paper, we go beyond weighing the examples with a discrete exponential family distribution,
relaxing the constraint that the total mass be unit but instead requiring it for the measure’s 1{p2 ´ tq’th
power, where t is a temperature parameter. Such measures, called tempered exponential measures
(TEMs), have been recently introduced [4]. Here we apply the discrete version of these TEMs for
deriving a novel boosting algorithm called t-A DA B OOST. Again the measures are solutions to a
relative entropy minimization problem, but the relative entropy is built from Tsallis entropy and
“tempered” by a parameter t. As t Ñ 1 TEMs become standard exponential family distributions and
our new algorithm merges into A DA B OOST. As much as A DA B OOST minimizes the exponential loss,
t-A DA B OOST minimizes a generalization of this loss we denote as the tempered exponential loss.
TEM s were introduced in the context of clustering, where they were shown to improve the robustness

to outliers of clustering’s population minimizers [4]. They have also been shown to bring low-level
sparsity features to optimal transport [3]. Boosting is a high-precision machinery: A DA B OOST is
known to achieve near-optimal boosting rates under the weak learning assumption [1], but it has
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

