Benchmarking and Analyzing 3D-aware Image
Synthesis with a Modularized Codebase

Qiuyu Wang1

Zifan Shi2

Kecheng Zheng1

1

2

Ant Group

Yinghao Xu3

HKUST

3

CUHK

Sida Peng4
4

Yujun Shen1

ZJU

Abstract
Despite the rapid advance of 3D-aware image synthesis, existing studies usually
adopt a mixture of techniques and tricks, leaving it unclear how each part
contributes to the final performance in terms of generality. Following the most
popular and effective paradigm in this field, which incorporates a neural radiance
field (NeRF) into the generator of a generative adversarial network (GAN),
we build a well-structured codebase, dubbed Carver, through modularizing the
generation process. Such a design allows researchers to develop and replace each
module independently, and hence offers an opportunity to fairly compare various
approaches and recognize their contributions from the module perspective. The
reproduction of a range of cutting-edge algorithms demonstrates the availability
of our modularized codebase. We also perform a variety of in-depth analyses,
such as the comparison across different types of point feature, the necessity of
the tailing upsampler in the generator, the reliance on the camera pose prior, etc.,
which deepen our understanding of existing methods and point out some further
directions of the research work. We release code and models here to facilitate the
development and evaluation of this field.

1

Introduction

Learning a 3D-aware generative model has received growing attention considering its practical
applications, such as digital avatar and virtual reality. In addition to image quality and diversity,
which are widely pursued by 2D generation, 3D-aware image synthesis also requires the output
images to be spatially consistent across different viewing directions. Due to the lack of large-scale
3D data, previous attempts [46, 39, 20, 8, 56, 40, 58] propose to learn the 3D-aware model with 2D
images as the only supervision. To accomplish such a challenging task, the most popular solution
is to introduce neural radiance fields (NeRFs) into generative adversarial networks (GANs) as the
inductive bias. In this way, the GAN generator acquires the awareness of the underlying geometry
when rendering an image, whose fidelity is promised by the competition with the discriminator [19].
Towards an effective incorporation between NeRFs and GANs, many techniques have been proposed,
such as SIREN activation [6] and tri-plane representation [8]. However, the popularity of this field
unintentionally leads to some problems. (1) Existing algorithms are usually developed with different
codebases [7, 21, 57, 9], which adopt different 3D coordinate systems and rendering pipelines,
making it hard to transfer well-trained models from one codebase to another. (2) State-of-the-art
performance is usually achieved through an adequate combination of many techniques and tricks,
where some are novel while some are inherited from prior arts. However, existing codebases typically
hold an entangled implementation, making it hard to recognize the contribution of each part. (3)
A follow-up problem of an entangled implementation is the inconvenience of drawing merits from
different approaches, causing additional burden to the advance of this field.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

