Joint Data-Task Generation for Auxiliary Learning

Hong Chen1 , Xin Wang1,2∗, Yuwei Zhou1 , Yijian Qin1 , Chaoyu Guan1 , Wenwu Zhu1,2∗
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua
{h-chen20,zhou-yw21,qinyj19,guancy19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{xin_wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Current auxiliary learning methods mainly adopt the methodology of reweighing
losses for the manually collected auxiliary data and tasks. However, these methods
heavily rely on domain knowledge during data collection, which may be hardly
available in reality. Therefore, current methods will become less effective and even
do harm to the primary task when unhelpful auxiliary data and tasks are employed.
To tackle the problem, we propose a joint data-task generation framework for
auxiliary learning (DTG-AuxL), which can bring benefits to the primary task by
generating the new auxiliary data and task in a joint manner. The proposed DTGAuxL framework contains a joint generator and a bi-level optimization strategy.
Specifically, the joint generator contains a feature generator and a label generator,
which are designed to be applicable and expressive for various auxiliary learning
scenarios. The bi-level optimization strategy optimizes the joint generator and the
task learning model, where the joint generator is effectively optimized in the upper
level via the implicit gradient from the primary loss and the explicit gradient of
our proposed instance regularization, while the task learning model is optimized in
the lower level by the generated data and task. Extensive experiments show that
our proposed DTG-AuxL framework consistently outperforms existing methods
in various auxiliary learning scenarios, particularly when the manually collected
auxiliary data and tasks are unhelpful.

1

Introduction

Auxiliary learning aims to improve the model generalization ability on the primary task with the help
of related auxiliary tasks [1, 2]. This learning paradigm has been widely adopted and has shown its
effectiveness in various areas, like image classification [3], recommendation [4] and reinforcement
learning [5, 6]. Different auxiliary tasks are often chosen manually according to the primary task,
e.g., [7] utilize the task of visual attribute classification to help the fine-grained bird classification and
[4] improve the click conversion rate prediction with the help of click-through rate prediction task.
Most existing works utilize the auxiliary information by first reweighing the losses of the auxiliary
data and tasks, and then use the sum of the weighted losses together with the primary loss to optimize
the task learning model. The weights are employed to balance the primary loss and the auxiliary
losses to avoid negative auxiliary transfer, which are tuned with HPO tools [4, 3, 8]. More recent
works [9, 6, 10, 1, 11] propose to dynamically weigh different auxiliary losses during training.
However, the existing methods require that there exists beneficial information in the auxiliary data
and tasks, so that the beneficial loss terms can be selected through the loss reweighing process. This
condition cannot always be satisfied because whether the auxiliary data or task is beneficial depends
on many factors including the chosen auxiliary task, the scale of primary task dataset and the selected
∗

Corresponding Authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

