Deep Patch Visual Odometry

Zachary Teed∗
Princeton University
zteed@princeton.edu

Lahav Lipson∗
Princeton University
llipson@princeton.edu

Jia Deng
Princeton University
jiadeng@princeton.edu

Abstract
We propose Deep Patch Visual Odometry (DPVO), a new deep learning system
for monocular Visual Odometry (VO). DPVO uses a novel recurrent network
architecture designed for tracking image patches across time. Recent approaches
to VO have significantly improved the state-of-the-art accuracy by using deep
networks to predict dense flow between video frames. However, using dense flow
incurs a large computational cost, making these previous methods impractical for
many use cases. Despite this, it has been assumed that dense flow is important
as it provides additional redundancy against incorrect matches. DPVO disproves
this assumption, showing that it is possible to get the best accuracy and efficiency
by exploiting the advantages of sparse patch-based matching over dense flow.
DPVO introduces a novel recurrent update operator for patch based correspondence
coupled with differentiable bundle adjustment. On Standard benchmarks, DPVO
outperforms all prior work, including the learning-based state-of-the-art VO-system
(DROID) using a third of the memory while running 3x faster on average. Code is
available at https://github.com/princeton-vl/DPVO

1

Introduction

Visual Odometry (VO) is the task of estimating a robot’s position and orientation from visual
measurements. In this work, we focus on most challenging case—monocular VO—where the only
input is a monocular video stream. The goal of the system is to estimate the 6-DOF pose of the
camera at every frame while simultaneously building a map of the environment.
VO is closely related to Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM). Like VO, SLAM systems
aim to estimate camera pose and map the environment but also incorporate techniques for global
corrections—such as loop closure and relocalization (3). SLAM systems typically include a VO
frontend which tracks incoming frames and performs local optimization.
Prior work typically treats VO as an optimization problem solving for a 3D model of the scene which
best explains the visual measurements (3). Indirect approaches first detect and match keypoints
between frames, then solve for poses and 3D points which minimize the reprojection distance (26; 4;
20). Direct approaches, on the other hand, operate directly on pixel intensities, attempting to solve for
poses and depths which align the images (13; 15; 12). The main issue with prior systems, both direct
and indirect, is the lack of robustness. Failure cases are too frequent for many important applications
such as autonomous vehicles. These failure cases typically stem from moving objects, lost feature
tracks, and poor convergence.
Several deep learning approaches (37; 45; 34; 39; 5; 43) have been introduced to address the
robustness issue. The main advantage of deep learning is better features as well as differentiable
optimization layers guided by neural networks. DROID-SLAM (37), which includes a VO frontend,
uses neural networks to estimate dense flow fields which are subsequently used to optimize depth
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

