Optimized Covariance Design for AB Test on Social
Network under Interference
Qianyi Chen1 , Bo Li1∗, Lu Deng2 , Yong Wang 2
School of Economics and Management, Tsinghua University, China
2
Tencent Inc., Shenzhen, China
cqy22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, libo@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn
adamdeng@tencent.com, darwinwang@tencent.com

1

Abstract
Online A/B tests have become increasingly popular and important for social platforms. However, accurately estimating the global average treatment effect (GATE)
has proven to be challenging due to network interference, which violates the Stable
Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA) and poses great challenge to experimental design. Existing network experimental design research was mostly based
on the unbiased Horvitz-Thompson (HT) estimator with substantial data trimming
to ensure unbiasedness at the price of high resultant estimation variance. In this
paper, we strive to balance the bias and variance in designing randomized network
experiments. Under a potential outcome model with 1-hop interference, we derive
the bias and variance of the standard HT estimator and reveal their relation to
the network topological structure and the covariance of the treatment assignment
vector. We then propose to formulate the experimental design problem as to optimize the covariance matrix of the treatment assignment vector to achieve the
bias and variance balance by minimizing a well-crafted upper bound of the mean
squared error (MSE) of the estimator, which allows us to decouple the unknown
interference effect component and the experimental design component. An efficient projected gradient descent algorithm is presented to the implement of the
desired randomization scheme. Finally, we carry out extensive simulation studies2
to demonstrate the advantages of our proposed method over other existing methods
in many settings, with different levels of model misspecification.

1

Introduction

A/B test, also known as controlled experiment, is an effective way to evaluate treatment effect of new
product features and facilitate data-driven decision-making [14]. Due to its simplicity and efficiency,
it has become the gold standard in the industry. The theory of A/B test is based on the Stable Unit
Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA), under Neyman-Rubin’s framework [33], which assumes
unit’s treatment effect isn’t influenced by other units’ treatment assignments. However, in situations
where social network connects units, SUTVA is often violated since an individual’s behavior can be
influenced by their friends. This violation of SUTVA is referred as network interference or social
interference, which brings challenges to both estimation and inference of parameters of interest. It
has been shown that ignoring network effect can induce much higher bias or variance [29].
To tackle the bias and variance induced by network interference, researchers have tried to design
randomization schemes in pre-treatment phase and estimators or adjustment methods in post-treatment
phase. In this paper, we will focus on designing randomization scheme, namely, experiment design.
∗
2

Corresponding author
The code is available at https://github.com/Cqyiiii/Optimized_Covariance_Design-NIPS2023

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

