Learning Regularized Monotone Graphon Mean-Field
Games

1

Fengzhuo Zhang1 Vincent Y. F. Tan1 Zhaoran Wang2 Zhuoran Yang3
National University of Singapore 2 Northwestern University 3 Yale University
fzzhang@u.nus.edu, vtan@nus.edu.sg,
zhaoranwang@gmail.com, zhuoranyang.work@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper studies two fundamental problems in regularized Graphon Mean-Field
Games (GMFGs). First, we establish the existence of a Nash Equilibrium (NE)
of any λ-regularized GMFG (for λ ≥ 0). This result relies on weaker conditions
than those in previous works for analyzing both unregularized GMFGs (λ = 0)
and λ-regularized MFGs, which are special cases of GMFGs. Second, we propose provably efficient algorithms to learn the NE in weakly monotone GMFGs,
motivated by Lasry and Lions [2007]. Previous literature either only analyzed
continuous-time algorithms or required extra conditions to analyze discrete-time
algorithms. In contrast, we design a discrete-time algorithm and derive its convergence rate solely under weakly monotone conditions. Furthermore, we develop and
analyze the action-value function estimation procedure during the online learning
process, which is absent from algorithms for monotone GMFGs. This serves as a
sub-module in our optimization algorithm. The efficiency of the designed algorithm
is corroborated by empirical evaluations.

1

Introduction

In Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL), the sizes of state and action spaces grow exponentially in the number of agents, which is known as the “curse of many agents” [Sonu et al., 2017,
Wang et al., 2020] and restrict its applicability to large-scale scenarios. The Mean-Field Game (MFG)
has thus been proposed to mitigate this problem by exploiting the homogeneity assumption [Huang
et al., 2006, Lasry and Lions, 2007], and it has achieved tremendous successes in many real-world
applications [Cousin et al., 2011, Achdou et al., 2020]. However, the homogeneity assumption is an
impediment when modeling scenarios in which the agents are heterogeneous. GMFGs, as extensions
of MFGs, have thus been proposed to model the behaviors of heterogeneous agents and ameliorate
the “curse of many agents” at the same time [Parise and Ozdaglar, 2019, Carmona et al., 2022].
Despite the empirical successes of the Graphon Mean-Field Game (GMFG) [Aurell et al., 2022a], its
theoretical understanding is lacking. First, sufficient conditions for Nash Equilibrium (NE) existence
in regularized GMFG have not been established. Most works only address the existence of the
NE in unregularized GMFGs. However, regularization is employed in practical implementations
for improved exploration and robustness [Geist et al., 2019]. Moreover, previous works prove
the existence of NE in regularized MFGs, a special case of GMFGs, only under the contraction
condition, which is overly restrictive for real-world applications. Second, the analysis of discretetime algorithms for monotone GMFGs is lacking. Most existing works design provably efficient
discrete-time algorithms only under contraction conditions, as shown in Table 1. Complementarily,
previous works on monotone GMFGs either only derive the convergence rate for continuous-time
algorithms, which ignores the discretization error, or require extra conditions, (e.g., potential games)
to analyze discrete-time algorithms.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

