Removing Hidden Confounding in Recommendation:
A Unified Multi-Task Learning Approach

Haoxuan Li1 , Kunhan Wu2 , Chunyuan Zheng3 , Yanghao Xiao4 ,
Hao Wang5 , Zhi Geng6 , Fuli Feng7 , Xiangnan He7 , Peng Wu6,∗
1
Peking University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 University of California, San Diego
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Zhejiang University
6
Beijing Technology and Business University 7 University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
In recommender systems, the collected data used for training is always subject to selection bias, which poses a great challenge for unbiased learning. Previous studies
proposed various debiasing methods based on observed user and item features, but
ignored the effect of hidden confounding. To address this problem, recent works
suggest the use of sensitivity analysis for worst-case control of the unknown true
propensity, but only valid when the true propensity is near to the nominal propensity
within a finite bound. In this paper, we first perform theoretical analysis to reveal
the possible failure of previous approaches, including propensity-based, multi-task
learning, and bi-level optimization methods, in achieving unbiased learning when
hidden confounding is present. Then, we propose a unified multi-task learning
approach to remove hidden confounding, which uses a few unbiased ratings to calibrate the learned nominal propensities and nominal error imputations from biased
data. We conduct extensive experiments on three publicly available benchmark
datasets containing a fully exposed large-scale industrial dataset, validating the
effectiveness of the proposed methods in removing hidden confounding.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems (RS) play a key role in information retrieval by filtering out items that may
be of interest to users [16, 24]. In general, the training process of recommendation uses historical
user interaction data. However, a challenge in using interactions to make predictions is selection
bias [3, 32, 40, 57], i.e., users always choose preferred items to interact [5, 51], resulting in a
difference in the distribution between data with and without interactions [14, 45–49, 54, 56, 60],
which poses a great challenge for unbiased evaluation and learning of the prediction models.
Many methods have been proposed to tackle the selection bias problem, such as the error imputationbased (EIB) [2], inverse propensity scoring (IPS) [33, 41, 42], and doubly robust (DR) methods [7,
11, 27–29, 52]. Based on these, recent works further incorporate multi-task learning to alleviate the
data sparsity issue, such as entire space multi-task model (ESMM) [34], multi-task IPS and multi-task
DR (Multi-IPS and Multi-DR) [59], and entire space counterfactual multi-task models (ESCM2 ) [44].
However, these studies only consider the selection bias induced by measured confounders, but
ignore the presence of hidden (or unmeasured) confounders, which considerably influences the
application of these advanced methods in real-world recommendation scenarios. Hidden confounders
are ubiquitous and inevitable in RS due to information limitations (e.g., friend useful suggestions) or
privacy restrictions (e.g., user salary) [8, 31, 35, 50]. In this paper, we perform theoretical analysis
∗

Corresponding author: pengwu@btbu.edu.cn.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

