Approximate Heavy Tails in Offline (Multi-Pass)
Stochastic Gradient Descent
Krunoslav Lehman Pavasovic
Inria Paris, CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University
Paris, France
krunoslav.lehman-pavasovic@inria.fr
Alain Durmus
CMAP, CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Paris, France
alain.durmus@polytechnique.edu
Umut Şimşekli
Inria Paris, CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University
Paris, France
umut.simsekli@inria.fr

Abstract
A recent line of empirical studies has demonstrated that SGD might exhibit a
heavy-tailed behavior in practical settings, and the heaviness of the tails might
correlate with the overall performance. In this paper, we investigate the emergence
of such heavy tails. Previous works on this problem only considered, up to our
knowledge, online (also called single-pass) SGD, in which the emergence of heavy
tails in theoretical findings is contingent upon access to an infinite amount of data.
Hence, the underlying mechanism generating the reported heavy-tailed behavior
in practical settings, where the amount of training data is finite, is still not wellunderstood. Our contribution aims to fill this gap. In particular, we show that the
stationary distribution of offline (also called multi-pass) SGD exhibits ‘approximate’
power-law tails and the approximation error is controlled by how fast the empirical
distribution of the training data converges to the true underlying data distribution
in the Wasserstein metric. Our main takeaway is that, as the number of data points
increases, offline SGD will behave increasingly ‘power-law-like’. To achieve this
result, we first prove nonasymptotic Wasserstein convergence bounds for offline
SGD to online SGD as the number of data points increases, which can be interesting
on their own. Finally, we illustrate our theory on various experiments conducted
on synthetic data and neural networks.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning problems can be cast as the following population risk minimization problem:
minimize x 7→ F (x) := E[f (x, Z)] ,

Z ∼ µz ,

(1)

where x ∈ Rd denotes the model parameters, µz is the data distribution over the measurable space
(Z, Z) and f : Rd × Z → R is a loss function. The main difficulty in addressing this problem is
that µz is typically unknown. Suppose we have access to an infinite sequence of independent and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

