Recurrent Temporal Revision Graph Networks
Yizhou Chen∗
Shopee Pte Ltd.,
Singapore
Qingtao Yu
Shopee Pte Ltd.,
Singapore

Anxiang Zeng∗
SCSE, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore
Kerui Zhang
Shopee Pte Ltd.,
Singapore

Yuanpeng Cao
Shopee Pte Ltd.,
Singapore

Guangda Huzhang∗
Shopee Pte Ltd.,
Singapore
Kangle Wu
Shopee Pte Ltd.,
Singapore

Zhiming Zhou†
Shanghai University of Finance
and Economics, China

Han Yu
SCSE, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore

Abstract
Temporal graphs offer more accurate modeling of many real-world scenarios than
static graphs. However, neighbor aggregation, a critical building block of graph
networks, for temporal graphs, is currently straightforwardly extended from that
of static graphs. It can be computationally expensive when involving all historical
neighbors during such aggregation. In practice, typically only a subset of the most
recent neighbors are involved. However, such subsampling leads to incomplete
and biased neighbor information. To address this limitation, we propose a novel
framework for temporal neighbor aggregation that uses the recurrent neural network
with node-wise hidden states to integrate information from all historical neighbors
for each node to acquire the complete neighbor information. We demonstrate the
superior theoretical expressiveness of the proposed framework as well as its stateof-the-art performance in real-world applications. Notably, it achieves a significant
+9.6% improvement on averaged precision in a real-world Ecommerce dataset
over existing methods on 2-layer models.

1

Introduction

Many real-world applications (such as social networks [28, 41], recommender systems [3, 29], traffic
forecasting [18, 45] and crime analysis [11]) involve dynamically changing entities and increasing
interactions, which can be naturally modeled as temporal graphs (also known as dynamic graphs)
where nodes and edges appear and evolve over time. Compared with static graph solutions [13, 35, 9],
dynamic graphs can be more accurate in modeling node states and inferring future events.
In modern graph representation learning, neighbor aggregation, i.e., generating higher-level node
embeddings via referring to the embeddings of their neighbors [13, 35, 17], is a critical common
ingredient that helps more effectively leverage the connectivity information in the graphs. Practically,
however, relatively hot nodes may have rapidly growing lists of neighbors, which makes involving all
neighbors in neighbor aggregation computationally expensive. In static graphs, SAGE [8] suggests
randomly sampling d neighbors to approximate all neighbors. For temporal graphs, the prevalent
approach is to consider only the most recent d neighbors [28, 33]. But such subsampling of neighbors
∗
†

The three authors contributed equally to the paper.
Corresponding author. zhouzhiming@mail.shufe.edu.cn.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

