Unpaired Multi-Domain Causal Representation
Learning

Nils Sturma
Technical University of Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
nils.sturma@tum.de

Chandler Squires
LIDS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
csquires@mit.edu

Mathias Drton
Technical University of Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
mathias.drton@tum.de

Caroline Uhler
LIDS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
cuhler@mit.edu

Abstract
The goal of causal representation learning is to find a representation of data that
consists of causally related latent variables. We consider a setup where one has
access to data from multiple domains that potentially share a causal representation.
Crucially, observations in different domains are assumed to be unpaired, that is, we
only observe the marginal distribution in each domain but not their joint distribution.
In this paper, we give sufficient conditions for identifiability of the joint distribution
and the shared causal graph in a linear setup. Identifiability holds if we can uniquely
recover the joint distribution and the shared causal representation from the marginal
distributions in each domain. We transform our results into a practical method to
recover the shared latent causal graph.

1

Introduction

An important challenge in machine learning is the integration and translation of data across multiple
domains (Zhu et al., 2017; Zhuang et al., 2021). Researchers often have access to large amounts of unpaired data from several domains, e.g., images and text. It is then desirable to learn a probabilistic coupling between the observed marginal distributions that captures the relationship between the domains.
One approach to tackle this problem is to assume that there is a latent representation that is invariant
across the different domains (Bengio et al., 2013; Ericsson et al., 2022). Finding a probabilistic coupling then boils down to learning such a latent representation, that is, learning high-level, latent variables that explain the variation of the data within each domain as well as similarities across domains.
In traditional representation learning, the latent variables are assumed to be statistically independent,
see for example the literature on independent component analysis (Hyvärinen and Oja, 2000; Comon
and Jutten, 2010; Khemakhem et al., 2020). However, the assumption of independence can be too
stringent and a poor match to reality. For example, the presence of clouds and the presence of wet
roads in an image may be dependent, since clouds may cause rain which may in turn cause wet roads.
Thus, it is natural to seek a causal representation, that is, a set of high-level causal variables and
relations among them (Schölkopf et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021b). Figure 1 illustrates the setup of
multi-domain causal representation learning, where multiple domains provide different views on
a shared causal representation.
Our motivation to study multi-domain causal representations comes, in particular, from single-cell
data in biology. Given a population of cells, different technologies such as imaging and sequencing
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

