Physics-Informed Bayesian Optimization of
Variational Quantum Circuits

Kim A. Nicoli1,2,3∗ Christopher J. Anders3,4∗ Lena Funcke1,2 Tobias Hartung5,6
Karl Jansen7 Stefan Kühn7 Klaus-Robert Müller3,4,8,9 Paolo Stornati10
Pan Kessel11 Shinichi Nakajima3,4,12
1

Transdisciplinary Research Area (TRA) Matter, University of Bonn, Germany
2
Helmholtz Institute for Radiation and Nuclear Physics (HISKP)
3
Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data (BIFOLD)
4
Technische Universität Berlin, Germany, 5 Northeastern University London, UK
6
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, USA
7
CQTA, Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY), Zeuthen, Germany
8
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Korea
9
Max Planck Institut für Informatik, Saarbrücken, Germany
10
Institute of Photonic Sciences, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (ICFO)
11
Prescient Design, gRED, Roche, Switzerland, 12 RIKEN Center for AIP, Japan

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel and powerful method to harness Bayesian optimization for Variational Quantum Eigensolvers (VQEs)—a hybrid quantumclassical protocol used to approximate the ground state of a quantum Hamiltonian.
Specifically, we derive a VQE-kernel which incorporates important prior information about quantum circuits: the kernel feature map of the VQE-kernel exactly
matches the known functional form of the VQE’s objective function and thereby
significantly reduces the posterior uncertainty. Moreover, we propose a novel acquisition function for Bayesian optimization called Expected Maximum Improvement
over Confident Regions (EMICoRe) which can actively exploit the inductive bias
of the VQE-kernel by treating regions with low predictive uncertainty as indirectly
“observed”. As a result, observations at as few as three points in the search domain
are sufficient to determine the complete objective function along an entire onedimensional subspace of the optimization landscape. Our numerical experiments
demonstrate that our approach improves over state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Quantum computing raises the exciting future prospect to efficiently tackle currently intractable
problems in quantum chemistry [1], many-body physics [2], combinatorial optimization [3], machine
learning [4], and beyond. Rapid progress over the last years has led to the development of the first
noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) devices [5]; quantum hardware with several hundreds of
qubits that can be harnessed to outperform classical computers on specific tasks (see, e.g., Ref. [6]).
However, these tasks have been specifically designed to be hard on classical computers and easy on
quantum computers, while being of no practical use. As we have entered the NISQ era, one of the
grand challenges of quantum computing lies in the development of algorithms for NISQ devices that
may exhibit a quantum advantage on a task of practical relevance.
∗
These authors contributed equally to the work.
Correspondence to knicoli@uni-bonn.de and {anders,nakajima}@tu-berlin.de

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

