NEO-KD: Knowledge-Distillation-Based Adversarial
Training for Robust Multi-Exit Neural Networks

Seokil Ham1

Jungwuk Park1 Dong-Jun Han2∗ Jaekyun Moon1
1
KAIST 2 Purdue University
{gkatjrdlf, savertm}@kaist.ac.kr, han762@purdue.edu, jmoon@kaist.edu

Abstract
While multi-exit neural networks are regarded as a promising solution for making
efficient inference via early exits, combating adversarial attacks remains a challenging problem. In multi-exit networks, due to the high dependency among different
submodels, an adversarial example targeting a specific exit not only degrades the
performance of the target exit but also reduces the performance of all other exits
concurrently. This makes multi-exit networks highly vulnerable to simple adversarial attacks. In this paper, we propose NEO-KD, a knowledge-distillation-based
adversarial training strategy that tackles this fundamental challenge based on two
key contributions. NEO-KD first resorts to neighbor knowledge distillation to
guide the output of the adversarial examples to tend to the ensemble outputs of
neighbor exits of clean data. NEO-KD also employs exit-wise orthogonal knowledge distillation for reducing adversarial transferability across different submodels.
The result is a significantly improved robustness against adversarial attacks. Experimental results on various datasets/models show that our method achieves the best
adversarial accuracy with reduced computation budgets, compared to the baselines
relying on existing adversarial training or knowledge distillation techniques for
multi-exit networks.

1

Introduction

Multi-exit neural networks are receiving significant attention [9, 13, 26, 27, 28, 32] for their ability
to make dynamic predictions in resource-constrained applications. Instead of making predictions at
the final output of the full model, a faster prediction can be made at an earlier exit depending on the
current time budget or computing budget. In this sense, a multi-exit network can be viewed as an
architecture having multiple submodels, where each submodel consists of parameters from the input
of the model to the output of a specific exit. These submodels are highly correlated as they share some
model parameters. It is also well-known that the performance of all submodels can be improved by
distilling the knowledge of the last exit to other exits, i.e., via self-distillation [15, 20, 24, 27]. There
have also been efforts to address the adversarial attack issues in the context of multi-exit networks
[3, 12].
Providing robustness against adversarial attacks is especially challenging in multi-exit networks:
since different submodels have high correlations by sharing parameters, an adversarial example
targeting a specific exit can significantly degrade the performance of other submodels. In other
words, an adversarial example can have strong adversarial transferability across different submodels,
making the model highly vulnerable to simple adversarial attacks (e.g., an adversarial attack targeting
a single exit).
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

