Learning Efficient Surrogate Dynamic Models with
Graph Spline Networks

Chuanbo Hua∗
KAIST
DiffeqML, AI4CO
Michael Poli
Stanford University
DiffeqML

Federico Berto∗
KAIST
DiffeqML, AI4CO

Stefano Massaroli
Mila and University of Montreal
DiffeqML

Jinkyoo Park
KAIST
OMELET

Abstract
While complex simulations of physical systems have been widely used in engineering and scientific computing, lowering their often prohibitive computational
requirements has only recently been tackled by deep learning approaches. In this
paper, we present G RAPH S PLINE N ETS, a novel deep-learning method to speed
up the forecasting of physical systems by reducing the grid size and number of
iteration steps of deep surrogate models. Our method uses two differentiable orthogonal spline collocation methods to efficiently predict response at any location in time and space. Additionally, we introduce an adaptive collocation strategy in space to prioritize sampling from the most important regions. G RAPH S PLINE N ETS improve the accuracy-speedup tradeoff in forecasting various dynamical systems with increasing complexity, including the heat equation, damped
wave propagation, Navier-Stokes equations, and real-world ocean currents in both
regular and irregular domains.

1

Introduction

For a growing variety of fields, simulations of partial differential equations (PDEs) representing physical processes are an essential tool.
PDE–based simulators have been
widely employed in a range of practical applications, spanning from astrophysics (Mücke
et al., 2000) to biology (Quarteroni and Veneziani, 2003), engineering (Wu and PortéAgel, 2011), finance, (Marriott et al., 2015) or weather forecasting (Bauer et al., 2015).
However, traditional solvers for physics-based simulation often need a significant amount of computational
resources (Houska et al., 2012), such as solvers based
on first principles and the modified Gauss-Newton methods. Traditional physics-based simulation heavily relies
on knowledge of underlying physics and parameters requiring ad-hoc modeling, which is sensitive to design
choices. Finally, even the best traditional simulators are
often inaccurate due to the difficulty in approximating
real dynamics (Kremer and Hancock, 2006; Oberkampf,
2019; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020).
Figure 1.1: Wind speed forecasts on the
An attractive alternative to traditional simulators is to use
deep learning to train surrogate models directly from observed data. Data-driven surrogate models can generate
∗

Black Sea. G RAPH S PLINE N ETS can learn
fast and accurate surrogate models for complex dynamics on irregular domains.

Equal contribution authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

