Do SSL Models Have Déjà Vu? A Case of Unintended
Memorization in Self-supervised Learning

Casey Meehan∗,1 , Florian Bordes∗,2,3 , Pascal Vincent2,3
, Kamalika Chaudhuri†,1,3 , Chuan Guo†,3
1
UCSD, 2 Mila, Université de Montréal, 3 FAIR, Meta
∗
Equal contribution, † Equal direction contribution
cmeehan@eng.ucsd.edu, florian.bordes@umontreal.ca,
{pascal,kamalika,chuanguo}@meta.com

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms can produce useful image representations by learning to associate different parts of natural images with one another.
However, when taken to the extreme, SSL models can unintendedly memorize
specific parts in individual training samples rather than learning semantically meaningful associations. In this work, we perform a systematic study of the unintended
memorization of image-specific information in SSL models—which we refer to
as déjà vu memorization. Concretely, we show that given the trained model and a
crop of a training image containing only the background (e.g., water, sky, grass),
it is possible to infer the foreground object with high accuracy or even visually
reconstruct it. Furthermore, we show that déjà vu memorization is common to
different SSL algorithms, is exacerbated by certain hyperparameter choices, and
cannot be detected by conventional techniques for evaluating representation quality.
Our study of déjà vu memorization reveals previously unknown privacy risks in
SSL models, as well as suggests potential practical mitigation strategies.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) [11; 12; 33; 2; 9; 20] aims to learn general representations of contentrich data without explicit labels by solving a pretext task. In many recent works, such pretext tasks
rely on joint-embedding architectures whereby randomized image augmentations are applied to create
multiple views of a training sample, and the model is trained to produce similar representations for
those views. When using cropping as random image augmentation, the model learns to associate
objects or parts (including the background scenery) that co-occur in an image. However, doing so
also arguably exposes the training data to higher privacy risk as objects in training images can be
explicitly memorized by the SSL model. For example, if the training data contains the photos of
individuals, the SSL model may learn to associate the face of a person with their activity or physical
location in the photo. This may allow an adversary to extract such information from the trained model
for targeted individuals.
In this work, we aim to evaluate to what extent SSL models memorize the association of specific
objects in training images or the association of objects and their specific backgrounds, and whether
this memorization signal can be used to reconstruct the model’s training samples. Our results
demonstrate that SSL models memorize such associations beyond simple correlation. For instance, in
Figure 1 (left), we use the SSL representation of a training image crop containing only water and
this enables us to reconstruct the object in the foreground with remarkable specificity—in this case a
black swan. By contrast, in Figure 1 (right), when using the crop from the background of a test set
image that the SSL model has not seen before, its representation only contains enough information to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

