Efficient Meta Neural Heuristic for Multi-Objective
Combinatorial Optimization

Jinbiao Chen1 , Jiahai Wang1,2,3,∗ , Zizhen Zhang1,∗ , Zhiguang Cao4 , Te Ye1 , Siyuan Chen1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, P.R. China
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education,
Sun Yat-sen University, P.R. China
3
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, P.R. China
4
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
chenjb69@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {wangjiah,zhangzzh7}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
zgcao@smu.edu.sg, {yete,chensy47}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, neural heuristics based on deep reinforcement learning have exhibited
promise in solving multi-objective combinatorial optimization problems (MOCOPs). However, they are still struggling to achieve high learning efficiency and
solution quality. To tackle this issue, we propose an efficient meta neural heuristic
(EMNH), in which a meta-model is first trained and then fine-tuned with a few steps
to solve corresponding single-objective subproblems. Specifically, for the training
process, a (partial) architecture-shared multi-task model is leveraged to achieve
parallel learning for the meta-model, so as to speed up the training; meanwhile, a
scaled symmetric sampling method with respect to the weight vectors is designed to
stabilize the training. For the fine-tuning process, an efficient hierarchical method
is proposed to systematically tackle all the subproblems. Experimental results on
the multi-objective traveling salesman problem (MOTSP), multi-objective capacitated vehicle routing problem (MOCVRP), and multi-objective knapsack problem
(MOKP) show that, EMNH is able to outperform the state-of-the-art neural heuristics in terms of solution quality and learning efficiency, and yield competitive
solutions to the strong traditional heuristics while consuming much shorter time.

1

Introduction

Multi-objective combinatorial optimization problems (MOCOPs) [1] are widely studied and applied
in many real-world sectors, such as telecommunication, logistics, manufacturing, and inventory.
Typically, an MOCOP requires the simultaneous optimization of multiple conflicting objectives,
where the amelioration of an objective may lead to the deterioration of others. Therefore, a set of
trade-off solutions, known as Pareto-optimal solutions, are usually sought for MOCOPs.
Generally, it is difficult to exactly find all the Pareto-optimal solutions of an MOCOP [2], especially
given that the decomposed single-objective subproblem might already be NP-hard. Hence, heuristic
methods [3] are usually preferred to solve MOCOPs in reality, as they can attain approximate
Pareto-optimal solutions in (relatively) reasonable time. Nevertheless, the traditional heuristics are
still lacking due to their reliance on handcrafted rules and massive iterative steps, and superfluous
computation even for instances of the same (or similar) class.
Recently, inspired by the success of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) in learning neural heuristics
for solving the single-objective combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) [4–7], a number of
∗

Jiahai Wang and Zizhen Zhang are the corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

