Towards In-context Scene Understanding

Ivana Balažević∗ David Steiner∗ Nikhil Parthasarathy† Relja Arandjelović Olivier J. Hénaff
Google DeepMind

Abstract
In-context learning—the ability to configure a model’s behavior with different
prompts—has revolutionized the field of natural language processing, alleviating
the need for task-specific models and paving the way for generalist models capable
of assisting with any query. Computer vision, in contrast, has largely stayed in
the former regime: specialized decoders and finetuning protocols are generally
required to perform dense tasks such as semantic segmentation and depth estimation.
In this work we explore a simple mechanism for in-context learning of such
scene understanding tasks: nearest neighbor retrieval from a prompt of annotated
features. We propose a new pretraining protocol—leveraging attention within and
across images—which yields representations particularly useful in this regime.
The resulting Hummingbird model, suitably prompted, performs various scene
understanding tasks without modification while approaching the performance of
specialists that have been finetuned for each task. Moreover, Hummingbird can
be configured to perform new tasks much more efficiently than finetuned models,
raising the possibility of scene understanding in the interactive assistant regime.

1

Introduction

In natural language processing (NLP), the pretrain-finetune paradigm has long been the dominant
way of acquiring domain-specific knowledge and adapting a model’s behavior to a particular task (e.g.
question answering, natural language inference, summarization). More recently and predominantly
due to the increase in model and dataset sizes, large language models have exhibited impressive,
task-agnostic emergent capabilities [11, 37, 68], where a single model, given an appropriate prompt,
can perform a wide range of downstream tasks without any change in its parameters.
While large-scale supervised and self-supervised pretraining in vision has yielded powerful encoders
which capture useful semantics [15, 22, 31, 32, 35, 42, 43], applying these representations to solve
downstream tasks has typically required bespoke decoders and end-to-end finetuning. The most
readily applicable representations are trained for image-text alignment, enabling zero-shot classification [53] and image-based dialogue [2, 19, 80, 81], however these models are inherently limited
by the coarseness of natural language outputs. Attempts have been made at casting fine-grained
tasks (e.g. detection) as language modeling [17], but dense scene understanding tasks requiring
millions of outputs do not lend themselves to this format. Indeed, deficiencies in fine-grained spatial
understanding have been well documented in visual language models [36, 45, 64, 79].
In this work, we investigate the components required for in-context learning of scene understanding
tasks, which we characterize along three axes: generality, data efficiency, and fast adaptation. To this
end, we expand the well-known non-parametric nearest neighbor (NN) retrieval method [7, 9, 15, 75]
to support a variety of dense scene understanding tasks. This retrieval-based decoding mechanism has
the advantage of requiring no task-specific parameters or finetuning, thus enabling effortless adaption
of standard encoders (e.g. ResNet [32] or ViT [22]) to any dense task of interest, as well as faster
research iteration by allowing for simpler and more efficient model selection during pretraining.
*

Equal contribution. † Current affiliation: NYU CNS, work done while interning at Google DeepMind.
Correspondence to {balazevic, davidsteiner, henaff}@google.com.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

