Multi-Objective Intrinsic Reward Learning for
Conversational Recommender Systems

Zhendong Chu
University of Virginia
zc9uy@virginia.edu
Charlottesville, VA, USA

Nan Wang∗
Netflix Inc.
nanw@netflix.com
Los Gatos, CA, USA

Hongning Wang
University of Virginia
hw5x@virginia.edu
Charlottesville, VA, USA

Abstract
Conversational Recommender Systems (CRS) actively elicit user preferences to
generate adaptive recommendations. Mainstream reinforcement learning-based
CRS solutions heavily rely on handcrafted reward functions, which may not be
aligned with user intent in CRS tasks. Therefore, the design of task-specific
rewards is critical to facilitate CRS policy learning, which remains largely underexplored in the literature. In this work, we propose a novel approach to address this
challenge by learning intrinsic rewards from interactions with users. Specifically,
we formulate intrinsic reward learning as a multi-objective bi-level optimization
problem. The inner level optimizes the CRS policy augmented by the learned
intrinsic rewards, while the outer level drives the intrinsic rewards to optimize two
CRS-specific objectives: maximizing the success rate and minimizing the number
of turns to reach a successful recommendation in conversations. To evaluate the
effectiveness of our approach, we conduct extensive experiments on three public
CRS benchmarks. The results show that our algorithm significantly improves CRS
performance by exploiting informative learned intrinsic rewards.

1

Introduction

Conversational recommender systems (CRS) leverage interactive conversations to delineate a user’s
preferences [Zhang et al., 2018, Lei et al., 2020a, Chu et al., 2023]. The conversations revolve around
questions aimed at discerning users’ preferences on specific item attributes (e.g., music genres).
Through an interactive process of questions and answers, a profile about a user’s intended item can
be depicted. Numerous CRS formulations have been proposed [Chen et al., 2019, Christakopoulou
et al., 2018, 2016]. In this work, we investigate a prevalent CRS setting known as the multi-round
conversational recommendation [Lei et al., 2020a, Deng et al., 2021], where a CRS agent can
ask a question or recommend an item in consecutive rounds of conversations. The conversation
continues until the user accepts the recommendation (indicating a successful conversation) or quits
the conversation (considered as a failed conversation).
CRS fundamentally embodies a sequential decision making problem, for which numerous reinforcement learning (RL)-based solutions have been proposed [Lei et al., 2020a, Chu et al., 2023]. However,
as the users only provide textual or binary responses (e.g., accepting or rejecting the inquired attributes), existing RL-based solutions heavily rely on heuristic reward functions that are manually
defined to train CRS policies. These reward functions, such as promoting attributes accepted by a user
and penalizing those rejected, may not accurately reflect user intent due to their heuristic nature. This
becomes problematic since the effectiveness of CRS policy learning largely depends on the quality of
pre-defined reward function – an inadequately designed reward function can lead to solutions that
∗

Work was done while at the University of Virginia.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

