LayoutPrompter: Awaken the Design Ability of
Large Language Models

Jiawei Lin∗
Xi’an Jiaotong University
kylelin@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Jiaqi Guo
Microsoft
jiaqiguo@microsoft.com

Zijiang James Yang
Xi’an Jiaotong University
zijiang@xjtu.edu.cn

Jian-Guang Lou
Microsoft
jlou@microsoft.com

Shizhao Sun
Microsoft
shizsu@microsoft.com

Dongmei Zhang
Microsoft
dongmeiz@microsoft.com

Abstract
Conditional graphic layout generation, which automatically maps user constraints
to high-quality layouts, has attracted widespread attention today. Although recent works have achieved promising performance, the lack of versatility and data
efficiency hinders their practical applications. In this work, we propose LayoutPrompter, which leverages large language models (LLMs) to address the above
problems through in-context learning. LayoutPrompter is made up of three key
components, namely input-output serialization, dynamic exemplar selection and
layout ranking. Specifically, the input-output serialization component meticulously
designs the input and output formats for each layout generation task. Dynamic
exemplar selection is responsible for selecting the most helpful prompting exemplars for a given input. And a layout ranker is used to pick the highest quality
layout from multiple outputs of LLMs. We conduct experiments on all existing
layout generation tasks using four public datasets. Despite the simplicity of our
approach, experimental results show that LayoutPrompter can compete with or
even outperform state-of-the-art approaches on these tasks without any model
training or fine-tuning. This demonstrates the effectiveness of this versatile and
training-free approach. In addition, the ablation studies show that LayoutPrompter
is significantly superior to the training-based baseline in a low-data regime, further
indicating the data efficiency of LayoutPrompter. Our project is available here.

1

Introduction

Layout, which consists of a set of well-arranged graphic elements, plays a critical role in graphic
design. To alleviate the workload of designers and allow non-expert users to engage in the design
process, numerous studies have delved into the automatic layout generation for diverse user needs [7,
15, 18, 19, 21, 22, 39] (i.e., layout constraints). Based on input layout constraints, existing conditional
layout generation tasks can be categorized into the following groups: constraint-explicit layout
generation (e.g., generating layouts conditioned on element types), content-aware layout generation,
and text-to-layout (see the left side of Figure 1 for constraint examples). Early works in this
field [7, 19, 21, 22] primarily focus on individual tasks and develop task-specific model architectures
and optimization methods. More recently, task-generic approaches [15, 12, 14] have emerged.
Compared to task-specific methods, they achieve greater flexibility and controllability on more tasks,
while maintaining the quality of the generated layouts.
∗

Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

