LeanDojo: Theorem Proving with
Retrieval-Augmented Language Models

Kaiyu Yang1 , Aidan M. Swope2 , Alex Gu3 , Rahul Chalamala1 , Peiyang Song4 ,
Shixing Yu5 , Saad Godil∗, Ryan Prenger2 , Anima Anandkumar1,2
1
Caltech, 2 NVIDIA, 3 MIT, 4 UC Santa Barbara, 5 UT Austin
https://leandojo.org

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have shown promise in proving formal theorems
using proof assistants such as Lean. However, existing methods are difficult to
reproduce or build on, due to private code, data, and large compute requirements.
This has created substantial barriers to research on machine learning methods for
theorem proving. This paper removes these barriers by introducing LeanDojo:
an open-source Lean playground consisting of toolkits, data, models, and benchmarks. LeanDojo extracts data from Lean and enables interaction with the proof
environment programmatically. It contains fine-grained annotations of premises in
proofs, providing valuable data for premise selection—a key bottleneck in theorem
proving. Using this data, we develop ReProver (Retrieval-Augmented Prover): an
LLM-based prover augmented with retrieval for selecting premises from a vast
math library. It is inexpensive and needs only one GPU week of training. Our
retriever leverages LeanDojo’s program analysis capability to identify accessible
premises and hard negative examples, which makes retrieval much more effective. Furthermore, we construct a new benchmark consisting of 98,734 theorems
and proofs extracted from Lean’s math library. It features challenging data split
requiring the prover to generalize to theorems relying on novel premises that are
never used in training. We use this benchmark for training and evaluation, and
experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of ReProver over non-retrieval
baselines and GPT-4. We thus provide the first set of open-source LLM-based
theorem provers without any proprietary datasets and release it under a permissive
MIT license to facilitate further research.

1

Introduction

Reasoning is a cornerstone of human intelligence and a fundamental goal of AI [3]. One prominent
task is automated theorem proving (ATP): automatically generating proofs for theorems expressed
in formal logic. ATP is useful for formal mathematics, producing mathematical proofs that can be
checked rigorously [4]. Furthermore, it underpins formal verification, which is essential for proving
the correctness and safety of high-stakes applications [5, 6].
ATP is challenging since the search space is prohibitively large. In many applications, it is impractical
to generate proofs fully automatically. Therefore, interactive theorem proving (ITP) has emerged as
an alternative paradigm. In ITP, proofs are constructed by human experts interacting with software
tools called proof assistants, such as Coq [7], Isabelle [8], and Lean [1]. Machine learning can
automate such interactive theorem proving, opening up a new avenue for theorem proving [9]. The
model can learn to interact with proof assistants, given data containing human-written proofs.
∗

Research conducted while Saad Godil was at NVIDIA.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

