State Sequences Prediction via Fourier Transform for
Representation Learning
Mingxuan Ye1

Yufei Kuang1

Wengang Zhou1,2
1

Jie Wang1,2∗

Houqiang Li1,2

Rui Yang1

Feng Wu1

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{mingxuanye, yfkuang, yr0013}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{jiewangx, zhwg, lihq, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
While deep reinforcement learning (RL) has been demonstrated effective in solving
complex control tasks, sample efficiency remains a key challenge due to the large
amounts of data required for remarkable performance. Existing research explores
the application of representation learning for data-efficient RL, e.g., learning predictive representations by predicting long-term future states. However, many existing
methods do not fully exploit the structural information inherent in sequential state
signals, which can potentially improve the quality of long-term decision-making
but is difficult to discern in the time domain. To tackle this problem, we propose
State Sequences Prediction via Fourier Transform (SPF), a novel method that
exploits the frequency domain of state sequences to extract the underlying patterns
in time series data for learning expressive representations efficiently. Specifically,
we theoretically analyze the existence of structural information in state sequences,
which is closely related to policy performance and signal regularity, and then
propose to predict the Fourier transform of infinite-step future state sequences to
extract such information. One of the appealing features of SPF is that it is simple
to implement while not requiring storage of infinite-step future states as prediction
targets. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms several
state-of-the-art algorithms in terms of both sample efficiency and performance.2

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in complex sequential decisionmaking tasks, such as computer games [1], robotic control [2], and combinatorial optimization [3].
However, these methods typically require large amounts of training data to learn good control, which
limits the applicability of RL algorithms to real-world problems. The crucial challenge is to improve
the sample efficiency of RL methods. To address this challenge, previous research has focused on
representation learning to extract adequate and valuable information from raw sensory data and
train RL agents in the learned representation space, which has been shown to be significantly more
data-efficient [4–8]. Many of these algorithms rely on auxiliary self-supervision tasks, such as
predicting future reward signals [4] and reconstructing future observations [5], to incorporate prior
knowledge about the environment into the representations.
∗
2

Corresponding Author
The code of SPF is available on GitHub at https://github.com/MIRALab-USTC/RL-SPF/.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

