One-for-All: Bridge the Gap Between Heterogeneous
Architectures in Knowledge Distillation
Zhiwei Hao1,2 , Jianyuan Guo3 , Kai Han2 , Yehui Tang2 ,
Han Hu1∗ , Yunhe Wang2∗, Chang Xu3
1
School of information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology.
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
3
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney.
{haozhw, hhu}@bit.edu.cn, jguo5172@uni.sydney.edu.au,
{kai.han, yehui.tang, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) has proven to be a highly effective approach for
enhancing model performance through a teacher-student training scheme. However, most existing distillation methods are designed under the assumption that
the teacher and student models belong to the same model family, particularly the
hint-based approaches. By using centered kernel alignment (CKA) to compare
the learned features between heterogeneous teacher and student models, we observe significant feature divergence. This divergence illustrates the ineffectiveness
of previous hint-based methods in cross-architecture distillation. To tackle the
challenge in distilling heterogeneous models, we propose a simple yet effective
one-for-all KD framework called OFA-KD, which significantly improves the distillation performance between heterogeneous architectures. Specifically, we project
intermediate features into an aligned latent space such as the logits space, where
architecture-specific information is discarded. Additionally, we introduce an adaptive target enhancement scheme to prevent the student from being disturbed by
irrelevant information. Extensive experiments with various architectures, including
CNN, Transformer, and MLP, demonstrate the superiority of our OFA-KD framework in enabling distillation between heterogeneous architectures. Specifically,
when equipped with our OFA-KD, the student models achieve notable performance
improvements, with a maximum gain of 8.0% on the CIFAR-100 dataset and
0.7% on the ImageNet-1K dataset. PyTorch code and checkpoints can be found at
https://github.com/Hao840/OFAKD.

1

Introduction

In recent years, knowledge distillation (KD) has emerged as a promising approach for training
lightweight deep neural network models in computer vision tasks [1, 2, 3, 4]. The core idea behind KD
is to train a compact student model to mimic the outputs, or soft labels, of a pretrained cumbersome
teacher model. This method was initially introduced by Hinton et al.. [5], and since then, researchers
have been actively developing more effective KD approaches. One notable improvement in KD
methods is the incorporation of intermediate features as hint knowledge [6, 7, 8]. These approaches
train the student to learn representations that closely resemble those generated by the teacher, and
have achieved significant performance improvements.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

