PCF-GAN: generating sequential data via the
characteristic function of measures on the path space

Hang Lou
Department of Mathematics
University College London
hang.lou.19@ucl.ac.uk

Siran Li
Department of Mathematics
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
sl4025@nyu.edu

Hao Ni
Department of Mathematics
University College London
h.ni@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Generating high-fidelity time series data using generative adversarial networks
(GANs) remains a challenging task, as it is difficult to capture the temporal dependence of joint probability distributions induced by time-series data. Towards
this goal, a key step is the development of an effective discriminator to distinguish
between time series distributions. We propose the so-called PCF-GAN, a novel
GAN that incorporates the path characteristic function (PCF) as the principled
representation of time series distribution into the discriminator to enhance its generative performance. On the one hand, we establish theoretical foundations of the
PCF distance by proving its characteristicity, boundedness, differentiability with
respect to generator parameters, and weak continuity, which ensure the stability
and feasibility of training the PCF-GAN. On the other hand, we design efficient
initialisation and optimisation schemes for PCFs to strengthen the discriminative
power and accelerate training efficiency. To further boost the capabilities of complex time series generation, we integrate the auto-encoder structure via sequential
embedding into the PCF-GAN, which provides additional reconstruction functionality. Extensive numerical experiments on various datasets demonstrate the
consistently superior performance of PCF-GAN over state-of-the-art baselines, in
both generation and reconstruction quality.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have been a powerful tool for generating complex data
distributions, e.g., image data. The original GAN suffers from optimisation instability and mode
collapse, partially remedied later by an alternative training scheme using integral probability metric
(IPM) in lieu of Jensen–Shannon divergence. The IPMs, e.g., metrics based on Wasserstein distances
or Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD), consistently yield good measures between generated and
real data distributions, thus resulting in more powerful GANs on empirical data ([14, 2, 24]).
More recently, [1] proposed an IPM based on the characteristic function (CF) of measures on Rd ,
which has the characteristic property, boundedness, and differentiability. Such properties enable the
GAN constructed using this IPM as discriminator (“CF-GAN”) to stabilise training and improve
generative performance. However, ineffective in capturing the temporal dependency of sequential
data, such CF-metric fails to address high-frequency cases due to the curse of dimensionality. To
tackle this issue, we take the continuous time perspective of time series and lift discrete time series to
the path space ([28, 29, 23]). This allows us to treat time series of variable length, unequal sampling,
and high frequency in a unified approach. We propose a path characteristic function (PCF) distance
to characterise distributions on the path space, and propose the corresponding PCF distance as a novel
IPM to quantify the distance between measures on the path space.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

