Detection Based Part-level Articulated Object
Reconstruction from Single RGBD Image

Yuki Kawana1 , Tatsuya Harada1,2
The University of Tokyo, 2 RIKEN AIP
{kawana, harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
1

Abstract
We propose an end-to-end trainable, cross-category method for reconstructing
multiple man-made articulated objects from a single RGBD image, focusing on
part-level shape reconstruction and pose and kinematics estimation. We depart
from previous works that rely on learning instance-level latent space, focusing on
man-made articulated objects with predefined part counts. Instead, we propose
a novel alternative approach that employs part-level representation, representing
instances as combinations of detected parts. While our detect-then-group approach
effectively handles instances with diverse part structures and various part counts,
it faces issues of false positives, varying part sizes and scales, and an increasing
model size due to end-to-end training. To address these challenges, we propose
1) test-time kinematics-aware part fusion to improve detection performance while
suppressing false positives, 2) anisotropic scale normalization for part shape learning to accommodate various part sizes and scales, and 3) a balancing strategy for
cross-refinement between feature space and output space to improve part detection
while maintaining model size. Evaluation on both synthetic and real data demonstrates that our method successfully reconstructs variously structured multiple
instances that previous works cannot handle, and outperforms prior works in shape
reconstruction and kinematics estimation.

1

Introduction

Estimating object shape, pose, size, and kinematics from a single frame of partial observation is a
fundamental challenge in computer vision. Understanding such properties of daily articulated objects
has various applications in robotics and AR/VR.
Shape reconstruction of daily articulated objects is a challenging task. These objects exhibit a range
of shapes resulting from different local part poses. More importantly, they display significant intraand inter-category diversity in part configurations, including variations in part counts and structures.
These factors together contribute to an exponentially increasing shape variation. Previous works
have addressed this issue by either limiting a single model to target objects with a single articulated
part [15] or employing multiple category-level models [28] to accommodate varying part counts.
These approaches first detect each instance, and then model the target shape in an instance-level
latent space, primarily employing A-SDF [38] for shape learning. A-SDF maps the target shape
into an instance-wise latent space, and then a shape decoder outputs the entire shape of the instance.
However, this approach is limited when dealing with varying part counts and structures, as the shape
decoder must handle an exponentially increasing number of shape variations due to different part
layout combinations [43, 9] in addition to local part poses. Consequently, addressing this variety with
a single model remains a complex and unsolved task.
In this paper, we address this complexity through our novel detect-then-group approach. Our key
observation is that daily articulated objects consist of similar part shapes. For example, regardless
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

