Guiding The Last Layer in Federated Learning with
Pre-Trained Models
Gwen Legate
Concordia University, Mila
Montreal, Canada
gwendolyne.legate@mila.quebec
Lucas Caccia
McGill University, Mila
Montreal, Canada

Nicolas Bernier
Concordia University, Mila
Montreal, Canada

Edouard Oyallon
Sorbonne University, ISIR, CNRS
Paris, France

Eugene Belilovsky
Concordia University, Mila
Montreal, Canada

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging paradigm that allows a model to be trained
across a number of participants without sharing data. Recent works have begun
to consider the effects of using pre-trained models as an initialization point for
existing FL algorithms; however, these approaches ignore the vast body of efficient
transfer learning literature from the centralized learning setting. Here we revisit the
problem of FL from a pre-trained model considered in prior work and expand it to
a set of computer vision transfer learning problems. We first observe that simply
fitting a linear classification head can be efficient in many cases. We then show
that in the FL setting, fitting a classifier using the Nearest Class Means (NCM) can
be done exactly and orders of magnitude more efficiently than existing proposals,
while obtaining strong performance. Finally, we demonstrate that using a two-stage
approach of obtaining the classifier and then fine-tuning the model can yield rapid
convergence and improved generalization in the federated setting. We demonstrate
the potential our method has to reduce communication and compute costs while
achieving better model performance. Code for our experiments is available1 .

1

Introduction

In recent years an increased focus on data privacy has attracted significant research interest in
Federated Learning (FL). FL is an approach in which a common global model is trained by aggregating
model updates computed across a set of distributed edge devices whose data is kept private. We
desire to train a federated global model capable of equivalent performance as one trained on the
same set of centralized data. However, it is worth noting that FedAvg [McMahan et al., 2017], the
most commonly used FL baseline, has been shown to suffer from performance degradation when the
distribution of data between clients is not iid [Li et al., 2020, Acar et al., 2021, Karimireddy et al.,
2020].
Transfer learning from pre-trained models that have been trained on sufficiently abundant and diverse
data is well known to produce state-of-the-art results in tasks related to vision [He et al., 2019,
Girshick et al., 2014], Natural Language Processing (NLP) [Radford et al., 2019], and other domains.
Indeed, pre-training combined with fine tuning to specialize the model for a specific downstream task
often leads to better generalization and faster model convergence in the centralized setting [Weiss
et al., 2016, Patel et al., 2015]. FL literature on the other hand, has been largely focused on models
trained from scratch [McMahan et al., 2017, Karimireddy et al., 2020, Li et al., 2020] and the impact
1

https://github.com/GwenLegate/GuidingLastLayerFLPretrain

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

