SPACE: Single-round Participant Amalgamation for
Contribution Evaluation in Federated Learning

Yi-Chung Chen
National Taiwan University
r10942081@ntu.edu.tw

Hsi-Wen Chen
National Taiwan University
hwchen@arbor.ee.ntu.edu.tw

Shun-Gui Wang
National Taiwan University
r11921099@ntu.edu.tw

Ming-Syan Chen
National Taiwan University
mschen@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
The evaluation of participant contribution in federated learning (FL) has recently gained significant attention due to its applicability in various domains,
such as incentive mechanisms, robustness enhancement, and client selection.
Previous approaches have predominantly relied on the widely adopted Shapley
value for participant evaluation. However, the computation of the Shapley value
is expensive, despite using techniques like gradient-based model reconstruction
and truncating unnecessary evaluations. Therefore, we present an efficient approach called Single-round Participants Amalgamation for Contribution Evaluation (SPACE). SPACE incorporates two novel components, namely Federated
Knowledge Amalgamation and Prototype-based Model Evaluation to reduce the
evaluation effort by eliminating the dependence on the size of the validation set
and enabling participant evaluation within a single communication round. Experimental results demonstrate that SPACE outperforms state-of-the-art methods
in terms of both running time and Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient (PCC). Furthermore, extensive experiments conducted on applications, client reweighting,
and client selection highlight the effectiveness of SPACE. The code is available at
https://github.com/culiver/SPACE.

1

Introduction

With the rapid growth of mobile services, the combination of rich user interactions and robust sensors means they are able to access an unprecedented amount of data. While conventional machine
learning approaches require centralizing the training data in a single machine or a data center,
which may limit the scalability of machine learning applications, Federated Learning (FL) [36]
has been proposed to leave the training data distributed on the client side and then aggregate locally computed updates, e.g., the gradient of the neural network, to a central coordinating server,
without accessing the raw data. A line of subsequent efforts has significantly improved the efficiency [1, 15, 30, 62, 70, 73], and robustness [17, 38, 63] of FL. Moreover, such distributed training
paradigm has been adapted to client personalization [8, 27, 40, 41], and heterogeneous model architecture [10, 75], making it even more practical.
Recently, there has been increasing interest in evaluating the participant’s contribution to FL for a
fair incentive mechanism [12, 29, 33, 45, 46, 55, 65, 69, 71, 72] based on the participant contribution
in attracting data owners. Additionally, deciding the participant weights [54, 57] during the training
process based on their contributions can accelerate the convergence of the training process but also
enhance the model’s robustness by alleviating the negative effect from the confused or even incorrect
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

