Birder: Communication-Efficient 1-bit Adaptive
Optimizer for Practical Distributed DNN Training

Hanyang Peng1∗ , Shuang Qin1∗, Yue Yu1†, Jin Wang1 , Hui Wang1 , Ge Li2 †
1
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
penghy@pcl.ac.cn, qinsh@pcl.ac.cn, yuy@pcl.ac.cn
wangj05@pcl.ac.cn, wangh06@pcl.ac.cn, geli@ece.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Various gradient compression algorithms have been proposed to alleviate the
communication bottleneck in distributed learning, and they have demonstrated effectiveness in terms of high compression ratios and theoretical low communication
complexity. However, when it comes to practically training modern deep neural
networks (DNNs), these algorithms have yet to match the inference performance
of uncompressed SGD-momentum (SGDM) and adaptive optimizers (e.g., Adam).
More importantly, recent studies suggest that these algorithms actually offer no
speed advantages over SGDM/Adam when used with common distributed DNN
training frameworks ( e.g., DistributedDataParallel (DDP)) in the typical settings,
due to heavy compression/decompression computation or incompatibility with the
efficient All-Reduce or the requirement of uncompressed warmup at the early stage.
For these reasons, we propose a novel 1-bit adaptive optimizer, dubbed Binary
randomization adaptive optimizer (Birder). The quantization of Birder can be
easily and lightly computed, and it does not require warmup with its uncompressed
version in the beginning. Also, we devise Hierarchical-1-bit-All-Reduce to further
lower the communication volume. We theoretically prove that it promises the same
convergence rate as the Adam. Extensive experiments, conducted on 8 to 64 GPUs
(1 to 8 nodes) using DDP, demonstrate that Birder achieves comparable inference
performance to uncompressed SGDM/Adam, with up to 2.5× speedup for training
ResNet-50 and 6.3× speedup for training BERT-Base. Code is publicly available
at https://openi.pcl.ac.cn/c2net_optim/Birder.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of computational power, "bigger" and "bigger" deep neural network
(DNN) models are proposed for expect better performance, from the early classical models, such as
AlexNet(61 million parameters) [15], and ResNet (ResNet-50: 20.5 million parameters) [12] to the
current large language models (LLMs), such as BERT (BERT-Lagre: 340 million parameters )[10],
and GPT (GPT-3: 176 billion parameters)[5]. Scalable parallelism across distributed computing
workers for training these large-scale models becomes a necessity. During training, millions to
billions of parameters need to be communicated among workers at each iteration, so distributed
large-scale DNN training almost invariably suffers from the communication bottleneck.
To address the communication bottleneck, a wide variety of lossy gradient compression algorithms
have been proposed to lower the communication overhead. The algorithms can be broadly divided
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

