Reimagining Synthetic Tabular Data Generation
through Data-Centric AI:
A Comprehensive Benchmark

Lasse Hansen∗ 1,2

1

Nabeel Seedat∗3

Mihaela van der Schaar3

Andrija Petrovic4

Department of Affective Disorders, Aarhus University Hospital - Psychiatry, Aarhus, Denmark
2
Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Denmark
3
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, UK
4
Faculty of Organisational Sciences, University of Belgrade, Serbia
lasse.hansen@clin.au.dk
ns741@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Synthetic data serves as an alternative in training machine learning models, particularly when real-world data is limited or inaccessible. However, ensuring that
synthetic data mirrors the complex nuances of real-world data is a challenging task.
This paper addresses this issue by exploring the potential of integrating data-centric
AI techniques which profile the data to guide the synthetic data generation process.
Moreover, we shed light on the often ignored consequences of neglecting these
data profiles during synthetic data generation — despite seemingly high statistical
fidelity. Subsequently, we propose a novel framework to evaluate the integration
of data profiles to guide the creation of more representative synthetic data. In
an empirical study, we evaluate the performance of five state-of-the-art models
for tabular data generation on eleven distinct tabular datasets. The findings offer
critical insights into the successes and limitations of current synthetic data generation techniques. Finally, we provide practical recommendations for integrating
data-centric insights into the synthetic data generation process, with a specific
focus on classification performance, model selection, and feature selection. This
study aims to reevaluate conventional approaches to synthetic data generation and
promote the application of data-centric AI techniques in improving the quality and
effectiveness of synthetic data.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has become an essential tool across various industries, with high-quality data
representative of the real world being a crucial component for training accurate models that generalize
[1, 2, 3]. In cases where data access is restricted or insufficient synthetic data has emerged as a
viable alternative [4, 5]. The purpose of synthetic data is to generate training data that closely mirrors
real-world data, enabling the effective use of models trained on synthetic data on real data. Moreover,
synthetic data is used for a variety of different uses, including privacy (i.e. to enable data sharing,
[6, 7]), competitions [8] fairness [9, 10], and improving downstream models [11, 12, 13, 14].
∗

Equal Contributions

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

