Causal Imitability Under Context-Specific
Independence Relations

Fateme Jamshidi
EPFL, Switzerland
fateme.jamshidi@epfl.ch

Sina Akbari
EPFL, Switzerland
sina.akbari@epfl.ch

Negar Kiyavash
EPFL, Switzerland
negar.kiyavash@epfl.ch

Abstract
Drawbacks of ignoring the causal mechanisms when performing imitation learning
have recently been acknowledged. Several approaches both to assess the feasibility
of imitation and to circumvent causal confounding and causal misspecifications
have been proposed in the literature. However, the potential benefits of the incorporation of additional information about the underlying causal structure are
left unexplored. An example of such overlooked information is context-specific
independence (CSI), i.e., independence that holds only in certain contexts. We
consider the problem of causal imitation learning when CSI relations are known.
We prove that the decision problem pertaining to the feasibility of imitation in
this setting is NP-hard. Further, we provide a necessary graphical criterion for
imitation learning under CSI and show that under a structural assumption, this
criterion is also sufficient. Finally, we propose a sound algorithmic approach for
causal imitation learning which takes both CSI relations and data into account.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning has been shown to significantly improve performance in learning complex tasks in
a variety of applications, such as autonomous driving [27], electronic games [17, 41], and navigation
[34]. Moreover, imitation learning allows for learning merely from observing expert demonstrations,
therefore circumventing the need for designing reward functions or interactions with the environment.
Instead, imitation learning works through identifying a policy that mimics the demonstrator’s behavior
which is assumed to be generated by an expert with near-optimal performance in terms of the reward.
Imitation learning techniques are of two main flavors: behavioral cloning (BC) [42, 30, 24, 25], and
inverse reinforcement learning1 (IRL) [26, 1, 37, 44]. BC approaches often require extensive data to
succeed. IRL methods have proved more successful in practice, albeit at the cost of an extremely
high computational load. The celebrated generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL) framework
and its variants bypass the IRL step by occupancy measure matching to learn an optimal policy [15].
Despite recent achievements, still in practice applying imitation learning techniques can result in
learning policies that are markedly different from that of the expert [9, 7, 22]. This phenomenon is for
the most part the result of a distributional shift between the demonstrator and imitator environments
[11, 31, 12]. All aforementioned imitation learning approaches rely on the assumption that the
imitator has access to observations that match those of the expert. An assumption clearly violated
when unobserved confounding effects are present, e.g., because the imitator has access only to partial
observations of the system. For instance, consider the task of training an imitator to drive a car, the
causal diagram of which is depicted in Figure 1a. X and Y in this graph represent the action taken by
the driver and the latent reward, respectively. The expert driver controls her speed (X) based on the
speed limit on the highway (denoted by S), along with other covariates such as weather conditions,
1

Also referred to as inverse optimal control in the literature.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

