Large Language Models of Code Fail at
Completing Code with Potential Bugs

Tuan Dinh1∗ † Jinman Zhao2 ∗ Samson Tan2 Renato Negrinho2
Leonard Lausen2 Sheng Zha2 George Karypis2
1
University of Wisconsin–Madison 2 Amazon Web Services
tuan.dinh@wisc.edu
{jinmaz,samson,renatoni,lausen,zhasheng,gkarypis}@amazon.com

Abstract
Large language models of code (Code-LLMs) have recently brought tremendous
advances to code completion, a fundamental feature of programming assistance
and code intelligence. However, most existing works ignore the possible presence
of bugs in the code context for generation, which are inevitable in software development. Therefore, we introduce and study the buggy-code completion problem,
inspired by the realistic scenario of real-time code suggestion where the code context contains potential bugs – anti-patterns that can become bugs in the completed
program. To systematically study the task, we introduce two datasets: one with synthetic bugs derived from semantics-altering operator changes (buggy-HumanEval)
and one with realistic bugs derived from user submissions to coding problems
(buggy-FixEval). We find that the presence of potential bugs significantly degrades
the generation performance of the high-performing Code-LLMs. For instance, the
passing rates of C ODE G EN -2B- MONO on test cases of buggy-HumanEval drop
more than 50% given a single potential bug in the context. Finally, we investigate
several post-hoc methods for mitigating the adverse effect of potential bugs and
find that there remains a significant gap in post-mitigation performance.3

1

Introduction

Suggesting code for a given context is a frequently used feature in modern integrated development
environments (IDEs) [1], bringing productivity gains to the code-writing process. This task is
widely studied as code completion [2, 3] in the literature, with techniques and models ranging from
probabilistic or sequence modeling [4, 5], incorporating code structure as prior knowledge [6, 7], to
adopting deep neural networks [8] and pre-training techniques [9] to learn representations for code.
Recently, large Transformer-based language models of code (Code-LLMs) [10, 11, 12] have become
a promising paradigm for code completion, attaining state-of-the-art (SotA) performance in various
code learning tasks including code completion and generation.
However, existing works studying Code-LLMs often assume the absence of bugs, despite the frequent
occurrences and the cost of bugs in software development: on average, 70 bugs are created per 1000
code lines [13]; and fixing bugs costs 50% of development time [14]. Consider a practical coding
scenario. A developer wants to use the code suggestion feature in an IDE when writing code. With a
high probability, their real-time code context, as an input to the code predictor, contains typos or less
refined, potentially buggy implementations. Since bugginess is a property of a complete program,
∗

Equal contribution.
Work done while interning at Amazon Web Services.
3
Code and datasets are available at https://github.com/amazon-science/buggy-code-completion

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

