Characterizing Out-of-Distribution Error
via Optimal Transport

Yuzhe Lu∗1 , Yilong Qin∗1 , Runtian Zhai1 , Andrew Shen1 , Ketong Chen1
Zhenlin Wang1 , Soheil Kolouri2 , Simon Stepputtis1 , Joseph Campbell1 , Katia Sycara1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Vanderbilt University
{yuzhelu, yilongq, rzhai, andrews, ketongc, zhenlinw}@cs.cmu.edu
soheil.kolouri@vanderbilt.edu, {sstepput, jcampbell, sycara}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) data poses serious challenges in deployed machine
learning models, so methods of predicting a model’s performance on OOD data
without labels are important for machine learning safety. While a number of methods have been proposed by prior work, they often underestimate the actual error,
sometimes by a large margin, which greatly impacts their applicability to real tasks.
In this work, we identify pseudo-label shift, or the difference between the predicted
and true OOD label distributions, as a key indicator of this under-estimation. Based
on this observation, we introduce a novel method for estimating model performance
by leveraging optimal transport theory, Confidence Optimal Transport (COT), and
show that it provably provides more robust error estimates in the presence of
pseudo label shift. Additionally, we introduce an empirically-motivated variant of
COT, Confidence Optimal Transport with Thresholding (COTT), which applies
thresholding to the individual transport costs and further improves the accuracy
of COT’s error estimates. We evaluate COT and COTT on a variety of standard
benchmarks that induce various types of distribution shift – synthetic, novel subpopulation, and natural – and show that our approaches significantly outperform
existing state-of-the-art methods with up to 3x lower prediction errors. Our code
can be found at https://github.com/luyuzhe111/COT.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning methods are largely based on the assumption that test samples are drawn from
the same distribution as training samples, providing a basis for generalization. However, this i.i.d.
assumption is often violated in real-world applications where test samples are found to be out-ofdistribution (OOD) – sampled from a different distribution than during training. This may result
in a significant negative impact on model performance [15, 34, 25, 38]. A common practice for
alleviating this issue is to regularly gauge the model’s performance on a set of labeled data from the
current target data distribution, and update the model if necessary. When labeled data is not available,
however, one needs to predict the model’s performance on the target distribution with unlabeled data,
a task known as OOD performance prediction.
Performance prediction on unlabeled data has previously been shown to be impossible without
imposing additional constraints over the unknown target distribution [7, 11, 5, 26], due to the fact that
target samples may take any label. Thus, the feasibility of this task is dependent on what assumptions
we make regarding the shift between the train and target distributions. Prior works often make the
assumption that the conditional density P (y|x) remains fixed in the presence of covariate shift [37].
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

