Learning Visual Prior via Generative Pre-Training

Jinheng Xie1

Kai Ye2∗ Yudong Li2∗ Yuexiang Li3 Kevin Qinghong Lin1
Yefeng Zheng3 Linlin Shen2 Mike Zheng Shou1†
1
Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 Shenzhen University
3
Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab
{sierkinhane,mike.zheng.shou}@gmail.com
https://sierkinhane.github.io/visor-gpt

Abstract
Various stuff and things in visual data possess specific traits, which can be learned
by deep neural networks and are implicitly represented as the visual prior, e.g.,
object location and shape, in the model. Such prior potentially impacts many vision
tasks. For example, in conditional image synthesis, spatial conditions failing to
adhere to the prior can result in visually inaccurate synthetic results. This work
aims to explicitly learn the visual prior and enable the customization of sampling.
Inspired by advances in language modeling, we propose to learn Visual prior via
Generative Pre-Training, dubbed V ISOR GPT. By discretizing visual locations, e.g.,
bounding boxes, human pose, and instance masks, into sequences, V ISORGPT can
model visual prior through likelihood maximization. Besides, prompt engineering
is investigated to unify various visual locations and enable customized sampling
of sequential outputs from the learned prior. Experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness of V ISORGPT in modeling visual prior and extrapolating to novel
scenes, potentially motivating that discrete visual locations can be integrated into
the learning paradigm of current language models to further perceive visual world.

1

Introduction

The digital camera can continuously capture photographs of the visual world, such that tremendous
photos and videos are currently shared on the Internet. In our world, various stuff and things possess
specific traits, which have been correspondingly embedded in such visual data. In the current
era of deep learning, deep neural networks [10, 40, 7] have demonstrated remarkable proficiency
in learning from vast amounts of data, leading to the development of visual foundation models
(VFMs) [15, 32, 43, 12, 22, 20]. Such traits have been accordingly learned and implicitly represented
as the visual prior in VFMs, which has the potential to impact real-world applications. An example
that highlights its importance can be seen in the field of image synthesis. To present high-quality
and natural-looking images, the synthetic stuff and things must adhere to the visual prior such as the
spatial location, shape, and interaction of objects (Fig. 1 (a)). A vivid example of layout-to-image
is provided in Fig. 1 (b). When the spatial conditions do not adhere to the visual prior, such as the
shape of ‘donut’ not being square, the size of ‘person’ being similar to that of ‘donut’, and ‘donut’
being floated in the air instead of being placed on ‘dining table’, the resulting synthetic contents
may be inaccurate and visually inconsistent with the desired outcome. Despite recent advances in
conditional image synthesis such as ControlNet [43] and GLIGEN [22], the challenge of continuously
sampling customized spatial conditions that adhere to the visual prior remains a difficult problem,
particularly for automatic synthesis of massive images with corresponding fine-grained annotations.
In this paper, we study the problem of how to explicitly learn visual prior from the real world and
enable customization of sampling. If we would like to paint a series of instances on a canvas, we
∗ Equal Contribution † Corresponding Author
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

