Self-Supervised Learning of Representations for Space
Generates Multi-Modular Grid Cells
Rylan Schaeffer∗
Computer Science
Stanford University
rschaef@cs.stanford.edu

Mikail Khona∗
Physics
MIT
mikail@mit.edu

Tzuhsuan Ma
Janelia Research Campus
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
mat@janelia.hhmi.org

Cristóbal Eyzaguirre
Computer Science
Stanford University
ceyzaguirre@stanford.edu

Sanmi Koyejo
Computer Science
Stanford University
sanmi@cs.stanford.edu

Ila Rani Fiete
Brain and Cognitive Sciences
MIT
fiete@mit.edu

Abstract
To solve the spatial problems of mapping, localization and navigation, the mammalian lineage has developed striking spatial representations. One important spatial
representation is the Nobel-prize winning grid cells: neurons that represent selflocation, a local and aperiodic quantity, with seemingly bizarre non-local and
spatially periodic activity patterns of a few discrete periods. Why has the mammalian lineage learnt this peculiar grid representation? Mathematical analysis
suggests that this multi-periodic representation has excellent properties as an algebraic code with high capacity and intrinsic error-correction, but to date, synthesis
of multi-modular grid cells in deep recurrent neural networks remains absent. In
this work, we begin by identifying key insights from four families of approaches to
answering the grid cell question: dynamical systems, coding theory, function optimization and supervised deep learning. We then leverage our insights to propose a
new approach that elegantly combines the strengths of all four approaches. Our
approach is a self-supervised learning (SSL) framework - including data, data augmentations, loss functions and a network architecture - motivated from a normative
perspective, with no access to supervised position information. Without making
assumptions about internal or readout representations, we show that multiple grid
cell modules can emerge in networks trained on our SSL framework and that the
networks generalize significantly beyond their training distribution. This work
contains insights for neuroscientists interested in the origins of grid cells as well as
machine learning researchers interested in novel SSL frameworks.

1

Introduction

Spatial information is fundamental to animal survival, particularly in animals that return to a home
base. Mammalian brains exhibit a menagerie of specialized representations for remembering and
∗

Denotes equal contribution and co-first authorship.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

