StreamNet: Memory-Efficient Streaming Tiny Deep
Learning Inference on the Microcontroller

Hong-Sheng Zheng, Chen-Fong Hsu, Yu-Yuan Liu, Tsung Tai Yeh
Department of Computer Science
National Yang-Ming Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan
{hszheng.cs08, fonghsu.cs08, yyliu.cs11, ttyeh14}@nycu.edu.tw

Abstract
With the emerging Tiny Machine Learning (TinyML) inference applications, there
is a growing interest when deploying TinyML models on the low-power Microcontroller Unit (MCU). However, deploying TinyML models on MCUs reveals several
challenges due to the MCU’s resource constraints, such as small flash memory, tight
SRAM memory budget, and slow CPU performance. Unlike typical layer-wise inference, patch-based inference reduces the peak usage of SRAM memory on MCUs
by saving small patches rather than the entire tensor in the SRAM memory. However, the processing of patch-based inference tremendously increases the amount
of MACs against the layer-wise method. Thus, this notoriously computational
overhead makes patch-based inference undesirable on MCUs. This work designs
StreamNet that employs the stream buffer to eliminate the redundant computation
of patch-based inference. StreamNet uses 1D and 2D streaming processing and
provides an parameter selection algorithm that automatically improve the performance of patch-based inference with minimal requirements on the MCU’s SRAM
memory space. In 10 TinyML models, StreamNet-2D achieves a geometric mean
of 7.3X speedup and saves 81% of MACs over the state-of-the-art patch-based
inference.

1

Introduction

With the emerging Tiny Machine Learning (TinyML) applications, challenges to successfully deploy
TinyML models on the resource-constrained microcontroller (MCU) are becoming critical. Unlike the
high-performance CPU, the MCU is basically composed of a small flash memory (several MBs), an
SRAM memory (hundreds of KBs), and a slow CPU (hundreds of MHz). Since the SRAM memory
has better performance on reading and writing data than the flash memory, most TinyML system
frameworks often place the input/output tensors on the SRAM and store weights and filters on the
flash memory. In addition, the size of memory on MCUs is always small because of their constrained
budgets. However, recent TinyML models tend to use large input images and intermediate tensors to
raise their training accuracy (1; 2). Such TinyML models expose grand challenges when deploying
these models on MCUs with the stringent memory constraint.
Tensor memory planner of TinyML system frameworks determines the usage of the SRAM memory.
An MCU is often responsible for Machine Learning (ML) inference and often uses a single batch to
facilitate the response time of ML inference tasks. Thus, the static tensor memory planner schedules
intermediate tensors to meet the SRAM memory constraint. Conventionally, the compiler/interpreter
employs layer-wise scheduling, pushes data of a layer in the SRAM memory, and replaces them after
finishing its operator (3; 4). However, such layer-wise inference will overuse the SRAM memory
space when TinyML models have large intermediate tensors. To overcome this shortcoming, patch37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

