Bias in Evaluation Processes:
An Optimization-Based Model

L. Elisa Celis
Yale University

Amit Kumar
IIT Delhi

Anay Mehrotra
Yale University

Nisheeth K. Vishnoi
Yale University

Abstract
Biases with respect to socially-salient attributes of individuals have been well
documented in evaluation processes used in settings such as admissions and hiring.
We view such an evaluation process as a transformation of a distribution of the
true utility of an individual for a task to an observed distribution and model it as a
solution to a loss minimization problem subject to an information constraint. Our
model has two parameters that have been identified as factors leading to biases:
the resource-information trade-off parameter in the information constraint and the
risk-averseness parameter in the loss function. We characterize the distributions
that arise from our model and study the effect of the parameters on the observed
distribution. The outputs of our model enrich the class of distributions that can be
used to capture variation across groups in the observed evaluations. We empirically
validate our model by fitting real-world datasets and use it to study the effect
of interventions in a downstream selection task. These results contribute to an
understanding of the emergence of bias in evaluation processes and provide tools
to guide the deployment of interventions to mitigate biases.

1

Introduction

Evaluation processes arise in numerous high-stakes settings such as hiring, university admissions,
and fund allocation decisions [20, 30, 90, 122]. Specific instances include recruiters estimating
the hireability of candidates via interviews [121, 30], reviewers evaluating the competence of grant
applicants from proposals [147, 18], and organizations assessing the scholastic abilities of students
via standardized examinations [99, 19]. In these processes, an evaluator estimates an individual’s
value to an institution. The evaluator need not be a person, they can be a committee, an exam, or
even a machine learning algorithm [51, 122, 145]. Moreover, outcomes of real-world evaluation
processes have at least some uncertainty or randomness [30, 18, 79]. This randomness can arise both,
due to the features of the individual (e.g., their test scores or grades) that an evaluator takes as input
[31, 76, 124], as well as, due to the evaluation process itself [50, 30, 140].
Biases against individuals in certain disadvantaged groups have been well-documented in evaluation
processes [147, 74, 104, 110, 30]. For instance, in employment decisions and peer review, women
receive systematically lower competence scores than men, even when qualifications are the same
[147, 110], in standardized tests, the scores show higher variance in students from certain genders
[21, 112], and in risk assessment–a type of evaluation–widely used tools were twice as likely to
misclassify Black defendants as being at a high risk of violent recidivism than White defendants
[6]. Here, neither the distribution of individuals’ true evaluation depends on their socially-salient
attributes nor is the process trying to bias evaluations, yet biases consistently arise [147, 74, 104,
110, 30]. Such evaluations are increasingly used by ML systems to learn or make decisions about
individuals, potentially exacerbating inequality [51, 122, 145]. This raises the question of explaining
the emergence of biases in evaluation processes which is important to understand how to mitigate
them, and is studied here.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

