SLIBO-Net: Floorplan Reconstruction via Slicing Box
Representation with Local Geometry Regularization

Jheng-Wei Su1 , Kuei-Yu Tung1 , Chi-Han Peng2 , Peter Wonka3 , Hung-Kuo Chu1,†
1
National Tsing Hua University 2 National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
†
Correspondence: hkchu@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper focuses on improving the reconstruction of 2D floorplans from unstructured 3D point clouds. We identify opportunities for enhancement over the existing
methods in three main areas: semantic quality, efficient representation, and local geometric details. To address these, we presents SLIBO-Net, an innovative approach
to reconstructing 2D floorplans from unstructured 3D point clouds. We propose a
novel transformer-based architecture that employs an efficient floorplan representation, providing improved room shape supervision and allowing for manageable
token numbers. By incorporating geometric priors as a regularization mechanism
and post-processing step, we enhance the capture of local geometric details. We
also propose a scale-independent evaluation metric, correcting the discrepancy in
error treatment between varying floorplan sizes. Our approach notably achieves a
new state-of-the-art on the Structured3D dataset. The resultant floorplans exhibit
enhanced semantic plausibility, substantially improving the overall quality and
realism of the reconstructions. Our code and dataset are available online1 .

1

Introduction

Reconstructing 2D floorplans from unstructured 3D point clouds has received significant attention
in recent years as it facilitates various applications in scene understanding, robotics, VR/AR, etc.
Prior works [24, 8, 9, 22, 14] typically employ a series of operations to address the problem at
hand. The raw 3D point cloud is initially projected along the gravity axis (or z-axis) to generate
a 2D density map. This density map is then fed into a deep neural network to either extract room
masks [8, 22] or regress room corners [9, 14], followed by an optimization process to extract room
polygons. In contrast to the two-stage framework, Yue et al. [24] introduced the RoomFormer model,
an end-to-end trainable, transformer-type architecture that directly predicts room polygons using
two-level queries. Although deep learning approaches have exhibited impressive performance in
floorplan reconstruction, we have identified the following opportunities for improvement.
Semantic quality. The plausibility or semantic quality of reconstructed floorplans heavily relies
on the accuracy of estimated room corners and masks. Insufficient supervision of the room shape or
fragile room representations can result in artificial room shapes, as demonstrated in Figure 1(a), that
are not plausible.
Efficient representation. One main challenge is designing a representation that requires only
a reasonable number of tokens in the transformer architecture and can handle a variable number
of rooms, each with a variable number of corners. For example, the naive approach of predicting
the layout room by room, corner by corner does not require too many tokens but is too difficult to
1

https://ericsujw.github.io/SLIBO-Net/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

