NuTrea: Neural Tree Search
for Context-guided Multi-hop KGQA

Hyeong Kyu Choi ∗
Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
hyeongkyu.choi@wisc.edu

Seunghun Lee
Computer Science & Engineering
Korea University
llsshh319@korea.ac.kr

Jaewon Chu
Computer Science & Engineering
Korea University
allonsy07@korea.ac.kr

Hyunwoo J. Kim †
Computer Science & Engineering
Korea University
hyunwoojkim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Multi-hop Knowledge Graph Question Answering (KGQA) is a task that involves
retrieving nodes from a knowledge graph (KG) to answer natural language questions. Recent GNN-based approaches formulate this task as a KG path searching
problem, where messages are sequentially propagated from the seed node towards
the answer nodes. However, these messages are past-oriented, and they do not
consider the full KG context. To make matters worse, KG nodes often represent
proper noun entities and are sometimes encrypted, being uninformative in selecting
between paths. To address these problems, we propose Neural Tree Search (NuTrea), a tree search-based GNN model that incorporates the broader KG context.
Our model adopts a message-passing scheme that probes the unreached subtree
regions to boost the past-oriented embeddings. In addition, we introduce the Relation Frequency–Inverse Entity Frequency (RF-IEF) node embedding that considers
the global KG context to better characterize ambiguous KG nodes. The general
effectiveness of our approach is demonstrated through experiments on three major
multi-hop KGQA benchmark datasets, and our extensive analyses further validate
its expressiveness and robustness. Overall, NuTrea provides a powerful means
to query the KG with complex natural language questions. Code is available at
https://github.com/mlvlab/NuTrea.

1

Introduction

The knowledge graph (KG) is a multi-relational data structure that defines entities in terms of their
relationships. Given its enormous size and complexity, it has long been a challenge to properly
query the KG via human languages [1–6]. A corresponding machine learning task is knowledge
graph question answering (KGQA), which entails complex reasoning on the KG to retrieve the nodes
that correctly answers the given natural language question. To resolve the task, several approaches
focused on parsing the natural language to a KG-executable form [7–10], whereas others tried to
process the KG so that answer nodes can be ranked and retrieved [11–14, 2]. Building on these
works, there has been a recent stream of research focusing on answering more complex questions
with intricate constraints, which demand multi-hop reasoning on the KG.
∗ Work done at Korea University.
† Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

