Red Teaming Deep Neural Networks
with Feature Synthesis Tools

Stephen Casper
MIT CSAIL
scasper@mit.edu
Kevin Zhang
Peking University

Yuxiao Li
Tsinghua University

Jiawei Li
Tsinghua University

Kaivalya Hariharan
MIT

Tong Bu
Peking University

Dylan Hadfield-Menell
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
Interpretable AI tools are often motivated by the goal of understanding model
behavior in out-of-distribution (OOD) contexts. Despite the attention this area of
study receives, there are comparatively few cases where these tools have identified
previously unknown bugs in models. We argue that this is due, in part, to a
common feature of many interpretability methods: they analyze model behavior
by using a particular dataset. This only allows for the study of the model in the
context of features that the user can sample in advance. To address this, a growing
body of research involves interpreting models using feature synthesis methods
that do not depend on a dataset. In this paper, we benchmark the usefulness
of interpretability tools for model debugging. Our key insight is that we can
implant human-interpretable trojans into models and then evaluate these tools
based on whether they can help humans discover them. This is analogous to
finding OOD bugs, except the ground truth is known, allowing us to know when
a user’s interpretation is correct. We make four contributions. (1) We propose
trojan discovery as an evaluation task for interpretability tools and introduce a
benchmark with 12 trojans of 3 different types. (2) We demonstrate the difficulty
of this benchmark with a preliminary evaluation of 16 state-of-the-art feature
attribution/saliency tools. Even under ideal conditions, given direct access to data
with the trojan trigger, these methods still often fail to identify bugs. (3) We
evaluate 7 feature-synthesis methods on our benchmark. (4) We introduce and
evaluate 2 new variants of the best-performing method from the previous evaluation.
Code is available at this https url, and a website for this paper is available at this
https url.

1

Introduction

The most common way to evaluate AI systems is with a test set. However, test sets can fail to identify
some problems (such as out-of-distribution failures) and can actively reinforce others (such as dataset
biases). This poses a challenge because many of the failures that neural networks may exhibit in
deployment can be due to novel features [24] or adversarial examples (see Appendix B). Identifying
problems like these requires techniques that are not simply based on passing a dataset through a
black-box model. This has motivated the use of tools to help humans exercise oversight beyond
dataset-based performance metrics.
Much of the unique potential value of interpretability tools comes from the possibility of characterizing OOD behavior [37]. Despite this, most interpretable AI research relies heavily on the use
of datasets, which can only help characterize a model’s behavior on features present in these data
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

