An Efficient and Robust Framework for Approximate
Nearest Neighbor Search with Attribute Constraint

Mengzhao Wang
Hangzhou Dianzi University
wmzssy@yeah.net

Lingwei Lv
Hangzhou Dianzi University
llw@hdu.edu.cn

Xiaoliang Xu∗
Hangzhou Dianzi University
xxl@hdu.edu.cn

Yuxiang Wang
Hangzhou Dianzi University
lsswyx@hdu.edu.cn

Qiang Yue
Hangzhou Dianzi University
yq@hdu.edu.cn

Jiongkang Ni
Hangzhou Dianzi University
hananoyuuki@hdu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper introduces an efficient and robust framework for hybrid query (HQ)
processing, which combines approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) with
attribute constraint. HQ aims to find objects that are similar to a feature vector and
match some structured attributes. Existing methods handle ANNS and attribute
filtering separately, leading to inefficiency and inaccuracy. Our framework, called
native hybrid query (NHQ), builds a composite index based on proximity graph
(PG) and applies joint pruning for HQ. We can easily adapt existing PGs to this
framework for efficient HQ processing. We also propose two new navigable PGs
(NPGs) with optimized edge selection and routing, which improve the overall
ANNS performance. We implement five HQ methods based on the proposed
NPGs and existing PGs in NHQ, and show that they outperform the state-of-the-art
methods on 10 real-world datasets (up to 315× faster with the same accuracy).

1

Introduction

Approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) is a crucial problem in data science and AI applications
[27, 43, 9, 47]. For example, in a paper-retrieval system based on ANNS, a user wants to find papers
that are most similar to her query text. As Fig. 1(a) shows, the system converts each paper’s
unstructured text and the query text into feature vectors in a high-dimensional space. Then it uses
a vector index to perform ANNS and obtain papers with similar content. Many effective ANNS
methods have been developed to balance query efficiency and accuracy [18, 19, 36, 40, 11].
However, ANNS does not support many real-world scenarios where users want to find objects with
similar feature vectors to the query object and meets the given attribute constraint (e.g., topic, venue,
and publish_year of a paper) [51, 41]. We call this a hybrid query (HQ) [51, 54, 60, 32, 50, 41, 42].
For instance, in Fig. 1(b), a user wants to find some recent papers from top-tier conferences related to
her research interest. She can form a HQ by providing a descriptive text of her interest and two paper
attributes (e.g., NeurIPS and 2022). However, the traditional ANNS shown in Fig. 1(a) only finds
papers with similar content, and it cannot guarantee matching attribute constraint. Therefore, many
have tried to add attribute filtering (AF) on top of ANNS to answer a HQ [54, 51, 60].
Vearch [29] uses ANNS to find candidates that match the feature vector, and then applies AF to
get the final results [32]. This strategy can work with other ANNS libraries, such as SPTAG [37],
NGT [59], and Faiss [17]. On the other hand, Alibaba AnalyticDB-V (ADBV) [54] employs product
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

