Towards Semi-Structured Automatic ICD Coding via
Tree-based Contrastive Learning

⋆

Chang Lu⋆ , Chandan K. Reddy† , Ping Wang⋆ , Yue Ning⋆
Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology
†
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech
⋆
{clu13, ping.wang, yue.ning}@stevens.edu
†
reddy@cs.vt.edu

Abstract
Automatic coding of International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is a multilabel text categorization task that involves extracting disease or procedure codes
from clinical notes. Despite the application of state-of-the-art natural language
processing (NLP) techniques, there are still challenges including limited availability
of data due to privacy constraints and the high variability of clinical notes caused by
different writing habits of medical professionals and various pathological features
of patients. In this work, we investigate the semi-structured nature of clinical
notes and propose an automatic algorithm to segment them into sections. To
address the variability issues in existing ICD coding models with limited data, we
introduce a contrastive pre-training approach on sections using a soft multi-label
similarity metric based on tree edit distance. Additionally, we design a masked
section training strategy to enable ICD coding models to locate sections related to
ICD codes. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our proposed training
strategies effectively enhance the performance of existing ICD coding methods.

1

Introduction

The adoption of electronic health records (EHR) data has become widespread in modern healthcare
facilities as they provide a centralized platform to maintain comprehensive medical information
of patients, including diagnoses, procedures, laboratory tests, and clinical notes [1]. To efficiently
manage and categorize diseases and procedures, EHR data utilizes the International Classification of
Diseases (ICD) system developed by the World Health Organization. The ICD system provides a
hierarchical structure that maps diseases/procedures to digital codes. Clinical notes in EHR data are
generally stored as free text, while diagnosis and procedure codes are extracted from these notes and
saved as structured data. The process of extracting ICD codes from clinical notes is referred to as
ICD coding and is a crucial task in medical services such as medical records management, medical
billing [23], and insurance reimbursement [19]. It also supports healthcare research endeavors such
as diagnosis prediction [1, 15] and medication recommendation [22].
The traditional ICD coding task relies on human effort, which is both time-consuming and prone to
errors [27]. Incorrect code assignments can be costly. For instance, the error payout rate due to wrong
code assignment reached 6.8% in 2000, as stated by the US Centers for Medicare and Medicaid’s
statistics [17]. Consequently, researchers are exploring automated ICD coding methods to assign
ICD codes to medical documents with algorithms. Recent methods generally treat the ICD coding
task as a multi-label classification problem [13, 32, 30], as one clinical note can contain multiple
diagnosis/procedure codes. To capture the relationship between text and codes, code representations
have been studied by incorporating the semantic information of code names [18] with hierarchical
structures, synonyms, and co-occurrence of codes to provide fine-grained code representations and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

