Why Did This Model Forecast This Future?
Information-Theoretic Saliency for Counterfactual
Explanations of Probabilistic Regression Models

Chirag Raman

Alec Nonnemaker

Amelia Villegas-Morcillo

Hayley Hung

Marco Loog

Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
{c.a.raman, a.o.villegasmorcillo, h.hung, m.loog}@tudelft.nl
a.m.nonnemaker@student.tudelft.nl

Abstract
We propose a post hoc saliency-based explanation framework for counterfactual
reasoning in probabilistic multivariate time-series forecasting (regression) settings.
Building upon Miller’s framework of explanations derived from research in multiple
social science disciplines, we establish a conceptual link between counterfactual
reasoning and saliency-based explanation techniques. To address the lack of a
principled notion of saliency, we leverage a unifying definition of informationtheoretic saliency grounded in preattentive human visual cognition and extend it to
forecasting settings. Specifically, we obtain a closed-form expression for commonly
used density functions to identify which observed timesteps appear salient to an
underlying model in making its probabilistic forecasts. We empirically validate our
framework in a principled manner using synthetic data to establish ground-truth
saliency that is unavailable for real-world data. Finally, using real-world data and
forecasting models, we demonstrate how our framework can assist domain experts
in forming new data-driven hypotheses about the causal relationships between
features in the wild.

1

Introduction

As we go about our daily lives, engaging in conversations, walking down the street, or driving a car,
we rely on our ability to anticipate the future actions and states of those around us [1, 2]. However,
the numerous unknowns, such as hidden thoughts and intentions, make our predictions of the future
inherently uncertain [2]. To reflect this uncertainty, several machine learning methods in such settings
forecast a full distribution over plausible futures, rather than making a single point prediction [3, 4].
Identifying the factors that influence such a model’s forecasts is particularly useful for domain experts
seeking to understand the causal relationships guiding complex real-world behaviors, especially in
situations where the future is uncertain. In this work, we introduce and address a novel research
question toward counterfactual reasoning in multivariate probabilistic regression settings: how can
we identify the observed timesteps that are salient for a model’s probabilistic forecasts over a
specific future window? Specifically, we introduce the first post hoc, model-agnostic, saliency-based
explanation framework for probabilistic time-series forecasting.
We begin with a fundamental observation about human social cognition: we are averse to uncertainty
and strive to minimize it [2]. Consider the scenario where a pedestrian is approaching you on the
street. Initially, there is uncertainty about which direction each of you will take to avoid a collision. As
one of you changes direction, the other observes and takes the opposite direction, ultimately avoiding
a collision. Concretely, the thesis of this work is to formalize the following notion of saliency: the
timestep that changes the uncertainty of a predicted future is salient toward predicting that future.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

