The Harvard USPTO Patent Dataset:
A Large-Scale, Well-Structured, and Multi-Purpose
Corpus of Patent Applications

Mirac Suzguna Luke Melas-Kyriazib Suproteem K. Sarkarc
Scott Duke Kominersc,d Stuart M. Shieberc
a
Stanford University b Oxford University c Harvard University d a16z crypto
?

Correspondence to: msuzgun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the Harvard USPTO Patent Dataset (HUPD), a largescale, well-structured, and multi-purpose corpus of English-language patent applications filed to the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) between
2004 and 2018. With more than 4.5 million patent documents, HUPD is two to
three times larger than comparable corpora. Unlike previously proposed patent
datasets, HUPD contains the inventor-submitted versions of patent applications—
not the final versions of granted patents—thereby allowing us to study patentability
at the time of filing using NLP methods for the first time. It is also novel among
NLP datasets in its inclusion of rich structured metadata alongside the text of patent
filings, enabling researchers to perform new NLP tasks leveraging this metadata.
As a case study on the types of research HUPD makes possible, we introduce a new
task to the NLP community—patent acceptance prediction. Finally, we demonstrate
how our dataset can be used for three additional tasks: multi-class classification
of patent subject areas, language modeling, and summarization. Overall, HUPD
is one of the largest multi-purpose NLP datasets containing domain-specific textual data, along with well-structured bibliographic metadata, and aims to advance
research extending language and classification models to diverse and dynamic
real-world data distributions.1

1

Introduction

Patents are key public indicators of innovation and technological advancement. They offer a simple
yet powerful source for studying, measuring, and appraising innovation activity, economic growth,
and emerging technology. Over the past two decades, the total number of patent applications filed
to the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) per year has almost doubled. In the
fiscal year 2020 alone, the USPTO received more than 650,000 patent filings, including requests for
continued examinations [1]. The competitive and regulatory landscape surrounding patent-driven
innovation is rapidly evolving, but despite the clear focus in textual data in the field of patent analysis,
it has yet to be systematically studied by the ML and NLP communities.
The absence of large-scale, well-structured, and distilled patent data is a major hurdle preventing
researchers and practitioners from applying ML tools to understand and explore innovation and
technological change through patent text. In recent years, there have been efforts to produce NLP
1
Our dataset, along with our code and models, is publicly available at https://patentdataset.org and
distributed through HuggingFace Datasets (https://huggingface.co/datasets/HUPD/hupd). All the authors
were based at Harvard University at the inception of this project.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

