Unleash the Potential of Image Branch for
Cross-modal 3D Object Detection

Yifan Zhang1 , Qijian Zhang1 , Junhui Hou1∗, Yixuan Yuan2∗ , and Guoliang Xing2
1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{yzhang3362-c,qijizhang3-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk;jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk;
yxyuan@ee.cuhk.edu.hk;glxing@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
To achieve reliable and precise scene understanding, autonomous vehicles typically
incorporate multiple sensing modalities to capitalize on their complementary attributes. However, existing cross-modal 3D detectors do not fully utilize the image
domain information to address the bottleneck issues of the LiDAR-based detectors.
This paper presents a new cross-modal 3D object detector, namely UPIDet, which
aims to unleash the potential of the image branch from two aspects. First, UPIDet
introduces a new 2D auxiliary task called normalized local coordinate map estimation. This approach enables the learning of local spatial-aware features from the
image modality to supplement sparse point clouds. Second, we discover that the
representational capability of the point cloud backbone can be enhanced through
the gradients backpropagated from the training objectives of the image branch,
utilizing a succinct and effective point-to-pixel module. Extensive experiments and
ablation studies validate the effectiveness of our method. Notably, we achieved the
top rank in the highly competitive cyclist class of the KITTI benchmark at the time
of submission. The source code is available at https://github.com/Eaphan/UPIDet.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been increasing attention from both academia and industry towards 3D object
detection, particularly in the context of autonomous driving scenarios [11, 57, 56, 58]. Two dominant
data modalities - 3D point clouds and 2D RGB images - demonstrate complementary properties, with
point clouds encoding accurate structure and depth cues but suffering from sparsity, incompleteness,
and non-uniformity. On the other hand, RGB images convey rich semantic features and has already
developed powerful learning architectures [10], but pose challenges in reliably modeling spatial
structures. Despite the efforts made by previous studies [43, 40] devoted to cross-modal learning,
how to reasonably mitigate the substantial gap between two modalities and utilize the information
from the image domain to complement single-modal detectors remains an open and significant issue.
Currently, the performance of single-modal detectors is limited by the sparsity of observed point
clouds. As shown in Figure 1 (b), the performance of detectors on objects with fewer points
(LEVEL_2) is significantly lower than that on objects with denser points (LEVEL_1). And Fig.1 (a)
shows the distribution of point clouds in a single object for the Waymo dataset. It can be observed
that a substantial proportion of objects have less than 50 point clouds, making it challenging to
deduce the 3D bounding boxes with seven degrees of freedom from very sparse point clouds, as
discussed in detail in Sec.3. While the observed point cloud can be sparse due to heavy occlusion or
low reflectivity material, their contour and appearance can still be clear in RGB images (as shown in
the example in Fig.1 (c)). Despite previous work exploring the use of semantic image features to
enhance features extracted from LiDAR [40, 12], they have not fundamentally improved the spatial
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

