On Computing Pairwise Statistics
with Local Differential Privacy

Badih Ghazi
Google Research
Mountain View, CA, US
badihghazi@gmail.com
Pasin Manurangsi
Google Research
Bangkok, Thailand
pasin@google.com

Pritish Kamath
Google Research
Mountain View, CA, US
pritish@alum.mit.edu

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
Mountain View, CA, US
ravi.k53@gmail.com

Adam Sealfon
Google Research
New York, NY, US
adamsealfon@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of computing pairwise statistics, i.e., ones of the form

n −1 P
i̸=j f (xi , xj ), where xi denotes the input to the ith user, with differential
2
privacy (DP) in the local model. This formulation captures important metrics such
as Kendall’s τ coefficient, Area Under Curve, Gini’s mean difference, Gini’s entropy, etc. We give several novel and generic algorithms for the problem, leveraging
techniques from DP algorithms for linear queries.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) [DMNS06] is a widely studied and used notion for quantifying the privacy
protections of algorithms in data analytics and machine learning. It has witnessed many practical
deployments [EPK14, Sha14, Gre16, App17, DKY17, Abo18, RE19, TM20, KT18, RSP+ 21]. On
a high level, DP dictates that the output of a (randomized) algorithm remains statistically indistinguishable if the input of any single user is modified; the degree of statistical indistinguishability is
quantified by the privacy parameter ε > 0.
An important setting of DP is the local model [EGS03, KLN+ 11], where each of n users holds an
input that they wish to keep private. An analyst wishes to compute some known function of the
users inputs. The analyst and the users engage in an interactive protocol at the end of which the
analyst is supposed to compute an estimate to the value of the function on the user inputs. When the
aforementioned statistical indistinguishability property is enforced on the algorithm’s transcript, the
algorithm is said to be ε-local DP (see Section 2 for a formal definition). Non-interactive algorithms
refer to the setting where each user sends a single (DP) message to the analyst, who is then supposed
to output an estimate of the desired value without any further interaction with the users. As usual
in the interactive local DP setting, we assume a broadcast model where every communication is
visible to all users and to the analyst (and subject to the DP constraint). The number of rounds of an
interactive protocol refers to the number of back-and-forths between the set of users and the analyst.
While the local DP setting offers a compelling trust model compared to the central DP model (where
an analyst is assumed to have access to the raw user data and the privacy guarantee is only enforced at
its output), the local setting is often limited by lower bounds on the error incurred by private protocols
(e.g., [BNO08, CSS12]). In this work, we study some basic tasks in analytics and learning, and give
local DP protocols with significantly smaller error than what was previously known.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

