Closing the Gap Between the Upper Bound and
the Lower Bound of Adam’s Iteration Complexity

Bohan Wang1∗, Jingwen Fu2∗, Huishuai Zhang3†, Nanning Zheng2†, Wei Chen4†
bhwangfy@gmail.com
fu1371252069@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
huzhang@microsoft.com
nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
chenwei2022@ict.ac.cn
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University,
3
Microsoft Research, 4 Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Recently, Arjevani et al. [1] establish a lower bound of iteration complexity for
the first-order optimization under an L-smooth condition and a bounded noise
variance assumption. However, a thorough review of existing literature on Adam’s
convergence reveals a noticeable gap: none of them meet the above lower bound. In
this paper, we close the gap by deriving a new convergence guarantee of Adam, with
only an L-smooth condition and a bounded noise variance assumption. Our results
remain valid across a broad spectrum of hyperparameters. Especially with properly
chosen hyperparameters, we derive an upper bound of iteration complexity of
Adam and show that it meets the lower bound for first-order optimizers. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first to establish such a tight upper bound for Adam’s
convergence. Our proof utilizes novel techniques to handle the entanglement
between momentum and adaptive learning rate and to convert the first-order term in
the Descent Lemma to the gradient norm, which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

First-order optimizers, also known as gradient-based methods, make use of gradient (first-order
derivative) information to find the minimum of a function. They have become a cornerstone of
many machine learning algorithms due to the efficiency as only gradient informaiton is required, and
the flexibility as gradients can be easily computed for any function represented as directed acyclic
computational graph via auto-differentiation [2, 25].
Therefore, it is fundamental to theoretically understand the properties of these first-order methods.
Recently, Arjevani et al. [1] establish a lower bound on the iteration complexity of stochastic firstorder methods. Formally, for a well-studied setting where the objective is L-smooth and a stochastic
oracle can query the gradient unbiasly with bounded variance (see Assumption 1 and 2), any stochastic
first-order algorithm requires at least ε−4 queries (in the worst case) to find an ε-stationary point, i.e.,
a point with gradient norm at most ε. Arjevani et al. [1] further show that the above lower bound is
tight as it matches the existing upper bound of iteration complexity of SGD [15].
On the other hand, among first-order optimizers, Adam [20] becomes dominant in training stateof-the-art machine learning models [3, 18, 4, 11]. Compared to vanilla stochastic gradient descent
(SGD), Adam consists of two more key components: (i) momentum to accumulate historical gradient
* Equal Contribution
†

Corresponding Authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

