DrugCLIP: Contrastive Protein-Molecule
Representation Learning for Virtual Screening

Bowen Gao1∗ , Bo Qiang2∗ , Haichuan Tan1 , Minsi Ren3 , Yinjun Jia4 , Minsi Lu5 ,
Jingjing Liu1 , Wei-Ying Ma1 , Yanyan Lan1,6†
1

Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
2
Department of Pharmaceutical Science, Peking University
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University
5
Department of Pharmaceutical Science, Tsinghua University
6
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Virtual screening, which identifies potential drugs from vast compound databases
to bind with a particular protein pocket, is a critical step in AI-assisted drug discovery. Traditional docking methods are highly time-consuming, and can only work
with a restricted search library in real-life applications. Recent supervised learning
approaches using scoring functions for binding-affinity prediction, although promising, have not yet surpassed docking methods due to their strong dependency on
limited data with reliable binding-affinity labels. In this paper, we propose a novel
contrastive learning framework, DrugCLIP, by reformulating virtual screening as
a dense retrieval task and employing contrastive learning to align representations
of binding protein pockets and molecules from a large quantity of pairwise data
without explicit binding-affinity scores. We also introduce a biological-knowledge
inspired data augmentation strategy to learn better protein-molecule representations.
Extensive experiments show that DrugCLIP significantly outperforms traditional
docking and supervised learning methods on diverse virtual screening benchmarks
with highly reduced computation time, especially in zero-shot setting. The code
for DrugCLIP is available at https://github.com/bowen-gao/DrugCLIP.

1

Introduction

Virtual screening is a crucial computer-aided drug discovery (CADD) technique that uses computational methods [26] to search for candidate drug structures from compound libraries, aiming to
identify molecules most likely to bind to a target (e.g., a protein receptor or enzyme). Common
practice follows the wisdom of “bigger is better" [25]: the larger the search library, the better chance
to find a matching drug candidate. For example, statistics show that increasing the data size from 105
to 108 leads to a significant jump in the number of true ligands among top-1000 results [19].
Molecular docking [11, 43, 41] is currently the dominant virtual screening method, which models
protein-molecule interaction by a quantitative score correlated with the free energy of binding. The
computation of such scores heavily depends on molecule orientations and conformations sampling,
which is time-consuming and impractical when dealing with large libraries in the magnitude of
billions [14]. As estimated by [32], given a standard computating rate of 10 seconds per compound on
∗
†

Equal contirbution
Correspondence to lanyanyan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

