KD-Zero: Evolving Knowledge Distiller for Any
Teacher-Student Pairs
Lujun Li†∗ Peijie Dong† Anggeng Li† Zimian Wei Ya Yang
HKUST
HKUST(GZ)
Huawei
NUST
CityU
{lilujunai, dongpeijie98}@gmail.com,{anggeng.li,yya9}@outlook.com, weizimian16@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) has emerged as an effective technique for compressing
models that can enhance the lightweight model. Conventional KD methods propose
various designs to allow student model to imitate the teacher better. However, these
handcrafted KD designs heavily rely on expert knowledge and may be sub-optimal
for various teacher-student pairs. In this paper, we present a novel framework,
KD-Zero, which utilizes evolutionary search to automatically discover promising
distiller from scratch for any teacher-student architectures. Specifically, we first
decompose the generalized distiller into knowledge transformations, distance functions, and loss weights. Then, we construct our distiller search space by selecting
advanced operations for these three components. With sharpness and represent gap
as fitting objectives, we evolve candidate populations and generate better distillers
by crossover and mutation. To ensure efficient searching, we employ the lossrejection protocol, search space shrinkage, and proxy settings during the search
process. In this manner, the discovered distiller can address the capacity gap and
cross-architecture challenges for any teacher-student pairs in the final distillation
stage. Comprehensive experiments reveal that KD-Zero consistently outperforms
other state-of-the-art methods across diverse architectures on classification, detection, and segmentation tasks. Noticeably, we provide some practical insights in
designing the distiller by analyzing the distiller discovered. Codes are available in
supplementary materials.

1

Introduction
Minibatch

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in
tackling a variety of visual recognition tasks [31, 17, 66]. Despite
the appealing performance, the prevailing DNN models usually
have large numbers of parameters, leading to heavy costs of memory and computation. Conventional techniques such as Neural
Architecture Search [16, 6, 26, 15] and quantizing networks to
use low-bit parameters [11, 53, 49] have proven to be effective
for mitigating this computational burden. Recently, Knowledge
Distillation (KD) has been widely used for training compact and
efficient neural networks by transferring the knowledge lied in the
logits [23] or features [57] from a large, pre-trained teacher to a
smaller student.

Teacher

feature

embed

Student

logits

feature

embed

logits

Transform OP
Input
Alignment/
Projection
unary
op
Transform
unary
op
OP

unary
op
Transform
unary
op
OP
Weight OP

Distance OP
L1
L2
KL
Hard
Cosine
Pearson
Corr
.....

BatchNorm
Mask
Exp
Pow2
ReLU
SoftMax_C
MultiScale
.....

Distance OP
Weight OP
Loss

Entropy
Focal
Similarity
Hard
Conf
T: 1,4,8,16
W:1,5,25...
...

Recently, although KD has made significant progress in the hand- Figure 1: Illustration of search
crafted designs, there are still some limitations to its practical space in KD-Zero.
∗

Corresponding author, † Co-first authors, equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

