Neural Sculpting: Uncovering hierarchically modular
task structure in neural networks through pruning
and network analysis

1

Shreyas Malakarjun Patil1 Loizos Michael2,3 Constantine Dovrolis4,1
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA 2 Open University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus
3
CYENS Center of Excellence, Nicosia, Cyprus 4 The Cyprus Institute, Nicosia, Cyprus
sm_patil@gatech.edu, loizos@ouc.ac.cy, c.dovrolis@cyi.ac.cy

Abstract
Natural target functions and tasks typically exhibit hierarchical modularity – they
can be broken down into simpler sub-functions that are organized in a hierarchy.
Such sub-functions have two important features: they have a distinct set of inputs
(input-separability) and they are reused as inputs higher in the hierarchy (reusability). Previous studies have established that hierarchically modular neural networks,
which are inherently sparse, offer benefits such as learning efficiency, generalization, multi-task learning, and transfer. However, identifying the underlying
sub-functions and their hierarchical structure for a given task can be challenging.
The high-level question in this work is: if we learn a task using a sufficiently deep
neural network, how can we uncover the underlying hierarchy of sub-functions in
that task? As a starting point, we examine the domain of Boolean functions, where
it is easier to determine whether a task is hierarchically modular. We propose an
approach based on iterative unit and edge pruning (during training), combined
with network analysis for module detection and hierarchy inference. Finally, we
demonstrate that this method can uncover the hierarchical modularity of a wide
range of Boolean functions and two vision tasks based on the MNIST digits dataset.

1

Introduction

Modular tasks typically consist of smaller sub-functions that operate on distinct input modalities, such
as visual, auditory, or haptic inputs. Additionally, modular tasks are often hierarchical, with simpler
sub-functions embedded in, or reused by, more complex functions [1]. Consequently, hierarchical
modularity is a key organizing principle studied in both engineering and biological systems. In
neuroscience, the hierarchical modularity of the brain’s neural circuits is believed to play a crucial role
in its ability to process information efficiently and adaptively [2, 3, 4, 5]. Translating this hierarchical
modularity to artificial neural networks (NNs) can potentially lead to more efficient, adaptable and
interpretable learning systems. Prior works have already shown that modular NNs efficiently adapt
to new tasks [6, 7, 8] and display superior generalization over standard NNs [9, 10, 11]. However,
those studies assume knowledge of the task’s hierarchy, or hand-design, modular NNs at initialization.
Given an arbitrary task, however, we normally do not know its underlying sub-functions or their
hierarchical organization. The high-level question in this work is: If we learn a task using a sufficiently
deep NN, how can we uncover the underlying hierarchical organization of sub-functions in that task?
Recent studies through NN unit clustering have demonstrated that certain modular structures can
emerge during the training of NNs [12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. However, it is unclear whether the structures
extracted reflect the underlying hierarchy of sub-functions in a task. Csordas et al. [17] proposed a
method that identifies sub-networks in NNs that learn specific sub-functions. This method however,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

