Natural Language Instruction-following with
Task-related Language Development and Translation

Jing-Cheng Pang∗, Xinyu Yang∗, Si-Hang Yang, Xiong-Hui Chen, Yang Yu†
National Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Polixir Technology
{pangjc,yangxy,yangsh,chenxh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, yuy@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Natural language-conditioned reinforcement learning (RL) enables agents to follow human instructions. Previous approaches generally implemented languageconditioned RL by providing the policy with human instructions in natural language
(NL) and training the policy to follow instructions. In this is outside-in approach,
the policy must comprehend the NL and manage the task simultaneously. However, the unbounded NL examples often bring much extra complexity for solving
concrete RL tasks, which can distract policy learning from completing the task.
To ease the learning burden of the policy, we investigate an inside-out scheme
for natural language-conditioned RL by developing a task language (TL) that is
task-related and easily understood by the policy, thus reducing the policy learning
burden. Besides, we employ a translator to translate natural language into the
TL, which is used in RL to achieve efficient policy training. We implement this
scheme as TALAR (TAsk Language with predicAte Representation) that learns
multiple predicates to model object relationships as the TL. Experiments indicate
that TALAR not only better comprehends NL instructions but also leads to a better
instruction-following policy that significantly improves the success rate over baselines and adapts to unseen expressions of NL instruction. Besides, the TL is also
an effective sub-task abstraction compatible with hierarchical RL.

1

Introduction

Enabling robots to collaborate effectively with humans is a crucial aspect of machine intelligence.
Natural language is a potent tool that reflects human intention and has been widely researched
for instructing robot execution, designing rewards, and serving as an observation or action in
reinforcement learning (RL)[1]. We are particularly interested in developing agents to follow human
instructions in this broad context. Natural language-conditioned reinforcement learning (NLC-RL)
is a promising approach to training instruction-following agents. It provides the policy with human
instructions in natural language (NL) and trains it to follow instructions with RL algorithms. In this
outside-in learning (OIL) scheme, the natural language instructions are directly exposed to the policy,
requiring it to understand and interpret them while accomplishing RL tasks (Fig. 1-left).
However, natural language is a complex and unbounded representation of human instruction. It
places an additional burden on the policy to understand diverse natural languages when solving
a specific RL task. To address this issue, previous studies have attempted to convert the natural
language to simpler latent embeddings [2] using pre-trained language models such as BERT [3] and
GPT [4]. However, these embeddings are typically learned independently of the RL task, making
capturing the task-related information in NL instructions difficult. Alternatively, some methods
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

