IMP-MARL: a Suite of Environments for Large-scale
Infrastructure Management Planning via MARL

*Pascal Leroy1♯ , *Pablo G. Morato2♭ , Jonathan Pisane3 , Athanasios Kolios2 , Damien Ernst1,4
1
Montefiore Institute, University of Liège, 2 Technical University of Denmark, 3 Thales Belgium
4
LTCI, Telecom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
♯
pleroy@uliege.be, ♭ pgmdo@dtu.dk
*
Authors contributed equally

Abstract
We introduce IMP-MARL, an open-source suite of multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) environments for large-scale Infrastructure Management Planning (IMP), offering a platform for benchmarking the scalability of cooperative
MARL methods in real-world engineering applications. In IMP, a multi-component
engineering system is subject to a risk of failure due to its components’ damage condition. Specifically, each agent plans inspections and repairs for a specific system
component, aiming to minimise maintenance costs while cooperating to minimise
system failure risk. With IMP-MARL, we release several environments including
one related to offshore wind structural systems, in an effort to meet today’s needs to
improve management strategies to support sustainable and reliable energy systems.
Supported by IMP practical engineering environments featuring up to 100 agents,
we conduct a benchmark campaign, where the scalability and performance of
state-of-the-art cooperative MARL methods are compared against expert-based
heuristic policies. The results reveal that centralised training with decentralised
execution methods scale better with the number of agents than fully centralised
or decentralised RL approaches, while also outperforming expert-based heuristic
policies in most IMP environments. Based on our findings, we additionally outline remaining cooperation and scalability challenges that future MARL methods
should still address. Through IMP-MARL, we encourage the implementation of
new environments and the further development of MARL methods.

1

Introduction

Intelligent agents trained with reinforcement learning (RL) have proven successful in solving complex decision-making tasks, e.g., games [1–3], autonomous driving [4, 5], human healthcare [6],
nuclear fusion [7], among others. RL training approaches where multiple agents interact together are
commonly denoted as multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) methods. In certain applications,
these agents must cooperate to accomplish a common goal, leading to the special case of cooperative
MARL. To support the advancement of cooperative MARL methods, multiple environments based on
games and simulators have served as benchmark testbeds, e.g., the particle environment [8], StarCraft
Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) [9, 10], and MaMuJoCo [11]. Benchmarking on environments
based on games and simulators is useful for the development of MARL methods in specific collaborative/competitive tasks, but additional challenges may still be encountered when deploying MARL
methods in real-world applications [12].
Infrastructure Management Planning (IMP) is a contemporary application that responds to current
societal and environmental concerns. In IMP, inspections, repairs, and/or retrofits should be timely
planned in order to control the risk of potential system failures, e.g., bridge and wind turbine failures,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

