TMT-VIS: Taxonomy-aware Multi-dataset Joint
Training for Video Instance Segmentation

Rongkun Zheng1 Lu Qi2 Xi Chen1 Yi Wang3
Kun Wang4 Yu Qiao3 Hengshuang Zhao1∗
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 University of California, Merced
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 SenseTime Research
{zrk22@connect, hszhao@cs}.hku.hk

Abstract
Training on large-scale datasets can boost the performance of video instance
segmentation while the annotated datasets for VIS are hard to scale up due to the
high labor cost. What we possess are numerous isolated filed-specific datasets, thus,
it is appealing to jointly train models across the aggregation of datasets to enhance
data volume and diversity. However, due to the heterogeneity in category space, as
mask precision increases with the data volume, simply utilizing multiple datasets
will dilute the attention of models on different taxonomies. Thus, increasing the
data scale and enriching taxonomy space while improving classification precision
is important. In this work, we analyze that providing extra taxonomy information
can help models concentrate on specific taxonomy, and propose our model named
Taxonomy-aware Multi-dataset Joint Training for Video Instance Segmentation
(TMT-VIS) to address this vital challenge. Specifically, we design a two-stage
taxonomy aggregation module that first compiles taxonomy information from input
videos and then aggregates these taxonomy priors into instance queries before
the transformer decoder. We conduct extensive experimental evaluations on four
popular and challenging benchmarks, including YouTube-VIS 2019, YouTubeVIS 2021, OVIS, and UVO. Our model shows significant improvement over the
baseline solutions, and sets new state-of-the-art records on all benchmarks. These
appealing and encouraging results demonstrate the effectiveness and generality of
our approach. The code is available at https://github.com/rkzheng99/TMT-VIS.

1

Introduction

Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) is a fundamental while challenging visual perception task that
involves detecting, segmenting, and tracking object instances within videos based on a set of predefined object categories. The goal of VIS is to accurately separate the objects from the background and
assign consistent instance IDs across frames, making it a crucial task for various popular downstream
applications such as autonomous driving, robot navigation, video editing, etc.
Benefiting from favorable modeling of visual tokens rather than modeling pixels with CNNs, querybased transformer methods [7, 44, 16, 42, 19, 49] like Mask2Former-VIS [7], SeqFormer [44], and
VITA [16] begin to dominate the VIS task. The recent success of SAM [21] demonstrates significant improvements in segmentation and detection performance through data scaling. However,
mainstream VIS datasets are much smaller than widely used image detection datasets (e.g., approximately 3K videos in YouTube-VIS [47] vs. 120K images in COCO [27]), leaving the potential of
leveraging scaled video datasets for multi-frame video input modeling largely unexplored. Previous
researches [23, 10] have proved that transformer structures, when compared with CNNs, have the
advantage that they can better leverage the large volume of data, and this naturally raises a question:
can we alleviate this dilemma via training on large-scale datasets?
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

