Mechanism Design for Collaborative Normal Mean Estimation

Yiding Chen
UW-Madison
ychen695@wisc.edu

Xiaojin Zhu
UW-Madison
jerryzhu@cs.wisc.edu

Kirthevasan Kandasamy
UW-Madison
kandasamy@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study collaborative normal mean estimation, where m strategic agents collect
i.i.d samples from a normal distribution N (µ, σ 2 ) at a cost. They all wish to
estimate the mean µ. By sharing data with each other, agents can obtain better
estimates while keeping the cost of data collection small. To facilitate this collaboration, we wish to design mechanisms that encourage agents to collect a sufficient
amount of data and share it truthfully, so that they are all better off than working
alone. In naive mechanisms, such as simply pooling and sharing all the data, an individual agent might find it beneficial to under-collect and/or fabricate data, which
can lead to poor social outcomes. We design a novel mechanism that overcomes
these challenges via two key techniques: first, when sharing the others’ data with
an agent, the mechanism corrupts this dataset proportional to how much the data
reported by the agent differs from the others; second, we design minimax optimal
estimators for the corrupted dataset. Our mechanism, which is Nash incentive
compatible and individually rational, achieves a social penalty (sum of all agents’
estimation errors and data collection costs) that is at most a factor 2 of the global
minimum. When applied to high dimensional (non-Gaussian) distributions with
bounded variance, this mechanism retains these three properties, but with slightly
weaker results. Finally, in two special cases where we restrict the strategy space of
the agents, we design mechanisms that essentially achieve the global minimum.

1

Introduction

With the rise in popularity of machine learning, data is becoming an increasingly valuable resource
for businesses, scientific organizations, and government institutions. However, data collection is often
costly. For instance, to collect data, businesses may need to carry out market research, scientists
may need to conduct experiments, and government institutions may need to perform surveys on
public services. However, once data has been generated, it can be freely replicated and used by many
organizations [20]. Hence, instead of simply collecting and learning from their own data, by sharing
data with each other, organizations can mutually reduce their own data collection costs and improve
the utility they derive from data [21]. In fact, there are already several platforms to facilitate data
sharing among businesses [1, 40], scientific organizations [2, 3], and public institutions [16, 34].
However, simply pooling everyone’s data and sharing with each other can lead to free-riding [23, 35].
For instance, if an agent (e.g an organization) sees that other agents are already contributing a large
amount of data, then, the cost she incurs to collect her own dataset may not offset the marginal
improvement in her own learned model due to diminishing returns of increasing dataset sizes (we
describe this rigorously in §2). Hence, while she benefits from others’ data, she has no incentive to
collect and contribute data to the pool. A seemingly simple fix to this free-riding problem is to only
return the datasets of the others if an agent submits a large enough dataset herself. However, this
can be easily manipulated by a strategic agent who submits a large fabricated (fake) dataset without
incurring any cost, receives the others’ data, and then discards her fabricated dataset when learning.
While the agent has benefited by this bad behavior, other agents who may use this fabricated dataset
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

