Critical Initialization of Wide and Deep Neural
Networks using Partial Jacobians: General Theory
and Applications

Darshil Doshi∗†
ddoshi@umd.edu

Tianyu He∗†
tianyuh@umd.edu

Andrey Gromov ‡†
gromovand@meta.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks are notorious for defying theoretical treatment. However,
when the number of parameters in each layer tends to infinity, the network function
is a Gaussian process (GP) and quantitatively predictive description is possible.
Gaussian approximation allows one to formulate criteria for selecting hyperparameters, such as variances of weights and biases, as well as the learning rate. These
criteria rely on the notion of criticality defined for deep neural networks. In this
work we describe a new practical way to diagnose criticality. We introduce partial
Jacobians of a network, defined as derivatives of preactivations in layer l with
respect to preactivations in layer l0 ≤ l. We derive recurrence relations for the
norms of partial Jacobians and utilize these relations to analyze criticality of deep
fully connected neural networks with LayerNorm and/or residual connections. We
derive and implement a simple and cheap numerical test that allows one to select
optimal initialization for a broad class of deep neural networks; containing fully
connected, convolutional and normalization layers. Using these tools we show
quantitatively that proper stacking of the LayerNorm (applied to preactivations)
and residual connections leads to an architecture that is critical for any initialization.
Finally, we apply our methods to analyze ResNet and MLP-Mixer architectures;
demonstrating the everywhere-critical regime. 4

1

Introduction

When the number of parameters in each layer becomes large, the functional space description of
deep neural networks simplifies dramatically. The network function, f (x), in this limit, is a Gaussian
process [37, 30] with a kernel – sometimes referred to as neural network Gaussian process (NNGP)
kernel [30] – determined by the network architecture and hyperparameters (e.g depth, precise choices
of layers and the activation functions, as well as the distribution of weights and biases). A similar
line of reasoning was earlier developed for recurrent neural networks [36]. Furthermore, for special
choices of parameterization and MSE loss function, the training dynamics under gradient descent can
be solved exactly in terms of the neural tangent kernel (NTK) [27, 31]. A large body of work was
devoted to the calculation of the NNGP kernel and NTK for different architectures, calculation of the
finite width corrections to these quantities, and empirical investigation of the training dynamics of
wide networks [39, 54, 25, 14, 3, 33, 1, 18, 19, 45, 58, 47, 6, 5, 32, 63, 61, 60, 59, 35, 17, 2, 49, 34].
∗

Equal Contributions
Condensed Matter Theory Center & Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD
20740
‡
Meta AI, Menlo Park, CA 94025
4
Code to reproduce our results is available at https://github.com/ablghtianyi/PartialJac.git
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

