Dual Self-Awareness Value Decomposition Framework
without Individual Global Max for Cooperative MARL

Zhiwei Xu, Bin Zhang, Dapeng Li, Guangchong Zhou, Zeren Zhang, Guoliang Fan
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{xuzhiwei2019, guoliang.fan}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Value decomposition methods have gained popularity in the field of cooperative
multi-agent reinforcement learning. However, almost all existing methods follow
the principle of Individual Global Max (IGM) or its variants, which limits their
problem-solving capabilities. To address this, we propose a dual self-awareness
value decomposition framework, inspired by the notion of dual self-awareness in
psychology, that entirely rejects the IGM premise. Each agent consists of an ego
policy for action selection and an alter ego value function to solve the credit assignment problem. The value function factorization can ignore the IGM assumption by
utilizing an explicit search procedure. On the basis of the above, we also suggest
a novel anti-ego exploration mechanism to avoid the algorithm becoming stuck
in a local optimum. As the first fully IGM-free value decomposition method, our
proposed framework achieves desirable performance in various cooperative tasks.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has recently drawn increasing attention. MARL algorithms have been successfully applied in diverse fields, including game AI [1] and energy networks [37], to solve practical problems. The fully cooperative multi-agent task is the most common scenario, where all agents must cooperate to achieve the same goal. Several cooperative
MARL algorithms have been proposed, with impressive results on complex tasks. Some algorithms [7, 32, 17] enable agents to collaborate through communication. However, these approaches
incur additional bandwidth overhead. Most communication-free MARL algorithms follow the conventional paradigm of centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) [20]. These works
can be roughly categorized into multi-agent Actor-Critic algorithm [8, 16] and value decomposition method [34, 27, 19, 40, 39]. Due to the high sample efficiency in off-policy settings, value
decomposition methods can outperform other MARL algorithms.
However, due to the nature of the CTDE paradigm, the value decomposition method can only operate
under the assumption of Individual Global Max (IGM) [30]. The IGM principle links the optimal
joint action to the optimal individual one, allowing the agent to find the action corresponding to the
maximal Q value during decentralized execution. Nevertheless, this assumption is not applicable in
most real-world scenarios. And most value decomposition approaches [27] directly constrain the
weights of the neural network to be non-negative, which restricts the set of global state-action value
functions that can be represented. We confirm this point through experiments in Appendix D.1.
Removing the IGM assumption requires agents to be able to find actions corresponding to the maximal
joint Q value during execution. Therefore, in addition to the evaluation network, agents also need an
additional network to learn how to search for the best actions in a decentralized manner. Similarly,
there are concepts of ego and alter ego in psychology. The ego usually refers to the conscious part of
the individual, and Freud considered the ego to be the executive of the personality [9]. Some people
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

