Entropy-based Training Methods for Scalable Neural
Implicit Sampler

Weijian Luo ∗

Boya Zhang †

Zhihua Zhang ‡

Abstract
Efficiently sampling from un-normalized target distributions is a fundamental
problem in scientific computing and machine learning. Traditional approaches
such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) guarantee asymptotically unbiased
samples from such distributions but suffer from computational inefficiency, particularly when dealing with high-dimensional targets, as they require numerous
iterations to generate a batch of samples. In this paper, we introduce an efficient
and scalable neural implicit sampler that overcomes these limitations. The implicit sampler can generate large batches of samples with low computational costs
by leveraging a neural transformation that directly maps easily sampled latent vectors to target samples without the need for iterative procedures. To train the neural
implicit samplers, we introduce two novel methods: the KL training method and
the Fisher training method. The former method minimizes the Kullback-Leibler
divergence, while the latter minimizes the Fisher divergence between the sampler
and the target distributions. By employing the two training methods, we effectively optimize the neural implicit samplers to learn and generate from the desired
target distribution. To demonstrate the effectiveness, efficiency, and scalability of
our proposed samplers, we evaluate them on three sampling benchmarks with different scales. These benchmarks include sampling from 2D targets, Bayesian inference, and sampling from high-dimensional energy-based models (EBMs). Notably, in the experiment involving high-dimensional EBMs, our sampler produces
samples that are comparable to those generated by MCMC-based methods while
being more than 100 times more efficient, showcasing the efficiency of our neural
sampler. Besides the theoretical contributions and strong empirical performances,
the proposed neural samplers and corresponding training methods will shed light
on further research on developing efficient samplers for various applications beyond the ones explored in this study.

1

Introduction

Efficiently sampling from un-normalized distributions is a fundamental challenge that arises in various research domains, including Bayesian statistics [1], biology and physics simulations [2, 3],
as well as generative modeling and machine learning [4, 5]. The task at hand involves generating
batches of samples from a target distribution defined by a differentiable un-normalized potential
function, denoted as log q(x). This problem seeks effective techniques for obtaining samples that
accurately represent the underlying target distribution while minimizing computational costs.
Two main classes of methods exist for addressing this challenge. The first class comprises Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms [6–9]. MCMC methods involve the design of Markov
Chains with stationary distributions that match the target distribution. By simulating these Markov
∗

School of Mathematical Sciences; Peking University; luoweijian@stu.pku.edu.cn;
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies; Peking University; zhangboya@pku.edu.cn;
‡
School of Mathematical Sciences; Peking University; zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn;

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

