Minimax-Optimal Location Estimation

Shivam Gupta
The University of Texas at Austin
shivamgupta@utexas.edu

Jasper C.H. Lee
University of Wisconsin–Madison
jasper.lee@wisc.edu

Eric Price
The University of Texas at Austin
ecprice@cs.utexas.edu

Paul Valiant
Purdue University
pvaliant@gmail.com

Abstract
Location estimation is one of the most basic questions in parametric statistics.
Suppose we have a known distribution density f , and we get n i.i.d. samples from
f (x − µ) for some unknown shift µ. The task is to estimate µ to high accuracy
with high probability. The maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) is known to
be asymptotically optimal as n → ∞, but what is possible for finite n? In this
paper, we give two location estimators that are optimal under different criteria:
1) an estimator that has minimax-optimal estimation error subject to succeeding
with probability 1 − δ and 2) a confidence interval estimator which, subject to
its output interval containing µ with probability at least 1 − δ, has the minimum
expected squared interval width among all shift-invariant estimators. The latter
construction can be generalized to minimizing the expectation of any loss function
on the interval width.

1

Introduction

We revisit one of the most basic questions in parametric statistics: location estimation. Suppose there
is a shift-invariant parametric model {f (θ) }θ∈R , namely that f (θ) = f (x − θ) for some distribution
f , and we get n i.i.d. samples from f (µ) for some unknown parameter µ. The task is to estimate
µ as accurately as possible, succeeding with probability at least 1 − δ. This problem includes
Gaussian mean estimation as a special case. Compared to general mean estimation, where we know
nothing about the distribution beyond mild moment assumptions, here we are given the shape of the
distribution, and only the shift is unknown. This allows us to aim for better performance than in
mean estimation, and even handle cases where the mean of the distribution does not exist.
The problem has been widely studied as a special case of parametric estimation. In particular, the
classic asymptotic theory [Vaa00] recommends using the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE),
which, when we fix a distribution f = f (0) and take the number of samples n to ∞, satisfies µMLE −
µ → N (0, 1/(nI)) for any parameter µ. Here, the variance of the asymptotic Gaussian is 1/(nI),
· R
where I is the Fisher information of the distribution f , defined by I = R (f ′ (x))2 /f (x) dx. It
is a standard fact that 1/I ≤ σ 2 for any variance-σ 2 distribution, meaning that the asymptotic
performance of the MLE is always at least as good as the sample mean. Conversely, the well-known
Cramér-Rao theorem states that, for any shift-equivariant estimator µ̂, its variance must be at least
1/(nI) as well.
However, the classic asymptotic guarantee can be misleading, since the convergence to the asymptotic Gaussian may be arbitrarily slow in the number of samples, depending on the underlying distribution f . Indeed, recent work by Gupta et al. [GLPV22] showed that the issue is in fact information37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

