Neural Oscillators are Universal
Samuel Lanthaler
California Institute of Technology
slanth@caltech.edu

T. Konstantin Rusch
ETH Zurich

Siddhartha Mishra
ETH Zurich

Abstract
Coupled oscillators are being increasingly used as the basis of machine learning (ML) architectures, for instance in sequence modeling, graph representation
learning and in physical neural networks that are used in analog ML devices. We
introduce an abstract class of neural oscillators that encompasses these architectures and prove that neural oscillators are universal, i.e, they can approximate
any continuous and casual operator mapping between time-varying functions, to
desired accuracy. This universality result provides theoretical justification for the
use of oscillator based ML systems. The proof builds on a fundamental result of independent interest, which shows that a combination of forced harmonic oscillators
with a nonlinear read-out suffices to approximate the underlying operators.

1

Introduction

Oscillators are ubiquitous in the sciences and engineering [12, 30]. Prototypical examples include
pendulums in mechanics, feedback and relaxation oscillators in electronics, business cycles in
economics and heart beat and circadian rhythms in biology. Particularly relevant to our context is the
fact that the neurons in our brain can be thought of as oscillators on account of the periodic spiking
and firing of the action potential [29, 11]. Consequently, functional brain circuits such as cortical
columns are being increasingly analyzed in terms of networks of coupled oscillators [29].
Given this wide prevalence of (networks of) oscillators in nature and man-made devices, it is not
surprising that oscillators have inspired various machine learning architectures in recent years.
Prominent examples include the CoRNN [27] and UnICORNN [28] recurrent neural networks for
sequence modeling. CoRNN is based on a network of coupled, forced and damped oscillators,
whereas UnICORNN is a multi-layer sequence model that stacks networks of independent undamped
oscillators as hidden layers within an RNN. Both these architectures were rigorously shown to mitigate
the exploding and vanishing gradient problem [20] that plagues RNNs. Hence, both CoRNN and
UnICORNN performed very well on sequence learning tasks with long-term dependencies. Another
example of the use of oscillators in machine learning is provided by GraphCON [26], a framework
for designing graph neural networks (GNNs) [3], that is based on coupled oscillators. GraphCON was
also shown to ameliorate the oversmoothing problem [25] and allow for the deployment of multi-layer
deep GNNs. Other examples include Second Order Neural ODEs (SONODEs) [19], which can be
interpreted as oscillatory neural ODEs, locally coupled oscillatory recurrent networks (LocoRNN)
[17], and Oscillatory Fourier Neural Network (O-FNN) [13].
Another avenue where ML models based on oscillators arise is that of physical neural networks
(PNNs) [35] i.e., physical devices that perform machine learning on analog (beyond digital) systems.
Such analog systems have been proposed as alternatives or accelerators to the current paradigm of
machine learning on conventional electronics, allowing us to significantly reduce the prohibitive
energy costs of training state-of-the-art ML models. In [35], the authors propose a variety of
physical neural networks which include a mechanical network of multi-mode oscillations on a
plate and electronic circuits of oscillators as well as a network of nonlinear oscillators. Coupled
with a novel physics aware training (PAT) algorithm, the authors of [35] demonstrated that their
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

