Counterfactual Conservative Q Learning for Offline
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning

Jianzhun Shao∗, Yun Qu∗, Chen Chen, Hongchang Zhang, Xiangyang Ji
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{sjz18, qy22, hc-zhang19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
cclvr@163.com
xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Offline multi-agent reinforcement learning is challenging due to the coupling effect
of both distribution shift issue common in offline setting and the high dimension
issue common in multi-agent setting, making the action out-of-distribution (OOD)
and value overestimation phenomenon excessively severe. To mitigate this problem, we propose a novel multi-agent offline RL algorithm, named CounterFactual
Conservative Q-Learning (CFCQL) to conduct conservative value estimation.
Rather than regarding all the agents as a high dimensional single one and directly
applying single agent methods to it, CFCQL calculates conservative regularization
for each agent separately in a counterfactual way and then linearly combines them
to realize an overall conservative value estimation. We prove that it still enjoys
the underestimation property and the performance guarantee as those single agent
conservative methods do, but the induced regularization and safe policy improvement bound are independent of the agent number, which is therefore theoretically
superior to the direct treatment referred to above, especially when the agent number
is large. We further conduct experiments on four environments including both
discrete and continuous action settings on both existing and our man-made datasets,
demonstrating that CFCQL outperforms existing methods on most datasets and
even with a remarkable margin on some of them.

1

Introduction

Online Reinforcement Learning (Online RL) needs frequently deploying untested policies to environment for data collection and policy optimization, making it dangerous and inefficient to apply in the
real-world scenarios (e.g. autonomous vehicle teams). While, Offline Reinforcement Learning (Offline RL) aims to learn policies from a fixed dataset rather than from interacting with the environment,
and therefore is suitable for the real applications with highly safety requirements or without efficient
simulators [25].
Directly applying off-policy RL to the offline setting may fail due to overestimation [13, 24]. Existing
works usually tackle this problem by pessimism. They either utilize behavior regularization to
constrain the learning policy close to the behavior policy induced by the dataset [49, 20, 11], or
conduct conservative(pessimistic) value iteration to mitigate unexpected overestimation [18, 21]. It
has been demonstrated both theoretically and empirically that these methods can achieve comparable
performance to their online counterparts under some conditions [21].
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

