Reward-agnostic Fine-tuning: Provable
Statistical Benefits of Hybrid Reinforcement Learning

Gen Li∗
CUHK

Wenhao Zhan∗
Princeton

Jason D. Lee
Princeton

Yuejie Chi
CMU

Yuxin Chen†
UPenn

Abstract
This paper studies tabular reinforcement learning (RL) in the hybrid setting, which
assumes access to both an offline dataset and online interactions with the unknown
environment. A central question boils down to how to efficiently utilize online
data to strengthen and complement the offline dataset and enable effective policy
fine-tuning. Leveraging recent advances in reward-agnostic exploration and offline RL, we design a three-stage hybrid RL algorithm that beats the best of both
worlds — pure offline RL and pure online RL — in terms of sample complexities.
The proposed algorithm does not require any reward information during data collection. Our theory is developed based on a new notion called single-policy partial
concentrability, which captures the trade-off between distribution mismatch and
miscoverage and guides the interplay between offline and online data.

1

Introduction

As reinforcement learning (RL) shows promise in achieving super-human empirical success across
diverse fields (e.g., games (Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2019; Berner et al., 2019; Mnih et al.,
2013), robotics (Brambilla et al., 2013), autonomous driving (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016)), theoretical understanding about RL has also been substantially expanded, with the aim of distilling
fundamental principles that can inform and guide practice. Among all sorts of theoretical questions
being pursued, how to make the best use of data emerges as a question of profound interest for
problems with enormous dimensionality.
There are at least two mainstream mechanisms when it comes to data collection: online RL and
offline RL. Let us briefly describe their attributes and differences as follows.
Online RL. In this setting, an agent learns how to maximize her cumulative reward through interaction with the unknown environment (by, say, executing a sequence of adaptively chosen actions and
utilizing the instantaneous feedback of the environment). Given that all information about the environment is obtained through real-time data collection, the main challenge lies in how to (optimally)
manage the trade-off between exploration and exploitation. Towards this, one popular approach
advertises the principle of optimism in the face of uncertainty — e.g., employing upper confidence
bounds during value estimation to guide exploration — whose effectiveness has been shown for both
the tabular case (Auer and Ortner, 2006; Jaksch et al., 2010; Azar et al., 2017; Dann et al., 2017; Jin
et al., 2018; Bai et al., 2019; Dong et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020b; Ménard et al., 2021b; Li et al.,
2021b) and the case with function approximation (Jin et al., 2020b; Zanette et al., 2020; Zhou et al.,
2021a; Li et al., 2021a; Du et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2021a; Foster et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022b).
Offline RL. In contrast, offline RL assumes access to a pre-collected dataset, without given permission to perform any further data collection. The feasibility of reliable offline RL depends heavily
∗
†

The first two authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

