A Multi-modal Global Instance Tracking Benchmark
(MGIT): Better Locating Target in Complex
Spatio-temporal and Causal Relationship

Shiyu Hu1,2 Dailing Zhang1,2 Meiqi Wu3 Xiaokun Feng1,2
Xuchen Li4 Xin Zhao1,2 Kaiqi Huang1,2,5
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
5
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{hushiyu2019, zhangdailing2023, fengxiaokun2022}@ia.ac.cn, wumeiqi18@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
xuchenli@bupt.edu.cn, {xzhao,kqhuang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Tracking an arbitrary moving target in a video sequence is the foundation for
high-level tasks like video understanding. Although existing visual-based trackers
have demonstrated good tracking capabilities in short video sequences, they always
perform poorly in complex environments, as represented by the recently proposed
global instance tracking task, which consists of longer videos with more complicated narrative content. Recently, several works have introduced natural language
into object tracking, desiring to address the limitations of relying only on a single
visual modality. However, these selected videos are still short sequences with
uncomplicated spatio-temporal and causal relationships, and the provided semantic
descriptions are too simple to characterize video content. To address these issues,
we (1) first propose a new multi-modal global instance tracking benchmark named
MGIT. It consists of 150 long video sequences with a total of 2.03 million frames,
aiming to fully represent the complex spatio-temporal and causal relationships
coupled in longer narrative content. (2) Each video sequence is annotated with
three semantic grains (i.e., action, activity, and story) to model the progressive
process of human cognition. We expect this multi-granular annotation strategy
can provide a favorable environment for multi-modal object tracking research and
long video understanding. (3) Besides, we execute comparative experiments on
existing multi-modal object tracking benchmarks, which not only explore the impact of different annotation methods, but also validate that our annotation method
is a feasible solution for coupling human understanding into semantic labels. (4)
Additionally, we conduct detailed experimental analyses on MGIT, and hope the explored performance bottlenecks of existing algorithms can support further research
in multi-modal object tracking. The proposed benchmark, experimental results,
and toolkit will be released gradually on http://videocube.aitestunion.com/.

1

Introduction

Single object tracking (SOT) is an important computer vision task that aims to locate an arbitrary
moving target in a video sequence, and can be regarded as the foundation for high-level tasks
like video understanding. In the past decade, researchers have proposed numerous high-quality
benchmarks [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] for the visual-based SOT task, and a series of trackers [10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

