Convolutional Visual Prompt
for Robust Visual Perception

Yun-Yun Tsai∗
Columbia University
yunyuntsai@cs.columbia.edu

Chengzhi Mao∗
Columbia University
mcz@cs.columbia.edu

Junfeng Yang
Columbia University
junfeng@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Vision models are often vulnerable to out-of-distribution (OOD) samples, which
often need adaptation to fix them. While visual prompts offer a lightweight
method of input-space adaptation for large-scale vision models, they rely on a
high-dimensional additive vector and labeled data. This leads to overfitting when
adapting models in a self-supervised test-time setting without labels. We introduce
convolutional visual prompts (CVP) for label-free test-time adaptation for robust
visual perception. The structured nature of CVP demands fewer trainable parameters, less than 1% compared to standard visual prompts, combating overfitting.
Extensive experiments and analysis on a wide variety of OOD visual perception
tasks show that our approach is effective, improving robustness by up to 5.87%
over several large-scale models.

1

Introduction

Deep models surpass humans when tested on in-distribution data, yet their performance plummets
when encountering unforeseen out-of-distribution (OOD) data at test time, such as unexpected
corruptions and shiftings [20, 22, 21, 18, 44]. This vulnerability raises serious risks when these models
are deployed, especially in safety-critical applications and high-stakes tasks [49]. Prior works have
studied how to improve generalization to OOD data at training time [54, 38, 56, 12, 36, 35, 39, 31],
yet little work has been done to adapt the model to OOD at test time, and most of them require to
modify model weights [59, 71, 55, 33].
Visual prompting emerges as an efficient and lightweight method to adapt the model at test time
without modifying the model [11, 60, 1] (previously also called adversarial reprogramming). In
contrast to finetuning the whole model weights, prompting can modify the original task of the model
by providing context in the input space. It requires fewer OOD samples and simplifies model version
management for practical applications. However, the OOD samples must be labeled, preventing these
methods from combating unforeseen distribution shifts.
Recent work [40] defends against unseen attacks at test time by repairing the adversarial inputs
with "reversal vectors" – high-dimensional prompt vectors directly added to inputs. It generates
the prompts by minimizing a self-supervised loss, requiring no prior labeled OOD samples. Unlike
adversarial attacks that damage arbitrary pixels by arbitrary amounts (within a given bound), however,
structured changes known as visual distribution shifts are not effectively addressed by unstructured
high dimensional vector prompts. Given that a self-supervised objective often has a shortcut and trivial
solutions [13], we empirically find prompts without the right structures often improve performance
minimally. (Sec. 5.2).
This paper presents Convolutional Visual Prompt (CVP), which uses the convolutional structure
as an inductive bias for adapting to visual OOD samples at test time. Prior work has demonstrated
*

equal contributions

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

