Uncovering and Quantifying Social Biases
in Code Generation
Yan Liu♣♦ Xiaokang Chen♥B Yan Gao♣ Zhe Su♣ Fengji Zhang♣ Daoguang Zan♣
Jian-Guang LOU♣ Pin-Yu Chen▶ Tsung-Yi Ho♦B
♣
Microsoft Research ♥ Peking University
♦
The Chinese University of Hong Kong ▶ IBM Research
{runningmelles, ho.tsungyi, fenj.zhang}@gmail.com,
pkucxk@pku.edu.cn, zhesu@andrew@cmu.edu,
daoguang@iscas.ac.cn, pin-yu.chen@ibm.com,
{yan.gao, jlou}@microsoft.com

Abstract
With the popularity of automatic code generation tools, such as Copilot, the study
of the potential hazards of these tools is gaining importance. In this work, we
explore the social bias problem in pre-trained code generation models. We propose
a new paradigm to construct code prompts and successfully uncover social biases in
code generation models. To quantify the severity of social biases in generated code,
we develop a dataset along with three metrics to evaluate the overall social bias
and fine-grained unfairness across different demographics. Experimental results
on three pre-trained code generation models (Codex, InCoder, and CodeGen) with
varying sizes, reveal severe social biases. Moreover, we conduct analysis to provide
useful insights for further choice of code generation models with low social bias1 .

1

Introduction

AI models have demonstrated their power once again, especially with the tremendous popularity
of ChatGPT and Codex [5] released by OpenAI recently. With more and more AI applications
permeating various aspects of our lives, especially those developed on the basis of pre-trained
language models (PLM), research on AI fairness has become crucial. Many works [2, 45] reveal that
pre-trained language models contain harmful social biases towards different demographics.
Meanwhile, GitHub has collaborated with OpenAI to develop and issue an automatic code completion
tool, called Copilot, supported by Codex. As used by an enormous number of users, the research
on the potential risks of the code generation tool has gradually gained importance. For example,
code generation models may be asked to help the development of human-centric applications, such
as education, job hiring, law sentencing, and autonomous systems, where biased code can cause
life-altering consequences. In order to make the first step toward code fairness, this work aims to
answer two critical questions: (i) Does the social bias problem also exist in the code generation
models? (ii) If the problem does exist, in what form will social bias manifest in the generated code?
Different from previous research on AI fairness that focuses on human-relevant scenarios [34, 44],
we find that the commonly used training datasets for the code generation task are highly humanirrelevant. For example, the HumanEval benchmark [5], is a set of programming problems. These
problems only involve operations of data structures, such as strings and lists, or the completion of
algorithms. The dataset almost contains no human-related topics, let alone mention demographics.
B Corresponding author.
This work contains examples that potentially implicate stereotypes, associations, and other harms that could
be offensive to individuals in certain social groups.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

