Convolutional Monge Mapping Normalization
for learning on sleep data

Theo Gnassounou
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA
Palaiseau 91120, France
theo.gnassounou@inria.fr

Rémi Flamary
IP Paris, CMAP, UMR 7641
Palaiseau 91120, France
remi.flamary@polytechnique.edu

Alexandre Gramfort∗
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA
Palaiseau 91120, France
alexandre.gramfort@inria.fr

Abstract
In many machine learning applications on signals and biomedical data, especially
electroencephalogram (EEG), one major challenge is the variability of the data
across subjects, sessions, and hardware devices. In this work, we propose a
new method called Convolutional Monge Mapping Normalization (CMMN), which
consists in filtering the signals in order to adapt their power spectrum density
(PSD) to a Wasserstein barycenter estimated on training data. CMMN relies on
novel closed-form solutions for optimal transport mappings and barycenters and
provides individual test time adaptation to new data without needing to retrain
a prediction model. Numerical experiments on sleep EEG data show that CMMN
leads to significant and consistent performance gains independent from the neural
network architecture when adapting between subjects, sessions, and even datasets
collected with different hardware. Notably our performance gain is on par with
much more numerically intensive Domain Adaptation (DA) methods and can be
used in conjunction with those for even better performances.

1

Introduction

Data shift in biological signals Biological signals, such as electroencephalograms (EEG), often
exhibit a significant degree of variability. This variability arises from various factors, including
the recording setup (hardware specifications, number of electrodes), individual human subjects
(variations in anatomies and brain activities), and the recording session itself (electrode impedance,
positioning). In this paper, we focus on the problem of sleep staging which consists of measuring
the activities of the brain and body during a session (here one session is done over a night of sleep)
with electroencephalograms (EEG), electrooculograms (EOG), and electromyograms (EMG) [1] to
classify the sleep stages. Depending on the dataset, the populations studied may vary from healthy
cohorts to cohorts suffering from disease [2, 3, 4]. Different electrodes positioned in the front/back
[3] or the side of the head [4] can be employed. Sleep staging is a perfect problem for studying the
need to adapt to this variability that is also commonly denoted as data shift between domains (that
can be datasets, subjects, or even sessions).
Normalization for data shift A traditional approach in machine learning to address data shifts
between domains is to apply data normalization. Different approaches exist in the literature to
∗

A. Gramfort joined Meta and can be reached at agramfort@meta.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

