TextDiffuser: Diffusion Models as Text Painters
Jingye Chen∗13 , Yupan Huang∗23 , Tengchao Lv3 , Lei Cui3 , Qifeng Chen1 , Furu Wei3
1
HKUST 2 Sun Yat-sen University 3 Microsoft Research
qwerty.chen@connect.ust.hk, huangyp28@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, cqf@ust.hk
{tengchaolv,lecu,fuwei}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Diffusion models have gained increasing attention for their impressive generation
abilities but currently struggle with rendering accurate and coherent text. To address
this issue, we introduce TextDiffuser, focusing on generating images with visually
appealing text that is coherent with backgrounds. TextDiffuser consists of two
stages: first, a Transformer model generates the layout of keywords extracted
from text prompts, and then diffusion models generate images conditioned on
the text prompt and the generated layout. Additionally, we contribute the first
large-scale text images dataset with OCR annotations, MARIO-10M, containing
10 million image-text pairs with text recognition, detection, and character-level
segmentation annotations. We further collect the MARIO-Eval benchmark to serve
as a comprehensive tool for evaluating text rendering quality. Through experiments
and user studies, we show that TextDiffuser is flexible and controllable to create
high-quality text images using text prompts alone or together with text template
images, and conduct text inpainting to reconstruct incomplete images with text. The
code, model, and dataset will be available at https://aka.ms/textdiffuser.
(a) Text-to-Image

(b) Text-to-Image with Template

A cat holds a
paper saying
"Hello World"

layout
generation

A dog ...

An astronaut ...

company

bookmark

cake

pizza

dress

newspaper

image
generation

A dinosaur ...

template

mask

(c) Text Inpainting

a boy draws good morning on a board

a supermarket called diffusion

Figure 1: TextDiffuser generates accurate and coherent text images from text prompts or together
with template images, as well as conducting text inpainting to reconstruct incomplete images.
∗

Equal contribution during internship at Microsoft Research.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

