Versatile Energy-Based Probabilistic Models for High
Energy Physics

Taoli Cheng
Mila
University of Montreal
chengtaoli.1990@gmail.com

Aaron Courville
Mila
University of Montreal
aaron.courville@umontreal.ca

Abstract
As a classical generative modeling approach, energy-based models have the natural
advantage of flexibility in the form of the energy function. Recently, energy-based
models have achieved great success in modeling high-dimensional data in computer
vision and natural language processing. In line with these advancements, we build a
multi-purpose energy-based probabilistic model for High Energy Physics events at
the Large Hadron Collider. This framework builds on a powerful generative model
and describes higher-order inter-particle interactions. It suits different encoding
architectures and builds on implicit generation. As for applicative aspects, it can
serve as a powerful parameterized event generator for physics simulation, a generic
anomalous signal detector free from spurious correlations, and an augmented event
classifier for particle identification.

1

Introduction

The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) [1], the most energetic particle collider in human history, collides
highly energetic protons to examine the underlying physics of subatomic particles and extend our
current understanding of the fundamental forces of nature, summarized by the Standard Model of
particle physics. After the great success in observing the Higgs boson [2, 28], the most critical task of
searching for new physics signals remains challenging. High Energy Physics (HEP) events produced
at the LHC have the properties of high dimensionality, high complexity, and enormous data size. To
detect rare signals from enormous background events, physics observables describing these patterns
have been used to identify different types of radiation patterns. However, it’s not possible to utilize
all the information recorded by the detectors with a few expert-designed features. Thus deep neural
classifiers and generative models, which can easily process high-dimensional data meet the needs for
more precise data analysis and signal detection.
Energy-based Models (EBMs) [38, 3, 46], as a classical generative framework, leverage the energy
function for learning dependencies between input variables. With an energy function E(x) and
constructing the un-normalized probabilities through the exponential p̃(x) = exp(−E(x)), the
energy model naturally yields a probability distribution. Despite the flexibility in the modeling, the
training of EBMs has been cumbersome and unstable due to the intractable partition function and
the corresponding Monte Carlo sampling involved. More recently, EBMs have been succeeding in
high-dimensional modeling [55, 56, 25, 23, 62, 19, 51] for computer vision and natural language
processing. At the same time, it has been revealed that neural classifiers are naturally connected with
EBMs [67, 33, 32], combining the discriminative and generative learning processes in a common
learning regime. More interestingly, compositionality [30] can be easily incorporated within the
framework of EBMs by simply summing up the energy functions [21, 22]. On the other hand,
statistical physics originally inspired the invention of EBMs. This natural connection in formalism
makes EBMs appealing in modeling physical systems. In physical sciences, EBMs have been used to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

