CLeAR: Continual Learning on Algorithmic
Reasoning for Human-like Intelligence

Bong Gyun Kang1∗

HyunGi Kim2

Dahuin Jung2

Sungroh Yoon1,2†

1
2

Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) aims to incrementally learn multiple tasks that are presented sequentially. The significance of CL lies not only in the practical importance
but also in studying the learning mechanisms of humans who are excellent continual learners. While most research on CL has been done on structured data such
as images, there is a lack of research on CL for abstract logical concepts such
as counting, sorting, and arithmetic, which humans learn gradually over time in
the real world. In this work, for the first time, we introduce novel algorithmic
reasoning (AR) methodology for continual tasks of abstract concepts: CLeAR. Our
methodology proposes a one-to-many mapping of input distribution to a shared
mapping space, which allows the alignment of various tasks of different dimensions
and shared semantics. Our tasks of abstract logical concepts, in the form of formal
language, can be classified into Chomsky hierarchies based on their difficulty. In
this study, we conducted extensive experiments consisting of 15 tasks with various
levels of Chomsky hierarchy, ranging from in-hierarchy to inter-hierarchy scenarios.
CLeAR not only achieved near zero forgetting but also improved accuracy during
following tasks, a phenomenon known as backward transfer, while previous CL
methods designed for image classification drastically failed.

1

Introduction

From an early age, humans develop their ability to solve complex logical reasoning problems through
lifelong learning. They gradually learn sequential cognitive skills, from basic counting methods to
more advanced concepts such as addition, subtraction, and logical operations [2]. Although this
sequential learning ability is inherent in humans, deep learning models experience catastrophic
forgetting [30], where their performance on previous tasks rapidly declines, after learning a new task.
Continual learning (CL) [6, 19] is essential not only for practical purposes but also for developing
human-like artificial intelligence that can maintain its performance on previous tasks after learning
new tasks. However, existing CL research has been limited to learning streams of structured data
with fixed input formats, such as images, where each task involves the same classification task only
with different image classes [47, 1, 48]. Current approaches fail to reflect the learning of abstract
logical concepts that humans continuously acquire in the real world.
There are three major challenges in naively leveraging existing CL methodologies to continual
algorithmic reasoning (AR) tasks. Firstly, in AR tasks, input data contain little information, and the
input data and task are decorrelated (Fig. 1b). In traditional image CL, the inherent information in the
image itself enables the model to estimate which task the image belongs to [18]. However, in CL for
abstract concepts, the input data may be completely decorrelated from the task that the model needs
∗
†

luckypanda@snu.ac.kr • The code is available at https://github.com/Pusheen-cat/CLeAR_2023
Corresponding author (sryoon@snu.ac.kr)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

