Prioritizing Samples in Reinforcement Learning with
Reducible Loss
Shivakanth Sujit
Mila, Quebec AI Institute, ÉTS Montréal
shivakanth.sujit@gmail.com

Somjit Nath
Mila, Quebec AI Institute, ÉTS Montréal
somjitnath@gmail.com

Pedro H.M. Braga
Mila, Quebec AI Institute, ÉTS Montréal, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco
pedromagalhaes.hb@gmail.com
Samira Ebrahimi Kahou
Mila, Quebec AI Institute, ÉTS Montréal, CIFAR AI Chair
samira.ebrahimi.kahou@gmail.com

Abstract
Most reinforcement learning algorithms take advantage of an experience replay
buffer to repeatedly train on samples the agent has observed in the past. Not
all samples carry the same amount of significance and simply assigning equal
importance to each of the samples is a naive strategy. In this paper, we propose
a method to prioritize samples based on how much we can learn from a sample.
We define the learn-ability of a sample as the steady decrease of the training
loss associated with this sample over time. We develop an algorithm to prioritize
samples with high learn-ability, while assigning lower priority to those that are
hard-to-learn, typically caused by noise or stochasticity. We empirically show
that across multiple domains our method is more robust than random sampling
and also better than just prioritizing with respect to the training loss, i.e. the
temporal difference loss, which is used in prioritized experience replay. The code
to reproduce our experiments can be found here.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has shown great promise in recent years, particularly with its ability
to solve difficult games such as Go [Silver et al., 2016], chess [Silver et al., 2018], and Atari [Mnih
et al., 2015]. However, online Reinforcement Learning (RL) suffers from sample inefficiency because
updates to network parameters take place at every time-step with the data being discarded immediately.
One of the landmarks in the space of online RL learning has been Deep Q Networks (DQN) [Mnih
et al., 2015], where the agent learns to achieve human-level performance in Atari 2600 games. A
key feature of that algorithm was the use of batched data for online learning. Observed transitions
are stored in a buffer called the experience replay [Lin, 2004], from which one randomly samples
batches of transitions for updating the RL agent.
Instead of randomly sampling from the experience replay, we propose to sample based on the learnability of the samples. We consider a sample to be learnable if there is a potential for reducing the
agent’s loss with respect to that sample. We term the amount by which we can reduce the loss of a
sample to be its reducible loss (ReLo). This is different from vanilla prioritization in Schaul et al.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

