PaintSeg: Training-free Segmentation via Painting

Xiang Li1 , Chung-Ching Lin2 , Yinpeng Chen2 , Zicheng Liu2 ,
Jinglu Wang2 , Rita Singh1 , Bhiksha Raj1,3
1
CMU, 2 Microsoft, 3 MBZUAI
xl6@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
The paper introduces PaintSeg, a new unsupervised method for segmenting objects without any training. We propose an adversarial masked contrastive painting (AMCP) process, which creates a contrast between the original image and a
painted image in which a masked area is painted using off-the-shelf generative
models. During the painting process, inpainting and outpainting are alternated,
with the former masking the foreground and filling in the background, and the
latter masking the background while recovering the missing part of the foreground
object. Inpainting and outpainting, also referred to as I-step and O-step, allow
our method to gradually advance the target segmentation mask toward the ground
truth without supervision or training. PaintSeg can be configured to work with
a variety of prompts, e.g. coarse masks, boxes, scribbles, and points. Our experimental results demonstrate that PaintSeg outperforms existing approaches
in coarse mask-prompt, box-prompt, and point-prompt segmentation tasks, providing a training-free solution suitable for unsupervised segmentation. Code:
https://github.com/lxa9867/PaintSeg.

1

Introduction

With deep learning advancements, significant progress has been made in the field of image generation
and segmentation in recent years. A particular generative model, the denoising diffusion probabilistic
model (DDPM), has demonstrated outstanding performance in a variety of generative tasks, such as
image inpainting [49, 16, 34] and text-to-image synthesis [21, 20, 79]. Similar developments have
occurred in the field of object segmentation, such as the strong zero-shot capability and excellent
segmentation quality demonstrated by SAM [30].
Image generation and segmentation can be mutually beneficial. Segmentation has been shown to be a
critical technique in improving the realism and stability of generative models by providing pixel-level
guidance during the synthesis process [75, 29]. Interesting to note is the fact that the relationship
between segmentation and generative models does not appear to be solely one-sided. Generative
models learning to “paint" objects actually know where the painted object is. The emergence of
unsupervised image segmentation methods utilizing generative adversarial networks (GANs) has
produced a line of methods that can segment objects in images [4, 10, 5] using generative models.
These methods work on the assumption that object appearance and location can be perturbed without
compromising scene realism. By using the GAN architecture to discriminate between perturbed and
real images, these methods can achieve effective object segmentation. Moreover, a follow-up work
[61] develops an approach to leverage pre-trained GAN by identifying “segmenting" direction in the
latent space to discriminate object shapes.
In this paper, we present PaintSeg, an approach for unsupervised image segmentation that leverages
off-the-shelf generative models. Unlike previous methods [61, 4] that require training on top of
these models, PaintSeg introduces a novel, training-free segmentation approach that relies on an
adversarial masked contrastive painting (AMCP) process. The AMCP process creates a contrast
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

