SaVeNet: A Scalable Vector Network for Enhanced
Molecular Representation Learning

Sarp Aykent
Auburn University
sarp@auburn.edu

Tian Xia
Auburn University
tian@auburn.edu

Abstract
Geometric representation learning of molecules is challenging yet essential for
applications in multiple domains. Despite the impressive breakthroughs made
by geometric deep learning in various molecular representation learning tasks,
effectively capturing complicated geometric features across spatial dimensions is
still underexplored due to the significant difficulties in modeling efficient geometric
representations and learning the inherent correlation in 3D structural modeling.
These include computational inefficiency, underutilization of vectorial embeddings,
and limited generalizability to integrate various geometric properties. To address
the raised concerns, we introduce an efficient and effective framework, Scalable
Vector Network (S AV E N ET), designed to accommodate a range of geometric
requirements without depending on costly embeddings. In addition, the proposed
framework scales effectively with introduced direction noise. Theoretically, we
analyze the desired properties (i.e., invariance and equivariant) and framework
efficiency of the S AV E N ET. Empirically, we conduct a comprehensive series of
experiments to evaluate the efficiency and expressiveness of the proposed model,
which achieves state-of-the-art performance across various tasks within molecular
representation learning.

1

Introduction

The field of geometric deep learning (GDL) has seen a rapid expansion in recent years, thanks to the
successful application of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for modeling graph structures [4]. The
ability to learn complex geometric representations has driven significant breakthroughs across various
disciplines and has proven to be particularly beneficial in diverse areas such as social science [24],
physics [14], and neuroscience [6]. Within the realm of molecular representation learning, the use of
message-passing-based GNNs has demonstrated remarkable outcomes, especially in understanding
the 3D structures of molecules.
Although geometric deep learning has recently seen promising results in various applications in
molecular representation learning, its full potential in the field is still untapped. To begin with, a
notable research gap persists within this field: the trade-off between expressiveness and efficiency
in GNNs. Many studies often resort to the use of multi-hop neighbors [9, 17, 21] or complex
embeddings [19] in their pursuit to augment the expressiveness of message-passing based GNNs
[9, 29, 33]. While these approaches can enhance the expressiveness and predictive power of the
model, they invariably compromise scalability and efficiency due to their computationally intensive
nature. As these networks grow more expressive, they demand more computational resources,
impeding their ability to scale to larger or more complex datasets. Addressing the challenge of
efficiently handling molecular structures to sufficiently capture the complete, multi-level structural
information during learning without compromising the computational efficiency of the network is of
critical importance. Our approach circumvents these issues by avoiding using multi-hop GNNs and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

