Aligning Synthetic Medical Images with
Clinical Knowledge using Human Feedback

Shenghuan Sun ∗
University of California, San Francisco
shenghuan.sun@ucsf.edu

Gregory M. Goldgof ∗
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
goldgofg@mskcc.org

Atul Butte
University of California, San Francisco
atul.butte@ucsf.edu

Ahmed M. Alaa
UC Berkeley and UCSF
amalaa@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Generative models capable of capturing nuanced clinical features in medical images hold great promise for facilitating clinical data sharing, enhancing rare disease
datasets, and efficiently synthesizing annotated medical images at scale. Despite
their potential, assessing the quality of synthetic medical images remains a challenge. While modern generative models can synthesize visually-realistic medical
images, the clinical validity of these images may be called into question. Domainagnostic scores, such as FID score, precision, and recall, cannot incorporate clinical
knowledge and are, therefore, not suitable for assessing clinical sensibility. Additionally, there are numerous unpredictable ways in which generative models may
fail to synthesize clinically plausible images, making it challenging to anticipate
potential failures and manually design scores for their detection. To address these
challenges, this paper introduces a pathologist-in-the-loop framework for generating clinically-plausible synthetic medical images. Starting with a diffusion model
pretrained using real images, our framework comprises three steps: (1) evaluating
the generated images by expert pathologists to assess whether they satisfy clinical
desiderata, (2) training a reward model that predicts the pathologist feedback on
new samples, and (3) incorporating expert knowledge into the diffusion model
by using the reward model to inform a finetuning objective. We show that human feedback significantly improves the quality of synthetic images in terms of
fidelity, diversity, utility in downstream applications, and plausibility as evaluated
by experts. We also show that human feedback can teach the model new clinical
concepts not annotated in the original training data. Our results demonstrate the
value of incorporating human feedback in clinical applications where generative
models may struggle to capture extensive domain knowledge from raw data alone.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have recently shown incredible success in the conditional generation of highfideltiy natural, stylized and artistic images [1–6]. The generative capabilities of these models can
be leveraged to create synthetic data in application domains where obtaining large-scale annotated
datasets is challenging. The medical imaging field is one such domain, where there is often a difficulty
in obtaining high-quality labeled datasets [7]. This difficulty may stem from the regulatory hurdles
that impede data sharing [8], the costs involved in getting experts to manually annotate images [9], or
the natural scarcity of data in rare diseases [10]. Generative (diffusion) models may provide a partial
solution to these problems by synthesizing high-fidelity medical images that can be easily shared
among researchers to replace or augment real data in downstream modeling applications [11, 12].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

