StyleTTS 2: Towards Human-Level Text-to-Speech
through Style Diffusion and Adversarial Training with
Large Speech Language Models

Yinghao Aaron Li Cong Han Vinay S. Raghavan
Gavin Mischler Nima Mesgarani
Columbia University
{yl4579,ch3212,vsr2119,gm2944,nm2764}@columbia.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we present StyleTTS 2, a text-to-speech (TTS) model that leverages
style diffusion and adversarial training with large speech language models (SLMs)
to achieve human-level TTS synthesis. StyleTTS 2 differs from its predecessor by
modeling styles as a latent random variable through diffusion models to generate
the most suitable style for the text without requiring reference speech, achieving
efficient latent diffusion while benefiting from the diverse speech synthesis offered
by diffusion models. Furthermore, we employ large pre-trained SLMs, such as
WavLM, as discriminators with our novel differentiable duration modeling for endto-end training, resulting in improved speech naturalness. StyleTTS 2 surpasses
human recordings on the single-speaker LJSpeech dataset and matches it on the
multispeaker VCTK dataset as judged by native English speakers. Moreover, when
trained on the LibriTTS dataset, our model outperforms previous publicly available
models for zero-shot speaker adaptation. This work achieves the first human-level
TTS on both single and multispeaker datasets, showcasing the potential of style
diffusion and adversarial training with large SLMs. The audio demos and source
code are available at https://styletts2.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis has seen significant advancements in recent years, with numerous
applications such as virtual assistants, audiobooks, and voice-over narration benefiting from increasingly natural and expressive synthetic speech [1, 2]. Some previous works have made significant
progress towards human-level performance [3, 4, 5]. However, the quest for robust and accessible
human-level TTS synthesis remains an ongoing challenge because there is still room for improvement
in terms of diverse and expressive speech [5, 6], robustness for out-of-distribution (OOD) texts [7],
and the requirements of massive datasets for high-performing zero-shot TTS systems [8].
In this paper, we introduce StyleTTS 2, an innovative TTS model that builds upon the style-based
generative model StyleTTS [6] to present the next step towards human-level TTS systems. We model
speech styles as a latent random variable and sample them with a probabilistic diffusion model,
allowing the model to efficiently synthesize highly realistic speech without the need for reference
audio. Since it only needs to sample a style vector instead of the entire speech as a latent variable,
StyleTTS 2 is faster than other diffusion TTS models while still benefiting from the diverse speech
synthesis enabled by diffusion models. One of the key contributions of StyleTTS 2 is the use of
large pre-trained speech language models (SLMs) like Wav2Vec 2.0 [9], HuBERT [10], and WavLM
[11] as discriminators, in conjunction with a novel differentiable duration modeling approach. This
end-to-end (E2E) training setup leverages SLM representations to enhance the naturalness of the
synthesized speech, transferring knowledge from large SLMs for speech generation tasks.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

