Diversify & Conquer: Outcome-directed Curriculum
RL via Out-of-Distribution Disagreement

Daesol Cho, Seungjae Lee, and H. Jin Kim
Seoul National University
Automation and Systems Research Institute (ASRI)
Artificial Intelligence Institute of Seoul National University (AIIS)
dscho1234@snu.ac.kr, ysz0301@snu.ac.kr, hjinkim@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) often faces the challenges of uninformed search
problems where the agent should explore without access to the domain knowledge
such as characteristics of the environment or external rewards. To tackle these
challenges, this work proposes a new approach for curriculum RL called Diversify
for Disagreement & Conquer (D2C). Unlike previous curriculum learning methods,
D2C requires only a few examples of desired outcomes and works in any environment, regardless of its geometry or the distribution of the desired outcome examples.
The proposed method performs diversification of the goal-conditional classifiers to
identify similarities between visited and desired outcome states and ensures that the
classifiers disagree on states from out-of-distribution, which enables quantifying
the unexplored region and designing an arbitrary goal-conditioned intrinsic reward
signal in a simple and intuitive way. The proposed method then employs bipartite
matching to define a curriculum learning objective that produces a sequence of
well-adjusted intermediate goals, which enable the agent to automatically explore
and conquer the unexplored region. We present experimental results demonstrating that D2C outperforms prior curriculum RL methods in both quantitative and
qualitative aspects, even with the arbitrarily distributed desired outcome examples.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has great potential for the automated learning of behaviors, but the
process of learning individual useful behavior can be time-consuming due to the significant amount
of experience required for the agent. Furthermore, in its general usage, RL often involves solving a
challenging uninformed search problem, where informative rewards or desired behaviors are rarely
observed. While there are some techniques that can alleviate the exploration burden such as rewardshaping [30] or preference-based reward [21, 6], they often require significant domain knowledge or
human intervention. This makes it difficult to utilize RL directly for problems that require challenging
exploration, especially in many domains of practical significance. Thus, it is becoming increasingly
crucial to tackle these challenges from the algorithmic level by developing RL agents that can learn
autonomously with minimal supervision.
One potential approach is a curriculum learning algorithm. It involves proposing a carefully designed
sequence of curriculum tasks or goals for the agent to accomplish, with each step building upon the
previous one to gradually progress the curriculum. By doing so, it enables the agent to automatically
explore the environment and improve the capability in a structured way. Previous studies primarily
involve a mechanism to adjust the curriculum distribution by maximizing its entropy within the
explored region [35], or taking into account the difficulty level [43, 11], or learning progress of the
agent [36]. However, efficient desired outcome-directed exploration is not available under these
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

