Bringing regularized optimal transport to lightspeed:
a splitting method adapted for GPUs

Jacob Lindbäck
EECS, KTH
Stockholm, Sweden
jlindbac@kth.se

Zesen Wang
EECS, KTH
Stockholm, Sweden
zesen@kth.se

Mikael Johansson
EECS, KTH
Stockholm, Sweden
mikaelj@kth.se

Abstract
We present an efficient algorithm for regularized optimal transport. In contrast to
previous methods, we use the Douglas-Rachford splitting technique to develop
an efficient solver that can handle a broad class of regularizers. The algorithm
has strong global convergence guarantees, low per-iteration cost, and can exploit
GPU parallelization, making it considerably faster than the state-of-the-art for
many problems. We illustrate its competitiveness in several applications, including
domain adaptation and learning of generative models.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) is an increasingly important tool for many ML problems. It has proven
successful in a wide range of applications, including domain adaptation [8, 19], learning generative
models [2, 17], smooth ranking and sorting schemes [12], and long-tailed recognition [29]. The
versatility of OT stems from the fact that it provides a flexible framework for comparing probability
distributions that incorporates the geometric structure of the underlying sample space [30]. Early on,
practitioners were directed to LP solvers with poor scalability to solve OT problems, but this changed
dramatically with the introduction of entropic regularization and the Sinkhorn algorithm for OT.
Sinkhorn’s simple parallelizable operations resolved a computational bottleneck of OT and enabled
the solution of large-scale problems at “lightspeed” [11]. Despite the computational advantages
of entropic regularization, many applications depend on sparse or structured transportation plans,
and the bias that entropic regularization introduces can significantly impact the performance of the
downstream task being solved. In such settings, other structure-promoting regularizers are typically
preferred (see e.g. [10, 25, 19]). However, to the best of our knowledge, no framework exists that
handles general regularizers for OT in a unifying way with a numerical efficiency that is comparable
to Sinkhorn. To this end, we study OT for a broad class of regularizers and develop an algorithm
with similar computational performance as Sinkhorn. Further, we benchmark our method against the
state-of-the-art, showing that our algorithm achieves up to 100x speed-up for several applications.
For discrete probability distributions, solving regularized OT problems amounts to finding a solution
to the optimization problem
minimize
m×n

⟨C, X⟩ + h(X)

subject to

X1n = p, X ⊤ 1m = q.

X∈R+

(1)

Here p and q are non-negative vectors that sum to 1, C is a non-negative cost matrix, and the
regularizer h is a function that promotes structured solutions. To solve (1) fast, it is important that
the large number of decision variables and the non-negativity constraint on the transportation plan
are handled in a memory-efficient way. It is also crucial to manage the non-smoothness induced
by the non-negativity constraints without altering the complexity of the algorithm. It is common
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

