FourierGNN: Rethinking Multivariate Time Series
Forecasting from a Pure Graph Perspective

Kun Yi1 , Qi Zhang2 , Wei Fan3 , Hui He1 , Liang Hu2 , Pengyang Wang4
Ning An5 , Longbing Cao6 , Zhendong Niu1∗
1
Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 Tongji University, 3 University of Oxford
4
University of Macau, 5 HeFei University of Technology, 6 Macquarie University
{yikun, hehui617, zniu}@bit.edu.cn, zhangqi_cs@tongji.edu.cn, weifan.oxford@gmail.com
railmilk@gmail.com, pywang@um.edu.mo, ning.g.an@acm.org, longbing.cao@mq.edu.au

Abstract
Multivariate time series (MTS) forecasting has shown great importance in numerous industries. Current state-of-the-art graph neural network (GNN)-based
forecasting methods usually require both graph networks (e.g., GCN) and temporal
networks (e.g., LSTM) to capture inter-series (spatial) dynamics and intra-series
(temporal) dependencies, respectively. However, the uncertain compatibility of the
two networks puts an extra burden on handcrafted model designs. Moreover, the
separate spatial and temporal modeling naturally violates the unified spatiotemporal
inter-dependencies in real world, which largely hinders the forecasting performance.
To overcome these problems, we explore an interesting direction of directly applying graph networks and rethink MTS forecasting from a pure graph perspective.
We first define a novel data structure, hypervariate graph, which regards each series
value (regardless of variates or timestamps) as a graph node, and represents sliding
windows as space-time fully-connected graphs. This perspective considers spatiotemporal dynamics unitedly and reformulates classic MTS forecasting into the
predictions on hypervariate graphs. Then, we propose a novel architecture Fourier
Graph Neural Network (FourierGNN) by stacking our proposed Fourier Graph
Operator (FGO) to perform matrix multiplications in Fourier space. FourierGNN
accommodates adequate expressiveness and achieves much lower complexity,
which can effectively and efficiently accomplish the forecasting. Besides, our
theoretical analysis reveals FGO’s equivalence to graph convolutions in the time domain, which further verifies the validity of FourierGNN. Extensive experiments on
seven datasets have demonstrated our superior performance with higher efficiency
and fewer parameters compared with state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at
this repository: https://github.com/aikunyi/FourierGNN.

1

Introduction

Multivariate time series (MTS) forecasting plays an important role in numerous real-world scenarios,
such as traffic flow prediction in transportation systems [1, 2], temperature estimation in weather
forecasting [3, 4], and electricity consumption planning in the energy market [5, 6], etc. In MTS
forecasting, the core challenge is to model intra-series (temporal) dependencies and simultaneously
capture inter-series (spatial) correlations. Existing literature has primarily focused on the temporal modeling and proposed several forecasting architectures, including Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN)-based methods (e.g., DeepAR [7]), Convolution Neural Network (CNN)-based methods (e.g.,
Temporal Convolution Network [8]) and more recent Transformer-based methods (e.g., Informer [9]
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

