LargeST: A Benchmark Dataset for Large-Scale
Traffic Forecasting

Xu Liu1 , Yutong Xia1 , Yuxuan Liang2∗, Junfeng Hu1 , Yiwei Wang1 , Lei Bai3 ,
Chao Huang4 , Zhenguang Liu5∗ , Bryan Hooi1 , Roger Zimmermann1
1
National University of Singapore, 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou),
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory, 4 University of Hong Kong, 5 Zhejiang University
{liuxu, junfengh, y-wang, bhooi, rogerz}@comp.nus.edu.sg, {yutong.x, yuxliang}@outlook.com,
{baisanshi, chaohuang75, liuzhenguang2008}@gmail.com

Abstract
Road traffic forecasting plays a critical role in smart city initiatives and has experienced significant advancements thanks to the power of deep learning in capturing
non-linear patterns of traffic data. However, the promising results achieved on
current public datasets may not be applicable to practical scenarios due to limitations within these datasets. First, the limited sizes of them may not reflect
the real-world scale of traffic networks. Second, the temporal coverage of these
datasets is typically short, posing hurdles in studying long-term patterns and acquiring sufficient samples for training deep models. Third, these datasets often
lack adequate metadata for sensors, which compromises the reliability and interpretability of the data. To mitigate these limitations, we introduce the LargeST
benchmark dataset. It encompasses a total number of 8,600 sensors in California
with a 5-year time coverage and includes comprehensive metadata. Using LargeST,
we perform in-depth data analysis to extract data insights, benchmark well-known
baselines in terms of their performance and efficiency, and identify challenges
as well as opportunities for future research. We release the datasets and baseline
implementations at: https://github.com/liuxu77/LargeST.

1

Introduction

Road traffic forecasting plays a pivotal role in enhancing urban planning, traffic management, and
public safety, making it one of the most critical components of Intelligent Transportation Systems
[35]. In recent years, the burgeoning technique of machine learning, particularly deep learning, has
exhibited remarkable advancements in this task [26]. Among the advances, spatio-temporal graph
neural networks have demonstrated great promise and become the widely embraced tool for accurate
traffic predictions [34, 19, 32, 1, 4]. Specifically, they utilize graph neural networks to capture spatial
correlations among sensors and employ sequential models to model temporal dependencies.
What steps can we take to further advance research in traffic forecasting? Historically, high-quality and
large-scale benchmark datasets have proven their value in driving research frontiers, as exemplified
by the transformative impact of ImageNet [6] in computer vision, GLUE [31] in natural language
processing, and OGB [13] in the general graph. In traffic forecasting research, however, we argue
that commonly-used datasets present critical issues that may pose obstacles to future progress.
∗

Y. Liang and Z. Liu are the corresponding authors of this paper.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

