SEENN: Towards Temporal
Spiking Early-Exit Neural Networks

Yuhang Li
Yale University
New Haven, CT, USA

Tamar Geller
Yale University
New Haven, CT, USA

yuhang.li@yale.edu

tamar.geller@yale.edu

Youngeun Kim
Yale University
New Haven, CT, USA

Priyadarshini Panda
Yale University
New Haven, CT, USA

youngeun.kim@yale.edu

priya.panda@yale.edu

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have recently become more popular as a biologically plausible substitute for traditional Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). SNNs
are cost-efficient and deployment-friendly because they process input in both spatial
and temporal manner using binary spikes. However, we observe that the information capacity in SNNs is affected by the number of timesteps, leading to an accuracyefficiency tradeoff. In this work, we study a fine-grained adjustment of the number
of timesteps in SNNs. Specifically, we treat the number of timesteps as a variable
conditioned on different input samples to reduce redundant timesteps for certain
data. We call our method Spiking Early-Exit Neural Networks (SEENNs). To
determine the appropriate number of timesteps, we propose SEENN-I which uses a
confidence score thresholding to filter out the uncertain predictions, and SEENN-II
which determines the number of timesteps by reinforcement learning. Moreover,
we demonstrate that SEENN is compatible with both the directly trained SNN and
the ANN-SNN conversion. By dynamically adjusting the number of timesteps, our
SEENN achieves a remarkable reduction in the average number of timesteps during
inference. For example, our SEENN-II ResNet-19 can achieve 96.1% accuracy
with an average of 1.08 timesteps on the CIFAR-10 test dataset. Code is shared at
https://github.com/Intelligent-Computing-Lab-Yale/SEENN.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has revolutionized a range of computational tasks such as computer vision and natural
language processing [1] using Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). These successes, however, have
come at the cost of tremendous computational demands and high latency [2]. In recent years, Spiking
Neural Networks (SNNs) have gained traction as an energy-efficient alternative to ANNs [3, 4, 5].
0SNNs infer inputs across a number of timesteps as opposed to ANNs, which infer over what is
essentially a single timestep. Moreover, during each timestep, the neuron in an SNN either fires
a spike or remains silent, thus making the output of the SNN neuron binary and sparse. Such
spike-based computing produces calculations that substitute multiplications with additions.
In the field of SNN research, there are two main approaches to getting an SNN: (1) directly training
SNNs from scratch and (2) converting ANNs to SNNs. Direct training seeks to optimize an SNN
using methods such as spike timing-based plasticity [6] or surrogate gradient-based optimization [7,8].
In contrast, the ANN-SNN conversion approach [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14] uses the feature representation
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

