GMSF: Global Matching Scene Flow

Yushan Zhang Johan Edstedt Bastian Wandt
Per-Erik Forssén Maria Magnusson Michael Felsberg
Linköping University
{firstname.lastname}@liu.se

Abstract
We tackle the task of scene flow estimation from point clouds. Given a source and
a target point cloud, the objective is to estimate a translation from each point in
the source point cloud to the target, resulting in a 3D motion vector field. Previous
dominant scene flow estimation methods require complicated coarse-to-fine or
recurrent architectures as a multi-stage refinement. In contrast, we propose a
significantly simpler single-scale one-shot global matching to address the problem.
Our key finding is that reliable feature similarity between point pairs is essential and
sufficient to estimate accurate scene flow. We thus propose to decompose the feature
extraction step via a hybrid local-global-cross transformer architecture which is
crucial to accurate and robust feature representations. Extensive experiments show
that the proposed Global Matching Scene Flow (GMSF) sets a new state-of-theart on multiple scene flow estimation benchmarks. On FlyingThings3D, with
the presence of occlusion points, GMSF reduces the outlier percentage from the
previous best performance of 27.4% to 5.6%. On KITTI Scene Flow, without
any fine-tuning, our proposed method shows state-of-the-art performance. On the
Waymo-Open dataset, the proposed method outperforms previous methods by a
large margin. The code is available at https://github.com/ZhangYushan3/GMSF.

1

Introduction

Scene flow estimation is a popular computer vision problem with many applications in autonomous
driving [31] and robotics [39]. With the development of optical flow estimation and the emergence of
numerous end-to-end trainable models in recent years, scene flow estimation, as a close research area
to optical flow estimation, takes advantage of the rapid growth. As a result, many end-to-end trainable
models have been developed for scene flow estimation using optical flow architectures [27, 46, 55].
Moreover, with the growing popularity of Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR), the interest has
shifted to computing scene flow from point clouds instead of stereo image sequences. In this work,
we focus on estimating scene flow from 3D point clouds.
One of the challenges faced in scene flow estimation is fast movement. Previous methods usually
employ a complicated multi-stage refinement with either a coarse-to-fine architecture [55] or a
recurrent architecture [46] to address the problem. We instead propose to solve scene flow estimation
by a single-scale one-shot global matching method, that is able to capture arbitrary correspondence,
thus, handling fast movements. Occlusion is yet another challenge faced in scene flow estimation.
We take inspiration from an optical flow estimation method [56] to enforce smoothness consistency
during the matching process.
The proposed method consists of two stages: feature extraction and matching. A detailed description
is given in Section 3. To extract high-quality features, we take inspiration from the recently dominant
transformers [47] and propose a hybrid local-global-cross transformer architecture to learn accurate
and robust feature representations. Both local and global-cross transformers are crucial for our
approach as also shown experimentally in Section 4.5. The global matching process, including
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

