Practical and Asymptotically Exact Conditional
Sampling in Diffusion Models

Luhuan Wu∗
Columbia University
lw2827@columbia.edu

Brian L. Trippe*
Columbia University
blt2114@columbia.edu

David M. Blei
Columbia University
david.blei@columbia.edu

Christian A. Naesseth
University of Amsterdam
c.a.naesseth@uva.nl

John P. Cunningham
Columbia University
jpc2181@columbia.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models have been successful on a range of conditional generation tasks
including molecular design and text-to-image generation. However, these achievements have primarily depended on task-specific conditional training or error-prone
heuristic approximations. Ideally, a conditional generation method should provide
exact samples for a broad range of conditional distributions without requiring
task-specific training. To this end, we introduce the Twisted Diffusion Sampler, or
TDS. TDS is a sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) algorithm that targets the conditional
distributions of diffusion models through simulating a set of weighted particles.
The main idea is to use twisting, an SMC technique that enjoys good computational
efficiency, to incorporate heuristic approximations without compromising asymptotic exactness. We first find in simulation and in conditional image generation
tasks that TDS provides a computational statistical trade-off, yielding more accurate approximations with many particles but with empirical improvements over
heuristics with as few as two particles. We then turn to motif-scaffolding, a core
task in protein design, using a TDS extension to Riemannian diffusion models; on
benchmark tasks, TDS allows flexible conditioning criteria and often outperforms
the state-of-the-art, conditionally trained model.2

1

Introduction

Conditional sampling is an essential primitive in the machine learning toolkit. One begins with a
generative model that parameterizes a distribution pθ (x) on data x, and then augments the model to
include information y in a joint distribution pθ (x, y) = pθ (x)p(y | x). This joint distribution then
implies a conditional distribution pθ (x | y), from which desired outputs are sampled.
For example, in protein design, pθ (x) can represent a distribution of physically realizable protein
structures, y a substructure that imparts a desired biochemical function, and samples from pθ (x | y)
are then physically realizable structures that contain the substructure of interest [e.g. 34, 37].
Diffusion models are a class of generative models that have demonstrated success in conditional generation tasks [18, 27, 33, 37]. They parameterize distributions pθ (x) through an iterative refinement
process that builds up data from noise. When a diffusion model is used for conditional generation,
this refinement process is modified to account for conditioning at each step [9, 19, 27, 33].
∗
2

Equal contribution, order by coin flip.
Code: https://github.com/blt2114/twisted_diffusion_sampler

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

