Understanding Few-Shot Learning: Measuring Task
Relatedness and Adaptation Difficulty via Attributes

Minyang Hu1,2 , Hong Chang1,2 , Zong Guo1,2 , Bingpeng Ma2 , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{minyang.hu, zong.guo}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {changhong, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn, bpma@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) aims to learn novel tasks with very few labeled samples
by leveraging experience from related training tasks. In this paper, we try to
understand FSL by exploring two key questions: (1) How to quantify the relationship between training and novel tasks? (2) How does the relationship affect
the adaptation difficulty on novel tasks for different models? To answer the first
question, we propose Task Attribute Distance (TAD) as a metric to quantify the
task relatedness via attributes. Unlike other metrics, TAD is independent of models,
making it applicable to different FSL models. To address the second question, we
utilize TAD metric to establish a theoretical connection between task relatedness
and task adaptation difficulty. By deriving the generalization error bound on a
novel task, we discover how TAD measures the adaptation difficulty on novel
tasks for different models. To validate our theoretical results, we conduct experiments on three benchmarks. Our experimental results confirm that TAD metric
effectively quantifies the task relatedness and reflects the adaptation difficulty on
novel tasks for various FSL methods, even if some of them do not learn attributes
explicitly or human-annotated attributes are not provided. Our code is available at
https://github.com/hu-my/TaskAttributeDistance.

1

Introduction

Learning in human biological system is highly efficient compared to artificial systems. For example,
only one example is enough for a child to learn a novel word [9], while thousands of training samples
are needed for deep learning models. This learning efficiency comes from the past experiences
accumulated by human brain. Inspired by human learning capability, Few-Shot Learning (FSL) aims
to learn novel tasks with very few samples by leveraging experience from related training tasks.
Despite the great progress made in FSL during the past decade [48, 42, 17, 45, 22, 10, 16, 50, 27],
there is less exploration on what it means for training tasks to be related. Some prior studies
[48, 17, 45] focus on constructing related training tasks by sampling categories within a dataset.
Recent works [46, 33] consider training tasks sampled from different datasets, known as cross-domain
few-shot learning. The latter is considered as a more challenging problem, partly because the category
gaps across datasets are usually larger, resulting in training tasks less related to novel tasks. Although
this follows the intuition, two natural questions arise: (1) How to quantify the relationship between
training and novel tasks? (2) How does the relationship affect the adaptation difficulty on novel tasks
for different FSL models?
To quantify the relationship between tasks, one approach is to measure the category relationship in a
common representation space. With properly learned representation function, various distribution
divergence metrics, like EMD [39] and FID [20], can be used to calculate the distance between
feature distributions of different categories, as well as tasks over them. The main obstacle to this
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

