AMDP: An Adaptive Detection Procedure for False
Discovery Rate Control in High-Dimensional
Mediation Analysis

Jiarong Ding
School of Mathematics and Statistics
Xi’an Jiaotong University
djr9901@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Xuehu Zhu∗
School of Mathematics and Statistics
Xi’an Jiaotong University
zhuxuehu@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
High-dimensional mediation analysis is often associated with a multiple testing
problem for detecting signiﬁcant mediators. Assessing the uncertainty of this detecting process via false discovery rate (FDR) has garnered great interest. To
control the FDR in multiple testing, two essential steps are involved: ranking and
selection. Existing approaches either construct p-values without calibration or disregard the joint information across tests, leading to conservation in FDR control
or non-optimal ranking rules for multiple hypotheses. In this paper, we develop
an adaptive mediation detection procedure (referred to as "AMDP") to identify
relevant mediators while asymptotically controlling the FDR in high-dimensional
mediation analysis. AMDP produces the optimal rule for ranking hypotheses and
proposes a data-driven strategy to determine the threshold for mediator selection.
This novel method captures information from the proportions of composite null
hypotheses and the distribution of p-values, which turns the high dimensionality
into an advantage instead of a limitation. The numerical studies on synthetic and
real data sets illustrate the performances of AMDP compared with existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Mediation analysis is regarded as a prevalent tool to dissect a mediation relationship between exposures and outcomes, and it has been widely applied in different ﬁelds, such as epidemiology [37],
public health [21], policy evaluation [1], social sciences [25], neuroscience [10], and many others. Baron et al. [4] provided the basis for the advance of mediation analysis. They proposed a
conventional regression-based approach, commonly referred to as the causal steps method, to examine the logical relationships among exposure, mediator, and outcome variables linking in a causal
chain. While the causal steps method established necessary conditions for causal inference, it did
not provide a joint test of the indirect effect of exposure on the outcome through a mediator, as
recommended by MacKinnon et al. [32]. Thus, MacKinnon et al. [32] investigated the normalitybased Sobel’s test [38] as a means to detect mediation effects under the framework of the productcoefﬁcient method, the product of the exposure-mediator and mediator-outcome effects. However,
as highlighted by MacKinnon et al. [31], the distribution of product coefﬁcients is not normally distributed, leading the Sobel’s test being overly conservative. Hence, MacKinnon et al. [32] proposed
the joint signiﬁcance test (also name as the MaxP test) to alleviate this conservatism. Nonetheless,
the joint signiﬁcance test still suffers from low statistical power, as it overlooks the impact of the
composite null structure in mediation analysis [33, 42].
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

