New Complexity-Theoretic Frontiers of Tractability
for Neural Network Training

Cornelius Brand
Algorithms & Complexity Group
Vienna University of Technology
Favoritenstraße 9-11, 1040 Vienna, Austria
cbrand@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Robert Ganian
Algorithms & Complexity Group
Vienna University of Technology
Favoritenstraße 9-11, 1040 Vienna, Austria
rganian@gmail.com

Mathis Rocton
Algorithms & Complexity Group
Vienna University of Technology
Favoritenstraße 9-11, 1040 Vienna, Austria
mrocton@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
In spite of the fundamental role of neural networks in contemporary machine
learning research, our understanding of the computational complexity of optimally
training neural networks remains incomplete even when dealing with the simplest
kinds of activation functions. Indeed, while there has been a number of very recent
results that establish ever-tighter lower bounds for the problem under linear and
ReLU activation functions, less progress has been made towards the identification
of novel polynomial-time tractable network architectures. In this article we obtain
novel algorithmic upper bounds for training linear- and ReLU-activated neural
networks to optimality which push the boundaries of tractability for these problems
beyond the previous state of the art. In particular, for ReLU networks we establish
the polynomial-time tractability of all architectures where hidden neurons have an
out-degree of 1, improving upon the previous algorithm of Arora, Basu, Mianjy
and Mukherjee. On the other hand, for networks with linear activation functions
we identify the first non-trivial polynomial-time solvable class of networks by
obtaining an algorithm that can optimally train network architectures satisfying a
novel data throughput condition.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are a prominent tool in contemporary
machine learning, one which has found ubiquitous applications throughout modern computer science (Goodfellow
et al., 2016). A neural network (cf. Figure 1) can be
thought of as a directed acyclic network consisting of n
sources (typically called input nodes), and w remaining
nodes, which we partition into output neurons (the sinks)
and hidden neurons (all other nodes in the network, typically organized into layers).

x1
x2
x3
x4

y1
y2
y3

Given the prominence of neural networks, it is surprising Figure 1: A neural network with two laythat—in spite of recent efforts—relatively little is known ers of hidden, ReLU-activated neurons,
about complexity-theoretic upper bounds for the funda- computing a function f : R4 → R3 .
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

