Maximize to Explore: One Objective Function Fusing
Estimation, Planning, and Exploration

Zhihan Liu1∗
Miao Lu2∗
Wei Xiong3∗
Han Zhong4
Hao Hu5
1
1
6
Shenao Zhang
Sirui Zheng
Zhuoran Yang
Zhaoran Wang1
1
2
3
Northwestern University Stanford University University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
4
Peking University 5 Tsinghua University 6 Yale University
{zhihanliu2027,shenaozhang2028,siruizheng2025}@u.northwestern.edu
miaolu@stanford.edu, wx13@illinois.edu, hanzhong@stu.pku.edu.cn
huh22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhuoran.yang@yale.edu, zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Abstract
In reinforcement learning (RL), balancing exploration and exploitation is crucial for
achieving an optimal policy in a sample-efficient way. To this end, existing sampleefficient algorithms typically consist of three components: estimation, planning,
and exploration. However, to cope with general function approximators, most of
them involve impractical algorithmic components to incentivize exploration, such
as data-dependent level-set constraints or complicated sampling procedures. To
address this challenge, we propose an easy-to-implement RL framework called
Maximize to Explore (MEX), which only needs to optimize unconstrainedly a single
objective that integrates the estimation and planning components while balancing
exploration and exploitation automatically. Theoretically, we prove that the MEX
achieves a sublinear regret with general function approximators and is extendable
to the zero-sum Markov game setting. Meanwhile, we adapt deep RL baselines to
design practical versions of MEX in both the model-based and model-free settings,
which outperform baselines in various MuJoCo environments with sparse reward by
a stable margin. Compared with existing sample-efficient algorithms with general
function approximators, MEX achieves similar sample efficiency while also enjoying
a lower computational cost and is more compatible with modern deep RL methods.
Our codes are available at https://github.com/agentification/MEX.

1

Introduction

The crux of online reinforcement learning (online RL) lies in maintaining a balance between exploiting
the current knowledge of the agent about the environment and exploring unfamiliar areas [69]. To
fulfill this, agents in existing sample-efficient RL algorithms predominantly undertake three tasks: i)
estimate a hypothesis using historical data to encapsulate their understanding of the environment; ii)
perform planning based on the estimated hypothesis to exploit their current knowledge; iii) further
explore the unknown environment via carefully designed exploration strategies.
There exists a long line of research on integrating the aforementioned three components harmoniously,
to find optimal policies in a sample-efficient manner. From theoretical perspectives, existing theories
aim to minimize the notion of online external regret which measures the cumulative suboptimality gap
of the policies learned during online learning. It is well studied that one can design both statistically
and computationally efficient algorithms (e.g., upper confidence bound (UCB), [6, 39, 12, 91])
with sublinear online regret for tabular and linear Markov decision processes (MDPs). But when it
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

