What is Flagged in Uncertainty Quantification?
Latent Density Models for Uncertainty Categorization

Hao Sun†∗, Boris van Breugel† , Jonathan Crabbé, Nabeel Seedat, Mihaela van der Schaar
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics
University of Cambridge

Abstract
Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) is essential for creating trustworthy machine
learning models. Recent years have seen a steep rise in UQ methods that can
flag suspicious examples, however, it is often unclear what exactly these methods
identify. In this work, we propose a framework for categorizing uncertain examples
flagged by UQ methods in classification tasks. We introduce the confusion density
matrix—a kernel-based approximation of the misclassification density—and use
this to categorize suspicious examples identified by a given uncertainty method
into three classes: out-of-distribution (OOD) examples, boundary (Bnd) examples,
and examples in regions of high in-distribution misclassification (IDM). Through
extensive experiments, we show that our framework provides a new and distinct
perspective for assessing differences between uncertainty quantification methods,
thereby forming a valuable assessment benchmark.

1

Introduction

Black-box parametric models like neural networks have achieved remarkably good performance
on a variety of challenging tasks, yet many real-world applications with safety concerns—e.g.
healthcare [1], finance [2, 3] and autonomous driving [4, 5]—necessitate reliability. These scenarios
require trustworthy model predictions to avoid the high cost of erroneous decisions.
Uncertainty quantification [6–10] addresses the challenge of trustworthy prediction through inspecting
the confidence of a model, enabling intervention whenever uncertainty is too high. Usually, however,
the cause of the uncertainty is not clear. In this work, we go beyond black-box UQ in the context
classification tasks and aim to answer two questions:
1. How do we provide a more granular categorization of why uncertainty methods to identify
certain predictions as suspicious?
2. What kind of examples do different UQ methods tend to mark as suspicious?
Categorizing Uncertainty We propose a Density-based Approach for Uncertainty Categorization
(DAUC): a model-agnostic framework that provides post-hoc categorization for model uncertainty.
We introduce the confusion density matrix, which captures the predictive behaviors of a given model.
Based on such a confusion density matrix, we categorize the model’s uncertainty into three classes:
(1) OOD uncertainty caused by OOD examples, i.e. test-time examples that resemble no training-time
sample [11–14]. Such uncertainty can be manifested by a low density in the confusion density matrix;
(2) Bnd uncertainty caused by neighboring decision boundaries, i.e., non-conformal predictions
due to confusing training-time resemblances from different classes or inherent ambiguities making
it challenging to classify the data [15–17]; Such uncertainty can be manifested by the density of
∗

hs789@cam.ac.uk, †: equal contributions

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

