Optimistic Natural Policy Gradient: a Simple Efficient
Policy Optimization Framework for Online RL

Qinghua Liu∗
Princeton University
qinghual@princeton.edu
Chi Jin
Princeton University
chij@princeton.edu

Gellért Weisz
Google DeepMind
gellert@deepmind.com

András György
Google DeepMind
agyorgy@deepmind.com

Csaba Szepesvári
Google DeepMind and University of Alberta
szepesva@ualberta.ca

Abstract
While policy optimization algorithms have played an important role in recent
empirical success of Reinforcement Learning (RL), the existing theoretical understanding of policy optimization remains rather limited—they are either restricted
to tabular MDPs or suffer from highly suboptimal sample complexity, especially in
online RL where exploration is necessary. This paper proposes a simple efficient
policy optimization framework—O PTIMISTIC NPG for online RL. O PTIMISTIC
NPG can be viewed as a simple combination of the classic natural policy gradient
(NPG) algorithm [Kakade, 2001] and an optimistic policy evaluation subroutine
to encourage exploration. For d-dimensional linear MDPs, O PTIMISTIC NPG is
computationally efficient, and learns an ϵ-optimal policy within Õ(d2 /ϵ3 ) samples,
which is the first computationally efficient algorithm whose sample complexity has
the optimal dimension dependence Θ̃(d2 ). It also improves over state-of-the-art
results of policy optimization algorithms [Zanette et al., 2021] by a factor of d. For
general function approximation that subsumes linear MDPs, O PTIMISTIC NPG, to
our best knowledge, is also the first policy optimization algorithm that achieves the
polynomial sample complexity for learning near-optimal policies.

1

Introduction

Policy optimization algorithms [Schulman et al., 2017, 2015] with neural network function approximation have played an important role in recent empirical success of reinforcement learning (RL), such
as robotics [Finn et al., 2016], games [Berner et al., 2019] and large language models [OpenAI, 2022].
Motivated by the empirical success, the theory community made a large effort to design provably
efficient policy optimization algorithms that work in the presence of linear function approximation
[Agarwal et al., 2021, Bhandari and Russo, 2019, Liu et al., 2019, Neu et al., 2017, Abbasi-Yadkori
et al., 2019, Agarwal et al., 2020, Zanette et al., 2021, Shani et al., 2020, Cai et al., 2020]. Early works
focused on proving that policy optimization algorithms are capable to learn near-optimal policies
using a polynomial number of samples under certain reachability (coverage) assumptions. [e.g.,
Agarwal et al., 2021, Bhandari and Russo, 2019, Liu et al., 2019, Neu et al., 2017, Abbasi-Yadkori
et al., 2019]. While this was good for laying down the foundations for future work, the reachability
assumptions basically imply that the state space is already well-explored or rather easy to explore,
which avoids the challenge of performing strategic exploration — one of the central problems in both
empirical and theoretical RL.
∗

This work was done when QL interned at DeepMind.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

