Optimal and Fair Encouragement Policy Evaluation
and Learning

Angela Zhou
Department of Data Sciences and Operations
University of Southern California
zhoua@usc.edu

Abstract
In consequential domains, it is often impossible to compel individuals to take treatment, so that optimal treatment assignments are merely suggestions when humans
make the final treatment decisions. On the other hand, there can be different heterogeneity in both the actual response to treatment and final treatment decisions given
recommendations. For example, in social services, a persistent puzzle is the gap in
take-up of beneficial services among those who may benefit from them the most.
When decision-makers have equity- for fairness-minded preferences over both access and average outcomes, the optimal decision rule changes due to these differing
heterogeneity patterns. We study identification and improved/robust estimation
under potential violations of positivity. We consider fairness constraints such as
demographic parity in treatment take-up, and other constraints, via constrained optimization. We develop a two-stage, online learning-based algorithm for solving over
parametrized policy classes under general constraints to obtain variance-sensitive
regret bounds. Our framework can be extended to handle algorithmic recommendations under an often-reasonable covariate-conditional exclusion restriction, using
our robustness checks for lack of positivity in the recommendation.

1

Introduction

The intersection of causal inference and machine learning for heterogeneous treatment effect estimation can improve public health, increase revenue, and improve outcomes by personalizing treatment
decisions, such as medications, e-commerce platform interactions, and social interventions, to those
who benefit from it the most [4, 30, 35, 49]. But, in many important settings, we do not have direct
control over treatment, and can only optimize over encouragements, or recommendations for treatment. For example, in e-commerce, companies can rarely compel users to sign up for certain services,
rather nudge or encourage users to sign up via promotions and offers. When we are interested
in optimizing the effects of signing up – or other voluntary actions beyond a platform’s control –
on important final outcomes such as revenue, we therefore need to consider fairness-constrained
optimal encouragement designs. Often human expert oversight is required in the loop in important
settings where ensuring fairness in machine learning [6] is also of interest: doctors prescribe treatment from recommendations [31], managers and workers combine their expertise to act based on
decision support [8], and in the social sector, caseworkers assign to beneficial programs based on
recommendations from risk scores that support triage [14, 19, 48].
The human in the loop requires new methodology for optimal encouragement designs because
when the human in the loop makes the final prescription, algorithmic recommendations do not have direct causal effects on outcomes; they change the probability of
treatment assignment.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

