iSCAN: Identifying Causal Mechanism Shifts among
Nonlinear Additive Noise Models
Tianyu Chen∗ †
Kevin Bello‡§
Bryon Aragam‡
Pradeep Ravikumar§
†
Department of Statistics and Data Science, University of Texas at Austin
‡
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago
§
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Structural causal models (SCMs) are widely used in various disciplines to represent causal relationships among variables in complex systems. Unfortunately, the
underlying causal structure is often unknown, and estimating it from data remains
a challenging task. In many situations, however, the end goal is to localize the
changes (shifts) in the causal mechanisms between related datasets instead of learning the full causal structure of the individual datasets. Some applications include
root cause analysis, analyzing gene regulatory network structure changes between
healthy and cancerous individuals, or explaining distribution shifts. This paper
focuses on identifying the causal mechanism shifts in two or more related datasets
over the same set of variables—without estimating the entire DAG structure of each
SCM. Prior work under this setting assumed linear models with Gaussian noises;
instead, in this work we assume that each SCM belongs to the more general class of
nonlinear additive noise models (ANMs). A key technical contribution of this work
is to show that the Jacobian of the score function for the mixture distribution allows
for the identification of shifts under general non-parametric functional mechanisms.
Once the shifted variables are identified, we leverage recent work to estimate the
structural differences, if any, for the shifted variables. Experiments on synthetic
and real-world data are provided to showcase the applicability of this approach.
Code implementing the proposed method is open-source and publicly available at
https://github.com/kevinsbello/iSCAN.

1

Introduction

Structural causal models (SCMs) are powerful models for representing causal relationships among
variables in a complex system [54, 58]. Every SCM has an underlying graphical structure that is
generally assumed to be a directed acyclic graph (DAG). Identifying the DAG structure of an SCM is
crucial since it enables reasoning about interventions [54]. Nonetheless, in most situations, scientists
can only access observational or interventional data, or both, while the true underlying DAG structure
remains unknown. As a result, in numerous disciplines such as computational biology [66, 30, 20],
epidemiology [64], medicine [61, 62], and econometrics [34, 28, 18], it is critically important to
develop methods that can estimate the entire underlying DAG structure based on available data.
This task is commonly referred to as causal discovery or structure learning, for which a variety of
algorithms have been proposed over the last decades.
Throughout this work, we make the assumption of causal sufficiency (i.e., non-existence of unobserved
confounders). Under this condition alone, identifying the underlying DAG structure is not possible in
general, and remains worst-case NP-complete [14, 16]. Indeed, prominent methods such as PC [71]
∗
Work done while at the Department of Statistics at the University of Chicago. Correspondence to
kbello@cs.cmu.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

