Exact recovery and Bregman hard clustering of
node-attributed Stochastic Block Model
Maximilien Dreveton
School of Computer and Communication Sciences
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
maximilien.dreveton@epfl.ch
Felipe S. Fernandes
Systems Engineering and Computer Science
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
felipesc@cos.ufrj.br

Daniel R. Figueiredo
Systems Engineering and Computer Science
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
daniel@cos.ufrj.br

Abstract
Network clustering tackles the problem of identifying sets of nodes (communities)
that have similar connection patterns. However, in many scenarios, nodes also
have attributes that are correlated with the clustering structure. Thus, network
information (edges) and node information (attributes) can be jointly leveraged
to design high-performance clustering algorithms. Under a general model for
the network and node attributes, this work establishes an information-theoretic
criterion for the exact recovery of community labels and characterizes a phase
transition determined by the Chernoff-Hellinger divergence of the model. The
criterion shows how network and attribute information can be exchanged in order to
have exact recovery (e.g., more reliable network information requires less reliable
attribute information). This work also presents an iterative clustering algorithm that
maximizes the joint likelihood, assuming that the probability distribution of network
interactions and node attributes belong to exponential families. This covers a broad
range of possible interactions (e.g., edges with weights) and attributes (e.g., nonGaussian models), as well as sparse networks, while also exploring the connection
between exponential families and Bregman divergences. Extensive numerical
experiments using synthetic data indicate that the proposed algorithm outperforms
classic algorithms that leverage only network or only attribute information as well
as state-of-the-art algorithms that also leverage both sources of information. The
contributions of this work provide insights into the fundamental limits and practical
techniques for inferring community labels on node-attributed networks.

1

Introduction

Community detection or network clustering–the task of identifying sets of similar nodes in a network–
is a fundamental problem in network analysis [4, 1, 18], with applications in diverse fields such
as digital humanities, data science and biology. In the classic formulation, a set of communities
must be determined from the connection patterns among the nodes of a single network. A simple
random graph model with community structure, the Stochastic Block Model (SBM), has been the
canonical model to characterise theoretical limitations and evaluate different community detection
algorithms [1].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

