Stable Diffusion is Unstable
Chengbin Du, Yanxi Li, Zhongwei Qiu, Chang Xu
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering
University of Sydney, Australia
chdu5632@uni.sydney.edu.au, yali0722@uni.sydney.edu.au
zhongwei.qiu@sydney.edu.au, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Recently, text-to-image models have been thriving. Despite their powerful generative capacity, our research has uncovered a lack of robustness in this generation process. Specifically, the introduction of small perturbations to the text
prompts can result in the blending of primary subjects with other categories or
their complete disappearance in the generated images. In this paper, we propose
Auto-attack on Text-to-image Models (ATM), a gradient-based approach, to
effectively and efficiently generate such perturbations. By learning a Gumbel
Softmax distribution, we can make the discrete process of word replacement or
extension continuous, thus ensuring the differentiability of the perturbation generation. Once the distribution is learned, ATM can sample multiple attack samples
simultaneously. These attack samples can prevent the generative model from
generating the desired subjects without tampering with the category keywords
in the prompt. ATM has achieved a 91.1% success rate in short-text attacks and
an 81.2% success rate in long-text attacks. Further empirical analysis revealed
three attack patterns based on: 1) variability in generation speed, 2) similarity of
coarse-grained characteristics, and 3) polysemy of words. The code is available at
https://github.com/duchengbin8/Stable_Diffusion_is_Unstable

1

Introduction

In recent years, the field of text-to-image generation has witnessed remarkable advancements, paving
the way for groundbreaking applications in computer vision and creative arts. Notably, many
significant developments have captured the attention of researchers and enthusiasts, such as Stable
Diffusion [28, 32], DALL·E2 [26, 27, 23] and Midjourney [19]. These developments push text-toimage synthesis boundaries, fostering artistic expression and driving computer vision research.
Despite the remarkable progress in text-to-image models, it is important to acknowledge their current
limitations. One significant challenge lies in the instability and inconsistency of the generated
outputs. In some cases, it can take multiple attempts to obtain the desired image that accurately
represents the given textual input. An additional obstacle revealed by recent researches [33, 2, 8]
is that the quality of generated images can be influenced by specific characteristics inherent to text
prompts. Tang et al. [33] proposes DAAM, which performs a text-image attribution analysis on
conditional text-to-image model and produces pixel-level attribution maps. Their research focuses on
the phenomenon of feature entanglement and uncovers that the presence of cohyponyms may degrade
the quality of generated images and that descriptive adjectives can attend too broadly across the
image. Attend-and-Excite [2] investigates the presence of catastrophic neglect in the Stable diffusion
model, where the generative model fails to include one or more of the subjects specified in the input
prompt. Additionally, they discover instances where the model fails to accurately associate attributes
such as colors with their respective subjects. Although those works have some progress, there is still
work to be done to enhance the stability and reliability of text-to-image models, ensuring consistent
and satisfactory results for a wide range of text prompts.
One prominent constraint observed in those works related to the stability of text-to-image models
lies in their dependence on manually crafted prompts for the purpose of vulnerability identification.
This approach presents several challenges. Firstly, it becomes difficult to quantify the success and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

