Combating Bilateral Edge Noise
for Robust Link Prediction
Zhanke Zhou1
1

Jiangchao Yao2,3† Jiaxu Liu4 Xiawei Guo4 Quanming Yao5
Li He4 Liang Wang4 Bo Zheng4 Bo Han1†

Hong Kong Baptist University 2 CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 Alibaba Group 5 Tsinghua Unversity

3

{cszkzhou, bhanml}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk sunarker@sjtu.edu.cn qyaoaa@tsinghua.edu.cn
{liujiaxu.ljx, guoxiawei, heli, wangliang}@taobao.com bozheng@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Although link prediction on graphs has achieved great success with the development of graph neural networks (GNNs), the potential robustness under the edge
noise is still less investigated. To close this gap, we first conduct an empirical
study to disclose that the edge noise bilaterally perturbs both input topology and
target label, yielding severe performance degradation and representation collapse.
To address this dilemma, we propose an information-theory-guided principle, Robust Graph Information Bottleneck (RGIB), to extract reliable supervision signals
and avoid representation collapse. Different from the basic information bottleneck, RGIB further decouples and balances the mutual dependence among graph
topology, target labels, and representation, building new learning objectives for
robust representation against the bilateral noise. Two instantiations, RGIB-SSL
and RGIB-REP, are explored to leverage the merits of different methodologies, i.e.,
self-supervised learning and data reparameterization, for implicit and explicit data
denoising, respectively. Extensive experiments on six datasets and three GNNs
with diverse noisy scenarios verify the effectiveness of our RGIB instantiations.
The code is publicly available at: https://github.com/tmlr-group/RGIB.

1

Introduction

Link prediction [25] is the process of determining whether two nodes in a graph are likely to be
connected. As a fundamental task in graph learning, it has attracted growing interest in real-world
applications, e.g., drug discovery [18], knowledge graph completion [3], and question answering [17].
While recent advances in graph neural networks (GNNs) [21, 12, 22, 48, 55] have achieved superior
performances, the poor robustness under the edge noise is still a practical bottleneck to the current
deep graph models [11, 10, 36, 8]. Early works explore improving the robustness of GNNs under
the node label noise [7, 24] by means of the smoothing effect of neighboring nodes. Other methods
achieve a similar goal via randomly removing edges [30] or actively selecting the informative nodes
or edges and pruning the task-irrelevant ones [50, 27]. However, when applying these noise-robust
methods to the link prediction with noise, only marginal improvements are achieved (Sec. 5). The
attribution is that different from the label noise, the edge noise here is bilateral: it can naturally
deteriorate both the input graph topology and the target edge labels, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Such a
bilateral noise is practical in real-world graph data [11, 36]. Nonetheless, previous works that only
consider unilateral noise in input space or label space cannot effectively deal with such a coupled
scenario. This raises a new challenge of tackling the bilateral edge noise for robust link prediction.
†

Correspondence to Bo Han (bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk) and Jiangchao Yao (sunarker@sjtu.edu.cn).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

