Learning-to-Rank Meets Language: Boosting
Language-Driven Ordering Alignment for Ordinal
Classification
Rui Wang1 , Peipei Li1⋆ , Huaibo Huang2 , Chunshui Cao3 , Ran He2 , Zhaofeng He1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
CRIPAC&MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
WATRIX.AI
{wr_bupt, lipeipei, zhaofenghe}@bupt.edu.cn
huaibo.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, chunshui.cao@watrix.ai, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
We present a novel language-driven ordering alignment method for ordinal classification. The labels in ordinal classification contain additional ordering relations,
making them prone to overfitting when relying solely on training data. Recent
developments in pre-trained vision-language models inspire us to leverage the rich
ordinal priors in human language by converting the original task into a visionlanguage alignment task. Consequently, we propose L2RCLIP, which fully utilizes
the language priors from two perspectives. First, we introduce a complementary prompt tuning technique called RankFormer, designed to enhance the ordering relation of original rank prompts. It employs token-level attention with
residual-style prompt blending in the word embedding space. Second, to further
incorporate language priors, we revisit the approximate bound optimization of
vanilla cross-entropy loss and restructure it within the cross-modal embedding
space. Consequently, we propose a cross-modal ordinal pairwise loss to refine the
CLIP feature space, where texts and images maintain both semantic alignment and
ordering alignment. Extensive experiments on three ordinal classification tasks,
including facial age estimation, historical color image (HCI) classification, and
aesthetic assessment demonstrate its promising performance. The code is available
at https://github.com/raywang335/L2RCLIP.

1

Introduction

Ordinal classification aims to predict labels that are related in a natural or implied order, which can
be considered as a special case of ordinal regression after label discretization, i.e. discretize the
continuous labels and each bin is then treated as a class. Common examples of such tasks are facial
age estimation (e.g., estimating the facial age from 1 to 100), historical color image classification (e.g.,
assigning a time period to color photographs, ranging from the 1930s to the 1970s), and aesthetics
assessment(e.g., rating image quality on a scale from "unacceptable" to "exceptional").
Compared with common classification, ordinal property of labels need to be additionally considered in
ordinal classification. Many algorithms [4, 35, 12] employ the ordinal classification framework, which
trains a set of classifiers or integrates probabilistic priors to directly predict rank labels. However,
these methods exhibit suboptimal performance as a result of insufficiently harnessing the ordering
properties. Order learning algorithms [48, 39, 26, 12] demonstrate competitive performance by
effectively capturing relative ordering relationships. These approaches determine the target order of a
⋆

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

