On the Exploitability of Instruction Tuning

Manli Shu1∗ Jiongxiao Wang2 Chen Zhu3 Jonas Geiping 1
Chaowei Xiao 2† Tom Goldstein1†
1
University of Maryland, 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison, 3 Google Deepmind

Abstract
Instruction tuning is an effective technique to align large language models (LLMs)
with human intents. In this work, we investigate how an adversary can exploit
instruction tuning by injecting specific instruction-following examples into the
training data that intentionally changes the model’s behavior. For example,
an adversary can achieve content injection by injecting training examples that
mention target content and eliciting such behavior from downstream models. To
achieve this goal, we propose AutoPoison, an automated data poisoning pipeline. It
naturally and coherently incorporates versatile attack goals into poisoned data with
the help of an oracle LLM. We showcase two example attacks: content injection
and over-refusal attacks, each aiming to induce a specific exploitable behavior.
We quantify and benchmark the strength and the stealthiness of our data poisoning
scheme. Our results show that AutoPoison allows an adversary to change a model’s
behavior by poisoning only a small fraction of data while maintaining a high level
of stealthiness in the poisoned examples. We hope our work sheds light on how
data quality affects the behavior of instruction-tuned models and raises awareness
of the importance of data quality for responsible deployments of LLMs.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs), such as GPT-4 [1], PaLM [2], and open-source alternatives [3, 4, 5,
6, 7], are now widely used as productivity assistants. These models have become extremely useful for
a range of user-oriented tasks. This strength is owed in large part to the surprising power of instruction
tuning [8, 9], in which a model is trained on a small number of instruction-following examples. While
model pre-training often involves trillions of tokens and thousands of GPUs, the sample complexity
of instruction tuning is shockingly low, with recent efforts achieving good performance using an
order of 10K conversations annotated by human volunteers [5] or by capable LLMs [10, 11].
Unfortunately, the low sample complexity of instruction tuning is a double-edged sword. While it
enables organizations to alter the behaviors of LLMs with very little training, it also opens the door
for effective poisoning attacks on instruction-tuning datasets in which a modest number of corrupted
examples lead to malicious downstream behaviors [12]. This risk is amplified by the prevalence of
crowd-sourced annotation projects [13, 14] in which volunteers can sign up anonymously.
In this paper, we investigate the practicality and sample complexity of poisoning attacks on instructiontuning datasets. We consider a class of attacks in which an adversary injects poisoned data [15] into
a training set for the purpose of eliciting exploitable behaviors from downstream models. There
are a number of possible outcomes that an adversary might seek. For example, an adversary can
provide training examples that promote their products in their responses to user inquiries. We study a
threat model where an adversary cannot access the victim model. We also restricted the adversary to
∗
†

manlis@umd.edu
Equal advising

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

