EFWI: Multiparameter Benchmark Datasets for
Elastic Full Waveform Inversion of
Geophysical Properties

Shihang Feng1,∗
Yanhua Liu1,3

Hanchen Wang1,∗
Min Zhu1,4

Chengyuan Deng1,2

Peng Jin1,5

Yinpeng Chen6

Yinan Feng1
Youzuo Lin1,7

1

Los Alamos National Laboratory 2 Rutgers University 3 Colorado School of Mines
4
University of Pennsylvania 5 The Pennsylvania State University 6 Microsoft
7
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
shihang.feng@live.com
{hanchen.wang, charles.deng, ynf, yanhualiu, minzhu, pjin, ylin}@lanl.gov
yiche@microsoft.com, yzlin@unc.edu

Abstract
Elastic geophysical properties (such as P- and S-wave velocities) are of great
importance to various subsurface applications like CO2 sequestration and energy
exploration (e.g., hydrogen and geothermal). Elastic full waveform inversion (FWI)
is widely applied for characterizing reservoir properties. In this paper, we introduce
EFWI , a comprehensive benchmark dataset that is specifically designed for elastic
FWI. EFWI encompasses 8 distinct datasets that cover diverse subsurface geologic
structures (flat, curve, faults, etc). The benchmark results produced by three different deep learning methods are provided. In contrast to our previously presented
dataset (pressure recordings) for acoustic FWI (referred to as O PEN FWI), the
seismic dataset in EFWI has both vertical and horizontal components. Moreover,
the velocity maps in EFWI incorporate both P- and S-wave velocities. While the
multicomponent data and the added S-wave velocity make the data more realistic,
more challenges are introduced regarding the convergence and computational cost
of the inversion. We conduct comprehensive numerical experiments to explore the
relationship between P-wave and S-wave velocities in seismic data. The relation
between P- and S-wave velocities provides crucial insights into the subsurface
properties such as lithology, porosity, fluid content, etc. We anticipate that EFWI
will facilitate future research on multiparameter inversions and stimulate endeavors
in several critical research topics of carbon-zero and new energy exploration. All
datasets, codes1 and relevant information can be accessed through our website
at https://efwi-lanl.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Seismic imaging is similar to how submarines use sonar to map out underwater landscapes and locate
objects. Just as sonar sends out sound waves and interprets the echoes to figure out distances and
∗
1

Equal contribution
Codes will be released upon approval by Los Alamos National Laboratory and U.S. Department of Energy.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

