Rewarded soups: towards Pareto-optimal alignment
by interpolating weights fine-tuned on diverse rewards

Alexandre Rame1∗, Guillaume Couairon1,2†, Mustafa Shukor1†,
Corentin Dancette1†, Jean-Baptiste Gaya1,2†, Laure Soulier1 , Matthieu Cord1,3
1

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR, Paris, France

2

Meta AI

3

Valeo.ai

Abstract
Foundation models are first pre-trained on vast unsupervised datasets and then
fine-tuned on labeled data. Reinforcement learning, notably from human feedback
(RLHF), can further align the network with the intended usage. Yet the imperfections in the proxy reward may hinder the training and lead to suboptimal results; the
diversity of objectives in real-world tasks and human opinions exacerbate the issue.
This paper proposes embracing the heterogeneity of diverse rewards by following a
multi-policy strategy. Rather than focusing on a single a priori reward, we aim for
Pareto-optimal generalization across the entire space of preferences. To this end,
we propose rewarded soup, first specializing multiple networks independently (one
for each proxy reward) and then interpolating their weights linearly. This succeeds
empirically because we show that the weights remain linearly connected when finetuned on diverse rewards from a shared pre-trained initialization. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach for text-to-text (summarization, Q&A, helpful
assistant, review), text-image (image captioning, text-to-image generation, visual
grounding), and control (locomotion) tasks. We hope to enhance the alignment of
deep models, and how they interact with the world in all its diversity.

1

Introduction

Foundation models [1] have emerged as the standard paradigm to learn neural networks’ weights.
They are typically first pre-trained through self-supervision [2, 3, 4, 5] and then fine-tuned [6, 7] via
supervised learning [8]. Yet, collecting labels is expensive, and thus supervision may not cover all
possibilities and fail to perfectly align [9, 10, 11] the trained network with the intended applications.
Recent works [12, 13, 14] showed that deep reinforcement learning (DRL) helps by learning from
various types of rewards. A prominent example is reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) [12, 15, 16, 17], which appears as the current go-to strategy to refine large language models
(LLMs) into powerful conversational agents such as ChatGPT [13, 18]. After pre-training on next
token prediction [19] using Web data, the LLMs are fine-tuned to follow instructions [20, 21, 22]
before reward maximization. This RL strategy enhances alignment by evaluating the entire generated
sentence instead of each token independently, handling the diversity of correct answers and allowing
for negative feedback [23]. Similar strategies have been useful in computer vision (CV) [14, 24], for
instance to integrate human aesthetics into image generation [25, 26, 27].
Diversity of proxy rewards. RL is usually seen as more challenging than supervised training [28],
notably because the real reward—ideally reflecting the users’ preferences—is often not specified at
training time. Proxy rewards are therefore developed to guide the learning, either as hand-engineered
metrics [29, 30, 31] or more recently in RLHF as models trained to reflect human preferences
∗
†

Project lead, main contributor, correspondence to alexandre.rame@isir.upmc.fr.
Equal experimental contribution, order determined at random.
Further information and resources related to this project can be found on this website.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

