Is Learning in Games Good for the Learners?

William Brown
Columbia University
w.brown@columbia.edu

Jon Schneider
Google Research
jschnei@google.com

Kiran Vodrahalli
Google Research
kirannv@google.com

Abstract
We consider a number of questions related to tradeoffs between reward and regret
in repeated gameplay between two agents. To facilitate this, we introduce a notion
of generalized equilibrium which allows for asymmetric regret constraints, and
yields polytopes of feasible values for each agent and pair of regret constraints,
where we show that any such equilibrium is reachable by a pair of algorithms
which maintain their regret guarantees against arbitrary opponents. As a central
example, we highlight the case one agent is no-swap and the other’s regret is
unconstrained. We show that this captures an extension of Stackelberg equilibria
with a matching optimal value, and that there exists a wide class of games where a
player can significantly increase their utility by deviating from a no-swap-regret
algorithm against a no-swap learner (in fact, almost any game without pure Nash
equilibria is of this form). Additionally, we make use of generalized equilibria
to consider tradeoffs in terms of the opponent’s algorithm choice. We give a
tight characterization for the maximal reward obtainable against some no-regret
learner, yet we also show a class of games in which this is bounded away from the
value obtainable against the class of common “mean-based” no-regret algorithms.
Finally, we consider the question of learning reward-optimal strategies via repeated
play with a no-regret agent when the game is initially unknown. Again we show
tradeoffs depending on the opponent’s learning algorithm: the Stackelberg strategy
is learnable in exponential time with any no-regret agent (and in polynomial time
with any no-adaptive-regret agent) for any game where it is learnable via queries,
and there are games where it is learnable in polynomial time against any no-swapregret agent but requires exponential time against a mean-based no-regret agent.

1

Introduction

How should two rational agents play a repeated, possibly unknown, game against one another?
One natural answer – barring any knowledge of the game, or the capacity to compute potentially
computationally intractible equilibria – is that they should employ some sort of learning algorithm to
learn how to play over time. Indeed, there is a vast literature which studies what happens when all the
players in a repeated game run (some specific type of) learning algorithms to select their actions. For
example, when all players in a game simultaneously run no-(swap)-regret learning algorithms, it is
known that the average strategy profile of the learners converges to a (coarse) correlated equilibrium
(23; 11; 16). More recent works have studied how to design algorithms that converge to these
equilibria at faster rates (7; 1; 8), performance guarantees of such equilibria compared to the optimal
possible welfare (4; 17), and the specific dynamics of such learning algorithms (9; 20; 22).
In contrast, relatively little attention has been devoted to whether it is actually in the interest of these
agents to run these specific learning algorithms. For example, in a setting where all agents are running
no-swap-regret learning algorithms, when can an agent significantly benefit by deviating and running
a different type of algorithm? And if they can, what algorithm should the agent deviate to?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

