ResMem: Learn what you can and memorize the rest

Zitong Yang
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
zitong@berkeley.edu

Michal Lukasik
Google Research
New York, NY, 10011
mlukasik@google.com

Vaishnavh Nagarajan
Google Research
New York, NY, 10011
vaishnavh@google.com

Zonglin Li
Google Research
New York, NY, 10011
lizonglin@google.com

Ankit Singh Rawat
Google Research
New York, NY, 10011
ankitsrawat@google.com

Manzil Zaheer
Google Research
New York, NY, 10011
manzilzaheer@google.com

Aditya Krishna Menon
Google Research
New York, NY, 10011
adityakmenon@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research
New York, NY, 10011
sanjivk@google.com

Abstract
The impressive generalization performance of modern neural networks is attributed
in part to their ability to implicitly memorize complex training patterns. Inspired by
this, we explore a novel mechanism to improve model generalization via explicit
memorization. Specifically, we propose the residual-memorization (ResMem)
algorithm, a new method that augments an existing prediction model (e.g., a neural
network) by fitting the model’s residuals with a k-nearest neighbor based regressor.
The final prediction is then the sum of the original model and the fitted residual
regressor. By construction, ResMem can explicitly memorize the training labels,
even when the base model has low capacity. We start by formulating a stylized
linear regression problem and rigorously show that ResMem results in a more
favorable test risk over a base linear neural network. Then, we empirically show that
ResMem consistently improves the test set generalization of the original prediction
model across standard vision and natural language processing benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Large neural networks achieve remarkable generalization on test samples despite memorization of
training samples, in the sense of achieving zero training error [54]. Several recent analyses have
established that, under certain settings, memorization is sufficient to achieve generalization [3, 15, 5,
40, 4], and, more surprisingly, can even be necessary [17, 19, 11]. These works suggest that suitable
memorization can be a valuable desiderata for learning. While increasing model size is a conceptually
simple strategy to enable memorization, this has the obvious downside of significantly increasing the
cost of model training and serving. This raises a natural question: are there alternate mechanisms to
improve the memorization (and thus generalization) of a relatively small model?
In this paper, we propose residual memorization (ResMem), a simple yet effective mechanism that
achieves this goal (cf. Figure 1). Compared to the implicit memorization performed by large neural
models, the key idea behind ResMem is to perform explicit memorization via a separate k-nearest
neighbor component. Specifically, ResMem involves first training a standard neural network fDeepNet ,
and then explicitly memorizing the model’s residuals with a k-nearest neighbor based regressor rkNN .
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

