Certification of Distributional Individual Fairness
Matthew Wicker
The Alan Turing Institute
mwicker@turing.ac.uk

Vihari Piratia
University of Cambridge
vp421@cam.ac.uk

Adrian Weller
University of Cambridge &
The Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
Providing formal guarantees of algorithmic fairness is of paramount importance
to socially responsible deployment of machine learning algorithms. In this work,
we study formal guarantees, i.e., certificates, for individual fairness (IF) of neural
networks. We start by introducing a novel convex approximation of IF constraints
that exponentially decreases the computational cost of providing formal guarantees
of local individual fairness. We highlight that prior methods are constrained by
their focus on global IF certification and can therefore only scale to models with
a few dozen hidden neurons, thus limiting their practical impact. We propose to
certify distributional individual fairness which ensures that for a given empirical
distribution and all distributions within a -Wasserstein ball, the neural network has
guaranteed individually fair predictions. Leveraging developments in quasi-convex
optimization, we provide novel and efficient certified bounds on distributional
individual fairness and show that our method allows us to certify and regularize
neural networks that are several orders of magnitude larger than those considered
by prior works. Moreover, we study real-world distribution shifts and find our
bounds to be a scalable, practical, and sound source of IF guarantees.

1

Introduction

There is a growing concern about the potential of machine learning models to perpetuate and amplify
discrimination (Barocas & Selbst, 2016). Machine learning algorithms have been put forward to
automate decision making in a variety of fairness-sensitive domains, such as healthcare (Davenport
& Kalakota, 2019), employment (Ding et al., 2021), and criminal justice (Dressel & Farid, 2018;
Zilka et al., 2022). It has been demonstrated that such models produce biased outcomes that unfairly
disadvantage certain individuals or groups (Seyyed-Kalantari et al., 2021; Yurochkin & Sun, 2020).
To combat this, there has been a surge of interest in algorithmic fairness metrics (Mehrabi et al., 2021).
Fairness metrics provide practitioners with a means to quantify the extent of bias within a model and
facilitate development of heuristics for debiasing models (Madras et al., 2018; Yurochkin et al., 2019).
However, relying solely on heuristic debiasing methods may not be satisfactory for justifying the
deployment of machine learning models as they do not provide guarantees of fairness. To address this
concern, there has been a recent focus on certification approaches, which provide formal guarantees
that a model adheres to a specified fairness criterion (John et al., 2020; Benussi et al., 2022; Khedr &
Shoukry, 2022). Providing certified guarantees of fairness is of utmost importance as it offers users,
stakeholders, and regulators formal assurances that the predictions of a model align with a rigorous
standards of fairness. These guarantees serve as a powerful tool to promote trust, accountability, and
ethical deployment of machine learning models.
In this work, we study the problem of certifying individual fairness (IF) in neural networks (NNs).
Individual fairness enforces the intuitive property that a given neural network issues similar predictions
for all pairs of similar individuals (Dwork et al., 2012). Individuals are considered similar if they
differ only with respect to protected attributes (e.g., race, gender, or age) or features correlated with
the protected attributes. This similarity is captured by a fair distance metric which can be learned by
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

