SAME: Uncovering GNN Black Box with
Structure-aware Shapley-based Multipiece
Explanation
Ziyuan Ye1,2,* , Rihan Huang1,3,⇤, Qilin Wu1,4 , Quanying Liu1,†
Southern University of Science and Technology, 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, 4 Carnegie Mellon University
{ziyuanye9801, rihanhuang.work, kyrinwu}@gmail.com, liuqy@sustech.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Post-hoc explanation techniques on graph neural networks (GNNs) provide economical solutions for opening the black-box graph models without model retraining.
Many GNN explanation variants have achieved state-of-the-art explaining results
on a diverse set of benchmarks, while they rarely provide theoretical analysis for
their inherent properties and explanatory capability. In this work, we propose
Structure-Aware Shapley-based Multipiece Explanation (SAME) method to address the structure-aware feature interactions challenges for GNNs explanation.
Specifically, SAME leverages an expansion-based Monte Carlo tree search to explore the multi-grained structure-aware connected substructure. Afterward, the
explanation results are encouraged to be informative of the graph properties by
optimizing the combination of distinct single substructures. With the consideration of fair feature interactions in the process of investigating multiple connected
important substructures, the explanation provided by SAME has the potential to
be as explainable as the theoretically optimal explanation obtained by the Shapley
value within polynomial time. Extensive experiments on real-world and synthetic
benchmarks show that SAME improves the previous state-of-the-art fidelity performance by 12.9% on BBBP, 7.01% on MUTAG, 42.3% on Graph-SST2, 38.9%
on Graph-SST5, 11.3% on BA-2Motifs and 18.2% on BA-Shapes under the same
testing condition. Code is available at https://github.com/same2023neurips/same.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated a powerful representation learning ability to deal
with data in non-Euclidean space. However, the explanation techniques for deep learning models
on images and text cannot directly apply to understand GNNs [27, 18, 6, 1]. There is a gap in the
understanding of how GNNs work, which largely limits GNNs’ application in many fields.
Many GNN explanation techniques aim to examine the extent to which GNNs depend on individual
nodes and edges of the graph [22, 35, 19, 24, 37]. However, graph features within nodes and
edges contribute different amounts of information when considered individually than contextualized
with topology [37, 39]. Therefore, discovering the most important explanation with one or more
connected components given an input graph and a well-trained GNN raises the additional challenge
of handling structure-aware feature interactions. Recently, a number of studies, including GNNLRP [25], SubgraphX [38] and GStarX [40] have endeavored to address this issue to some extent.
Although many of the current GNN explanation techniques have empirically achieved state-of-the-art
⇤
†

Equal contribution, co-first author.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

