ContinuAR: Continuous Autoregression For
Infinite-Fidelity Fusion
Wei W. Xing ∗
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Sheffield
Hicks Building, Hounsfield Rd, Sheffield, UK, S3 7RH
w.xing@sheffield.ac.uk
Yuxin Wang
Department of Statistics and Data Science
National Univerisity of Singapore
21 Lower Kent Ridge Road, Singapore, 119077.
yuxinwang@u.nus.edu

Zheng Xing
Graphics& Computing Department
Rockchip Electronics Co., Ltd
Fuzhou, China, 350003.
zheng.xing@rock-chips.com

Abstract
Multi-fidelity fusion has become an important surrogate technique, which provides insights into expensive computer simulations and effectively improves
decision-making, e.g., optimization, with less computational cost. Multi-fidelity
fusion is much more computationally efficient compared to traditional singlefidelity surrogates. Despite the fast advancement of multi-fidelity fusion techniques, they lack a systematic framework to make use of the fidelity indicator,
deal with high-dimensional and arbitrary data structure, and scale well to infinitefidelity problems. In this work, we first generalize the popular autoregression
(AR) to derive a novel linear fidelity differential equation (FiDE), paving the way
to tractable infinite-fidelity fusion. We generalize FiDE to a high-dimensional system, which also provides a unifying framework to seemly bridge the gap between
many multi- and single-fidelity GP-based models. We then propose ContinuAR,
a rank-1 approximation solution to FiDEs, which is tractable to train, compatible
with arbitrary multi-fidelity data structure, linearly scalable to the output dimension, and most importantly, delivers consistent SOTA performance with a significant margin over the baseline methods. Compared to the SOTA infinite-fidelity
fusion, IFC, ContinuAR achieves up to 4x improvement in accuracy and 62,500x
speedup in training time.

1

Introduction

Contemporary scientific and engineering endeavors depend significantly on analyzing highly complex systems, where the repeated execution of large-scale differential equation numerical simulations, often with intricate interconnections, is essential. For instance, in the design of a systemon-chip (SoC), more than 80% of the design time is spent on analysis based on different types of
simulations, e.g., timing analysis and yield optimization. Such an intense computational demand
prompts the use of a data-driven surrogate model, which essentially acts as a functional approximation for the input-output mapping of a simulation. To enhance convergence efficiency, especially in
scenarios involving recurrent simulations, such as those encountered in Bayesian optimization (BO)
[1] and uncertainty quantification (UQ) [2].
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

