Formalizing locality for normative synaptic plasticity
models
Colin Bredenberg∗
Mila- Quebec AI Institute
Montreal, Quebec H2S 3H1
Cristina Savin
New York University
New York, NY 10003

Ezekiel Williams
Mila- Quebec AI Institute
Montreal, Quebec H2S 3H1

Blake Richards†
McGill University
Mila- Quebec AI Institute
Montreal, Quebec H2S 3H1

Guillaume Lajoie†
Université de Montréal
Mila- Quebec AI Institute
Montreal, Quebec H2S 3H1

Abstract
In recent years, many researchers have proposed new models for synaptic plasticity
in the brain based on principles of machine learning. The central motivation has
been the development of learning algorithms that are able to learn difficult tasks
while qualifying as “biologically plausible”. However, the concept of a biologically
plausible learning algorithm is only heuristically defined as an algorithm that
is potentially implementable by biological neural networks. Further, claims that
neural circuits could implement any given algorithm typically rest on an amorphous
concept of “locality” (both in space and time). As a result, it is unclear what many
proposed local learning algorithms actually predict biologically, and which of
these are consequently good candidates for experimental investigation. Here, we
address this lack of clarity by proposing formal and operational definitions of
locality. Specifically, we define different classes of locality, each of which makes
clear what quantities cannot be included in a learning rule if an algorithm is to
qualify as local with respect to a given (biological) constraint. We subsequently use
this framework to distill testable predictions from various classes of biologically
plausible synaptic plasticity models that are robust to arbitrary choices about neural
network architecture. Therefore, our framework can be used to guide claims of
biological plausibility and to identify potential means of experimentally falsifying
a proposed learning algorithm for the brain.

1

Introduction

Over the last several decades, computational neuroscience researchers have proposed a variety of
“biologically plausible” models of synaptic plasticity that seek to provide normative accounts of
a variety of learning processes in the brain—these models aim to explain how modifications of
cellular properties such as excitability and synaptic strengths can improve performance on a variety
of important tasks for an organism, using only the information “locally” available to a real neuron in
the brain. However, there is no consensus on what “biologically plausible” really means. This is due
to a lack of any precise definition of locality, with individual studies adopting different, architecturespecific heuristics that are often not explicitly articulated; further, at an experimental level, the precise
quantities available to neurons for computing synaptic updates are still up for debate [1, 2], and likely
vary across cell types [3, 4, 5] and brain regions [6, 7, 8, 9, 10].
∗
†

Corresponding author, email at: colin.bredenberg@mila.quebec.
Co-senior authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

