A Unified Framework for Uniform Signal Recovery in
Nonlinear Generative Compressed Sensing

Junren Chen∗
University of Hong Kong
chenjr58@connect.hku.hk

Jonathan Scarlett
National University of Singapore
scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg

Michael K. Ng
Hong Kong Baptist University
michael-ng@hkbu.edu.hk

Zhaoqiang Liu∗
UESTC
zqliu12@gmail.com

Abstract
In generative compressed sensing (GCS), we want to recover a signal x∗ ∈ Rn
from m measurements (m ≪ n) using a generative prior x∗ ∈ G(Bk2 (r)), where
G is typically an L-Lipschitz continuous generative model and Bk2 (r) represents
the radius-r ℓ2 -ball in Rk . Under nonlinear measurements, most prior results are
non-uniform, i.e., they hold with high probability for a fixed x∗ rather than for all
x∗ simultaneously. In this paper, we build a unified framework to derive uniform
recovery guarantees for nonlinear GCS where the observation model is nonlinear
and possibly discontinuous or unknown. Our framework accommodates GCS
with 1-bit/uniformly quantized observations and single index models as canonical
examples. Specifically, using a single realization of the sensing ensemble and
generalized Lasso, all x∗ ∈ G(Bk2 (r)) can be recovered up to an ℓ2 -error at most ϵ
using roughly Õ(k/ϵ2 ) samples, with omitted logarithmic factors typically being
dominated by log L. Notably, this almost coincides with existing non-uniform
guarantees up to logarithmic factors, hence the uniformity costs very little. As part
of our technical contributions, we introduce the Lipschitz approximation to handle
discontinuous observation models. We also develop a concentration inequality that
produces tighter bounds for product processes whose index sets have low metric
entropy. Experimental results are presented to corroborate our theory.

1

Introduction

In compressed sensing (CS) that concerns the reconstruction of low-complexity signals (typically
sparse signals) [5, 6, 15], it is standard to employ a random measurement ensemble, i.e., a random
sensing matrix and other randomness that produces the observations. Thus, a recovery guarantee
involving a single draw of the measurement ensemble could be non-uniform or uniform — the nonuniform one ensures the accurate recovery of any fixed signal with high probability, while the uniform
one states that one realization of the measurements works simultaneously for all structured signals
of interest. Uniformity is a highly desired property in CS, since in applications the measurement
ensemble is typically fixed and should work for all signals [17]. Besides, the derivation of a uniform
guarantee is often significantly harder than a non-uniform one, making uniformity an interesting
theoretical problem in its own right.
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

