Geometric Algebra Transformer

Johann Brehmer∗

Pim de Haan∗
Sönke Behrends
Taco Cohen
Qualcomm AI Research†
{jbrehmer, pim, sbehrend, tacos}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Problems involving geometric data arise in physics, chemistry, robotics, computer
vision, and many other fields. Such data can take numerous forms, for instance
points, direction vectors, translations, or rotations, but to date there is no single
architecture that can be applied to such a wide variety of geometric types while
respecting their symmetries. In this paper we introduce the Geometric Algebra
Transformer (GATr), a general-purpose architecture for geometric data. GATr
represents inputs, outputs, and hidden states in the projective geometric (or Clifford)
algebra, which offers an efficient 16-dimensional vector-space representation of
common geometric objects as well as operators acting on them. GATr is equivariant
with respect to E(3), the symmetry group of 3D Euclidean space. As a Transformer,
GATr is versatile, efficient, and scalable. We demonstrate GATr in problems
from n-body modeling to wall-shear-stress estimation on large arterial meshes to
robotic motion planning. GATr consistently outperforms both non-geometric and
equivariant baselines in terms of error, data efficiency, and scalability.

1

Introduction

From molecular dynamics to astrophysics, from material design to robotics, fields across science
and engineering deal with geometric data such as positions, shapes, orientations, or directions. The
geometric nature of data provides a rich structure: a notion of common operations between geometric
types (computing distances between points, applying rotations to orientations, etc.), a well-defined
behaviour of data under transformations of a system, and the independence of certain properties of
coordinate system choices. When learning from geometric data, incorporating this rich structure into
the architecture has the potential to improve the performance.
With this goal, we introduce the Geometric Algebra Transformer (GATr), a general-purpose network
architecture for geometric data. GATr brings together three key ideas.
Geometric algebra: To naturally describe both geometric objects as well as their transformations
in three-dimensional space, GATr represents data as multivectors of the projective geometric
algebra G3,0,1 . Geometric (or Clifford) algebra is an principled yet practical mathematical
framework for geometrical computations. The particular algebra G3,0,1 extends the vector
space R3 to 16-dimensional multivectors, which can natively represent various geometric
types and E(3) poses. Unlike the O(3) representations popular in geometric deep learning,
this algebra can represent data that is not invariant to translations, such as absolute positions.
Equivariance: GATr is equivariant with respect to E(3), the symmetry group of three-dimensional
space. To this end, we develop several new E(3)-equivariant primitives mapping between
multivectors, including equivariant linear maps, an attention mechanism, nonlinearities, and
normalization layers.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

