Smoothed Online Learning for Prediction in Piecewise
Affine Systems
Adam Block
Department of Mathematics
MIT
ablock@mit.edu

Max Simchowitz
CSAIL
MIT
msimchow@csail.mit.edu
Russ Tedrake
CSAIL
MIT

Abstract
The problem of piecewise affine (PWA) regression and planning is of foundational
importance to the study of online learning, control, and robotics, where it provides
a theoretically and empirically tractable setting to study systems undergoing sharp
changes in the dynamics. Unfortunately, due to the discontinuities that arise when
crossing into different “pieces,” learning in general sequential settings is impossible and practical algorithms are forced to resort to heuristic approaches. This
paper builds on the recently developed smoothed online learning framework and
provides the first algorithms for prediction and simulation in PWA systems whose
regret is polynomial in all relevant problem parameters under a weak smoothness
assumption; moreover, our algorithms are efficient in the number of calls to an
optimization oracle. We further apply our results to the problems of one-step
prediction and multi-step simulation regret in piecewise affine dynamical systems,
where the learner is tasked with simulating trajectories and regret is measured in
terms of the Wasserstein distance between simulated and true data. Along the way,
we develop several technical tools of more general interest.

1

Introduction

A central problem in the fields of online learning, control, and robotics is how to efficiently plan
through piecewise-affine (PWA) systems. Such systems are described by a finite set of disjoint regions
in state-space, within which the dynamics are affine. In this paper, we consider the related problem
of learning to make predictions in PWA systems when the dynamics are unknown. While recent
years have seen considerable progress around our understanding of linear control systems, the vast
majority of dynamics encountered in practical settings involve nonlinearities. Learning and predicting
in nonlinear systems is typically far more challenging because, unlike their linear counterparts, the
dynamics in a local region of a nonlinear system do not determine its global dynamics.
PWA systems allow for discontinuities across the separate regions (“pieces”), and are thus a simplified
way of modeling rich phenomena that arise in numerous robotic manipulation and locomotion tasks
[41, 64, 40], such as modeling dynamics involving contact. In addition, deep neural networks with
ReLU activation [24] are PWA systems, providing further motiviation for their study. Already, there is
a computational challenge simply in optimizing an objective over these systems, which is the subject
of much of the previous literature. Here, we take a statistical perspective, assuming that we have
access to effective heuristic algorithms for this optimization task, as is common in online learning
[29, 9, 28]. Uniformly accurate learning of the dynamics across all pieces is typically impossible
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

