Chasing Fairness Under Distribution Shift:
A Model Weight Perturbation Approach
Zhimeng Jiang1⇤, Xiaotian Han1⇤ , Hongye Jin1 , Guanchu Wang2 , Rui Chen3 , Na Zou1 , Xia Hu2
1
Texas A&M University, 2 Rice University, 3 Samsung Electronics America

Abstract
Fairness in machine learning has attracted increasing attention in recent years.
The fairness methods improving algorithmic fairness for in-distribution data may
not perform well under distribution shifts. In this paper, we first theoretically
demonstrate the inherent connection between distribution shift, data perturbation,
and model weight perturbation. Subsequently, we analyze the sufficient conditions to guarantee fairness (i.e., low demographic parity) for the target dataset,
including fairness for the source dataset, and low prediction difference between
the source and target datasets for each sensitive attribute group. Motivated by
these sufficient conditions, we propose robust fairness regularization (RFR) by
considering the worst case within the model weight perturbation ball for each
sensitive attribute group. We evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed RFR
algorithm on synthetic and real distribution shifts across various datasets. Experimental results demonstrate that RFR achieves better fairness-accuracy trade-off
performance compared with several baselines. The source code is available at
https://github.com/zhimengj0326/RFR_NeurIPS23.

1

Introduction

Previous research [1–4] has shown that a classifier trained on a specific source distribution will
perform worse when testing on a different target distribution, due to distribution shift. Recently,
many studies have focused on investigating the impact of distribution shift on machine learning
models, where fairness performance degradation is even more significant than that of prediction
performance [5]. The sensitivity of fairness over distribution shift challenges machine learning
models in high stake applications, such as criminal justice [6], healthcare [7], and job marketing [8].
Thus the transferability of the fairness performance under distribution shift is a crucial consideration
for real-world applications.
To achieve the fairness of the model (already achieved fairness on the source dataset ) on the target
dataset, we first reveal that distribution shift is equivalent to model weight perturbation, and then seek
to achieve fairness under distribution shift via model weight perturbation. Specifically, i) we reveal
the inherent connection between distribution shift, data perturbation, and model weight perturbation.
We theoretically demonstrate that any distribution shift can be equivalent to data perturbation and
model weight perturbation in terms of loss value. In other words, the effect of distribution shift on
model training can be attributed to data or model perturbation. ii) Given the established connection
between the distribution shift and model weight perturbation, we next tackle fairness under the
distribution shift problem. We first investigate demographic parity relation between source and target
datasets. Achieving fair prediction (e.g., low demographic parity) in the source dataset is insufficient
for fair prediction in the target dataset. More importantly, the average prediction difference between
source and target datasets with the same sensitive attribute also matters for achieving fairness in target
datasets.
⇤

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

