Minimax Forward and Backward Learning of
Evolving Tasks with Performance Guarantees

Verónica Álvarez1 Santiago Mazuelas1,2 Jose A. Lozano1,3
1
Basque Center of Applied Mathematics (BCAM)
2
IKERBASQUE-Basque Foundation for Science 3 University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU
{valvarez, smazuelas, jlozano}@bcamath.org

Abstract
For a sequence of classification tasks that arrive over time, it is common that tasks
are evolving in the sense that consecutive tasks often have a higher similarity. The
incremental learning of a growing sequence of tasks holds promise to enable accurate classification even with few samples per task by leveraging information from
all the tasks in the sequence (forward and backward learning). However, existing
techniques developed for continual learning and concept drift adaptation are either designed for tasks with time-independent similarities or only aim to learn the
last task in the sequence. This paper presents incremental minimax risk classifiers
(IMRCs) that effectively exploit forward and backward learning and account for
evolving tasks. In addition, we analytically characterize the performance improvement provided by forward and backward learning in terms of the tasks’ expected
quadratic change and the number of tasks. The experimental evaluation shows
that IMRCs can result in a significant performance improvement, especially for
reduced sample sizes.

1 Introduction
In practical scenarios, it is often of interest to incrementally learn a growing sequence of classification problems (tasks) that arrive over time. In such a sequence, it is common that tasks are evolving
in the sense that consecutive tasks often have a higher similarity. Examples of evolving tasks are the
classification of portraits from different time periods [1] and the classification of spam emails over
time [2]; in these problems, the similarity between consecutive tasks (portraits of consecutive time
periods and emails from consecutive years) is significantly higher (see Figure 1). The incremental
learning of a growing sequence of tasks holds promise to significantly improve performance by leveraging information from different tasks. Specifically, at each time step, information from preceding
tasks can be used to improve the performance of the last task (forward learning) and, reciprocally,
the information from the last task can be used to improve the performance of the preceding tasks
(backward learning) [3–5]. Such transfer of information can enable accurate classification even in
cases with reduced sample sizes, thus significantly increasing the effective sample size (ESS) of
each task. However, exploiting the benefits of forward and backward learning is challenging due
to the continuous arrival of samples from tasks characterized by different underlying distributions
[6–8].
Techniques developed for concept drift adaptation (aka learning in a dynamic scenario) [9–16] are
designed for evolving tasks but only aim to learn the last task in the sequence. In particular, methods
based on learning rates learn the last task by slightly updating the classification rule for the preceding
task [12, 13]; and methods based on sliding windows learn the last task by using a set of stored
samples from the most recent preceding tasks [14, 15]. In concept drift adaptation, at each time
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

