A Bayesian Take on Gaussian Process Networks
Enrico Giudice
Dep. of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland
enrico.giudice@unibas.ch

Jack Kuipers
Dep. of Biosystems Science and Engineering
ETH Zurich, Basel, Switzerland
jack.kuipers@bsse.ethz.ch

Giusi Moffa
Dep. of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland
and Division of Psychiatry, University College London, London, UK
giusi.moffa@unibas.ch

Abstract
Gaussian Process Networks (GPNs) are a class of directed graphical models which
employ Gaussian processes as priors for the conditional expectation of each variable
given its parents in the network. The model allows the description of continuous
joint distributions in a compact but flexible manner with minimal parametric
assumptions on the dependencies between variables. Bayesian structure learning
of GPNs requires computing the posterior over graphs of the network and is
computationally infeasible even in low dimensions. This work implements Monte
Carlo and Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods to sample from the posterior
distribution of network structures. As such, the approach follows the Bayesian
paradigm, comparing models via their marginal likelihood and computing the
posterior probability of the GPN features. Simulation studies show that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms in recovering the graphical structure of the
network and provides an accurate approximation of its posterior distribution.

1

Introduction

Bayesian networks (BNs) are a powerful tool for compactly representing joint distributions and the
underlying relationships among a large set of variables [33]. These relationships are described via a
directed acyclic graph (DAG), with each node in the graph representing a random variable. The joint
distribution of a set of random variables X = {X1 , ... , Xn } factorizes into conditional distributions
for each variable given its parents in the DAG:
p(X) =

n
Y

i=1

p(Xi | PaXi ).

(1)

The DAG provides a visual description of the dependency structure among the variables, where
missing edges encode conditional independence relations among pairs of variables. Thanks to their
inherent flexibility and their ability to combine expert knowledge with data, Bayesian networks have
been applied to a large range of domains [2].
In the absence of full prior knowledge of the underlying graph, inference on the structure is necessary.
For this purpose, a plethora of structure learning algorithms have been proposed, which involve either
learning the structure from the conditional independence relations in the data (i.e. constraint-based)
or assigning a score to each DAG and searching the graph space for high-scoring networks. A
recent overview of current algorithms appears in Kitson et al. [23] while a reproducible workflow for
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

