Optimal Regret Is Achievable with Bounded
Approximate Inference Error: An Enhanced Bayesian
Upper Confidence Bound Framework

1

Ziyi Huang, 1 Henry Lam, 2 Amirhossein Meisami, 1 Haofeng Zhang ∗
1
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
2
Adobe Inc., San Jose, CA, USA
zh2354,khl2114,hz2553@columbia.edu, meisami@adobe.com

Abstract
Bayesian bandit algorithms with approximate Bayesian inference have been widely
used in real-world applications. However, there is a large discrepancy between
the superior practical performance of these approaches and their theoretical justification. Previous research only indicates a negative theoretical result: Thompson
sampling could have a worst-case linear regret Ω(T ) with a constant threshold
on the inference error measured by one α-divergence. To bridge this gap, we
propose an Enhanced Bayesian Upper Confidence Bound (EBUCB) framework
that can efficiently accommodate bandit problems in the presence of approximate
inference. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that for Bernoulli multi-armed
bandits, EBUCB can achieve the optimal regret order O(log T ) if the inference
error measured by two different α-divergences is less than a constant, regardless of
how large this constant is. To our best knowledge, our study provides the first theoretical regret bound that is better than o(T ) in the setting of constant approximate
inference error. Furthermore, in concordance with the negative results in previous
studies, we show that only one bounded α-divergence is insufficient to guarantee a
sub-linear regret.

1

Introduction

The stochastic bandit problem, dated back to [37], is an important sequential decision-making
problem that aims to find optimal adaptive strategies to maximize cumulative reward. At each time
step, the learning agent chooses an action among all possible actions and observes its corresponding
reward (but not others), and thus requires a balance between exploration and exploitation. Previous
theoretical studies mainly focus on exact Bayesian bandit problems, requiring access to exact posterior
distributions. However, their work cannot be easily applied to complex models such as deep neural
networks, where maintaining exact posterior distributions tends to be intractable [36]. In contrast,
approximate Bayesian bandit methods are widely employed in real-world applications with stateof-the-art performances [36, 41, 33, 45, 17, 50]. In comparison with exact algorithms, approximate
Bayesian bandit algorithms are more challenging to analyze, as the inaccessibility of exact posterior
sampling adds another level of discrepancy, and the resulting theory and solutions hence also differ
substantially.
Few theoretical studies have been developed around Bayesian bandit approaches with approximate
inference, despite their superior practical performance. [28] gave a theoretical analysis of an approximate sampling method called Ensemble Sampling, which possessed constant Kullback–Leibler
divergence (KL divergence) error from the exact posterior and thus indicated a linear regret. [34]
∗

Authors are listed alphabetically.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

