Perceptual adjustment queries and an inverted
measurement paradigm for low-rank metric learning

Austin Xu∗
Georgia Institute of Technology

Andrew D. McRae
EPFL

Mark A. Davenport
Georgia Institute of Technology

Jingyan Wang
Georgia Institute of Technology

Ashwin Pananjady
Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
We introduce a new type of query mechanism for collecting human feedback, called
the perceptual adjustment query (PAQ). Being both informative and cognitively
lightweight, the PAQ adopts an inverted measurement scheme, and combines advantages from both cardinal and ordinal queries. We showcase the PAQ in the metric
learning problem, where we collect PAQ measurements to learn an unknown Mahalanobis distance. This gives rise to a high-dimensional, low-rank matrix estimation
problem to which standard matrix estimators cannot be applied. Consequently,
we develop a two-stage estimator for metric learning from PAQs, and provide
sample complexity guarantees for this estimator. We present numerical simulations
demonstrating the performance of the estimator and its notable properties.

1

Introduction

Should we query cardinal or ordinal data from people? This question arises in a broad range of applications, such as in conducting surveys [1–3], grading assignments [4, 5], evaluating employees [6],
and comparing or rating products [7, 8], to name a few. Cardinal data are numerical scores. For
example, teachers score writing assignments in the range of 0-100, and survey respondents express
their agreement with a statement on a scale of 1 to 7. Ordinal data are relations between items, such
as pairwise comparisons (choosing the better item in a pair) and rankings (ordering all or a subset of
items). There is no free lunch, and both cardinal and ordinal queries have pros and cons.
On the one hand, collecting ordinal data is typically more efficient in terms of worker time and
cognitive load [9], and surprisingly often matches or exceeds the accuracy of cardinal data [1, 9]. The
information contained in ordinal queries, however, is fundamentally limited and lacks expressiveness.
For example, pairwise comparisons elicit binary responses where two items are compared against
each other, but the absolute placement of these items with respect to the entire pool is lost. On the
other hand, cardinal data are more expressive [10]. For example, assigning two items scores of 1 and
2 conveys a very different message from assigning them scores of 9 and 10, or 1 and 10, although
all yield the same pairwise comparison outcome. However, the expressiveness of cardinal data
often comes at the cost of miscalibration: Prior work has shown that different people have different
scales [11], and even a single person’s scale can drift over time (e.g., [12, 13]). These inter-person
and intra-person discrepancies make it challenging to interpret and aggregate raw scores effectively.
The goal of this paper is to study whether one can combine the advantages of cardinal and ordinal
queries to achieve the best of both worlds. Specifically, we pose the research question:
∗

Contact: axu@gatech.edu. The full version of this work can be found on arXiv.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

