Loss Decoupling for Task-Agnostic
Continual Learning

Yan-Shuo Liang and Wu-Jun Li∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, P. R. China
liangys@smail.nju.edu.cn,liwujun@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Continual learning requires the model to learn multiple tasks in a sequential order.
To perform continual learning, the model must possess the abilities to maintain
performance on old tasks (stability) and adapt itself to learn new tasks (plasticity).
Task-agnostic problem in continual learning is a challenging problem, in which
task identities are not available in the inference stage and hence the model must
learn to distinguish all the classes in all the tasks. In task-agnostic problem,
the model needs to learn two new objectives for learning a new task, including
distinguishing new classes from old classes and distinguishing between different
new classes. For task-agnostic problem, replay-based methods are commonly
used. These methods update the model with both saved old samples and new
samples for continual learning. Most existing replay-based methods mix the two
objectives in task-agnostic problem together, inhibiting the models from achieving
a good trade-off between stability and plasticity. In this paper, we propose a simple
yet effective method, called loss decoupling (LODE), for task-agnostic continual
learning. LODE separates the two objectives for the new task by decoupling the
loss of the new task. As a result, LODE can assign different weights for different
objectives, which provides a way to obtain a better trade-off between stability and
plasticity than those methods with coupled loss. Experiments show that LODE can
outperform existing state-of-the-art replay-based methods on multiple continual
learning datasets.

1

Introduction

Continual learning requires the model to learn multiple tasks in a sequential order [31]. However,
neural network models suffer from a phenomenon called catastrophic forgetting (CF) [12], in which
the performance of the network on the old tasks degrades significantly after it learns a new task. To
address this challenge and enable continual learning, the model must possess the abilities to maintain
performance on old tasks (stability) and adapt itself to learn new tasks (plasticity). Nevertheless, an
excess of stability or plasticity can interfere with the other [39], and hence the model needs to make a
trade-off between stability and plasticity [39, 31].
There exist two different kinds of problems, task-agnostic problem and task-aware problem, in
continual learning. Task-agnostic problem [39] in continual learning is a challenging problem, in
which task identities are not available in the inference stage and hence the model must learn to
distinguish all the classes in all the tasks. In contrast, task-aware problem [28] in continual learning
enables the model to get task identities in the inference stage. Therefore, the model for task-aware
problem only needs to distinguish the classes belonging to the same task. The difference between
task-agnostic problem and task-aware problem [28, 29] shows that the model in task-agnostic problem
∗

Wu-Jun Li is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

