Benchmarking Robustness to Adversarial Image
Obfuscations
Florian Stimberg
Google DeepMind

Ayan Chakrabarti
Google Research

Chun-Ta Lu
Google Research

Hussein Hazimeh
Google Research

Otilia Stretcu
Google Research

Wei Qiao
Google Ads Safety

Yintao Liu
Google Ads Safety

Merve Kaya
Google Research

Cyrus Rashtchian
Google Research

Ariel Fuxman
Google Research

Mehmet Tek
Google Ads Safety

Sven Gowal
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Automated content filtering and moderation is an important tool that allows online
platforms to build striving user communities that facilitate cooperation and prevent
abuse. Unfortunately, resourceful actors try to bypass automated filters in a bid
to post content that violate platform policies and codes of conduct. To reach this
goal, these malicious actors may obfuscate policy violating images (e.g. overlay
harmful images by carefully selected benign images or visual patterns) to prevent
machine learning models from reaching the correct decision. In this paper, we
invite researchers to tackle this specific issue and present a new image benchmark.
This benchmark, based on I MAGE N ET, simulates the type of obfuscations created
by malicious actors. It goes beyond I MAGE N ET-C and I MAGE N ET- C̄ by proposing
general, drastic, adversarial modifications that preserve the original content intent.
It aims to tackle a more common adversarial threat than the one considered by
`p -norm bounded adversaries. We evaluate 33 pretrained models on the benchmark
and train models with different augmentations, architectures and training methods
on subsets of the obfuscations to measure generalization. Our hope is that this
benchmark will encourage researchers to test their models and methods and try to
find new approaches that are more robust to these obfuscations.

1

Introduction

Advances in in computer vision have lead to classifiers that nearly match human performance in
many applications. However, while the human visual system is remarkably versatile in extracting
semantic meaning out of even degraded and heavily obfuscated images, today’s visual classifiers
significantly lag behind in emulating the same robustness, and often yield incorrect outputs in the
presence of natural and adversarial degradations. This is why evaluating robustness [1, 2] and
improving the robustness of visual classifiers has been the subject of considerable research [3, 4],
with multiple benchmarks looking at out of distribution examples [5, 6], distribution shift [7–9]
or focusing on robustness to “natural degradations”, like blur and noise, which are inherent in the
imaging process [10, 11]. However, with more and more visual classifiers being deployed in real
systems, robustness to adversarial perturbations—deliberate changes to an image introduced by an
adversary to fool classifiers—has emerged as an important research direction [12–14].
Such work on adversarial robustness has largely focused on perturbations that are imperceptible to
human observers—often cast as an explicit `p -norm constraint between the original and perturbed
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

