Let the Flows Tell: Solving Graph Combinatorial
Optimization Problems with GFlowNets

Dinghuai Zhang∗
Mila

Hanjun Dai
Google DeepMind

Nikolay Malkin, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, Ling Pan
Mila

Abstract
Combinatorial optimization (CO) problems are often NP-hard and thus out of
reach for exact algorithms, making them a tempting domain to apply machine
learning methods. The highly structured constraints in these problems can hinder
either optimization or sampling directly in the solution space. On the other hand,
GFlowNets have recently emerged as a powerful machinery to efficiently sample
from composite unnormalized densities sequentially and have the potential to
amortize such solution-searching processes in CO, as well as generate diverse
solution candidates. In this paper, we design Markov decision processes (MDPs)
for different combinatorial problems and propose to train conditional GFlowNets
to sample from the solution space. Efficient training techniques are also developed
to benefit long-range credit assignment. Through extensive experiments on a
variety of different CO tasks with synthetic and realistic data, we demonstrate that
GFlowNet policies can efficiently find high-quality solutions. Our implementation
is open-sourced at https://github.com/zdhNarsil/GFlowNet-CombOpt.

1

Introduction
max ind set

…
Combinatorial optimization (CO) is a branch of op…
timization that studies problems of minimizing or
maximizing some cost over a finite feasible set. CO
…
problems usually involve discrete structures, such
as graphs, networks, and permutations, and require
optimizing an objective function subject to discrete
…
constraints in the solution space, which is often NP…
hard. CO problems have broad applications, including in medicine, engineering, operations research,
…
…
and management (Paschos, 2010), and have spurred
the development of discrete mathematics and theo- Figure 1: Illustration of GFlowNet for a toy
retical computer science for a century (Kuhn, 1955; MIS problem where all the states form a DAG.
Kruskal, 1956; Ford & Fulkerson, 1956).
Every trajectory starts from the same initial
During the past few decades, researchers have devel- state (whose vertices are all gray). Each transioped numerical solvers such as G UROBI (Gurobi Op- tion denotes adding one vertex to the solution
timization, 2023) to give approximate solutions via set, i.e., changing one vertex to black. See Secinteger programming. In recent years, interest in tion 3.2 for details.
learning-based methods for solving CO problems has grown significantly. These approaches leverage
the power of deep networks to learn the inherent structure of CO problems and provide efficient

∗

Correspondence to dinghuai.zhang@mila.quebec.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

