Multiplication-Free Transformer Training
via Piecewise Affine Operations

Atli Kosson
Martin Jaggi
EPFL, Switzerland
firstname.lastname@epfl.ch

Abstract
Multiplications are responsible for most of the computational cost involved in
neural network training and inference. Recent research has thus looked for ways
to reduce the cost associated with them. Inspired by Mogami (2020), we replace
multiplication with a cheap piecewise affine approximation that is achieved by
adding the bit representation of the floating point numbers together as integers.
We show that transformers can be trained with the resulting modified matrix
multiplications on both vision and language tasks with little to no performance
impact, and without changes to the training hyperparameters. We further replace
all non-linearities in the networks making them fully and jointly piecewise affine in
both inputs and weights. Finally, we show that we can eliminate all multiplications
in the entire training process, including operations in the forward pass, backward
pass and optimizer update, demonstrating the first successful training of modern
neural network architectures in a fully multiplication-free fashion.

1

Introduction

The computational cost of training state-of-theart neural networks has risen rapidly in recent
years [1]. Aside from the increased price of
training, this also requires more energy which often comes with an environmental impact. Large
language models, such as foundation models [2],
are particularly expensive to train. These models
are typically based on the transformer architecture [34].
Neural network training consists largely of matrix multiplications that generally account for
the vast majority of the computational cost
for standard architectures such as transform- Figure 1: Elementary neural network operations
ers. These matrix multiplications are performed (solid lines) along with cheaper piecewise affine
by multiplying and accumulating the scalar el- alternatives (dashed lines). The piecewise affine
ements of the matrices which are generally en- functions periodically match the originals and the
coded as floating point values during training. derivative of each segment is an exact power of 2.
As floating point multiplication is significantly
more complicated than addition, it requires more
logic gates and energy to perform in hardware. Horowitz (2014) estimates that for float32 operands,
multiplication requires 4× more energy than addition. Approaches for computationally efficient
training thus often focus on reducing the cost of the multiplications. One such method is mixed
precision training [23], where the multiplications are performed in a lower precision format such
as float16 or bfloat16 [15] while the accumulation is still performed in the standard float32. Mod37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

