Variational Weighting for Kernel Density Ratios

Sangwoong Yoon
Korea Institute for Advanced Study
swyoon@kias.re.kr
Gunsu Yun
POSTECH
gunsu@postech.ac.kr

Frank C. Park
Seoul National University / Saige Research
fcp@snu.ac.kr
Iljung Kim
Hanyang University
iljung0810@hanyang.ac.kr

Yung-Kyun Noh
Hanyang University / Korea Institute for Advanced Study
nohyung@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
Kernel density estimation (KDE) is integral to a range of generative and discriminative tasks in machine learning. Drawing upon tools from the multidimensional
calculus of variations, we derive an optimal weight function that reduces bias in
standard kernel density estimates for density ratios, leading to improved estimates
of prediction posteriors and information-theoretic measures. In the process, we
shed light on some fundamental aspects of density estimation, particularly from
the perspective of algorithms that employ KDEs as their main building blocks.

1

Introduction

One fundamental component for building many applications in machine learning is a correctly
estimated density for prediction and estimation tasks, with examples ranging from classification
[1, 2], anomaly detection [3], and clustering [4] to the generalization of value functions [5], policy
evaluation [6], and estimation of various information-theoretic measures [7, 8, 9]. Nonparametric
density estimators, such as the nearest neighbor density estimator or kernel density estimators
(KDEs), have been used as substitutes for the probability density component within the equation of
the posterior probability, or the density-ratio equation, with theoretical guarantees derived in part
from the properties of the density estimators used [10, 11].
Given a specific task which uses the ratio between two densities, p1 (x) and p2 (x) at a point x ∈ RD ,
we consider the ratio handled by the ratio of their corresponding two KDEs, pb1 (x) and pb2 (x):
pb1 (x)
p1 (x)
−−−−−→
.
pb2 (x) Estimate p2 (x)

(1)

Each estimator is a KDE which counts the effective number of data within a small neighborhood of
x by averaging the kernels. The biases produced by the KDEs in the nominator and denominator
[12, Theorem 6.28] are combined to produce a single bias of the ratio, as demonstrated in Fig. 1.
For example, the ratio pp12 (x)
(x) at x0 in Fig. 1(a) is clearly expected to be underestimated because of
the dual effects in Fig. 1(b): the underestimation of the nominator p1 (x0 ) and the overestimation
of the denominator p2 (x0 ). The underestimation is attributed to the concavity of p1 (x) around
x0 which leads to a reduced number of data being generated compared to a uniform density. The
underestimation of p2 (x) can be explained similarly. The second derivative—Laplacian—that creates
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

