Locality Sensitive Hashing in Fourier Frequency
Domain For Soft Set Containment Search
Indradyumna Roy† Rishi Agarwal†
Soumen Chakrabarti† Anirban Dasgupta⋄ Abir De†
†
IIT Bombay, ⋄ IIT Gandhinagar
{indraroy15, rishiagarwal18, soumen, abir}@cse.iitb.ac.in
anirbandg@cse.iitgn.ac.in

Abstract
In many search applications related to passage retrieval, text entailment, and subgraph search, the query and each ‘document’ is a set of elements, with a document
being relevant if it contains the query. These elements are not represented by atomic
IDs, but by embedded representations, thereby extending set containment to soft
set containment. Recent applications address soft set containment by encoding sets
into fixed-size vectors and checking for elementwise vector dominance. This 0/1
property can be relaxed to an asymmetric hinge distance for scoring and ranking
candidate documents. Here we focus on data-sensitive, trainable indices for fast
retrieval of relevant documents. Existing LSH methods are designed for mostly
symmetric or few simple asymmetric distance functions, which are not suitable for
hinge distance. Instead, we transform hinge distance into a proposed dominance
similarity measure, to which we then apply a Fourier transform, thereby expressing
dominance similarity as an expectation of inner products of functions in the frequency domain. Next, we approximate the expectation with an importance-sampled
estimate. The overall consequence is that now we can use a traditional LSH, but in
the frequency domain. To ensure that the LSH uses hash bits efficiently, we learn
hash functions that are sensitive to both corpus and query distributions, mapped to
the frequency domain. Our experiments show that the proposed asymmetric dominance similarity is critical to the targeted applications, and that our LSH, which we
call F OURIER H ASH N ET, provides a better query time vs. retrieval quality trade-off,
compared to several baselines. Both the Fourier transform and the trainable hash
codes contribute to performance gains.

1

Introduction

Consider a corpus X of sets x (which we call ‘documents’) over some universe of discrete items, and
let q be a query which is also a subset of this universe. We wish to retrieve those x ∈ X which satisfy
q ⊆ x. In most real-world applications, the items in the universe are not just opaque IDs, but are
embedded in a rich feature space, demanding that the definition of “q ⊆ x” be generalized suitably.
We formalize the notion of soft set containment by writing q = {qi } and x = {xi } and the
corresponding sets of item embeddings as {⃗qi } and {⃗xi }. If q, x are sentences, q⃗i , ⃗xi may be perword contextual embeddings output from a transformer. If q, x are graphs, q⃗i , ⃗xi may be contextual
node embeddings, such as those output by a Graph Neural Network (GNN). These set-of-vector
representations of q and x are generally of variable sizes. A suitable set encoding gadget, such as
simple pooling [41, 31] or a trainable Deep Set [60] or Set Transformer [27] network, converts them
to fixed-size vectors given by q = SetEnc({⃗qi }) and x = SetEnc({⃗xi }), with x, q ∈ RK . Several
applications [52, 26, 10, 31] then use the test “q ≤ x” (elementwise vector dominance) as a surrogate
for testing if q ⊆ x.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

