Structured State Space Models for In-Context
Reinforcement Learning

Chris Lu∗
FLAIR, University of Oxford

Yannick Schroecker
DeepMind

Jakob Foerster
FLAIR, University of Oxford

Albert Gu
DeepMind

Satinder Singh
DeepMind

Emilio Parisotto
DeepMind

Feryal Behbahani
DeepMind

Abstract
Structured state space sequence (S4) models have recently achieved state-of-the-art
performance on long-range sequence modeling tasks. These models also have
fast inference speeds and parallelisable training, making them potentially useful
in many reinforcement learning settings. We propose a modification to a variant
of S4 that enables us to initialise and reset the hidden state in parallel, allowing
us to tackle reinforcement learning tasks. We show that our modified architecture
runs asymptotically faster than Transformers in sequence length and performs
better than RNN’s on a simple memory-based task. We evaluate our modified
architecture on a set of partially-observable environments and find that, in practice,
our model outperforms RNN’s while also running over five times faster. Then,
by leveraging the model’s ability to handle long-range sequences, we achieve
strong performance on a challenging meta-learning task in which the agent is
given a randomly-sampled continuous control environment, combined with a
randomly-sampled linear projection of the environment’s observations and actions.
Furthermore, we show the resulting model can adapt to out-of-distribution held-out
tasks. Overall, the results presented in this paper show that structured state space
models are fast and performant for in-context reinforcement learning tasks. We
provide code at https://github.com/luchris429/s5rl.

1

Introduction

Structured state space sequence (S4) models [12] and their variants such as S5 [38] have recently
achieved impressive results in long-range sequence modelling tasks, far outperforming other popular
sequence models such as the Transformer [42] and LSTM [16] on the Long-Range Arena benchmark [41]. Notably, S4 was the first architecture to achieve a non-trivial result on the difficult Path-X
task, which requires the ability to handle extremely long-range dependencies of lengths 16k.
Furthermore, S4 models display a number of desirable properties that are not directly tested by raw
performance benchmarks. Unlike transformers, for which the per step runtime usually scales quadratically with the sequence length, S4 models have highly-scalable inference runtime performance,
asymptotically using constant memory and time per step with respect to the sequence length. While
LSTMs and other RNNs also have this property, empirically, S4 models are far more performant
while also being parallelisable across the sequence dimension during training.
While inference-time is normally not included when evaluating on sequence modelling benchmarks,
it has a large impact on the scalability and wallclock-time for reinforcement learning (RL) because
∗

Work done during an internship at DeepMind. Contact: christopher.lu@exeter.ox.ac.uk

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

