Distribution-Free Statistical Dispersion Control for
Societal Applications

Zhun Deng
zhun.d@columbia.edu
Columbia University

Thomas P. Zollo
tpz2105@columbia.edu
Columbia University

Toniann Pitassi
toni@cs.columbia.edu
Columbia University

Jake C. Snell
js2523@princeton.edu
Princeton University

Richard Zemel
zemel@cs.columbia.edu
Columbia University

Abstract
Explicit finite-sample statistical guarantees on model performance are an important
ingredient in responsible machine learning. Previous work has focused mainly
on bounding either the expected loss of a predictor or the probability that an
individual prediction will incur a loss value in a specified range. However, for
many high-stakes applications it is crucial to understand and control the dispersion
of a loss distribution, or the extent to which different members of a population
experience unequal effects of algorithmic decisions. We initiate the study of
distribution-free control of statistical dispersion measures with societal implications
and propose a simple yet flexible framework that allows us to handle a much
richer class of statistical functionals beyond previous work. Our methods are
verified through experiments in toxic comment detection, medical imaging, and
film recommendation.

1

Introduction

Learning-based predictive algorithms are widely used in real-world systems and have significantly
impacted our daily lives. However, many algorithms are deployed without sufficient testing or
a thorough understanding of likely failure modes. This is especially worrisome in high-stakes
application areas such as healthcare, finance, and autonomous transportation. In order to address
this critical challenge and provide tools for rigorous system evaluation prior to deployment, there
has been a rise in techniques offering explicit and finite-sample statistical guarantees that hold for
any unknown data distribution and black-box algorithm, a paradigm known as distribution-free
uncertainty quantification (DFUQ). In [1], a framework is proposed for selecting a model based on
bounds on expected loss produced using validation data. Subsequent work [30] goes beyond expected
loss to provide distribution-free control for a class of risk measures known as quantile-based risk
measures (QBRMs) [8]. This includes (in addition to expected loss): median, value-at-risk (VaR),
and conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) [23]. For example, such a framework can be used to get bounds
on the 80th percentile loss or the average loss of the 10% worst cases.
While this is important progress towards the sort of robust system verification necessary to ensure the
responsible use of machine learning algorithms, in some scenarios measuring the expected loss or
value-at-risk is not enough. As models are increasingly deployed in areas with long-lasting societal
consequences, we should also be concerned with the dispersion of error across the population, or
the extent to which different members of a population experience unequal effects of decisions made
based on a model’s prediction. For example, a system for promoting content on a social platform
may offer less appropriate recommendations for the long tail of niche users in service of a small set
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

