Team-PSRO for Learning Approximate TMECor in
Large Team Games via Cooperative Reinforcement
Learning

Stephen McAleer
Carnegie Mellon University
Mingzhi Wang
Peking University

Gabriele Farina
MIT
Yaodong Yang
Peking University

Gaoyue Zhou
Carnegie Mellon University
Tuomas Sandholm∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Recent algorithms have achieved superhuman performance at a number of twoplayer zero-sum games such as poker and go. However, many real-world situations
are multi-player games. Zero-sum two-team games, such as bridge and football,
involve two teams where each member of the team shares the same reward with
every other member of that team, and each team has the negative of the reward
of the other team. A popular solution concept in this setting, called TMECor,
assumes that teams can jointly correlate their strategies before play, but are not
able to communicate during play. This setting is harder than two-player zerosum games because each player on a team has different information and must
use their public actions to signal to other members of the team. Prior works
either have game-theoretic guarantees but only work in very small games, or are
able to scale to large games but do not have game-theoretic guarantees. In this
paper we introduce two algorithms: Team-PSRO, an extension of PSRO from twoplayer games to team games, and Team-PSRO Mix-and-Match which improves
upon Team PSRO by better using population policies. In Team-PSRO, in every
iteration both teams learn a joint best response to the opponent’s meta-strategy
via reinforcement learning. As the reinforcement learning joint best response
approaches the optimal best response, Team-PSRO is guaranteed to converge to a
TMECor. In experiments on Kuhn poker and Liar’s Dice, we show that a tabular
version of Team-PSRO converges to TMECor, and a version of Team PSRO using
deep cooperative reinforcement learning beats self-play reinforcement learning in
the large game of Google Research Football.

1

Introduction

Two-player zero-sum games have served as testbeds for artificial intelligence research. Algorithms that
have achieved superhuman performance in games such as go (Silver et al., 2017) and poker (Bowling
et al., 2015; Brown & Sandholm, 2017) are widely seen as milestones. These algorithms use gametheoretic techniques to find an approximate Nash equilibrium, in other words a strategy that cannot
be exploited by humans. Despite these successes in two-player games, real-world scenarios often
involve more than two players.
In this paper we study a class of games with multiple players where each player shares reward with
the other players in one of two teams, which we call two-team games. A canonical example of a
∗

Additional affiliations: Strategy Robot, Inc., Strategic Machine, Inc., Optimized Markets, Inc.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

