Interpretable Prototype-based Graph Information
Bottleneck
Sangwoo Seo1 Sungwon Kim1 Chanyoung Park1∗
1
KAIST
{sangwooseo@kaist.ac.kr, swkim@kaist.ac.kr, cy.park@kaist.ac.kr}

Abstract
The success of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) has led to a need for understanding
their decision-making process and providing explanations for their predictions,
which has given rise to explainable AI (XAI) that offers transparent explanations for
black-box models. Recently, the use of prototypes has successfully improved the
explainability of models by learning prototypes to imply training graphs that affect
the prediction. However, these approaches tend to provide prototypes with excessive information from the entire graph, leading to the exclusion of key substructures
or the inclusion of irrelevant substructures, which can limit both the interpretability
and the performance of the model in downstream tasks. In this work, we propose a
novel framework of explainable GNNs, called interpretable Prototype-based Graph
Information Bottleneck (PGIB), that incorporates prototype learning within the information bottleneck framework to provide prototypes with the key subgraph from
the input graph that is important for the model prediction. This is the first work that
incorporates prototype learning into the process of identifying the key subgraphs
that have a critical impact on the prediction performance. Extensive experiments,
including qualitative analysis, demonstrate that PGIB outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in terms of both prediction performance and explainability. The source
code of PGIB is available at https://github.com/sang-woo-seo/PGIB.

1

Introduction

With the success of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) in a wide range of deep learning tasks, there has
been an increasing demand for exploring the decision-making process of these models and providing
explanations for their predictions. To address this demand, explainable AI (XAI) has emerged as a
way to understand black-box models by providing transparent explanations for their predictions. This
approach can improve the credibility of models and ensure transparency in their decision-making
processes. As a result, XAI is actively being used in various applications, such as medical, finance,
security, and chemistry [3, 26].
In general, explainability can be viewed from two perspectives: 1) improving the interpretability
by providing explanations for the model’s predictions, and 2) providing the reasoning process
behind the model prediction by giving explanations for the model’s training process. Improving the
interpretability in GNNs involves detecting important substructures during the inference phase, which
is useful for tasks such as identifying functional groups (i.e., important substructures) in molecular
chemistry [29, 33, 23, 12]. On the other hand, it is also important to provide the reasoning process
for why the model predicts in a certain way, which requires an in-depth analysis of the training phase,
so as to understand the model in a more fundamental level. Through this reasoning process, we can
visualize and analyze how the model makes correct or incorrect decisions, thus obtaining crucial
information for improving its performance.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

