Global Update Tracking: A Decentralized Learning
Algorithm for Heterogeneous Data

Sai Aparna Aketi Abolfazl Hashemi Kaushik Roy
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
{saketi, abolfazl, kaushik}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Decentralized learning enables training of deep learning models over large distributed datasets generated at different locations, without the need for a central
server. However, in practical scenarios, the data distribution across these devices
can be significantly different, leading to a degradation in model performance. In
this paper, we focus on designing a decentralized learning algorithm that is less susceptible to variations in data distribution across devices. We propose Global Update
Tracking (GUT), a novel tracking-based method that aims to mitigate the impact
of heterogeneous data in decentralized learning without introducing any communication overhead. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed technique
through an exhaustive set of experiments on various Computer Vision datasets
(CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, Fashion MNIST, and ImageNette), model architectures,
and network topologies. Our experiments show that the proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance for decentralized learning on heterogeneous data via a
1 − 6% improvement in test accuracy compared to other existing techniques.

1

Introduction

Decentralized learning is a branch of distributed optimization which focuses on learning from data
distributed across multiple agents without a central server. It offers many advantages over the
traditional centralized approach in core aspects such as data privacy, fault tolerance, and scalability
[18]. It has been demonstrated that decentralized learning algorithms [15] can perform comparable
to centralized algorithms on benchmark vision datasets. Decentralized Parallel Stochastic Gradient
Descent (DSGD) presented in [15] combines SGD with a gossip averaging algorithm [26]. Further, the
authors analytically show that the convergence rate of DSGD is similar to its centralized counterpart
[5]. A momentum version of DSGD referred to as Decentralized Momentum Stochastic Gradient
Descent (DSGDm) was proposed in [3]. The authors in [2] introduce Stochastic Gradient Push
(SGP) which extends DSGD to directed and time-varying graphs. Recently, a unified framework for
analyzing gossip-based decentralized SGD methods and the best-known convergence guarantees was
presented in [11].
One of the key assumptions to achieve state-of-the-art performance by all the above-mentioned
decentralized algorithms is that the data is independently and identically distributed (IID) across the
agents. In particular, the data is assumed to be distributed in a uniform and random manner across the
agents. This assumption does not hold in most real-world settings where the data distributions across
the agents are significantly different (non-IID/heterogeneous) [9]. The effect of heterogeneous data in
a peer-to-peer decentralized setup is a relatively under-studied problem and an active area of research.
Recently, there have been few efforts to bridge the performance gap between IID and non-IID data
for a decentralized setup [16, 23, 19, 7, 1, 24]. Cross Gradient Aggregation [7] and Neighborhood
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

