Relax, it doesn’t matter how you get there:
A new self-supervised approach for multi-timescale
behavior analysis

Mehdi Azabou∗
Georgia Tech

Michael J. Mendelson
Georgia Tech

Shantanu Thakoor
DeepMind

Nauman Ahad
Georgia Tech

Carolina Urzay
Georgia Tech

Maks Sorokin
Georgia Tech
Eva L. Dyer∗
Georgia Tech

Abstract
Unconstrained and natural behavior consists of dynamics that are complex and
unpredictable, especially when trying to predict what will happen multiple steps
into the future. While some success has been found in building representations
of animal behavior under constrained or simplified task-based conditions, many
of these models cannot be applied to free and naturalistic settings where behavior
becomes increasingly hard to model. In this work, we develop a multi-task representation learning model for animal behavior that combines two novel components:
(i) an action-prediction objective that aims to predict the distribution of actions
over future timesteps, and (ii) a multi-scale architecture that builds separate latent
spaces to accommodate short- and long-term dynamics. After demonstrating the
ability of the method to build representations of both local and global dynamics in
robots in varying environments and terrains, we apply our method to the MABe
2022 Multi-Agent Behavior challenge, where our model ranks first overall on both
mice and fly benchmarks. In all of these cases, we show that our model can build
representations that capture the many different factors that drive behavior and solve
a wide range of downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Behavior is shaped by various factors operating across different timescales. Immediate motivations
can drive moment-to-moment interactions, while long-term experiences or even the time of day
can influence behavior on broader scales. Analyzing these dynamics, particularly in complex and
naturalistic contexts (34; 28), has now become a critical component in many modern studies in
neuroscience (28), cognitive science, and in social behavior and decision making (38; 52; 56; 5).
Additionally, monitoring and tracking systems now allow for modeling of multi-agent interactions
(27; 11; 16) and social behaviors (52; 1), providing valuable insights into dynamics across many
individuals.
In order to learn latent factors that may influence behavioral patterns, a promising solution is to
build models of behavior in a unsupervised manner (25; 68). Unsupervised models are of particular
interest in this domain as it becomes hard to identify complex behaviors which can be composed of
many “syllables” of movement (65), and are thus hard and tedious to annotate. Recent work in this
direction build such representations using generative modeling and reconstruction-based objectives,
∗
Contact: {mazabou,evadyer}@gatech.edu. Project page and code: https://multiscale-behavior.
github.io/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

