V-InFoR: A Robust Graph Neural Networks Explainer
for Structurally Corrupted Graphs

Senzhang Wang∗ †
Central South University
szwang@csu.edu.cn

Jun Yin†
Central South University
yinjun2000@csu.edu.cn

Xing Xie
Microsoft Research Asia
xing.xie@microsoft.com

Chaozhuo Li
Microsoft Research Asia
cli@microsoft.com

Jianxin Wang
Central South University
jxwang@mail.csu.edu.cn

Abstract
GNN explanation method aims to identify an explanatory subgraph which contains
the most informative components of the full graph. However, a major limitation
of existing GNN explainers is that they are not robust to the structurally corrupted
graphs, e.g., graphs with noisy or adversarial edges. On the one hand, existing
GNN explainers mostly explore explanations based on either the raw graph features
or the learned latent representations, both of which can be easily corrupted. On
the other hand, the corruptions in graphs are irregular in terms of the structural
properties, e.g., the size or connectivity of graphs, which makes the rigorous constraints used by previous GNN explainers unfeasible. To address these issues, we
propose a robust GNN explainer called V-InfoR 3 . Specifically, a robust graph
representation extractor, which takes insights of variational inference, is proposed
to infer the latent distribution of graph representations. Instead of directly using
the corrupted raw features or representations of each single graph, we sample the
graph representations from the inferred distribution for the downstream explanation
generator, which can effectively eliminate the minor corruption. We next formulate
the explanation exploration as a graph information bottleneck (GIB) optimization
problem. As a more general method that does not need any rigorous structural
constraints, our GIB-based method can adaptively capture both the regularity and
irregularity of the severely corrupted graphs for explanation. Extensive evaluations on both synthetic and real-world datasets indicate that V-InfoR significantly
improves the GNN explanation performance for the structurally corrupted graphs.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, graph data is ubiquitous in various domains, such as citation networks [1, 2, 3], social
networks [4, 5], and chemical molecules [6]. GNN has manifested promising performance in many
graph tasks, e.g., node classification [7, 8], link prediction [9], and graph classification [10, 11], by
aggregating node features in light of the topological structures. Similar to other deep learning models,
GNN models also have the defect that they are non-transparent, and the prediction results lack humanintelligible explanations [12]. Precise explanations can not only make people better understand GNN
predictions but also assist GNN designers in detecting underlying flaws and purifying them.
∗

Corresponding author.
Equally contribute to this research.
3
Code and dataset are available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/V-InfoR-EF88

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

