Dynamic Personalized Federated Learning with
Adaptive Differential Privacy

1

Xiyuan Yang1∗ Wenke Huang1∗ Mang Ye1†
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
School of Computer Science, Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
{yangxiyuan,wenkehuang,yemang}@whu.edu.cn
https://github.com/xiyuanyang45/DynamicPFL

Abstract
Personalized federated learning with differential privacy has been considered a
feasible solution to address non-IID distribution of data and privacy leakage risks.
However, current personalized federated learning methods suffer from inflexible
personalization and convergence difficulties due to two main factors: 1) Firstly,
we observe that the prevailing personalization methods mainly achieve this by
personalizing a fixed portion of the model, which lacks flexibility. 2) Moreover,
we further demonstrate that the default gradient calculation is sensitive to the
widely-used clipping operations in differential privacy, resulting in difficulties in
convergence. Considering that Fisher information values can serve as an effective
measure for estimating the information content of parameters by reflecting the
model sensitivity to parameters, we aim to leverage this property to address the
aforementioned challenges. In this paper, we propose a novel federated learning
method with Dynamic Fisher Personalization and Adaptive Constraint (FedDPA) to
handle these challenges. Firstly, by using layer-wise Fisher information to measure
the information content of local parameters, we retain local parameters with high
Fisher values during the personalization process, which are considered informative,
simultaneously prevent these parameters from noise perturbation. Secondly, we
introduce an adaptive approach by applying differential constraint strategies to
personalized parameters and shared parameters identified in the previous for better
convergence. Our method boosts performance through flexible personalization
while mitigating the slow convergence caused by clipping operations. Experimental
results on CIFAR-10, FEMNIST and SVHN dataset demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach in achieving better performance and robustness against clipping,
under personalized federated learning with differential privacy.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [32] has shown great potential in facilitating collaborative machine learning
across distributed devices. However, in real-world scenarios, local data normally present non-IID
[40, 44, 43, 10, 16, 27, 26], (non-independent and identically distributed), posing data heterogeneity
challenges [19, 22, 14, 9, 37] in FL. To address these challenges, various personalized federated
learning (PFL) algorithms have emerged [39, 2, 30, 28], demonstrating significant effectiveness
by incorporating personalized components that cater to the local data characteristics of each client.
Despite their success, PFL faces severe privacy leakage issues, as client-local training data may be
reconstructed through inference attacks [11, 33, 18, 42] during the collaborative updating phase. As a
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

