Scalable Primal-Dual Actor-Critic Method for Safe
Multi-Agent RL with General Utilities

Donghao Ying
IEOR Department
UC Berkeley
donghaoy@berkeley.edu
Yuhao Ding
IEOR Department
UC Berkeley
yuhao_ding@berkeley.edu

Yunkai Zhang
IEOR Department
UC Berkeley
yunkai_zhang@berkeley.edu

Alec Koppel
Artificial Intelligence Research
J.P. Morgan
alec.koppel@jpmchase.com

Javad Lavaei
IEOR Department
UC Berkeley
lavaei@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We investigate safe multi-agent reinforcement learning, where agents seek to collectively maximize an aggregate sum of local objectives while satisfying their own
safety constraints. The objective and constraints are described by general utilities,
i.e., nonlinear functions of the long-term state-action occupancy measure, which
encompass broader decision-making goals such as risk, exploration, or imitations.
The exponential growth of the state-action space size with the number of agents
presents challenges for global observability, further exacerbated by the global
coupling arising from agents’ safety constraints. To tackle this issue, we propose a
primal-dual method utilizing shadow reward and κ-hop neighbor truncation under
a form of correlation decay property, where κ is the communication radius. In the
exact setting, our algorithm converges to a first-order stationary point (FOSP) at
the rate of O (T −2/3 ). In the sample-based setting, we demonstrate that, with high
̃ (ϵ−3.5 ) samples to achieve an ϵ-FOSP with
probability, our algorithm requires O
2κ
an approximation error of O(ϕ0 ), where ϕ0 ∈ (0, 1). Finally, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of our model through extensive numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) involves agents operating within a shared
environment, where each agent’s decisions influence not only their objectives, but also those of
others and the state trajectories [1]. In seeking to bring conceptually sound MARL techniques
out of simulation [2, 3] and into real-world environments [4, 5], some key issues emerge: safety
and communications overhead implied by a training mechanism. Although experimentally, the
centralized training decentralized execution (CTDE) framework has gained traction recently [6, 7],
its requirement for centralized data collection can pose issues for large-scale [8] or privacy-sensitive
applications [9]. Therefore, we prioritize decentralized training, where to date most MARL techniques
impose global state observability for performance certification [1]. In this work, we extend recent
efforts to alleviate this bottleneck [10] especially in the case of safety critical settings, in a flexible
manner that allows agents to incorporate risk, exploration, or prior information.
More specifically, we hypothesize that the multi-agent system consists of a network of agents that
interact with each other locally according to an underlying dependence graph [10]. Second, to model
safety constraints in reinforcement learning (RL), we adopt a standard approach based on constrained
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

