Orthogonal Non-negative Tensor Factorization based
Multi-view Clustering

Jing Li
Xidian University
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
jinglxd@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Quanxue Gao ∗
Xidian University
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
qxgao@xidian.edu.cn

Ming Yang
Harbin Engineering University
Harbin, Heilongjiang, China
yangmingmath@gmail.com

Qianqian Wang
Xidian University
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
qqwang@xidian.edu.cn

Wei Xia
Xidian University
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
xdweixia@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-view clustering (MVC) based on non-negative matrix factorization (NMF)
and its variants have attracted much attention due to their advantages in clustering
interpretability. However, existing NMF-based multi-view clustering methods
perform NMF on each view respectively and ignore the impact of between-view.
Thus, they can’t well exploit the within-view spatial structure and between-view
complementary information. To resolve this issue, we present orthogonal nonnegative tensor factorization (Orth-NTF) and develop a novel multi-view clustering
based on Orth-NTF with one-side orthogonal constraint. Our model directly
performs Orth-NTF on the 3rd-order tensor which is composed of anchor graphs of
views. Thus, our model directly considers the between-view relationship. Moreover,
we use the tensor Schatten p-norm regularization as a rank approximation of the
3rd-order tensor which characterizes the cluster structure of multi-view data and
exploits the between-view complementary information. In addition, we provide an
optimization algorithm for the proposed method and prove mathematically that the
algorithm always converges to the stationary KKT point. Extensive experiments on
various benchmark datasets indicate that our proposed method is able to achieve
satisfactory clustering performance.

1

Introduction

As one of the most typical methods in unsupervised learning, clustering has a wide scope of application [26; 4; 1] to assign data to different clusters according to the information describing
the objects and their relationships. Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) [19] is one of the
representative methods of clustering, which is proved to be equivalent to K-means clustering [7].
Despite the widespread use of NMF, there are some drawbacks that have prompted some variants of
NMF [8; 5; 27; 9; 3].
In particular, the one-side G-orthogonal NMF [8] can guarantee the uniqueness of the solution of
matrix factorization and has excellent clustering interpretation. Also, Ding et al.proposed the semiNMF [9]. The data matrix and one of the factor matrices are unconstrained, which allows semi-NMF
to be more suitable for applications where the input data is mixed with positive and negative numbers.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

