Private Distribution Learning with Public Data:
The View from Sample Compression∗

Shai Ben-David
University of Waterloo
Vector Institute
shai@uwaterloo.ca

Alex Bie
University of Waterloo
yabie@uwaterloo.ca

Gautam Kamath
University of Waterloo
Vector Institute
g@csail.mit.edu

Clément L. Canonne
University of Sydney
clement.canonne@sydney.edu.au

Vikrant Singhal
University of Waterloo
vikrant.singhal@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
We study the problem of private distribution learning with access to public data. In
this setup, which we refer to as public-private learning, the learner is given public
and private samples drawn from an unknown distribution p belonging to a class Q,
with the goal of outputting an estimate of p while adhering to privacy constraints
(here, pure differential privacy) only with respect to the private samples.
We show that the public-private learnability of a class Q is connected to the
existence of a sample compression scheme for Q, as well as to an intermediate
notion we refer to as list learning. Leveraging this connection: (1) approximately
recovers previous results on Gaussians over Rd ; and (2) leads to new ones, including
sample complexity upper bounds for arbitrary k-mixtures of Gaussians over Rd ,
results for agnostic and distribution-shift resistant learners, as well as closure
properties for public-private learnability under taking mixtures and products of
distributions. Finally, via the connection to list learning, we show that for Gaussians
in Rd , at least d public samples are necessary for private learnability, which is close
to the known upper bound of d + 1 public samples.

1

Introduction

Statistical analysis of sensitive data, and specifically parameter and density estimation, is a workhorse
of privacy-preserving machine learning. To provide meaningful and rigorous guarantees on algorithm
for these tasks, the framework of differential privacy (DP) [DMNS06] has been widely adopted
by both algorithm designers and machine learning practitioners [App17, Abo18, XZA+ 23], and is,
by and large, one of the past decade’s success stories in principled approaches to private machine
learning, with a host of results and implementations [Goo19a, Goo19b, HBAL19, Ope20] for many
of the flagship private learning tasks.
Yet, however usable the resulting algorithms may be, DP often comes at a steep price: namely, many
estimation tasks simple without privacy constraints provably require much more data to be performed
privately; even more dire, they sometimes become impossible with any finite number of data points,
absent some additional strong assumptions.
The prototypical example in that regard is learning a single d-dimensional Gaussian distribution from
samples. In this task, a learner receives i.i.d. samples from an unknown d-dimensional Gaussian p
∗

Authors are listed in alphabetical order. Full paper: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.06239.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

