FLuID: Mitigating Stragglers in Federated Learning
using Invariant Dropout

Irene Wang1,3 , Prashant J. Nair1 , Divya Mahajan2,3
University of British Columbia1 , Microsoft2 , Georgia Institute of Technology3
irene.wang@gatech.edu prashantnair@ece.ubc.edu divya.mahajan@gatech.edu

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) allows machine learning models to train locally on individual mobile devices, synchronizing model updates via a shared server. This
approach safeguards user privacy; however, it generates a heterogeneous training
environment due to the varying performance capabilities of devices. As a result,
“straggler” devices with lower performance often dictate the overall training time.
In this work, we aim to alleviate this performance bottleneck due to stragglers by
dynamically load balancing the training across the system. We introduce Invariant
Dropout, a method that extracts a sub-model based on the weight update threshold, thereby minimizing potential impacts on accuracy. Building on this dropout
technique, we develop an adaptive training framework, Federated Learning using
Invariant Dropout (FLuID). FLuID offers a lightweight framework for sub-model
extraction to regulate the computational intensity, thereby reducing the load on
straggler devices without affecting model quality. Our method leverages neuron
updates from non-straggler devices to construct a tailored sub-model for each
straggler based on client performance profiling. Unlike prior work, FLuID can
dynamically adapt to changes in stragglers as runtime conditions shift. We evaluate
FLuID using five real-world mobile clients. The evaluations show that Invariant
Dropout maintains baseline model efficiency while alleviating the performance
bottleneck of stragglers through a dynamic and lightweight runtime approach. 1

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) enables machine learning models to train on edge and mobile devices,
synchronizing the model updates via a common server [SB09, SVHN10, LSTS20, ZBW+ 22]. This
method ensures user privacy as local data remains on the device, minimizing the risk of data
breaches, leaks, or unauthorized access to sensitive information in the cloud [MMR+ 17]. However,
FL introduces heterogeneity due to varying performance capabilities of the participating devices.
Consequently, straggler devices with lower computational and network performance often dictate the
overall training latency and throughput, as shown in Figure 1.
Previous research mitigates the impact of stragglers through asynchronous aggregation, where
clients can communicate and update the server model independently and asynchronously [CCA+ 21,
CNSR20, XKG19]. While this approach alleviates some of the detrimental effects of stragglers, it
can introduce staleness into the global model. This occurs because the gradients used to update the
server model may rely on outdated parameters, resulting in inaccuracies that have the potential to
slow down convergence and reduce overall accuracy [BHS20, CCA+ 21, WUH+ 21, HBGS19].
Other research proposes eliminating updates from slower devices entirely. [KMA+ 19]. However, this
approach can introduce training bias, as it effectively excludes certain clients and their respective data.
1

Source code is available at https://github.com/iwang05/FLuID

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

