Subject-driven Text-to-Image Generation via
Apprenticeship Learning

Wenhu Chen♠∗
Hexiang Hu♠∗
Yandong Li♥
Nataniel Ruiz♥
♥
♠
Xuhui Jia
Ming-Wei Chang
William W. Cohen♠
♠
♥
Google Deepmind
Google Research
{wenhuchen,hexiang,mingweichang,wcohen}@google.com
fancy boot

… under the stage lights

… with silver-tipped toes

… with silver-tipped toes
kicking a football.

… on the stage with bunny
sticking its head out.

… eating ice-cream in a
bowl.

… jumping over a creek on
a snowy day.

… reading a book with
pink glasses on.

A back view of … watching
a TV show about birds.

A stack of colorful … fill
the shelves of a toy store.

… waddles across the floor as
the a puppy chases after it.

𝙴𝚗𝚌𝚘𝚍𝚎𝚛ℂ

𝙴𝚗𝚌𝚘𝚍𝚎𝚛p
Atten

𝙳𝚒𝚏𝚏𝚞𝚜𝚒𝚘𝚗

(Inference Detail)

Novel Text

canine dog
Demo

SuTI
New Rendition

duck toy

• Generalizable
• In-Context Learn
• Instant Customization

… floats lazily in the
… on the bed with a
bathtub full of blue bubbles. nightcap.

Figure 1: We train a single SuTI model to generate novel scenes faithfully reflecting given subjects (unseen in
training, specified only by 3-5 in-context text→image demonstrations), without any optimization.

Abstract
Recent text-to-image generation models like DreamBooth have made remarkable
progress in generating highly customized images of a target subject, by fine-tuning
an “expert model” for a given subject from a few examples. However, this process
is expensive, since a new expert model must be learned for each subject. In this
paper, we present SuTI, a Subject-driven Text-to-Image generator that replaces
subject-specific fine tuning with in-context learning. Given a few demonstrations
of a new subject, SuTI can instantly generate novel renditions of the subject in
different scenes, without any subject-specific optimization. SuTI is powered by
apprenticeship learning, where a single apprentice model is learned from data
generated by a massive number of subject-specific expert models. Specifically, we
mine millions of image clusters from the Internet, each centered around a specific
visual subject. We adopt these clusters to train a massive number of expert models,
each specializing in a different subject. The apprentice SuTI model then learns to
imitate the behavior of these fine-tuned experts. SuTI can generate high-quality
and customized subject-specific images 20x faster than optimization-based SoTA
methods. On the challenging DreamBench and DreamBench-v2, human evaluation
shows that SuTI significantly outperforms other existing models.
∗

Core Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

