Mixture Weight Estimation and Model Prediction in
Multi-source Multi-target Domain Adaptation

Yuyang Deng
Pennsylvania State University
yzd82@psu.edu

Ilja Kuzborskij
Google DeepMind
iljak@google.com

Mehrdad Mahdavi
Pennsylvania State University
mzm616@psu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning a model from multiple heterogeneous sources
with the goal of performing well on a new target distribution. The goal of learner
is to mix these data sources in a target-distribution aware way and simultaneously
minimize the empirical risk on the mixed source. The literature has made some
tangible advancements in establishing theory of learning on mixture domain. However, there are still two unsolved problems. Firstly, how to estimate the optimal
mixture of sources, given a target domain; Secondly, when there are numerous
target domains, how to solve empirical risk minimization (ERM) for each target
using possibly unique mixture of data sources in a computationally efficient manner.
In this paper we address both problems efficiently and with guarantees. We cast the
first problem, mixture weight estimation, as a convex-nonconcave compositional
minimax problem, and propose an efficient stochastic algorithm with provable
stationarity guarantees. Next, for the second problem, we identify that for certain
regimes, solving ERM for each target domain individually can be avoided, and
instead parameters for a target optimal model can be viewed as a non-linear function on a space of the mixture coefficients. Building upon this, we show that in
the offline setting, a GD-trained overparameterized neural network can provably
learn such function to predict the model of target domain instead of solving a
designated ERM problem. Finally, we also consider an online setting and propose
a label efficient online algorithm, which predicts parameters for new targets given
an arbitrary sequence of mixing coefficients, while enjoying regret guarantees.

1

Introduction

With a rapidly increasing amount of decentralized data, multiple source domain adaptation has been
an important learning scheme in modern machine learning, e.g., in learning with data collected from
multiple sources (e.g. crowdsourcing) or learning in distributed systems where the data can be highly
heterogeneous such as federated learning. In this learning scenario, given an input space X and
output space Y, we assume access to N sources of data, each with its own underlying distributions
b1 , . . . , D
bN , and a hypothesis space H,
Dj , j ∈ [N ] over X × Y. Then, given i.i.d. training samples D
our goal is to learn a model on the combination of these sources, for instance through the Empirical
PN
Risk Minimization (ERM) procedure b
hα = arg minh∈H j=1 α(j)LDbj (h), where LDbj (h) is the
bj , and α ∈ ∆N is some mixing parameter,
empirical loss of a model h ∈ H over data samples in D
such that predictor b
hα entails a good generalization performance
R on a target domain characterized by
a distribution T , i.e., yielding a small true risk LT (b
hα ) = ℓ(b
hα (x), y) dT (x, y). It is natural to
b
measure the quality of hα in terms of the excess risk — namely, the difference between the risk of
optimal model for target domain h∗T = arg minh∈H LT (h), and that achieved by b
hα . Clearly, the
b
performance of hα will be influenced by several factors, such as the choice of mixing coefficients
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

