Rubik’s Cube: High-Order Channel Interactions
with a Hierarchical Receptive Field

Naishan Zheng∗ Man Zhou* Chong Zhou Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
naishan.zheng,man.zhou,chong033,ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Image restoration techniques, spanning from the convolution to the transformer
paradigm, have demonstrated robust spatial representation capabilities to deliver
high-quality performance. Yet, many of these methods, such as convolution and
the Feed Forward Network (FFN) structure of transformers, primarily leverage
the basic first-order channel interactions and have not maximized the potential
benefits of higher-order modeling. To address this limitation, our research dives
into understanding relationships within the channel dimension and introduces a
simple yet efficient, high-order channel-wise operator tailored for image restoration.
Instead of merely mimicking high-order spatial interaction, our approach offers
several added benefits: Efficiency: It adheres to the zero-FLOP and zero-parameter
principle, using a spatial-shifting mechanism across channel-wise groups. Simplicity: It turns the favorable channel interaction and aggregation capabilities into
element-wise multiplications and convolution units with 1 × 1 kernel. Our new
formulation expands the first-order channel-wise interactions seen in previous
works to arbitrary high orders, generating a hierarchical receptive field akin to
a Rubik’s cube through the combined action of shifting and interactions. Furthermore, our proposed Rubik’s cube convolution is a flexible operator that can
be incorporated into existing image restoration networks, serving as a drop-in
replacement for the standard convolution unit with fewer parameters overhead.
We conducted experiments across various low-level vision tasks, including image denoising, low-light image enhancement, guided image super-resolution, and
image de-blurring. The results consistently demonstrate that our Rubik’s cube
operator enhances performance across all tasks. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/zheng980629/RubikCube.

1

Introduction

Image restoration aims at restoring a high-quality image from its degraded counterpart. This task
is inherently ill-posed, given that a multitude of valid solutions could potentially exist for a single
degraded image. The convolutional neural network (CNN), with its remarkable learning capabilities,
has been a driving force behind the surge of learning-driven methodologies for image restoration,
including the residual block [1, 2], dense connection [3, 4], multi-stage strategy [5, 6], and dropout [7].
High-order spatial modeling. As shown by recent studies [8, 9, 10, 11, 12], vision transformers
have overtaken convolutional neural networks as the leading method for image restoration. The key
factor driving this shift is the powerful mechanism for modeling spatial interactions inherent in vision
transformers. Unlike the local first-order spatial modeling found in the convolution family [13, 14, 15],
vision transformers [16] employ a dot-product self-attention paradigm. This paradigm performs
matrix multiplication among queries, keys, and values, thereby enhancing the model’s capacity by
∗

These authors contributed equally to the work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

