Segment Anything in 3D with NeRFs

Jiazhong Cen1†, Zanwei Zhou1†, Jiemin Fang2,3‡, Chen Yang1 ,
Wei Shen1B , Lingxi Xie2 , Dongsheng Jiang2 , Xiaopeng Zhang2 , Qi Tian2
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Inc. 3 School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
wei.shen@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, the Segment Anything Model (SAM) emerged as a powerful vision
foundation model which is capable to segment anything in 2D images. This paper
aims to generalize SAM to segment 3D objects. Rather than replicating the data
acquisition and annotation procedure which is costly in 3D, we design an efficient
solution, leveraging the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) as a cheap and off-theshelf prior that connects multi-view 2D images to the 3D space. We refer to the
proposed solution as SA3D, for Segment Anything in 3D. It is only required to
provide a manual segmentation prompt (e.g., rough points) for the target object
in a single view, which is used to generate its 2D mask in this view with SAM.
Next, SA3D alternately performs mask inverse rendering and cross-view selfprompting across various views to iteratively complete the 3D mask of the target
object constructed with voxel grids. The former projects the 2D mask obtained by
SAM in the current view onto 3D mask with guidance of the density distribution
learned by the NeRF; The latter extracts reliable prompts automatically as the
input to SAM from the NeRF-rendered 2D mask in another view. We show in
experiments that SA3D adapts to various scenes and achieves 3D segmentation
within minutes. Our research reveals a potential methodology to lift the ability
of a 2D vision foundation model to 3D, as long as the 2D model can steadily
address promptable segmentation across multiple views. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Jumpat/SegmentAnythingin3D.

1

Introduction

The computer vision community has been pursuing a vision foundation model that can perform basic
tasks (e.g., segmentation) in any scenario and for either 2D or 3D image data. Recently, the Segment
Anything Model (SAM) [25] emerged and attracted a lot of attention, due to its ability to segment
anything in 2D images, but generalizing the ability of SAM to 3D scenes remains mostly uncovered.
One may choose to replicate the pipeline of SAM to collect and semi-automatically annotate a large
set of 3D scenes, but the costly burden seems unaffordable for most research groups.
We realize that an alternative and efficient solution lies in equipping the 2D foundation model (i.e.,
SAM) with 3D perception via a 3D representation model. In other words, there is no need to establish
a 3D foundation model from scratch. However, there is a prerequisite: the 3D representation model
shall be capable to render 2D views and register 2D segmentation results to the 3D scene. Thus, we
use the Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [38, 53, 3] as an off-the-shelf solution. NeRF is a family
of algorithms that formulates each 3D scene into a deep neural network that serves as a 3D prior
connecting multiple 2D views.
B

Corresponding author.
Equal contribution.
‡
Project lead.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

