Prototype-based Aleatoric Uncertainty Quantification
for Cross-modal Retrieval
Hao Li
18th.leolee@gmail.com

Jingkuan Song∗
jingkuan.song@gmail.com

Xiaosu Zhu
xiaosu.zhu@outlook.com

Lianli Gao
lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn

Heng Tao Shen
shenhengtao@hotmail.com

Center for Future Media,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Cross-modal Retrieval methods build similarity relations between vision and language modalities by jointly learning a common representation space. However, the
predictions are often unreliable due to the Aleatoric uncertainty, which is induced
by low-quality data, e.g., corrupt images, fast-paced videos, and non-detailed texts.
In this paper, we propose a novel Prototype-based Aleatoric Uncertainty Quantification (PAU) framework to provide trustworthy predictions by quantifying the
uncertainty arisen from the inherent data ambiguity. Concretely, we first construct
a set of various learnable prototypes for each modality to represent the entire
semantics subspace. Then Dempster-Shafer Theory and Subjective Logic Theory
are utilized to build an evidential theoretical framework by associating evidence
with Dirichlet Distribution parameters. The PAU model induces accurate uncertainty and reliable predictions for cross-modal retrieval. Extensive experiments are
performed on four major benchmark datasets of MSR-VTT, MSVD, DiDeMo, and
MS-COCO, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method. The code is accessible
at https://github.com/leolee99/PAU.

1

Introduction

Cross-modal Retrieval, devoted to searching a gallery of related samples in vision/language modality
given a query in another, has attracted increasing interest as the wellspring development of multimedia platforms. However, the heterogeneity between modalities casts daunting challenges for this
task. To tackle these challenges, most existing methods [9, 60, 19, 15, 4, 53, 49] map the query and
retrieval items from distinct modalities into a joint latent space to make similarity calculation feasible.
Some early works [9, 60] corroborate the powerful capabilities of deep neural networks to extract
high-level features. Chen et al. [9] construct a hierarchical graph structure for videos and texts to build
the relationships between the local and the global features. PVSE [60] utilizes the multi-head selfattention module to learn multiple and diverse representations of videos and texts for the polysemous
problem. Recently, a large body of transformer-based pre-training models [19, 15, 4, 53, 49] have
shown remarkable superiority with excellent generalization and performance.
However, prior approaches routinely assume the data qualities are absolutely stable and view them
equally. They estimate the relevance of vision-language pairs relying only on the similarity scores
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

