Category-Extensible Out-of-Distribution Detection via
Hierarchical Context Descriptions

Kai Liu1,2∗, Zhihang Fu2†, Chao Chen2 , Sheng Jin2 , Ze Chen2 ,
Mingyuan Tao2 , Rongxin Jiang1†, Jieping Ye2
1

Zhejiang University,

2

Alibaba Cloud

Abstract
The key to OOD detection has two aspects: generalized feature representation
and precise category description. Recently, vision-language models such as CLIP
provide significant advances in both two issues, but constructing precise category
descriptions is still in its infancy due to the absence of unseen categories. This
work introduces two hierarchical contexts, namely perceptual context and spurious
context, to carefully describe the precise category boundary through automatic
prompt tuning. Specifically, perceptual contexts perceive the inter-category difference (e.g., cats vs apples) for current classification tasks, while spurious contexts
further identify spurious (similar but exactly not) OOD samples for every single
category (e.g., cats vs panthers, apples vs peaches). The two contexts hierarchically
construct the precise description for a certain category, which is, first roughly classifying a sample to the predicted category and then delicately identifying whether
it is truly an ID sample or actually OOD. Moreover, the precise descriptions for
those categories within the vision-language framework present a novel application:
CATegory-EXtensible OOD detection (CATEX). One can efficiently extend the
set of recognizable categories by simply merging the hierarchical contexts learned
under different sub-task settings. And extensive experiments are conducted to
demonstrate CATEX’s effectiveness, robustness, and category-extensibility. For
instance, CATEX consistently surpasses the rivals by a large margin with several
protocols on the challenging ImageNet-1K dataset. In addition, we offer new
insights on how to efficiently scale up the prompt engineering in vision-language
models to recognize thousands of object categories, as well as how to incorporate
large language models (like GPT-3) to boost zero-shot applications.

1

Introduction

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection focuses on determining whether an input image is in-distribution
(ID) or OOD, while classifying the ID data into respective categories [17]. The key to OOD detection
has two aspects: (1) constructing a sufficiently generalized feature representation capability, so that
images of arbitrarily different categories can be roughly separated from each other regardless of
semantic shifts [67]; and (2) acquiring precise descriptions (namely decision boundary) for each ID
category in the image feature space (in CNNs the last fully-connected layer plays this role), so as to
determine whether the input image belongs to the corresponding category or just OOD [22].
Specifically, generalized feature representation comes from large-scale and diverse training data for
learning-based data-driven models. Therefore, OOD detection works[33, 13, 50] have made great
progress on the basis of large-scale pre-trained models such as ResNet [19] and ViT [14]. To achieve
* Work done during Kai Liu’s research internship at Alibaba Cloud. Email: kail@zju.edu.cn.
†

Corresponding authors. Email: rongxinj@zju.edu.cn, zhihang.fzh@alibaba-inc.com.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

