ARTree: A Deep Autoregressive Model for
Phylogenetic Inference

Tianyu Xie† , Cheng Zhang†,‡,∗
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
‡
Center for Statistical Science, Peking University
tianyuxie@pku.edu.cn, chengzhang@math.pku.edu.cn
†

Abstract
Designing flexible probabilistic models over tree topologies is important for developing efficient phylogenetic inference methods. To do that, previous works often
leverage the similarity of tree topologies via hand-engineered heuristic features
which would require pre-sampled tree topologies and may suffer from limited
approximation capability. In this paper, we propose a deep autoregressive model
for phylogenetic inference based on graph neural networks (GNNs), called ARTree.
By decomposing a tree topology into a sequence of leaf node addition operations
and modeling the involved conditional distributions based on learnable topological
features via GNNs, ARTree can provide a rich family of distributions over the entire
tree topology space that have simple sampling algorithms and density estimation
procedures, without using heuristic features. We demonstrate the effectiveness and
efficiency of our method on a benchmark of challenging real data tree topology
density estimation and variational Bayesian phylogenetic inference problems.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing the evolutionary relationships among species has been one of the central problems
in computational biology, with a wide range of applications such as genomic epidemiology (Dudas
et al., 2017; du Plessis et al., 2021; Attwood et al., 2022) and conservation genetics (DeSalle &
Amato, 2004). Based on molecular sequence data (e.g. DNA, RNA, or protein sequences) of the
observed species and a model of evolution, this has been formulated as a statistical inference problem
on the hypotheses of shared history, i.e., phylogenetic trees, where maximum likelihood and Bayesian
approaches are the most popular methods (Felsenstein, 1981; Yang & Rannala, 1997; Mau et al.,
1999; Larget & Simon, 1999; Huelsenbeck et al., 2001). However, phylogenetic inference can be
challenging due to the composite structure of tree space which contains both continuous and discrete
components (e.g., the branch lengths and the tree topologies) and the large search space of tree
topologies that explodes combinatorially as the number of species increases (Whidden & Matsen IV,
2015; Dinh et al., 2017).
Recently, several efforts have been made to improve the efficiency of phylogenetic inference algorithms by designing flexible probabilistic models over the tree topology space (Höhna & Drummond,
2012; Larget, 2013; Zhang & Matsen IV, 2018). One typical example is subsplit Bayesian networks
(SBNs) (Zhang & Matsen IV, 2018), which is a powerful probabilistic graphical model that provides
a flexible family of distributions over tree topologies. Given a sample of tree topologies (e.g., sampled
tree topologies from an MCMC run), SBNs have proved effective for accurate tree topology density
estimation that generalizes beyond observed samples by leveraging the similarity of hand-engineered
subsplit structures among tree topologies. Moreover, SBNs also allow fast ancestral sampling and
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

