Context-PIPs: Persistent Independent Particles
Demands Spatial Context Features

1

CUHK MMLab

Weikang Bian1,2∗ Zhaoyang Huang1∗ Xiaoyu Shi1
Yitong Dong3 Yijin Li3 Hongsheng Li1,2
2
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence 3 Zhejiang University

wkbian@outlook.com, drinkingcoder@link.cuhk.edu.hk, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We tackle the problem of Persistent Independent Particles (PIPs), also called Tracking Any Point (TAP), in videos, which specifically aims at estimating persistent
long-term trajectories of query points in videos. Previous methods attempted to
estimate these trajectories independently to incorporate longer image sequences,
therefore, ignoring the potential benefits of incorporating spatial context features.
We argue that independent video point tracking also demands spatial context
features. To this end, we propose a novel framework Context-PIPs, which effectively improves point trajectory accuracy by aggregating spatial context features
in videos. Context-PIPs contains two main modules: 1) a SOurse Feature Enhancement (SOFE) module, and 2) a TArget Feature Aggregation (TAFA) module.
Context-PIPs significantly improves PIPs all-sided, reducing 11.4% Average Trajectory Error of Occluded Points (ATE-Occ) on CroHD and increasing 11.8%
Average Percentage of Correct Keypoint (A-PCK) on TAP-Vid-Kinetics. Demos
are available at https://wkbian.github.io/Projects/Context-PIPs/.

1

Introduction

Video particles are a set of sparse point trajectories in a video that originate from the first frame
(the source image) and move across the following frames, which are regarded as the target images.
In contrast to optical flow estimation that computes pixel-wise correspondences between a pair of
adjacent video frames, Persistent Independent Particles (PIPs) [12] or Tracking Any Point (TAP) [5]
is interested in tracking the points in the follow-up frames that correspond to the original query
points even when they are occluded in some frames. Video particles provide long-term motion
information for videos and can support various downstream tasks, such as video editing [16] and
Structure-from-Motion [48].
Long-range temporal information is essential for video particles especially when the particles are
occluded because the positions of the occluded particles can be inferred from the previous and
subsequent frames where they are visible. However, simultaneously encoding long image sequences
brings larger computational and memory costs. Previous methods [12, 5] learn to track individual
points independently because dense video particles are unnecessary in most scenarios. Inspired
by optical flow estimation from visual similarities, they learn to predict point trajectories from the
similarities between the query point and the subsequent target images. Specifically, given a query
point at the source image, PIPs encodes T feature maps from T consecutive target images and builds
a T × H × W correlation volume by computing the feature similarity between the feature of the query
point and the feature maps. The T particle positions are iteratively refined with the 3D correlation
volume through a shared MLP-Mixer [40]. In other words, PIPs trades the spatial context features of
∗

Weikang Bian and Zhaoyang Huang assert equal contributions.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023), Vancouver, Canada.

