Winner Takes It All: Training Performant RL
Populations for Combinatorial Optimization

Nathan Grinsztajn
InstaDeep
n.grinsztajn@instadeep.com

Daniel Furelos-Blanco
Imperial College London∗

Clément Bonnet
InstaDeep

Shikha Surana
InstaDeep

Thomas D. Barrett
InstaDeep

Abstract
Applying reinforcement learning (RL) to combinatorial optimization problems
is attractive as it removes the need for expert knowledge or pre-solved instances.
However, it is unrealistic to expect an agent to solve these (often NP-)hard problems in a single shot at inference due to their inherent complexity. Thus, leading
approaches often implement additional search strategies, from stochastic sampling
and beam-search to explicit fine-tuning. In this paper, we argue for the benefits
of learning a population of complementary policies, which can be simultaneously
rolled out at inference. To this end, we introduce Poppy, a simple training procedure for populations. Instead of relying on a predefined or hand-crafted notion of
diversity, Poppy induces an unsupervised specialization targeted solely at maximizing the performance of the population. We show that Poppy produces a set of
complementary policies, and obtains state-of-the-art RL results on four popular
NP-hard problems: traveling salesman, capacitated vehicle routing, 0-1 knapsack,
and job-shop scheduling.

1

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning (ML) approaches have overtaken algorithms that use handcrafted
features and strategies across a variety of challenging tasks [Mnih et al., 2015, van den Oord et al.,
2016, Silver et al., 2018, Brown et al., 2020]. In particular, solving combinatorial optimization (CO)
problems – where the maxima or minima of an objective function acting on a finite set of discrete
variables is sought – has attracted significant interest [Bengio et al., 2021] due to both their (often
NP) hard nature and numerous practical applications across domains varying from logistics [Sbihi
and Eglese, 2007] to fundamental science [Wagner, 2020].
As the search space of feasible solutions typically grows exponentially with the problem size, exact
solvers can be challenging to scale; hence, CO problems are often also tackled with handcrafted
heuristics using expert knowledge. Whilst a diversity of ML-based heuristics have been proposed,
reinforcement learning [RL; Sutton and Barto, 2018] is a promising paradigm as it does not require
pre-solved examples of these hard problems. Indeed, algorithmic improvements to RL-based CO
solvers, coupled with low inference cost, and the fact that they are by design targeted at specific
problem distributions, have progressively narrowed the gap with traditional solvers.
RL methods frame CO as sequential decision-making problems, and can be divided into two families
[Mazyavkina et al., 2021]. First, improvement methods start from a feasible solution and iteratively
∗

Work completed during an internship at InstaDeep.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

