Restless Bandits with Average Reward: Breaking the
Uniform Global Attractor Assumption

Yige Hong1∗ Qiaomin Xie2 Yudong Chen2 Weina Wang1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison
{yigeh,weinaw}@cs.cmu.edu
{qiaomin.xie,yudong.chen}@wisc.edu

1

Abstract
We study the infinite-horizon restless bandit problem with the average reward criterion, in both discrete-time and continuous-time settings. A fundamental goal is to
efficiently compute policies that achieve a diminishing optimality gap as the number of arms, N , grows large. Existing results on asymptotic optimality all rely on
the uniform global attractor property (UGAP), a complex and challenging-to-verify
assumption. In this paper, we propose a general, simulation-based framework,
Follow-the-Virtual-Advice, that converts any single-armed policy into a policy for the original N -armed problem. This is done by simulating the single-armed
policy on each arm and carefully steering the real state towards the simulated
√
state. Our framework can be instantiated to produce a policy with an O(1/ N )
optimality gap. In the discrete-time setting, our result holds under a simpler synchronization assumption, which covers some problem instances that violate UGAP.
More notably, in the continuous-time setting, we do not require any additional
assumptions beyond the standard unichain condition. In both settings, our work is
the first asymptotic optimality result that does not require UGAP.

1

Introduction

The restless bandit (RB) problem is a dynamic decision-making problem that involves a number of
Markov decision processes (MDPs) coupled by a constraint. Each MDP, referred to as an arm, has a
binary action space, {passive, active}. At every decision epoch, the decision maker is constrained to
select a fixed number of arms to activate, with the goal of maximizing the expected reward accrued.
The RB problem finds applications across a spectrum of domains, including wireless communication
[ALT19], congestion control [AADJ13], queueing models [ABG09], crawling web content [AB19],
machine maintenance [GMA05], clinical trials [VBW15], to name a few.
In this paper, we focus on infinite-horizon RBs with the average-reward criterion. Since the exact
optimal policy is PSPACE-hard to compute [PT99], it is of great theoretical and practical interest
to focus on policies that approximately achieve the optimal value and compute such policies in an
efficient matter. The optimality gap of a policy is defined as the difference between its average reward
per arm and that of an optimal policy. In a typical asymptotic regime where the number of arms, N ,
grows large, we say that a policy is asymptotically optimal if its optimality gap is o(1) as N → ∞.
Prior work and the uniform global attractor property assumption. Prior work has studied the
celebrated Whittle index policy [Whi88] and LP-Priority policies [Ver16] and established sufficient
conditions for their asymptotic optimality [WW90, Ver16, GGY20, GGY22]. One key assumption
underpinning all prior work is the uniform global attractor property (UGAP)—also known as globally
asymptotic stability—which pertains to the mean-field/fluid limit of the restless bandit system in the
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

