Mr. HiSum: A Large-scale Dataset for Video Highlight
Detection and Summarization
Jinhwan Sul∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
jsul7@gatech.edu

Jihoon Han∗
Seoul National University
joon7092@snu.ac.kr

Joonseok Lee†
Seoul National University
joonseok@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Video highlight detection is a task to automatically select the most engaging
moments from a long video. This problem is highly challenging since it aims to
learn a general way of finding highlights from a variety of videos in the real world.
The task has an innate subjectivity because the definition of a highlight differs
across individuals. Therefore, to detect consistent and meaningful highlights, prior
benchmark datasets have been labeled by multiple (5-20) raters. Due to the high
cost of manual labeling, most existing public benchmarks are in extremely small
scale, containing only a few tens or hundreds of videos. This insufficient benchmark
scale causes multiple issues such as unstable evaluation or high sensitivity in traintest splits. We present Mr. HiSum (https://github.com/MRHiSum/MR.HiSum),
a large-scale dataset for video highlight detection and summarization, containing
31,892 videos and reliable labels aggregated over 50,000+ users per video. We
empirically prove reliability of the labels as frame importance by cross-dataset
transfer and user study.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, an enormous amount of videos are prevalent around us. With the widespread smart
devices and popularity of video sharing platforms like YouTube, videos are easily created and shared
at an unprecedented scale. Followed by the proliferation of video data, users tend to prefer watching
short snippets of interesting content or video summaries rather than consuming the entire long video.
To meet this demand, researchers have studied automatic video highlight detection, to find the most
engaging (interesting) moments from a long video. It is highly challenging to learn a general way of
finding highlights from a variety of videos in the real world. With recent advances in visual content
understanding [57, 62, 56, 26, 40, 41, 39] and sequential data modeling [11, 22, 65, 29], deep learning
models have been widely applied to video highlight detection [71, 69, 27, 24, 61, 46, 52, 45, 7].
Like other machine learning tasks, video highlight detection also requires access to a quality dataset
at scale, sufficiently covering the vast variety of samples from the underlying distribution, to apply
a data-driven approach. To the best of our knowledge, a large-scale high-quality video highlight
detection dataset has never been published, probably due to the high cost of labeling for each video.
More specifically, one major difficulty of creating a video highlight detection dataset comes from
the innate subjectivity of this task. Highlights of a video are the most interesting (engaging) parts
of the whole video, but the concept of the most interesting part is inherently subjective and differs
across individuals. In other words, highlight scores labeled by a handful number of raters can be
easily biased to their perspective. For this reason, video highlight detection benchmarks often employ
multiple raters to annotate each video to reserve confidence in the quality of the labels.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

