The Double-Edged Sword of Implicit Bias:
Generalization vs. Robustness in ReLU Networks
Spencer Frei∗
UC Davis
sfrei@ucdavis.edu

Gal Vardi∗
TTI-Chicago and Hebrew University
galvardi@ttic.edu

Peter L. Bartlett
UC Berkeley and Google DeepMind
peter@berkeley.edu

Nathan Srebro
TTI-Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
In this work, we study the implications of the implicit bias of gradient flow on
generalization and adversarial robustness in ReLU networks. We focus on a setting
where the data consists of clusters and the correlations between cluster means are
small, and show that in two-layer ReLU networks gradient flow is biased towards
solutions that generalize well, but are vulnerable to adversarial examples. Our
results hold even in cases where the network is highly overparameterized. Despite
the potential for harmful overfitting in such settings, we prove that the implicit bias
of gradient flow prevents it. However, the implicit bias also leads to non-robust
solutions (susceptible to small adversarial ℓ2 -perturbations), even though robust
networks that fit the data exist.

1

Introduction

A central question in the theory of deep learning is how neural networks can generalize even when
trained without any explicit regularization, and when there are more learnable parameters than
training examples. In such optimization problems there are many solutions that label the training
data correctly, and gradient descent seems to prefer solutions that generalize well [Zha+17]. Thus, it
is believed that gradient descent induces an implicit bias towards solutions which enjoy favorable
properties [Ney+17]. Characterizing this bias in various settings has been a subject of extensive
research in recent years, but it is still not well understood when the implicit bias provably implies
generalization in non-linear neural networks.
An additional intriguing phenomenon in deep learning is the abundance of adversarial examples in
trained neural networks. In a seminal paper, Szegedy et al. [Sze+14] observed that deep networks
are extremely vulnerable to adversarial examples, namely, very small perturbations to the inputs
can significantly change the predictions. This phenomenon has attracted considerable interest, and
various attacks (e.g., [GSS15; CW17; Pap+17; ACW18; CW18; Wu+20]) and defenses (e.g., [Pap+16;
KGB17; Mad+18; WK18; CH20; WRK20]) were developed. However, the fundamental principles
underlying the existence of adversarial examples are still unclear, and it is believed that for most tasks
where trained neural networks suffer from a vulnerability to adversarial attacks, there should exist
other neural networks which can be robust to such attacks. This is suggestive of the possible role of
the optimization algorithms used to train neural networks in the existence of adversarial examples.
In this work, we study the implications of the implicit bias for generalization and robustness in ReLU
networks, in a setting where the data consists of clusters (i.e., Gaussian mixture model) and the
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

