Generalized test utilities for long-tail performance in
extreme multi-label classification
Erik Schultheis
Aalto University
Helsinki, Finland
erik.schultheis@aalto.fi

Marek Wydmuch
Poznan University of Technology
Poznan, Poland
mwydmuch@cs.put.poznan.pl

Wojciech Kotłowski
Poznan University of Technology
Poznan, Poland
wkotlowski@cs.put.poznan.pl

Rohit Babbar
University of Bath / Aalto University
Bath, UK / Helsinki, Finland
rb2608@bath.ac.uk

Krzysztof Dembczyński
Yahoo! Research / Poznan University of Technology
New York, USA / Poznan, Poland
krzysztof.dembczynski@yahooinc.com

Abstract
Extreme multi-label classification (XMLC) is the task of selecting a small subset of
relevant labels from a very large set of possible labels. As such, it is characterized
by long-tail labels, i.e., most labels have very few positive instances. With standard
performance measures such as precision@k, a classifier can ignore tail labels and
still report good performance. However, it is often argued that correct predictions in
the tail are more “interesting” or “rewarding,” but the community has not yet settled
on a metric capturing this intuitive concept. The existing propensity-scored metrics
fall short on this goal by confounding the problems of long-tail and missing labels.
In this paper, we analyze generalized metrics budgeted “at k” as an alternative
solution. To tackle the challenging problem of optimizing these metrics, we
formulate it in the expected test utility (ETU) framework, which aims to optimize
the expected performance on a fixed test set. We derive optimal prediction rules and
construct computationally efficient approximations with provable regret guarantees
and robustness against model misspecification. Our algorithm, based on block
coordinate ascent, scales effortlessly to XMLC problems and obtains promising
results in terms of long-tail performance.

1

Introduction

Extreme multi-label classification (XMLC) is a challenging task with a wide spectrum of real-life
applications, such as tagging of text documents [10], content annotation for multimedia search [14],
or different type of recommendation [5, 1, 33, 44, 53, 28, 7]. Because of the nature of its applications,
the typical approach in XMLC is to predict exactly k labels (e.g., corresponding to k slots in the
user interface) which optimize a standard performance metric such as precision or (normalized)
discounted cumulative gain. Given the enormous number of labels in XMLC tasks, which can reach
millions or more, it is not surprising that many of them are very sparse, and hence make the label
distribution strongly long-tailed [2]. It has been noticed that algorithms can achieve high performance
on the standard metrics, but never predict any tail labels [42]. Therefore, there is a need to develop
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

