Canonical normalizing flows for manifold learning

Kyriakos Flouris
Department of Information Technology
and Electrical Engineering
ETH Zürich
kflouris@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Ender Konukoglu
Department of Information Technology
and Electrical Engineering
ETH Zürich
kender@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Manifold learning flows are a class of generative modelling techniques that assume
a low-dimensional manifold description of the data. The embedding of such a
manifold into the high-dimensional space of the data is achieved via learnable
invertible transformations. Therefore, once the manifold is properly aligned via
a reconstruction loss, the probability density is tractable on the manifold and
maximum likelihood can be used to optimize the network parameters. Naturally,
the lower-dimensional representation of the data requires an injective-mapping.
Recent approaches were able to enforce that the density aligns with the modelled
manifold, while efficiently calculating the density volume-change term when
embedding to the higher-dimensional space. However, unless the injective-mapping
is analytically predefined, the learned manifold is not necessarily an efficient
representation of the data. Namely, the latent dimensions of such models frequently
learn an entangled intrinsic basis, with degenerate information being stored in each
dimension. Alternatively, if a locally orthogonal and/or sparse basis is to be
learned, here coined canonical intrinsic basis, it can serve in learning a more
compact latent space representation. Toward this end, we propose a canonical
manifold learning flow method, where a novel optimization objective enforces the
transformation matrix to have few prominent and non-degenerate basis functions.
We demonstrate that by minimizing the off-diagonal manifold metric elements
ℓ1 -norm, we can achieve such a basis, which is simultaneously sparse and/or
orthogonal. Canonical manifold flow yields a more efficient use of the latent space,
automatically generating fewer prominent and distinct dimensions to represent
data, and consequently a better approximation of target distributions than other
manifold flow methods in most experiments we conducted, resulting in lower FID
scores. 1

1

Introduction

Many emerging methods in generative modeling are based on the manifold hypothesis, i.e., higherdimensional data are better described by a lower-dimensional sub-manifold embedded in an ambient
space. These methods replace the bijective normalizing flow in the original construction [1–5] (NF)
with an injective flow. NFs are constructed as a smooth bijective mapping, i.e. a homeomorphism,
where the learned distribution density is supported on the set of dimension D equal to the data
dimension, where RD is the data space. In order to fulfill the manifold hypothesis, an emerging class
of methods, namely manifold learning flow models (MLF) [6–9], model the latent distribution as a
random variable in Rd where d < D, i.e. realize injective flows. Consequently, the density lives on
some d-dimensional manifold Md embedded in RD as required. If Md is known a-priori, [10, 11],
the density transformation to RD in MLF is a relatively straight forward affair. If the manifold is to be
1

Code is available at https://github.com/k-flouris/cmf/.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

