Bayesian Active Causal Discovery with
Multi-Fidelity Experiments

Zeyu Zhang ∗
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence
Renmin University of China
zeyuzhang@ruc.edu.cn

Chaozhuo Li ∗
Microsoft Research Asia
cli@microsoft.com

Xu Chen †
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence
Renmin University of China
xu.chen@ruc.edu.cn

Xing Xie
Microsoft Research Asia
xingx@microsoft.com

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of active causal discovery when the experiments
can be done based on multi-fidelity oracles, where higher fidelity experiments are
more precise and expensive, while the lower ones are cheaper but less accurate.
In this paper, we formally define the task of multi-fidelity active causal discovery,
and design a probabilistic model for solving this problem. In specific, we first
introduce a mutual-information based acquisition function to determine which
variable should be intervened at which fidelity, and then a cascading model is
proposed to capture the correlations between different fidelity oracles. Beyond the
above basic framework, we also extend it to the batch intervention scenario. We find
that the theoretical foundations behind the widely used and efficient greedy method
do not hold in our problem. To solve this problem, we introduce a new concept
called ϵ-submodular, and design a constraint based fidelity model to theoretically
validate the greedy method. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our model.

1

Introduction

Causal discovery aims to learn the causal structure of a set of variables, which is fundamental for
many real-world applications, including health caring [1], education [2] drug discovery [3] and
protein synthesis [4]. In general, causal structure learning is an NP-hard problem [5], and purely
based on the observational datasets, one cannot identify the unique causal structure, where the best
result is discovering its Markov equivalence class [6].
To more accurately identify the unique causal structure, a promising direction is active causal
discovery (ACD), where the model is allowed to actively intervene the causal structure to query key
information for orienting the causal relations between different variables. For example, to study
the causal relations between the drugs and diseases, one can conduct clinical tests via selectively
administering the medicines to the patients. The key of active causal discovery is how to design
effective experiments when the total cost (e.g., the number of experiments) is limited. To achieve this
goal, recent years have witnessed many promising models. For example, Agrawal et al. [7] proposes
to intervene on the variables which can orient as many as possible undirected edges. Tigas et al. [8]
∗
†

Co-first authors.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

