On Learning Latent Models with Multi-Instance Weak
Supervision

Kaifu Wang
University of Pennsylvania
kaifu@sas.upenn.edu

Efthymia Tsamoura
Samsung AI
efi.tsamoura@samsung.com

Dan Roth
University of Pennsylvania
danroth@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We consider a weakly supervised learning scenario where the supervision signal
is generated by a transition function σ of labels associated with multiple input
instances. We formulate this problem as multi-instance Partial Label Learning
(multi-instance PLL). Our problem is an extension to the standard PLL problem and
is met in different fields, including latent structural learning and neuro-symbolic
integration. Despite the existence of many learning techniques, limited theoretical
analysis has been dedicated to this problem. In this paper, we provide the first
theoretical study of multi-instance PLL with possibly an unknown transition σ.
Our main contributions are as follows. First, we propose a necessary and sufficient
condition for the learnability of the problem. This condition nontrivially generalizes
and relaxes the existing small ambiguity degree in PLL literature since we allow the
transition to be deterministic. Second, we derive Rademacher-style error bounds
based on a top-k surrogate loss that is widely used in the neuro-symbolic literature.
Furthermore, we conclude with empirical experiments for learning under unknown
transitions. The empirical results align with our theoretical findings, exposing also
the issue of scalability in the weak supervision literature.

1

Introduction

Consider the scenario in Figure 1, where a learner aims to learn one or more classifiers f1 , . . . , fn ,
each of which maps an instance x to its corresponding label y. The learner is given training examples,
each of which consists of a vector of M > 1 instances x = (x1 , . . . , xM ), and each xi is processed
by one of the fj ’s. Differently from supervised learning, the gold labels y = (y1 , . . . , yM ) of x
are hidden; instead, the learner is provided with a weak label s which is produced by applying a
transition function1 σ to the gold labels y. The transition σ itself may be unknown to the learner.
The above weak supervision setting has been a topic of active research in NLP [42, 35, 34, 32, 45, 52,
22]. Recently, it has received renewed attention as it is met in neuro-symbolic frameworks [14], i.e.,
frameworks that integrate inference and learning over neural models with inference and learning over
symbolic models, such as logical theories [30, 53, 13, 59, 43, 31, 24, 27]. The benefits of this setting
over architectures that approximate the fi ’s and σ via an end-to-end neural model [48] are (i) the
ability to reuse the latent models, something particularly useful in NLP [34, 32], (ii) higher accuracy
in multiple tasks, e.g., NLP [55] and visual question answering [24], (iii) greater interpretability and
(iv) the ability to encode prior knowledge via σ. Below, we present an example of our learning setting
in neuro-symbolic learning.
Example 1 (SUM2). We aim to learn an MNIST classifzer f . Differently from supervised learning,
we use training examples of the form (x1 , x2 , s), where x1 and x2 are MNIST digits and s is
1
We use the term transition function (or transition in short) instead of simply function, due to the relationship
between our setting and learning with partial labels literature [8, 9].

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

