Creating a Public Repository for Joining Private Data

James Cook
Independent Researcher∗
falsifian@falsifian.org

Milind Shyani
Amazon
mshyani@amazon.com

Nina Mishra
Amazon
nmishra@amazon.com

Abstract
How can one publish a dataset with sensitive attributes in a way that both preserves
privacy and enables joins with other datasets on those same sensitive attributes?
This problem arises in many contexts, e.g., a hospital and an airline may want
to jointly determine whether people who take long-haul flights are more likely
to catch respiratory infections. If they join their data by a common keyed user
identifier such as email address, they can determine the answer, though it breaks
privacy. This paper shows how the hospital can generate a private sketch and
how the airline can privately join with the hospital’s sketch by email address.
The proposed solution satisfies pure differential privacy and gives approximate
answers to linear queries and optimization problems over those joins. Whereas
prior work such as secure function evaluation requires sender/receiver interaction,
a distinguishing characteristic of the proposed approach is that it is non-interactive.
Consequently, the sketch can be published to a repository for any organization to
join with, facilitating data discovery. The accuracy of the method is demonstrated
through both theoretical analysis and extensive empirical evidence.

1

Introduction

Given a sensitive dataset keyed by individual identities (which must never be revealed), how can
we publish a private version of it that can nonetheless be joined by identity to another dataset to
produce approximate answers to questions about the join? Can a sender publish this private version to
a repository so that receivers can both approximate joint distributions and train ML models, without
any interaction between the sender and the receiver?
There are inter-organizational scenarios where answering these questions is valuable. For example, a
healthcare provider may have clinical records keyed by patient email address and a private column
such as “has cancer”. A company wants to determine if employees who work near toxic waste sites
have a higher incidence of cancer. We show how two companies can privately join their data in
order to build such predictive models. With the rise of data marketplaces, it is more common for
organizations to seek to “decorate” their data by adding new columns from other organizations, while
preserving privacy. Intra-organizational scenarios also abound. Within a large organization, it is
common that data collected in one team is hidden from other teams. With a central repository, not
only is data discovery possible, but more private joins can be performed to assess predictive power.
The Repository Setting. A stylized view of the problem is shown in Fig. 1. One party, the sender S,
holds a dataset DS with two columns: a unique identifier to join on, and a value from a small finite
domain (in this case, has cancer encoded as ±1). S would like to share DS in a privacy-preserving
way with many other organizations without explicitly interacting with each one. To this end, S uploads
a private representation of DS to a public repository. Party R is one of many possible receivers,
and holds a dataset which has a column with unique identities to join on, and any number of other
columns, e.g., latitude and longitude of where their employees work. R’s goal is to perform a joint
∗

Work done while employed by Amazon.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

