A Sublinear-Time Spectral Clustering Oracle with
Improved Preprocessing Time

Ranran Shen∗
ranranshen@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Pan Peng∗
ppeng@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
We address the problem of designing a sublinear-time spectral clustering oracle
for graphs that exhibit strong clusterability. Such graphs contain k latent clusters,
each characterized by a large inner conductance (at least φ) and a small outer
conductance (at most ε). Our aim is to preprocess the graph to enable clustering
membership queries, with the key requirement that both preprocessing and query
answering should be performed in sublinear time, and the resulting partition should
be consistent with a k-partition that is close to the ground-truth clustering. Previous
oracles have relied on either a poly(k) log n gap between inner and outer conductances or exponential (in k/ε) preprocessing time. Our algorithm relaxes these
assumptions, albeit at the cost of a slightly higher misclassification ratio. We also
show that our clustering oracle is robust against a few random edge deletions. To
validate our theoretical bounds, we conducted experiments on synthetic networks.

1

Introduction

Graph clustering is a fundamental task in the field of graph analysis. Given a graph G = (V, E) and
an integer k, the objective of graph clustering is to partition the vertex set V into k disjoint clusters
C1 , . . . , Ck . Each cluster should exhibit tight connections within the cluster while maintaining
loose connections with the other clusters. This task finds applications in various domains, including
community detection [32, 12], image segmentation [11] and bio-informatics [29].
However, global graph clustering algorithms, such as spectral clustering [27], modularity maximization [26], density-based clustering [10], can be computationally expensive, especially for large
datasets. For instance, spectral clustering is a significant algorithm for solving the graph clustering
problem, which involves two steps. The first step is to map all the vertices to a k-dimensional
Euclidean space using the Laplacian matrix of the graph. The second step is to cluster all the points
in this k-dimensional Euclidean space, often employing the k-means algorithm. The time complexity
of spectral clustering, as well as other global clustering algorithms, is poly(n), where n = |V |
denotes the size of the graph. As the graph size increases, the computational demands of these global
clustering algorithms become impractical.
Addressing this challenge, an effective approach lies in the utilization of local algorithms that operate
within sublinear time. In this paper, our primary focus is on a particular category of such algorithms
designed for graph clustering, known as sublinear-time spectral clustering oracles [30, 14]. These
algorithms consist of two phases: the preprocessing phase and the query phase, both of which can
be executed in sublinear time. During the preprocessing phase, these algorithms sample a subset
of vertices from V , enabling them to locally explore a small portion of the graph and gain insights
into its cluster structure. In the query phase, these algorithms utilize the cluster structure learned
during the preprocessing phase to respond to W HICH C LUSTER(G, x) queries. The resulting partition
∗

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
Corresponding author: Pan Peng.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

