Model-Free Active Exploration
in Reinforcement Learning

Alessio Russo
Division of Decision and Control Systems
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, SE

Alexandre Proutiere
Division of Decision and Control Systems
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, SE

Abstract
We study the problem of exploration in Reinforcement Learning and present a
novel model-free solution. We adopt an information-theoretical viewpoint and
start from the instance-specific lower bound of the number of samples that have
to be collected to identify a nearly-optimal policy. Deriving this lower bound
along with the optimal exploration strategy entails solving an intricate optimization
problem and requires a model of the system. In turn, most existing sample optimal
exploration algorithms rely on estimating the model. We derive an approximation
of the instance-specific lower bound that only involves quantities that can be
inferred using model-free approaches. Leveraging this approximation, we devise
an ensemble-based model-free exploration strategy applicable to both tabular and
continuous Markov decision processes. Numerical results demonstrate that our
strategy is able to identify efficient policies faster than state-of-the-art exploration
approaches.

1

Introduction

Efficient exploration remains a major challenge for reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. Over the
last two decades, several exploration strategies have been proposed in the literature, often designed
with the aim of minimizing regret. These include model-based approaches such as Posterior Sampling
for RL [36](PSRL) and Upper Confidence Bounds for RL [4, 25, 2](UCRL), along with model-free
UCB-like methods [19, 56]. Regret minimization is a relevant objective when one cares about the
rewards accumulated during the learning phase. Nevertheless, an often more important objective
is to devise strategies that explore the environment so as to learn efficient policies using the fewest
number of samples [16]. Such an objective, referred to as Best Policy Identification (BPI), has been
investigated in simplistic Multi-Armed Bandit problems [16, 21] and more recently in tabular MDPs
[28, 29]. For these problems, tight instance-specific sample complexity lower bounds are known, as
well as model-based algorithms approaching these limits. However, model-based approaches may be
computationally expensive or infeasible to obtain. In this paper, we investigate whether we can adapt
the design of these algorithms so that they become model-free and hence more practical.
Inspired by [28, 29], we adopt an information-theoretical approach, and design our algorithms starting
from an instance-specific lower bound on the sample complexity of learning a nearly-optimal policy
in a Markov decision process (MDP). This lower bound is the value of an optimization problem,
referred to as the lower bound problem, whose solution dictates the optimal exploration strategy in
an environment. Algorithms designed on this instance-specific lower bound, rather than minimax
bounds, result in truly adaptive methods, capable of tailoring their exploration strategy according
to the specific MDP’s learning difficulty. Our method estimates the solution to the lower bound
problem and employs it as our exploration strategy. However, we face two major challenges: (1) the
Code repository: https://github.com/rssalessio/ModelFreeActiveExplorationRL
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

