Faster approximate subgraph counts with privacy

Dung Nguyen
Department of Computer Science and
UVA Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative
University of Virginia, USA
dungn@virginia.edu
Venkatesh Srinivasan
Department of Mathematics and
Computer Science
Santa Clara University, USA
vsrinivasan4@scu.edu

Mahantesh Halappanavar
Data Sciences and Machine Intelligence Group
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA
hala@pnnl.gov

Anil Vullikanti
Department of Computer Science and
UVA Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative
University of Virginia, USA
vsakumar@virginia.edu

Abstract
One of the most common problems studied in the context of differential privacy
for graph data is counting the number of non-induced embeddings of a subgraph in
a given graph. These counts have very high global sensitivity. Therefore, adding
noise based on powerful alternative techniques, such as smooth sensitivity and
higher-order local sensitivity have been shown to give significantly better accuracy.
However, all these alternatives to global sensitivity become computationally very
expensive, and to date efficient polynomial time algorithms are known only for few
selected subgraphs, such as triangles, k-triangles, and k-stars. In this paper, we
show that good approximations to these sensitivity metrics can be still used to get
private algorithms. Using this approach, we much faster algorithms for privately
counting the number of triangles in real-world social networks, which can be easily
parallelized. We also give a private polynomial time algorithm for counting any
constant size subgraph using less noise than the global sensitivity; we show this
can be improved significantly for counting paths in special classes of graphs.

1

Introduction

The notion of Differential Privacy (DP) [12] has emerged as the de facto standard notion for supporting
queries on private and sensitive data. DP ensures that changes in private data have limited statistical
influence (measured by the privacy budget ϵ, δ) on the output of queries, without needing any attack
model, which is one of the reasons of its popularity. Networked abstractions are commonly used
in a number of applications, such as public health, social networks, and finance. Such datasets
are usually sensitive, and maintaining privacy is an important concern. Within the context of
network/graph data, two privacy models have been considered in most prior work, namely, edge
and node privacy. There has been a lot of interest in developing private algorithms for a number of
network problems, such as community detection [29, 9, 8, 22], and counting small subgraphs (e.g.,
stars and triangles [25, 36, 23, 31]).
However, efficient private algorithms with good accuracy are not known for many graph problems,
including counting small subgraphs. One of the main challenges is that graph problems often have
very high global sensitivity (the maximum change in the output function due to the change in one
edge/vertex (see Section 3)), in contrast to many statistical and machine learning queries. As a
result, DP algorithms based on global sensitivity (which can usually be computed quite easily for
many problems) do not give good accuracy bounds, in general. For instance, in the edge-privacy
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

