Creating Multi-Level Skill Hierarchies in
Reinforcement Learning

Joshua B. Evans
Department of Computer Science
University of Bath
Bath, United Kingdom
jbe25@bath.ac.uk

Özgür Şimşek
Department of Computer Science
University of Bath
Bath, United Kingdom
o.simsek@bath.ac.uk

Abstract
What is a useful skill hierarchy for an autonomous agent? We propose an answer
based on a graphical representation of how the interaction between an agent and its
environment may unfold. Our approach uses modularity maximisation as a central
organising principle to expose the structure of the interaction graph at multiple
levels of abstraction. The result is a collection of skills that operate at varying
time scales, organised into a hierarchy, where skills that operate over longer time
scales are composed of skills that operate over shorter time scales. The entire
skill hierarchy is generated automatically, with no human intervention, including
the skills themselves (their behaviour, when they can be called, and when they
terminate) as well as the hierarchical dependency structure between them. In a wide
range of environments, this approach generates skill hierarchies that are intuitively
appealing and that considerably improve the learning performance of the agent.

1

Introduction

One of the most important open problems in artificial intelligence is how to make it possible for
autonomous agents to develop useful action hierarchies on their own, without any input from humans,
including system designers and domain specialists. Before addressing this algorithmic question, it
is useful to first consider a conceptual one: What constitutes a useful action hierarchy? Here we
focus on this conceptual question with the aim of providing a useful foundation for algorithmic
development.
Our primary contribution is a characterisation of a useful action hierarchy. In defining this action
hierarchy, we use no information other than a graphical representation of how the interaction between
the agent and its environment may unfold. When this information is not known a priori, it would be
discovered naturally by the agent as it operates in its environment. Beyond this interaction graph, no
particular domain knowledge is needed. Hence, our approach is applicable broadly.
Multiple strands of earlier work have used the interaction graph as a basis for defining collections
of actions. The main novelty in our approach is our use of modularity maximisation as a central
organising principle to expose the structure of the interaction graph at multiple levels of abstraction.
The outcome is an action hierarchy that enables the agent to explore its environment efficiently at
multiple time scales.
Our approach yields an action hierarchy with four desirable properties. First, it contains actions
that operate at a wide range of time scales. This is necessary to solve complex problems, which
require agents to be able to act, learn, and plan at varying time scales. Secondly, the actions are
naturally organised into a hierarchy, with actions that operate over longer time scales being composed
of actions that operate over shorter time scales. This hierarchical structure offers substantial benefits
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

