Formulating Discrete Probability Flow Through
Optimal Transport

Pengze Zhang ∗
Sun Yat-sen University
zhangpz3@mail2.edu.cn

Hubery Yin∗
WeChat, Tencent Inc.
hubery@tencent.com

Chen Li
WeChat, Tencent Inc.
chaselli@tencent.com

Xiaohua Xie †
Sun Yat-sen University
xiexiaoh6@mail.edu.cn

Abstract
Continuous diffusion models are commonly acknowledged to display a deterministic probability flow, whereas discrete diffusion models do not. In this
paper, we aim to establish the fundamental theory for the probability flow of
discrete diffusion models. Specifically, we first prove that the continuous probability flow is the Monge optimal transport map under certain conditions, and
also present an equivalent evidence for discrete cases. In view of these findings, we are then able to define the discrete probability flow in line with the
principles of optimal transport. Finally, drawing upon our newly established definitions, we propose a novel sampling method that surpasses previous discrete
diffusion models in its ability to generate more certain outcomes. Extensive experiments on the synthetic toy dataset and the CIFAR-10 dataset have validated
the effectiveness of our proposed discrete probability flow. Code is released at:
https://github.com/PangzeCheung/Discrete-Probability-Flow.

1

Introduction

The emerging diffusion-based models [43, 20, 45, 46] have been proven to be an effective technique
for modeling data distribution, and generating high-quality texts [31, 14], images [34, 11, 40, 37,
38, 21] and videos [22, 19, 39, 51, 17]. Considering their generative capabilities have surpassed the
previous state-of-the-art results achieved by generative adversarial networks [11], there has been
a growing interest in exploring the potential of diffusion models in various advanced applications
[41, 33, 48, 55, 10, 32, 49, 52, 18, 53].
Diffusion models are widely recognized for generating samples in a stochastic manner [46], which
complicates the task of defining an encoder that translates a sample to a certain latent space. For
instance, by following the configuration proposed by [20], it has been observed that generated samples
from any given initial point have the potential to span the entire support of the data distribution.
To achieve a deterministic sampling process while preserving the generative capability, Song et
al.[46] proposed the probability flow, which provides a deterministic map between the data space
and the latent space for continuous diffusion models. Unfortunately, the situation differs when it
comes to discrete models. For instance, considering two binary distributions (P0 = 12 , P1 = 21 )
and (P0 = 13 , P1 = 32 ), there is no deterministic map that can transform the former distribution
to the latter one, as it would simply be a permutation. Although some previous research has been
∗
†

Equal contribution. This work was done when Pengze Zhang was an intern at WeChat.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

