Projection-Free Online Convex Optimization via
Efficient Newton Iterations
Khashayar Gatmiry
MIT
gatmiry@mit.com

Zakaria Mhammedi
MIT
mhammedi@mit.edu

Abstract
This paper presents new projection-free algorithms for Online Convex Optimization (OCO) over a convex domain K ⊂ Rd . Classical OCO algorithms (such as
Online Gradient Descent) typically need to perform Euclidean projections onto the
convex set K to ensure feasibility of their iterates. Alternative algorithms, such
as those based on the Frank-Wolfe method, swap potentially-expensive Euclidean
projections onto K for linear optimization over K. However, such algorithms have
a sub-optimal regret in OCO compared to projection-based algorithms. In this
paper, we look at a third type of algorithms that output approximate Newton iterates
using a self-concordant barrier for the set of interest. The use of a self-concordant
barrier automatically ensures feasibility without the need of projections. However,
the computation of the Newton iterates requires a matrix inverse, which can still
be expensive. As our main contribution, we show how the stability of the Newton
iterates can be leveraged to only compute the inverse Hessian a vanishing fractions
of the rounds, leading to a new efficient projection-free OCO algorithm with a
state-of-the-art regret bound.

1

Introduction

We consider the Online Convex Optimization (OCO) problem over a convex set K ⊂ Rd , in which a
learner (algorithm) plays a game against an adaptive adversary for T rounds. At each round t ∈ [T ],
the learner picks wt ∈ K given knowledge of the history Ht−1 ∶= {(ℓs , ws )}s<t . Then, the adversary
picks a convex loss function ℓt ∶ K → R with the knowledge of Ht−1 and the iterate wt , and the
learner suffers loss ℓt (wt ) and proceeds to the next round. The goal of the learner is to minimize the
regret after T rounds:
T

T

t=1

t=1

RegT (w) = ∑ ℓt (wt ) − ∑ ℓt (w),
against any comparator w ∈ K. The aim of this paper is to design computationally-efficient
(projection√
̃ T ) regret.
free) algorithms for OCO that enjoy the optimal (up to log-factor in T ) O(
The OCO framework captures many optimization settings relevant to machine learning applications.
For example, OCO algorithms can be used in offline convex optimization as more computationallyand memory-efficient alternatives to interior-point and cutting plane methods whenever the dimension
d is large [14, 16].
√ OCO algorithms are also often used in stochastic convex optimization, where
the standard
O(
T ) regret (achieved by, e.g. Online Gradient Descent) translates into the optimal
√
O(1/ T ) rate1 via the classical online-to-batch conversion technique [3, 37]. It has been shown that
OCO algorithms can also achieve state-of-the-art accelerated rates in both the offline and stochastic
optimization settings despite being designed for the more general OCO framework [6, 28]. What is
1

This is the optimal rate when no further assumptions are made.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

