Can Pre-Trained Text-to-Image Models Generate
Visual Goals for Reinforcement Learning?

1

Jialu Gao1∗ , Kaizhe Hu1,2,3∗, Guowei Xu1 , Huazhe Xu1,2,3
Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 3 Shanghai AI Lab
gaojialululu@gmail.com, huazhe_xu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-trained text-to-image generative models can produce diverse, semantically rich,
and realistic images from natural language descriptions. Compared with language,
images usually convey information with more details and less ambiguity. In this
study, we propose Learning from the Void (LfVoid), a method that leverages the
power of pre-trained text-to-image models and advanced image editing techniques
to guide robot learning. Given natural language instructions, LfVoid can edit the
original observations to obtain goal images, such as “wiping” a stain off a table.
Subsequently, LfVoid trains an ensembled goal discriminator on the generated
image to provide reward signals for a reinforcement learning agent, guiding it
to achieve the goal. The ability of LfVoid to learn with zero in-domain training
on expert demonstrations or true goal observations (the void) is attributed to the
utilization of knowledge from web-scale generative models. We evaluate LfVoid
across three simulated tasks and validate its feasibility in the corresponding realworld scenarios. In addition, we offer insights into the key considerations for the
effective integration of visual generative models into robot learning workflows.
We posit that our work represents an initial step towards the broader application
of pre-trained visual generative models in the robotics field. Our project page:
LfVoid.github.io.

1

Introduction

What is the simplest way to provide guidance or goals to a robot? This question is answered
multiple times: a set of expert demonstrations [1, 2, 3, 4], goal images [5, 6, 7], or natural language
instructions [8, 9]. However, these answers either require a laborious and sometimes prohibitive
effort to collect data, or contain ambiguity across modalities. The desire to alleviate the challenges
begs the question: can we generate goal images from natural language instructions directly, without
physically achieving the goals for robots?
Large text-to-image generative models [10, 11, 12, 13] have achieved exciting breakthroughs, demonstrating an unprecedented ability to generate plausible images that are semantically aligned with given
text prompts. Trained on extensive datasets, these models are thought to possess a basic understanding
of the world [14]. Therefore, we aim to harness the power of these large generative models to provide
unambiguous visual goals for robotic tasks without any in-domain training.
In the past, a common approach to leverage off-the-shelf large generative models in robot learning
involves using these models for data augmentation on expert datasets to improve policy general∗

equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

