Local Convergence of Gradient Methods for Min-Max
Games: Partial Curvature Generically Suffices

Guillaume Wang
Institute of Mathematics
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne
Station Z, CH-1015 Lausanne
guillaume.wang@epfl.ch

Lénaïc Chizat
Institute of Mathematics
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne
Station Z, CH-1015 Lausanne
lenaic.chizat@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study the convergence to local Nash equilibria of gradient methods for twoplayer zero-sum differentiable games. It is well-known that such dynamics converge
locally when S ≻ 0 and may diverge when S = 0, where S ⪰ 0 is the symmetric
part of the Jacobian at equilibrium that accounts for the “potential” component of
the game. We show that these dynamics also converge as soon as S is nonzero
(partial curvature) and the eigenvectors of the antisymmetric part A are in general
position with respect to the kernel of S. We then study the convergence rates when
S ≪ A and prove that they typically depend on the average of the eigenvalues
of S, instead of the minimum as an analogy with minimization problems would
suggest. To illustrate our results, we consider the problem of computing mixed
Nash equilibria of continuous games. We show that, thanks to partial curvature,
conic particle methods – which optimize over both weights and supports of the
mixed strategies – generically converge faster than fixed-support methods. For
min-max games, it is thus beneficial to add degrees of freedom “with curvature”:
this can be interpreted as yet another benefit of over-parameterization.

1

Introduction

Min-max optimization is notoriously subtler than minimization, even in convex-concave settings.
While many of the proof techniques for minimization have a natural equivalent in the min-max
world, some common intuitions fail to transfer. The picture is clear for strongly convex-strongly
concave (SC-SC) min-max games: all the classical gradient methods converge exponentially (for
small enough step-sizes) with worst-case convergence rates dependent on the strong convexity and
strong concavity parameters µx , µy . But, most famously perhaps, for bilinear min-max games the
last iterate of simultaneous Gradient Descent-Ascent (GDA) diverges, while the Proximal Point (PP)
method converges, and alternating GDA and the continuous-time limit of all of these algorithms –
Gradient Flow (GF) – exhibit a cycling behavior.
Based on those two extreme cases, it still seems that part of our intuition from minimization, where
the last-iterate convergence rate is indeed determined by the strong convexity parameter, is preserved.
In this paper, we argue that this intuition is in fact overly pessimistic, and that gradient methods
behave in general more favorably in the min-max setting than in the minimization setting.
Let us first look at a basic example. Consider a bilinear min-max game regularized by a quadratic
term only in one scalar variable:
min max x⊤ P y +

x∈Rd y∈Rd

α 2
x .
2 1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

