High-Fidelity Audio Compression
with Improved RVQGAN

Rithesh Kumar*
Descript, Inc.
Alejandro Luebs
Descript, Inc.

Prem Seetharaman*
Descript, Inc.
Ishaan Kumar
Descript, Inc.

Kundan Kumar
Descript, Inc.

Abstract
Language models have been successfully used to model natural signals, such as
images, speech, and music. A key component of these models is a high quality
neural compression model that can compress high-dimensional natural signals
into lower dimensional discrete tokens. To that end, we introduce a high-fidelity
universal neural audio compression algorithm that achieves 90x compression of
44.1 KHz audio into tokens at just 8kbps bandwidth. We achieve this by combining
advances in high-fidelity audio generation with better vector quantization techniques from the image domain, along with improved adversarial and reconstruction
losses. We compress all domains (speech, environment, music, etc.) with a single
universal model, making it widely applicable to generative modeling of all audio.
We compare with competing audio compression algorithms, and find our method
outperforms them significantly. We provide thorough ablations for every design
choice, as well as open-source code and trained model weights. We hope our work
can lay the foundation for the next generation of high-fidelity audio modeling.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling of high-resolution audio is difficult due to high dimensionality (~44,100 samples
per second of audio) [24, 19], and presence of structure at different time-scales with both short and
long-term dependencies. To mitigate this problem, audio generation is typically divided into two
stages: 1) predicting audio conditioned on some intermediate representation such as mel-spectrograms
[24, 28, 19, 30] and 2) predicting the intermediate representation given some conditioning information,
such as text [35, 34]. This can be interpreted as a hierarchical generative model, with observed
intermediate variables. Naturally, an alternate formulation is to learn the intermediate variables using
the variational auto-encoder (VAE) framework, with a learned conditional prior to predict the latent
variables given some conditioning. This formulation, with continuous latent variables and training an
expressive prior using normalizing flows has been quite successful for speech synthesis [17, 36].
A closely related idea is to train the same varitional-autoencoder with discrete latent variables using
VQ-VAE [38]. Arguably, discrete latent variables are a better choice since expressive priors can be
trained using powerful autoregressive models that have been developed for modeling distributions
over discrete variables [27]. Specifically, transformer language models [39] have already exhibited
the capacity to scale with data and model capacity to learn arbitrarily complex distributions such as
text[6], images[12, 44], audio [5, 41], music [1], etc. While modeling the prior is straightforward,
modeling the discrete latent codes using a quantized auto-encoder remains a challenge.
*
Equal contribution to this work. Address correspondence to papers@descript.com, or raise an issue at
https://github.com/descriptinc/descript-audio-codec.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

