Drift doesn’t Matter: Dynamic Decomposition with
Diffusion Reconstruction for Unstable Multivariate
Time Series Anomaly Detection

Chengsen Wang∗ Zirui Zhuang∗ Qi Qi† Jingyu Wang†
Xingyu Wang Haifeng Sun Jianxin Liao
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
{cswang, zhuangzirui, qiqi8266, wangjingyu}@bupt.edu.cn
{wangxingyu, hfsun, liaojx}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Many unsupervised methods have recently been proposed for multivariate time
series anomaly detection. However, existing works mainly focus on stable data yet
often omit the drift generated from non-stationary environments, which may lead
to numerous false alarms. We propose Dynamic Decomposition with Diffusion
Reconstruction (D3 R), a novel anomaly detection network for real-world unstable
data to fill the gap. D3 R tackles the drift via decomposition and reconstruction. In
the decomposition procedure, we utilize data-time mix-attention to dynamically
decompose long-period multivariate time series, overcoming the limitation of
the local sliding window. The information bottleneck is critical yet difficult to
determine in the reconstruction procedure. To avoid retraining once the bottleneck
changes, we control it externally by noise diffusion and directly reconstruct the
polluted data. The whole model can be trained end-to-end. Extensive experiments
on various real-world datasets demonstrate that D3 R significantly outperforms
existing methods, with a 11% average relative improvement over the previous
SOTA models. Code is available at https://github.com/ForestsKing/D3R.

1

Introduction

Due to the rarity of anomalies, unsupervised anomaly detection of multivariate time series is an
essential area in data mining and industrial applications. Reconstruction-based models are commonly
used in unsupervised anomaly detection. The reconstruction error is small for normal series while
large for abnormal series. Based on this principle, most anomalies can be detected without the
label. In the real world, the temporal patterns typically change over time as they are generated from
non-stationary environments. For example, the growth in the popularity of a service would cause
customer metrics (e.g., request count) to drift upwards over time. Ignoring these factors would cause
a deterioration in the performance of the anomaly detector. Despite the enormous advancements of
previous research, most focus on stable data. Figure 1 illustrates how the anomaly scores provided by
existing approaches tend to increase in the red area when the data is unstable, leading to false alarms.
To handle the unstable data, we attempt to decompose it into a stable component and a trend
component, focusing more on the stable part in the reconstruction procedure. However, the trend part
cannot be ignored completely, as the drift may be anomalous. There are still two challenges in this
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

