DreamHuman: Animatable 3D Avatars from Text
Nikos Kolotouros Thiemo Alldieck Andrei Zanfir
Eduard Gabriel Bazavan Mihai Fieraru Cristian Sminchisescu
Google Research
{kolotouros,alldieck,andreiz,egbazavan,fieraru,sminchisescu}@google.com

Abstract
We present DreamHuman, a method to generate realistic animatable 3D human
avatar models solely from textual descriptions. Recent text-to-3D methods have
made considerable strides in generation, but are still lacking in important aspects.
Control and often spatial resolution remain limited, existing methods produce
fixed rather than animated 3D human models, and anthropometric consistency for
complex structures like people remains a challenge. DreamHuman connects large
text-to-image synthesis models, neural radiance fields, and statistical human body
models in a novel modeling and optimization framework. This makes it possible
to generate dynamic 3D human avatars with high-quality textures and learned,
instance-specific, surface deformations. We demonstrate that our method is capable
to generate a wide variety of animatable, realistic 3D human models from text.
Our 3D models have diverse appearance, clothing, skin tones and body shapes,
and significantly outperform both generic text-to-3D approaches and previous
text-based 3D avatar generators in visual fidelity.

1

Introduction

The remarkable progress in Large Language Models [46, 8] has sparked considerable interest in
generating a wide variety of media modalities from text. There has been significant progress in
text-to-image [49, 50, 52, 67, 10, 34], text-to-speech [37, 41], text-to-music [2, 19] and text-to-3D
[22, 43] generation, to name a few. Key to the success of some of the popular generative image
methods conditioned on text has been diffusion models [52, 50, 55]. Recent works have shown these
text-to-image models can be combined with differentiable neural 3D scene representations [5] and
optimized to generate realistic 3D models solely from textual descriptions [22, 43].
Controllable generation of photorealistic 3D human models has been in the focus of the research
community for a long time. This is also the goal of our work; we want to generate realistic,
animatable 3D humans given only textual descriptions. Our method goes beyond static text-to-3D
generation methods, because we learn a dynamic, articulated 3D model that can be placed in different
poses, without additional training or fine-tuning. We capitalize on the recent progress in text-to3D generation [43], neural radiance fields [31, 5] and human body modelling [64, 3] to produce
3D human models with realistic appearance and high-quality geometry. We achieve this without
using any supervised text-to-3D data, or any image conditioning. We generate photorealistic and
animatable 3d human models by relying only on text, as can be seen in Figure 1 and Figure 2.
As impressive as general-purpose 3D generation methods [43] are, we argue these are suboptimal
for 3D human synthesis, due to limited control over generation which often results in undesirable
visual artifacts such as unrealistic body proportions, missing limbs, or the wrong number of fingers.
Such inconsistencies can be partially attributed to known problems of text-to-image networks, but
become even more apparent when considering the arguably more difficult problem of 3D generation.
Besides enabling animation capabilities, we show that geometric and kinematic human priors can
resolve anthropometric consistency problems in an effective way. Our proposed method, coined
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

