Systematic Visual Reasoning through
Object-Centric Relational Abstraction
Taylor W. Webb*†
Department of Psychology
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA
taylor.w.webb@gmail.com

Shanka Subhra Mondal*†
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ
smondal@princeton.edu

* Equal Contribution
Jonathan D. Cohen
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ
jdc@princeton.edu

Abstract
Human visual reasoning is characterized by an ability to identify abstract patterns
from only a small number of examples, and to systematically generalize those
patterns to novel inputs. This capacity depends in large part on our ability to
represent complex visual inputs in terms of both objects and relations. Recent work
in computer vision has introduced models with the capacity to extract object-centric
representations, leading to the ability to process multi-object visual inputs, but
falling short of the systematic generalization displayed by human reasoning. Other
recent models have employed inductive biases for relational abstraction to achieve
systematic generalization of learned abstract rules, but have generally assumed
the presence of object-focused inputs. Here, we combine these two approaches,
introducing Object-Centric Relational Abstraction (OCRA), a model that extracts
explicit representations of both objects and abstract relations, and achieves strong
systematic generalization in tasks (including a novel dataset, CLEVR-ART, with
greater visual complexity) involving complex visual displays.

1

Introduction

When presented with a visual scene, human reasoners have a capacity to identify not only the objects
in that scene, but also the relations between objects, and the higher-order patterns formed by multiple
relations. These abilities are fundamental to human visual intelligence, enabling the rapid induction
of abstract rules from a small number of examples, and the systematic generalization of those rules
to novel inputs [32, 25, 13, 27]. For example, when presented with the image in Figure 1, one can
easily determine that the objects in the top and bottom rows are both governed by a common abstract
pattern (ABA). Furthermore, one could easily then generalize this pattern to any potential shapes,
even those that one has never observed before. Indeed, this is arguably what it means for a pattern to
be considered abstract.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
† Co-first author order is arbitrary and may be swapped when citing this work.

