ning, rain,
oderate"

"A toy on the
street sitting on
a board"

Any-to-Any Generation via Composable Diffusion

Zineng Tang1∗

Ziyi Yang2†
Chenguang Zhu2‡
Michael Zeng2
1
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
2
Microsoft Azure Cognitive Services Research
https://codi-gen.github.io

Mohit Bansal1†

Abstract
We present Composable Diffusion (CoDi), a novel generative model capable of
generating any combination of output modalities, such as language, image, video,
or audio, from any combination of input modalities. Unlike existing generative
AI systems, CoDi can generate multiple modalities in parallel and its input is not
limited to a subset of modalities like text or image. Despite the absence of training
datasets for many combinations of modalities, we propose to align modalities in
both the input and output space. This allows CoDi to freely condition on any input
combination and generate any group of modalities, even if they are not present in
the training data. CoDi employs a novel composable generation strategy which
involves building a shared multimodal space by bridging alignment in the diffusion
process, enabling the synchronized generation of intertwined modalities, such
as temporally aligned video and audio. Highly customizable and flexible, CoDi
achieves strong joint-modality generation quality, and outperforms or is on par
with the unimodal state-of-the-art for single-modality synthesis. The project page
with demonstrations and code is at https://codi-gen.github.io/

"A toy on the
street sitting on
a board"

"Teddy bear on a
skateboard, 4k"

CoDi

(Raining street
ambience)

"Raining, rain,
moderate"

(Raining ambience)

(Rain ambience, street noise, skateboard sound)

Figure 1: CoDi can generate various (joint) combinations of output modalities from diverse (joint)
sets of inputs: video, image, audio, and text (example combinations depicted by the colored arrows).
∗

Work done at Microsoft internship and UNC.
Corresponding authors: ziyiyang@microsoft.com, mbansal@cs.unc.edu
‡
Work done while at Microsoft.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

