Self-Predictive Universal AI
Elliot Catt, Jordi Grau Moya, Marcus Hutter, Matthew Aitchison
Tim Genewein, Gregoire Deletang, Kevin Li Wenliang, Joel Veness
Google DeepMind
ecatt@google.com

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms typically utilize learning and/or planning
techniques to derive effective policies. Integrating both approaches has proven to
be highly successful in addressing complex sequential decision-making challenges,
as evidenced by algorithms such as AlphaZero and MuZero, which consolidate
the planning process into a parametric search-policy. AIXI, the universal Bayesoptimal agent, leverages planning through comprehensive search as its primary
means to find an optimal policy. Here we define an alternative universal Bayesian
agent, which we call Self-AIXI, that on the contrary to AIXI, maximally exploits
learning to obtain good policies. It does so by self-predicting its own stream of
action data, which is generated, similarly to other TD(0) agents, by taking an action
maximization step over the current on-policy (universal mixture-policy) Q-value
estimates. We prove that Self-AIXI converges to AIXI, and inherits a series of
properties like maximal Legg-Hutter intelligence and the self-optimizing property.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) [1] algorithms exploit learning, planning 1 , or their combination, to
obtain good policies from experience. Pure learning consists of using real experience for improving a
policy via a (parametric) model, possibly representing an explicit policy-model and/or the Q-values [2–
6]. In a sense, learning stores the computational effort of policy-improvement into the parameters,
which makes it a computationally efficient approach when needing to reuse the policy later on. In
contrast, pure planning finds good policies via simulated experience using an environment model and a
randomized (or exhaustive) search policy [1, 7, 8]. In the case of unknown or stochastic environments,
one must re-plan after receiving a new observation, thus wasting all computational-effort from the
previous step. This makes pure planning a wasteful approach. Using both, planning and learning,
is a good way to improve performance and efficiency as demonstrated by modern high-performant
RL algorithms such as MuZero [9–12]. These algorithms distill the planning effort back into the
parametric search-policy by training it to predict the good actions obtained from planning. In a way,
these agents are self-predicting their own policy-improvements. Although empirically successful and
widely used, this distillation [13] or self-prediction 2 process is motivated in a purely heuristic way
without much theoretical understanding on its optimality condition.
The AIXI agent [14, 15] is a theoretical universal Bayes-optimal agent obtained through pure planning without relying on distilling the search effort as described above. AIXI learns an environment
model via a Solomonoff predictor [16, 17] and uses it for exhaustive (computationally intractable)
planning. Thus, although it uses learning for the environment model, we say AIXI adopts a pure
planning approach in the context of policy generation. Two desirable properties of Solomonoff prediction are universality—obtained by considering a huge hypothesis class containing all computable
1

We use the terms planning and search interchangeably.
Policy distillation usually refers to the process of amortizing one or several policies into another policy
model. We view self-prediction as a type of distillation where a search-policy is consolidated into another model.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

