Unbiased Compression Saves Communication in
Distributed Optimization: When and How Much?

Yutong He∗
Peking University
yutonghe@pku.edu.cn

Xinmeng Huang∗
University of Pennsylvania
xinmengh@sas.upenn.edu

Kun Yuan
Peking University
kunyuan@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Communication compression is a common technique in distributed optimization
that can alleviate communication overhead by transmitting compressed gradients
and model parameters. However, compression can introduce information distortion,
which slows down convergence and incurs more communication rounds to achieve
desired solutions. Given the trade-off between lower per-round communication
costs and additional rounds of communication, it is unclear whether communication
compression reduces the total communication cost.
This paper explores the conditions under which unbiased compression, a widely
used form of compression, can reduce the total communication cost, as well as the
extent to which it can do so. To this end, we present the first theoretical formulation
for characterizing the total communication cost in distributed optimization with
unbiased compressors. We demonstrate that unbiased compression alone does not
necessarily save the total communication cost, but this outcome can be achieved
if the compressors used by all workers are further assumed independent. We
establish lower bounds on the communication rounds required by algorithms using
independent unbiased compressors to minimize smooth convex functions and
show that these lower bounds are tight by refining the analysis for ADIANA.
Our results reveal that using independent unbiasedpcompression can reduce the
total communication cost by a factor of up to Θ( min{n, κ}) when all local
smoothness constants are constrained by a common upper bound, where n is the
number of workers and κ is the condition number of the functions being minimized.
These theoretical findings are supported by experimental results.

1

Introduction

Distributed optimization is a widely used technique in large-scale machine learning, where data
is distributed across multiple workers and training is carried out through worker communication.
However, dealing with a vast number of data samples and model parameters across workers poses a
significant challenge in terms of communication overhead, which ultimately limits the scalability of
distributed machine learning systems. To tackle this issue, communication compression strategies
[3, 8, 52, 55, 49] have emerged, aiming to reduce overhead by enabling efficient yet imprecise
message transmission. Instead of transmitting full-size gradients or models, these strategies exchange
compressed gradients or model vectors of much smaller sizes in communication.
There are two common approaches to compression: quantization and sparsification. Quantization
[3, 20, 39, 52] maps input vectors from a large, potentially infinite, set to a smaller set of discrete
values. In contrast, sparsification [57, 55, 50] drops a certain amount of entries to obtain a sparse
vector for communication. In literature [3, 27, 21], these compression techniques are often modeled
∗
Equal Contribution. Corresponding Author: Kun Yuan. Kun Yuan is also affiliated with National Engineering Labratory for Big Data Analytics and Applications, and AI for Science Institute, Beijing, China.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

