CP-SLAM: Collaborative Neural Point-based SLAM
Jiarui Hu1 , Mao Mao1 , Hujun Bao1 , Guofeng Zhang1 , Zhaopeng Cui1∗
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Abstract
This paper presents a collaborative implicit neural simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM) system with RGB-D image sequences, which consists of complete front-end and back-end modules including odometry, loop detection, sub-map
fusion, and global refinement. In order to enable all these modules in a unified
framework, we propose a novel neural point based 3D scene representation in
which each point maintains a learnable neural feature for scene encoding and is
associated with a certain keyframe. Moreover, a distributed-to-centralized learning
strategy is proposed for the collaborative implicit SLAM to improve consistency
and cooperation. A novel global optimization framework is also proposed to improve the system accuracy like traditional bundle adjustment. Experiments on
various datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method in both camera
tracking and mapping.

1

Introduction

Dense visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is an enduring fundamental challenge
in computer vision, which aims to achieve 3D perception and exploration of unknown environments
by self-localization and scene mapping with wide downstream applications in autonomous driving,
unmanned aerial vehicle(UAV) navigation, and virtual/augmented reality (VR/AR).
The traditional visual SLAM has witnessed continuous development, leading to accurate tracking and
mapping in various scenes. Most of the current prominent visual SLAM systems pay their primary
attention to real-time tracking performance [29, 31, 4], while dense map reconstruction is normally
achieved with the temporal fusion of additional depth input or estimated depth images, thus sensitive
to noises and outliers. Some collaborative visual SLAM systems [34, 20] have also been proposed as
a straightforward extension of monocular visual SLAM.
The learning-based visual SLAM has attracted more attention recently with better robustness against
noises and outliers [37]. Very recently, some methods [36, 50, 44] exploit the Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) for dense visual SLAM in a rendering-based optimization framework showing appealing
rendering quality in novel view. However, different from the traditional feature-based SLAM system,
such learning-based methods with implicit representation are normally pure visual odometry systems
without loop closure and pose graph optimization due to the limitation of the scene representation
(e.g., a neural network or feature grid), which also makes it hard to be adapted to the collaborative
SLAM. Take the feature grid representation as an example, it is hard to adjust or align the feature
grid when the pose is optimized after loop closure or transformed to the unified global coordinate
system for collaborative SLAM.
In this paper, we introduce a novel collaborative neural point-based SLAM system, named CP-SLAM,
which enables cooperative localization and mapping for multiple agents and inherently supports loop
closure for a single agent. However, it is nontrivial to design such a system. At first, we need a new
neural representation for SLAM that is easy to be adjusted for loop closure and collaborative SLAM.
Inspired by Point-NeRF [43], we built a novel neural point-based scene representation with keyframes.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

