Towards Federated Foundation Models: Scalable
Dataset Pipelines for Group-Structured Learning

Zachary Charles∗
Google Research
zachcharles@google.com

Nicole Mitchell∗
Google Research
nicolemitchell@google.com

Michael Reneer
Google Research
michaelreneer@google.com

Krishna Pillutla∗
Google Research
kpillutla@google.com

Zachary Garrett
Google Research
zachgarrett@google.com

Abstract
We introduce Dataset Grouper, a library to create large-scale group-structured
(e.g., federated) datasets, enabling federated learning simulation at the scale of
foundation models. This library facilitates the creation of group-structured versions of existing datasets based on user-specified partitions, and directly leads
to a variety of useful heterogeneous datasets that can be plugged into existing
software frameworks. Dataset Grouper offers three key advantages. First, it
scales to settings where even a single group’s dataset is too large to fit in memory. Second, it provides flexibility, both in choosing the base (non-partitioned)
dataset and in defining partitions. Finally, it is framework-agnostic. We empirically demonstrate that Dataset Grouper enables large-scale federated language
modeling simulations on datasets that are orders of magnitude larger than in previous work, allowing for federated training of language models with hundreds
of millions, and even billions, of parameters. Our experimental results show
that algorithms like FedAvg operate more as meta-learning methods than as empirical risk minimization methods at this scale, suggesting their utility in downstream personalization and task-specific adaptation. Dataset Grouper is available at
https://github.com/google-research/dataset_grouper.

1

Introduction

In most machine learning and artificial intelligence settings, algorithms operate on “flat” collections
of examples, that is, examples with no differentiation in source or group structure. However, data in
the real world often consists of an explicit or implicit underlying group structure, where the examples
are partitioned across some number of groups with markedly different statistical characteristics.
Increasingly, research has found that this structure is important in a variety of settings, both for
encoding constraints (such as data restrictions) and in developing algorithms for learning tasks.
Federated learning (FL) is one such setting. FL methods are designed to operate on data partitioned
explicitly across “clients”. In cross-device FL [1, Table 1], clients are often edge devices which
exhibit heterogeneity in both quantity and distribution of data. Cross-silo FL exhibits a similar
structure, often with a coarser notion of clients (such as institutions or companies). Group structures
also arise in meta-learning, in which data is grouped according to a notion of “task” [2], and in
personalization, in which a user’s specific data is used to tune an algorithm’s outputs. The group
structure can also be highly relevant in the context of differential privacy [3, 4]. An intuitive “unit
∗

Authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

