Expanding Small-Scale Datasets with
Guided Imagination

Yifan Zhang1∗ Daquan Zhou2∗ Bryan Hooi1
1
National University of Singapore

Kai Wang1
ByteDance

Jiashi Feng2

2

Abstract
The power of DNNs relies heavily on the quantity and quality of training data.
However, collecting and annotating data on a large scale is often expensive and timeconsuming. To address this issue, we explore a new task, termed dataset expansion,
aimed at expanding a ready-to-use small dataset by automatically creating new
labeled samples. To this end, we present a Guided Imagination Framework (GIF)
that leverages cutting-edge generative models like DALL-E2 and Stable Diffusion
(SD) to "imagine" and create informative new data from the input seed data.
Specifically, GIF conducts data imagination by optimizing the latent features of
the seed data in the semantically meaningful space of the prior model, resulting in
the creation of photo-realistic images with new content. To guide the imagination
towards creating informative samples for model training, we introduce two key
criteria, i.e., class-maintained information boosting and sample diversity promotion.
These criteria are verified to be essential for effective dataset expansion: GIF-SD
obtains 13.5% higher model accuracy on natural image datasets than unguided
expansion with SD. With these essential criteria, GIF successfully expands small
datasets in various scenarios, boosting model accuracy by 36.9% on average over
six natural image datasets and by 13.5% on average over three medical datasets. The
source code is available at https://github.com/Vanint/DatasetExpansion.

1

Introduction

A substantial number of training samples is essential for unleashing the power of deep networks [14].
However, such requirements often impede small-scale data applications from fully leveraging deep
learning solutions. Manual collection and labeling of large-scale datasets are often expensive and
time-consuming in small-scale scenarios [52]. To address data scarcity while minimizing costs, we
explore a novel task, termed Dataset Expansion. As depicted in Figure 1 (left), dataset expansion
aims to create an automatic data generation pipeline that can expand a small dataset into a larger and
more informative one for model training. This task particularly focuses on enhancing the quantity and
quality of the small-scale dataset by creating informative new samples. This differs from conventional
data augmentations that primarily focus on increasing data size through transformations, often
without creating samples that offer fundamentally new content. The expanded dataset is expected to
be versatile, fit for training various network architectures, and promote model generalization.
We empirically find that naive applications of existing methods cannot address the problem well
(cf. Table 1 and Figure 4). Firstly, data augmentation [12, 15, 109], involving applying pre-set
transformations to images, can be used for dataset expansion. However, these transformations
primarily alter the surface visual characteristics of an image, but cannot create images with novel
content (cf. Figure 5a). As a result, the new information introduced is limited, and the performance
gains tend to saturate quickly as more data is generated. Secondly, we have explored pre-trained
generative models (e.g., Stable Diffusion (SD) [59]) to create images for model training. However,
∗

Corresponding to: yifan.zhang@u.nus.edu, zhoudaquan21@gmail.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

