An Optimal and Scalable Matrix Mechanism for Noisy
Marginals under Convex Loss Functions

Yingtai Xiao
Penn State University
yxx5224@psu.edu

Guanlin He
Penn State University
gbh5146@psu.edu

Danfeng Zhang
Penn State University
dbz5017@psu.edu

Daniel Kifer
Penn State University
duk17@psu.edu

Abstract
Noisy marginals are a common form of confidentiality-protecting data release and
are useful for many downstream tasks such as contingency table analysis, construction of Bayesian networks, and even synthetic data generation. Privacy mechanisms
that provide unbiased noisy answers to linear queries (such as marginals) are known
as matrix mechanisms.
We propose ResidualPlanner, a matrix mechanism for marginals with Gaussian
noise that is both optimal and scalable. ResidualPlanner can optimize for many
loss functions that can be written as a convex function of marginal variances (prior
work was restricted to just one predefined objective function). ResidualPlanner can
optimize the accuracy of marginals in large scale settings in seconds, even when the
previous state of the art (HDMM) runs out of memory. It even runs on datasets with
100 attributes in a couple of minutes. Furthermore ResidualPlanner can efficiently
compute variance/covariance values for each marginal (prior methods quickly run
out of memory, even for relatively small datasets).

1

Introduction

Marginals are tables of counts on a set of attributes (e.g., how many people there are for each
combination of race and gender). They are one of the most common formats for the dissemination of
statistical data [8, 2], studying correlations between attributes, and are sufficient statistics for loglinear
models, including Bayesian networks and Markov random fields. For this reason, a lot of work in
the differential privacy literature has considered how to produce a set of noisy marginals that is both
privacy-preserving and accurate.
One line of work, called the matrix mechanism [32, 52, 30, 53, 37, 51, 46, 18, 42] designs algorithms
for answering linear queries (such as marginals) so that the privacy-preserving noisy answers are
accurate, unbiased, and have a simple distribution (e.g., multivariate normal). These crucial properties
allow statisticians to work with the data, model error due to data collection (sampling error) and
error due to privacy protections. It enables valid confidence intervals and hypothesis tests and
other methods for quantifying the uncertainty of a statistical analysis (e.g,. [20, 29, 50, 25, 26]).
Incidentally, sets of noisy marginals are also used to generate differentially private synthetic data
(e.g., [54, 4, 41, 10]).
For the case of marginals, significant effort has been spent in designing optimal or nearly optimal
matrix mechanisms for just a single objective function (total variance of all the desired marginals)
[32, 49, 13, 52, 53, 31, 51] and each new objective function requires significant additional effort
[6, 18, 42, 46]. However, existing optimal solutions do not scale and additional effort is needed to
design scalable, but suboptimal, matrix mechanisms for marginals [37, 38]. This is because prior
work used mathematical properties specific to their chosen objective function in order to improve
runtime. Furthermore, computing the individual variances of the desired noisy marginals is a slow
process and more difficult is computing the covariance between cells in the same marginal.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

