Sample based Explanations via Generalized
Representers
Che-Ping Tsai
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
chepingt@andrew.cmu.edu

Chih-Kuan Yeh
Google Deepmind ⇤
jason6582@gmail.com

Pradeep Ravikumar
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose a general class of sample based explanations of machine learning
models, which we term generalized representers. To measure the effect of a
training sample on a model’s test prediction, generalized representers use two
components: a global sample importance that quantifies the importance of the
training point to the model and is invariant to test samples, and a local sample
importance that measures similarity between the training sample and the test
point with a kernel. A key contribution of the paper is to show that generalized
representers are the only class of sample based explanations satisfying a natural
set of axiomatic properties. We discuss approaches to extract global importances
given a kernel, and also natural choices of kernels given modern non-linear models.
As we show, many popular existing sample based explanations could be cast as
generalized representers with particular choices of kernels and approaches to extract
global importances. Additionally, we conduct empirical comparisons of different
generalized representers on two image and two text classification datasets.

1

Introduction

As machine learning becomes increasingly integrated into various aspects of human life, the demand
for understanding, interpreting, and explaining the decisions made by complex AI and machine
learning models has grown. Consequently, numerous approaches have been proposed in the field
of Explainable AI (XAI). Feature based explanations interpret models by identifying the most
relevant input features [1–4], while sample based explanations do so via the most relevant training
samples [5–8]. Although different methods emphasize different aspects of the model, some may even
have conflicting philosophies [9]. To address this issue, there have been growing calls within the
XAI community for more objective or normative approaches [10–12], which could help align XAI
techniques more effectively with human needs.
One of the most straightforward approaches to assess the effectiveness of explanations is by evaluating
their utility in downstream applications [13, 14]. However, such evaluations can be costly, particularly
during the development stages of explanations, as they often necessitate the involvement of real
human users. As a result, a well-grounded, axiom-based evaluation can be beneficial for designing
and selecting explanations for implementation. Axioms can be viewed as theoretical constraints that
dictate how explanations should behave in response to specific inputs. A notable example is the
Shapley value [15], which originated in cooperative game theory and has gained popularity in XAI
due to its appealing axiomatic properties. Nonetheless, while axiomatic approaches have been widely
applied in identifying significant features [4, 16, 17], feature interactions [18, 19], and high-level
concepts [20], they have not been extensively discussed in sample based explanations.
⇤

Work done in Carnegie Mellon Univerisity.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

