Granger Components Analysis: Unsupervised learning
of latent temporal dependencies

Jacek P. Dmochowski
Department of Biomedical Engineering
City College of New York
New York, NY 10031
jdmochowski@ccny.cuny.edu

Abstract
A new technique for unsupervised learning of time series data based on the notion
of Granger causality is presented. The technique learns pairs of projections of a
multivariate data set such that the resulting components – “driving” and “driven” –
maximize the strength of the Granger causality between the latent time series (how
strongly the past of the driving signal predicts the present of the driven signal). A
coordinate descent algorithm that learns pairs of coefficient vectors in an alternating
fashion is developed and shown to blindly identify the underlying sources (up to
scale) on simulated vector autoregressive (VAR) data. The technique is tested
on scalp electroencephalography (EEG) data from a motor imagery experiment
where the resulting components lateralize with the side of the cued hand, and
also on functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data, where the recovered
components express previously reported resting-state networks.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised component analysis techniques such as Independent Components Analysis (ICA) and
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) are routinely employed for dimensionality reduction, blind
source separation, and feature selection [1, 2]. In particular, these methods are often applied to data
from complex systems such as the brain and financial markets, as their interpretability facilitates
insight into the structure and dynamics of the system. Nevertheless, the sources underlying complex
systems often violate the assumptions made by these classical tools. For example, the sources of
activity in the brain are highly dependent due to functional connectivity, and their dynamics exhibit
lagged (in addition to instantaneous) temporal correlations.
Granger causality [3] is a well-known technique for measuring a form of dependence rooted in
the temporal precedence effect. Time series x(t) is said to “Granger-cause” y(t) if the past of x
improves the prediction of the present value of y above that of its own past. The technique has
many generalizations [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] and is conventionally utilized as a statistical test. One
specifies the two time series being probed and their assumed directionality, and then carries out
hypothesis testing on the measured relationship. The time series are typically defined in the sensor
space, meaning that if the sources of interest are mixed in the observations, Granger causality may not
optimally identify the true relationship. Relatedly, statistically independent sources that are linearly
mixed at the sensors may spuriously indicate Granger causality [12, 13, 14].
Here the concept of Granger causality is employed to propose a new criterion for unsupervised
learning that is appropriate in the case of temporally-dependent source signals. The basic idea is
to identify two projections of a multivariate time series such that the Granger causality among the
resulting pair of components is maximized. A coordinate descent algorithm that decomposes a
multivariate dataset into pairs of components is proposed such that each pair consists of a “driving”
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

