DELTA: Diverse Client Sampling for Fasting
Federated Learning

1

Lin Wang1,2 , Yongxin Guo1,2 , Tao Lin4,5 , Xiaoying Tang1,2,3∗
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
2
The Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
3
The Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Future Networks of Intelligence
4
Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University
5
School of Engineering, Westlake University.

Abstract
Partial client participation has been widely adopted in Federated Learning (FL)
to reduce the communication burden efficiently. However, an inadequate client
sampling scheme can lead to the selection of unrepresentative subsets, resulting in
significant variance in model updates and slowed convergence. Existing sampling
methods are either biased or can be further optimized for faster convergence. In this
paper, we present DELTA, an unbiased sampling scheme designed to alleviate these
issues. DELTA characterizes the effects of client diversity and local variance, and
samples representative clients with valuable information for global model updates.
In addition, DELTA is a proven optimal unbiased sampling scheme that minimizes
variance caused by partial client participation and outperforms other unbiased
sampling schemes in terms of convergence. Furthermore, to address full-client
gradient dependence, we provide a practical version of DELTA depending on the
available clients’ information, and also analyze its convergence. Our results are
validated through experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed learning paradigm that allows a group of clients to collaborate
with a central server to train a model. Edge clients can perform local updates without sharing their
data, which helps to protect their privacy. However, communication can be a bottleneck in FL, as edge
devices often have limited bandwidth and connection availability [58]. To reduce the communication
burden, only a subset of clients are typically selected for training. However, an improper client
sampling strategy, such as uniform client sampling used in FedAvg [38], can worsen the effects of
data heterogeneity in FL. This is because the randomly selected unrepresentative subsets can increase
the variance introduced by client sampling and slow down convergence.
Existing sampling strategies can be broadly classified into two categories: biased and unbiased.
Unbiased sampling is important because it can preserve the optimization objective. However, only
a few unbiased sampling strategies have been proposed in FL, such as multinomial distribution (MD)
sampling and cluster sampling. Specifically, cluster sampling can include clustering based on sample
size and clustering based on similarity. Unfortunately, these sampling methods often suffer from
slow convergence, large variance, and computation overhead issues [2, 13].
To accelerate the convergence of FL with partial client participation, Importance Sampling (IS),
an unbiased sampling strategy, has been proposed in recent literature [5, 49]. IS selects clients
with a large gradient norm, as shown in Figure 1. Another sampling method shown in Figure 1 is
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

