Compositional Abilities Emerge Multiplicatively:
Exploring Diffusion Models on a Synthetic Task

Maya Okawa∗1,2 , Ekdeep Singh Lubana∗1,3 , Robert P. Dick3 , Hidenori Tanaka∗1,2
1
Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
2
Physics & Informatics Laboratories, NTT Research, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA
3
EECS Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Abstract
Modern generative models exhibit unprecedented capabilities to generate extremely
realistic data. However, given the inherent compositionality of the real world, reliable use of these models in practical applications requires that they exhibit the
capability to compose a novel set of concepts to generate outputs not seen in the
training data set. Prior work demonstrates that recent diffusion models do exhibit
intriguing compositional generalization abilities, but also fail unpredictably. Motivated by this, we perform a controlled study for understanding compositional
generalization in conditional diffusion models in a synthetic setting, varying different attributes of the training data and measuring the model’s ability to generate
samples out-of-distribution. Our results show: (i) the order in which the ability to
generate samples from a concept and compose them emerges is governed by the
structure of the underlying data-generating process; (ii) performance on compositional tasks exhibits a sudden “emergence” due to multiplicative reliance on the
performance of constituent tasks, partially explaining emergent phenomena seen
in generative models; and (iii) composing concepts with lower frequency in the
training data to generate out-of-distribution samples requires considerably more optimization steps compared to generating in-distribution samples. Overall, our study
lays a foundation for understanding emergent capabilities and compositionality in
generative models from a data-centric perspective.

1

Introduction

The scaling of data, models, and computation has unleashed powerful capabilities in generative
models, enabling controllable synthesis of realistic images [1–11], 3D scenes [12–16], videos [17–
25], accurate image-editing [26–31], and semantically coherent text generation [32–46]. With
increased interest in incorporating these models in day-to-day applications [47–50], e.g., to improve
robotic systems via better planning and grounding [51–59], analyzing and improving their reliability
has become crucial.
With the motivation above, we study compositional generalization abilities of conditional diffusion
models, i.e., diffusion models that are conditioned on auxiliary inputs to control their generated
images (e.g., text-conditioned diffusion models [6, 26]). Given the inherent compositionality of
the real world, it is difficult to create a training dataset that exposes a model to all combinations of
different concepts underlying the data-generating process. We therefore argue that compositional
generalization is central to model reliability in out-of-distribution scenarios, i.e., when the model has
to compose a novel set of concepts to generate outputs not seen in the training data set [60, 61]. As
shown by several prior works investigating the compositional generalization capabilities of off-theshelf text-conditioned diffusion models [62–72], modern diffusion models often compose complicated
*Equal contribution. Email: {mayaokawa, ekdeeplubana, hidenori_tanaka}@fas.harvard.edu.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

