Replicable Reinforcement Learning

Eric Eaton
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
eeaton@seas.upenn.edu

Marcel Hussing
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
mhussing@seas.upenn.edu

Michael Kearns
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
mkearns@cis.upenn.edu

Jessica Sorrell
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
jsorrell@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
The replicability crisis in the social, behavioral, and data sciences has led to the
formulation of algorithm frameworks for replicability — i.e., a requirement that
an algorithm produce identical outputs (with high probability) when run on two
different samples from the same underlying distribution. While still in its infancy,
provably replicable algorithms have been developed for many fundamental tasks
in machine learning and statistics, including statistical query learning, the heavy
hitters problem, and distribution testing. In this work we initiate the study of
replicable reinforcement learning, providing a provably replicable algorithm for
parallel value iteration, and a provably replicable version of R-max in the episodic
setting. These are the first formal replicability results for control problems, which
present different challenges for replication than batch learning settings.

1

Introduction

The growing prominence of machine learning (ML) and its widespread adoption across industries
underscore the need for replicable research [Wagstaff, 2012, Pineau et al., 2021]. Many scientific
fields have suffered from this same inability to reproduce the results of published studies [Begley
and Ellis, 2012]. Replicability in ML requires not only the ability to reproduce published results
[Wagstaff, 2012], as may be partially addressed by sharing code and data [Stodden et al., 2014], but
also consistency in the results obtained from successive deployments of an ML algorithm in the same
environment. However, the inherent variability and randomness present in ML pose challenges to
achieving replicability, as these factors may cause significant variations in results.
Building upon foundations of algorithmic stability [Bousquet and Elisseeff, 2002], recent work in
learning theory has established rigorous definitions for the study of supervised learning [Impagliazzo
et al., 2022] and bandit algorithms [Esfandiari et al., 2023a] that are provably replicable, meaning
that algorithms produce identical outputs (with high probability) when executed on distinct data
samples from the same underlying distribution. However, these results have not been extended
to the study of control problems such as reinforcement learning (RL), that have long been known
to suffer from stability issues [White and Eldeib, 1994, Mannor et al., 2004, Islam et al., 2017,
Henderson et al., 2018]. These stability issues have already sparked research into robustness for
control problems including RL [Khalil et al., 1996, Nilim and Ghaoui, 2005, Iyengar, 2005]. Nondeterministic environments and evaluation benchmarks, the randomness of the exploration process,
and the sequential interaction of an RL agent with the environment all complicate the ability to make
RL replicable. Our work is orthogonal to that of the robustness literature and our goal is not to reduce
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

