Robust covariance estimation with missing values and
cell-wise contamination
Karim Lounici
CMAP
Ecole Polytechnique
Palaiseau, France
karim.lounici@polytechnique.edu

Gregoire Pacreau
CMAP
Ecole Polytechnique
Palaiseau, France
gregoire.pacreau@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
Large datasets are often affected by cell-wise outliers in the form of missing or
erroneous data. However, discarding any samples containing outliers may result in
a dataset that is too small to accurately estimate the covariance matrix. Moreover,
the robust procedures designed to address this problem require the invertibility of
the covariance operator and thus are not effective on high-dimensional data. In
this paper, we propose an unbiased estimator for the covariance in the presence
of missing values that does not require any imputation step and still achieves near
minimax statistical accuracy with the operator norm. We also advocate for its
use in combination with cell-wise outlier detection methods to tackle cell-wise
contamination in a high-dimensional and low-rank setting, where state-of-the-art
methods may suffer from numerical instability and long computation times. To
complement our theoretical findings, we conducted an experimental study which
demonstrates the superiority of our approach over the state of the art both in low
and high dimension settings.

1

Introduction

Outliers are a common occurrence in datasets, and they can significantly affect the accuracy of
data analysis. While research on outlier detection and treatment has been ongoing since the 1960s,
much of it has focused on cases where entire samples are outliers (Huber’s contamination model)
[11, 41, 13]. While sample-wise contamination is a common issue in many datasets, modern data
analysis often involves combining data from multiple sources. For example, data may be collected
from an array of sensors, each with an independent probability of failure, or financial data may come
from multiple companies, where reporting errors from one source do not necessarily impact the
validity of the information from the other sources. Discarding an entire sample as an outlier when
only a few features are contaminated can result in the loss of valuable information, especially in
high-dimensional datasets where samples are already scarce. It is important to identify and address
the specific contaminated features, rather than simply treating the entire sample as an outlier. In
fact, if each dimension of a sample has a contamination probability of ", then the probability of that
sample containing at least one outlier is given by 1 (1 ")p , where p is the dimensionality of the
sample. In high dimension, this probability can quickly exceed 50%, surpassing the breakdown point
of many robust estimators designed for the Huber sample-wise contamination setting. Hence, it is
crucial to develop robust methods that can handle cell-wise contaminations and still provide accurate
results.
The issue of cell-wise contamination, where individual cells in a dataset may be contaminated, was
first introduced in [3]. However, the issue of missing data due to outliers was studied much earlier,
dating back to the work of [35]. Although missing values in a dataset are much easier to detect than
outliers, they can lead to errors in estimating the location and scale of the underlying distribution [25]
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

