Curvature Filtrations for Graph Generative Model
Evaluation
Joshua Southern∗
Imperial College London
jks17@ic.ac.uk

Jeremy Wayland∗
Helmholtz Munich & Technical University of Munich
jeremy.wayland@tum.de

Michael Bronstein†
University of Oxford
michael.bronstein@cs.ox.ac.uk

Bastian Rieck†
Helmholtz Munich & Technical University of Munich
bastian.rieck@tum.de

Abstract
Graph generative model evaluation necessitates understanding differences between graphs on
the distributional level. This entails being able to harness salient attributes of graphs in an
efficient manner. Curvature constitutes one such property that has recently proved its utility in
characterising graphs. Its expressive properties, stability, and practical utility in model evaluation
remain largely unexplored, however. We combine graph curvature descriptors with emerging
methods from topological data analysis to obtain robust, expressive descriptors for evaluating
graph generative models.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data are prevalent in a number of different domains, including social networks [48],
bioinformatics [38, 59], and transportation [33]. The ability to generate new graphs from a distribution
is a burgeoning technology with promising applications in molecule or protein design [34, 35], as
well as circuit design [47]. To compare graph generative models and advance research in this area, it
is essential to have a metric that can measure the distance between a set of generated and reference
graphs, with enough expressivity to critically evaluate model performance. Typically, this is done by
using a set of descriptor functions, which map a graph to a high-dimensional representation in Rd .
An evaluator function, such as the maximum mean discrepancy [27, MMD], may then be used to get
a distance between two distributions of graphs by comparing their vectorial representations [44, 53].
This state of the art was recently critiqued by O’Bray et al. [54] since it (i) requires numerous
parameter and function choices, (ii) is limited by the expressivity of the descriptor function, and
(iii) does not come equipped with stability guarantees.
We propose to overcome these issues through topological data analysis (TDA), which is capable
of capturing multi-scale features of graphs while being more expressive than simple descriptor
functions. TDA is built on the existence of a function of the form f : V → R, or f : E → R on a
graph G = (V, E). This is used to obtain a filtration, i.e. an ordering of subgraphs, resulting in a
set of topological descriptors, the persistence diagrams. Motivated by their expressive power and
computational efficiency, we use recent notions of discrete curvature [19, 24, 55] to define filtrations
and calculate persistence landscapes [10] from the persistence diagrams, thus obtaining a descriptor
whose Banach space formulation permits statistical calculations. Our proposed method comes
equipped with stability guarantees, can count certain substructures and measure important graph
characteristics, and can be used to evaluate a variety of statistical tests since it permits computing
distances between graph distributions.
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
These authors jointly directed the work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

