3D-Aware Visual Question Answering
about Parts, Poses and Occlusions

1

Xingrui Wang1 Wufei Ma1∗ Zhuowan Li1† Adam Kortylewski2, 3 Alan Yuille1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics 3 University of Freiburg
{xwang378, wma27, zli110, ayuille1}@jhu.edu
akortyle@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Despite rapid progress in Visual question answering (VQA), existing datasets and
models mainly focus on testing reasoning in 2D. However, it is important that VQA
models also understand the 3D structure of visual scenes, for example to support
tasks like navigation or manipulation. This includes an understanding of the 3D
object pose, their parts and occlusions. In this work, we introduce the task of 3Daware VQA, which focuses on challenging questions that require a compositional
reasoning over the 3D structure of visual scenes. We address 3D-aware VQA from
both the dataset and the model perspective. First, we introduce Super-CLEVR-3D, a
compositional reasoning dataset that contains questions about object parts, their 3D
poses, and occlusions. Second, we propose PO3D-VQA, a 3D-aware VQA model
that marries two powerful ideas: probabilistic neural symbolic program execution
for reasoning and deep neural networks with 3D generative representations of
objects for robust visual recognition. Our experimental results show our model
PO3D-VQA outperforms existing methods significantly, but we still observe a
significant performance gap compared to 2D VQA benchmarks, indicating that
3D-aware VQA remains an important open research area. The code is available at
https://github.com/XingruiWang/3D-Aware-VQA.

1

Introduction

Visual question answering (VQA) is a challenging task that requires an in-depth understanding
of vision and language, as well as multi-modal reasoning. Various benchmarks and models have
been proposed to tackle this challenging task, but they mainly focus on 2D questions about objects,
attributes, or 2D spatial relationships. However, it is important that VQA models understand the 3D
structure of scenes, in order to support tasks like autonomous navigation and manipulation.
An inherent property of human vision is that we can naturally answer questions that require a
comprehensive understanding of the 3D structure in images. For example, humans can answer the
questions shown in Fig. 1, which ask about the object parts, their 3D poses, and occlusions. However,
current VQA models, which often rely on 2D bounding boxes to encode a visual scene [2, 59, 25]
struggle to answer such questions reliably (as can be seen from our experiments). We hypothesize
this is caused by the lack of understanding of the 3D structure images.
In this work, we introduce the task of 3D-aware VQA, where answering the questions requires
compositional reasoning over the 3D structure of the visual scenes. More specifically, we focus on
challenging questions that require multi-step reasoning about the object-part hierarchy, the 3D poses
of the objects, and the occlusion relationships between objects or parts.
∗
†

Wufei contributed to develop the 3D algorithm for multi-objects pose estimation.
Zhuowan contributed to dataset construction, manuscript writing and conceptualizing the framework.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

