Multiply Robust Federated Estimation of Targeted
Average Treatment Effects

Larry Han
Department of Health Sciences
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
lar.han@northeastern.edu

Zhu Shen
Department of Biostatistics
Harvard University
Boston, MA 02115
zhushen@g.harvard.edu

José R. Zubizarreta
Departments of Health Care Policy, Biostatistics, and Statistics
Harvard University
Boston, MA 02115
zubizarreta@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Abstract
Federated or multi-site studies have distinct advantages over single-site studies,
including increased generalizability, the ability to study underrepresented populations, and the opportunity to study rare exposures and outcomes. However, these
studies are complicated by the need to preserve the privacy of each individual’s
data, heterogeneity in their covariate distributions, and different data structures
between sites. We propose a novel federated approach to derive valid causal inferences for a target population using multi-site data. We adjust for covariate shift and
accommodate covariate mismatch between sites by developing a multiply-robust
and privacy-preserving nuisance function estimation approach. Our methodology
incorporates transfer learning to estimate ensemble weights to combine information
from source sites. We show that these learned weights are efficient and optimal
under different scenarios. We showcase the finite sample advantages of our approach in terms of efficiency and robustness compared to existing state-of-the-art
approaches. We apply our approach to study the treatment effect of percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) on the duration of hospitalization for patients experiencing acute myocardial infarction (AMI) with data from the Centers for Medicare
& Medicaid Services (CMS).

1

Introduction

Compared to single-site studies, federated or multi-site studies confer distinct advantages, such as
the potential for increased generalizability of findings, the opportunity to learn about underrepresented populations, and the ability to study rare exposures and outcomes. However, deriving valid
causal inferences using multi-site data is difficult due to numerous real-world challenges, including
heterogeneity of site populations, different data structures, and privacy-preserving constraints stemming from policies such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) that prohibit direct data pooling.
Recent methodological developments have focused on privacy-preserving estimation strategies.
These strategies typically involve sharing summary-level information from multiple data sources
[28, 29, 13, 14, 20]. However, they often require restrictive assumptions such as homogeneous data
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

