Towards Foundation Models
for Scientific Machine Learning:
Characterizing Scaling and Transfer Behavior

Shashank Subramanian
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab
shashanksubramanian@lbl.gov

Peter Harrington
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab
pharrington@lbl.gov

Kurt Keutzer
UC Berkeley
keutzer@eecs.berkeley.edu

Wahid Bhimji
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab
wbhimji@lbl.gov

Dmitriy Morozov
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab
dmorozov@lbl.gov

Michael W. Mahoney
ICSI, LBNL, and Department of Statistics
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Amir Gholami
ICSI, UC Berkeley
amirgh@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Pre-trained machine learning (ML) models have shown great performance for a
wide range of applications, in particular in natural language processing (NLP)
and computer vision (CV). Here, we study how pre-training could be used for
scientific machine learning (SciML) applications, specifically in the context of
transfer learning. We study the transfer behavior of these models as (i) the pretrained model size is scaled, (ii) the downstream training dataset size is scaled,
(iii) the physics parameters are systematically pushed out of distribution, and (iv)
how a single model pre-trained on a mixture of different physics problems can
be adapted to various downstream applications. We find that—when fine-tuned
appropriately—transfer learning can help reach desired accuracy levels with orders
of magnitude fewer downstream examples (across different tasks that can even be
out-of-distribution) than training from scratch, with consistent behaviour across a
wide range of downstream examples. We also find that fine-tuning these models
yields more performance gains as model size increases, compared to training from
scratch on new downstream tasks. These results hold for a broad range of PDE
learning tasks. All in all, our results demonstrate the potential of the “pre-train and
fine-tune” paradigm for SciML problems, demonstrating a path towards building
SciML foundation models. Our code is available as open-source at [1].

1

Introduction

Foundation models have received considerable interest recently [3]. This terminology refers to certain
models that are trained on extremely large and diverse quantities of data and applied to a wide range
of tasks. Rather than being designed for any single task, a foundation model serves as a “prior”
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

