Strategic Data Sharing between Competitors

Nikita Tsoy
INSAIT, Sofia University
Sofia, Bulgaria
nikita.tsoy@insait.ai

Nikola Konstantinov
INSAIT, Sofia University
Sofia, Bulgaria
nikola.konstantinov@insait.ai

Abstract
Collaborative learning techniques have significantly advanced in recent years,
enabling private model training across multiple organizations. Despite this opportunity, firms face a dilemma when considering data sharing with competitors—while
collaboration can improve a company’s machine learning model, it may also benefit
competitors and hence reduce profits. In this work, we introduce a general framework for analyzing this data-sharing trade-off. The framework consists of three
components, representing the firms’ production decisions, the effect of additional
data on model quality, and the data-sharing negotiation process, respectively. We
then study an instantiation of the framework, based on a conventional market model
from economic theory, to identify key factors that affect collaboration incentives.
Our findings indicate a profound impact of market conditions on the data-sharing incentives. In particular, we find that reduced competition, in terms of the similarities
between the firms’ products, and harder learning tasks foster collaboration.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has become integral to numerous business functions in the past decade, such as
service operations optimization, the creation of new products, consumer service analytics, and risk
analysis (Chui et al., 2022). Despite the transformative power of machine learning, its efficacy hinges
significantly on the quality and quantity of the training data, making data a key asset corporations can
use to increase their profit.
One way to enhance data access and machine learning models is collaboration via data sharing (Rieke
et al., 2020; Durrant et al., 2022). Data-sharing schemes can bring benefits in many industries, such as
agriculture, finance, and healthcare (Durrant et al., 2022; FedAI; Rieke et al., 2020). However, at least
two barriers exist to such collaborations. The first is privacy and the associated regulatory concerns,
which can be partially addressed by new collaborative learning techniques, such as federated learning
(Kairouz et al., 2021). The second is proper incentives for collaboration. If the entities have no such
incentives, they may not collaborate at all, free-ride (Blum et al., 2021; Karimireddy et al., 2022), or
attack the shared model (Blanchard et al., 2017).
Such conflicting incentives arise naturally between market competitors. On the one hand, the
competitors are an appealing source of data, since they operate on the same market and have data of a
similar type. On the other hand, the collaboration could also strengthen the competitors’ machine
learning models, potentially leading to downstream losses for the company. This concern is especially
important for big firms that can influence prices and act strategically by considering how their
decisions affect competitors’ responses. Strategic actions might increase profits through various
channels and produce complex downstream effects. For example, firms might collude to capture

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

