Feature-Learning Networks Are Consistent Across
Widths At Realistic Scales
Nikhil Vyas1∗ Alexander Atanasov2,3,4∗ Blake Bordelon1,3,4∗
Depen Morwani1,3 Sabarish Sainathan1,3,4 Cengiz Pehlevan1,3,4
1
SEAS 2 Department of Physics 3 Kempner Institute 4 Center for Brain Science
Harvard University
{nikhil,atanasov,blake_bordelon,dmorwani,
sabarish_sainathan,cpehlevan}@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
We study the effect of width on the dynamics of feature-learning neural networks
across a variety of architectures and datasets. Early in training, wide neural networks trained on online data have not only identical loss curves but also agree
in their point-wise test predictions throughout training. For simple tasks such as
CIFAR-5m this holds throughout training for networks of realistic widths. We also
show that structural properties of the models, including internal representations, preactivation distributions, edge of stability phenomena, and large learning rate effects
are consistent across large widths. This motivates the hypothesis that phenomena
seen in realistic models can be captured by infinite-width, feature-learning limits.
For harder tasks (such as ImageNet and language modeling), and later training
times, finite-width deviations grow systematically. Two distinct effects cause these
deviations across widths. First, the network output has an initialization-dependent
variance scaling inversely with width, which can be removed by ensembling networks. We observe, however, that ensembles of narrower networks perform worse
than a single wide network. We call this the bias of narrower width. We conclude
with a spectral perspective on the origin of this finite-width bias.

1

Introduction

Studies of large-scale language and vision models have shown that models with a larger number of
parameters achieve better performance [1, 2]. Motivated by the success of large-scale models, several
theories of deep learning have been developed, including large-width limits. Infinite width limits
which arise in standard parameterization (SP) or neural tangent parameterization (NTP) considered
in [3, 4] gives rise to a a model with no feature learning (a kernel method). In this limit, the neural
network loses the ability to adapt its internal features. Feature learning is crucial to explain deep
learning’s superior performance to kernels, the emergence of interpretable neurons such as edgedetecting CNN filters, transfer learning capabilities, and large learning rate effects such as edge of
stability [5–8]. All of these effects are exhibited in modern large-scale networks.
Recently, several works have identified an alternative parameterization of neural networks that
preserves feature-learning even at infinite width [9–14]. In this work, we focus on the maximal update
parameterization (µP), or equivalently the mean field parameterization [12, 15, 14]. The existence of
infinite-width feature-learning limit, suggests that this parameterization is potentially more promising
to explain deep learning phenomena than the previous limits. This motivates us to ask:
Question: Can realistic-width neural networks be accurately described by their infinite-width
feature-learning limits?
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

