Graph Contrastive Learning with Stable and Scalable
Spectral Encoding

Deyu Bo1∗ , Yuan Fang2 , Yang Liu1 , Chuan Shi1†
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Singapore Management University, Singapore
{bodeyu, liuyangjanet, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, yfang@smu.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Graph contrastive learning (GCL) aims to learn representations by capturing the
agreements between different graph views. Traditional GCL methods generate
views in the spatial domain, but it has been recently discovered that the spectral
domain also plays a vital role in complementing spatial views. However, existing
spectral-based graph views either ignore the eigenvectors that encode valuable
positional information, or suffer from high complexity when trying to address
the instability of spectral features. To tackle these challenges, we first design
an informative, stable, and scalable spectral encoder, termed EigenMLP, to learn
effective representations from the spectral features. Theoretically, EigenMLP is
invariant to the rotation and reflection transformations on eigenvectors and robust
against perturbations. Then, we propose a spatial-spectral contrastive framework
(Sp2 GCL) to capture the consistency between the spatial information encoded by
graph neural networks and the spectral information learned by EigenMLP, thus
effectively fusing these two graph views. Experiments on the node- and graph-level
datasets show that our method not only learns effective graph representations but
also achieves a 2–10x speedup over other spectral-based methods.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have become the de facto framework to encode graph-structured
data [14, 35, 39]. However, training high-quality GNNs usually requires a large number of domainspecific labels, which is not feasible in many real-world applications. Therefore, as a paradigm
of self-supervised learning, graph contrastive learning (GCL) is proposed to learn node or graph
representations without using labels [20, 19, 12, 38].
Typically, GCL methods first generate different views of a graph, and then contrast the positive
views against the negative ones. By minimizing a contrastive loss, GCL methods can learn invariant
information from different views for various downstream tasks. Therefore, how to generate ideal
graph views is crucial to GCL. Most graph views are obtained by augmenting graphs in the spatial
domain, such as dropping nodes and edges, heuristically [49, 44, 8] or adversarially [27, 40, 41].
Nevertheless, recent studies [18, 17] argue that spatial perturbations ignore the structural properties,
and propose to perturb graph spectrum in the spectral domain.
Generally, the spatial and spectral views represent different information of the graph. The spatial
domain captures the feature information and learns local graph representations by propagating the
node features along local topology, i.e., k-hop subgraphs. In contrast, the spectral domain covers the
global structural information. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors encode the global shapes [13] and
∗
†

This work was done when the first author was a visiting student at Singapore Management University
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

