SQ Lower Bounds for Learning Mixtures of Linear
Classifiers
Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane
University of California, San Diego
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Yuxin Sun
University of Wisconsin-Madison
yxsun@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of learning mixtures of linear classifiers under Gaussian
covariates. Given sample access to a mixture of r distributions on Rn of the form
(x, yℓ ), ℓ ∈ [r], where x ∼ N (0, In ) and y = sign(⟨vℓ , x⟩)) for an unknown
unit vector vℓ , the goal is to learn the underlying distribution in total variation
distance. Our main result is a Statistical Query (SQ) lower bound suggesting
that known algorithms for this problem are essentially best possible, even for the
special case of uniform mixtures. In particular, we show that the complexity of any
SQ algorithm for the problem is npoly(1/∆) log(r) , where ∆ is a lower bound on the
pairwise ℓ2 -separation between the vℓ ’s. The key technical ingredient underlying
our result is a new construction of spherical designs that may be of independent
interest.

1

Introduction

The motivation behind this work is to understand the computational complexity of learning highdimensional latent variable (aka mixture) models. The task of learning various mixture models has a
long history in statistics with an early focus on sample efficiency, starting with the pioneering work
of Karl Pearson [Pea94] on learning Gaussian mixtures. During the past decades, an extensive line
of work in machine learning and theoretical computer science has made significant progress on the
computational aspects of this general question for a range of mixture models, including mixtures of
high-dimensional Gaussians [Das99, AK01, VW02, AM05, KSV08, BV08, MV10, RV17, HL18,
DKS18], mixtures of linear regressions [SJA16, LL18, CLS20, DK20], and more generally mixtures
of experts [JJ94, XA09, ME14, MVKO19, HYJ22].
In this paper, we focus on mixtures of linear classifiers, a classical supervised probabilistic
model that has been intensely investigated from both statistical and algorithmic standpoints [SIM14,
LLYH17, GMP20, CDV22]. A linear classifier (or halfspace) is any Boolean function h : Rn →
{±1} of the form h(x) = sign(⟨v, x⟩), where v ∈ Rn is known as the weight vector and the
univariate function sign is defined by sign(t) = 1 for t ≥ 0 and sign(t) = −1 otherwise. For
an integer r ≥ 2, we can now formally describe an r-mixture of linear
Pr classifiers. The parameters
of the model contain r unknown positive weights w1 , . . . , wr with ℓ=1 wℓ = 1, and r unknown
unit vectors v1 , . . . , vr ∈ Rn . A random sample is drawn from the underlying distribution D(x, y)
as follows: the sample oracle selects the index ℓ ∈ [r] with probability wℓ , and we then receive
a random point (x, y) ∈ Rn × {±1} where x ∼ N (0, In ) and y = sign(⟨vℓ , x⟩)). The goal is
to approximately estimate the model either by learning the underlying distribution D(x, y) in total
variation distance (density estimation), or by approximately recovering the hidden parameters, i.e.,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

