Provably Efficient Algorithm for Nonstationary
Low-Rank MDPs
Yuan Cheng
National University of Singapore
yuan.cheng@u.nus.edu

Jing Yang
The Pennsylvania State University
yangjing@psu.edu

Yingbin Liang
The Ohio State University
liang.889@osu.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) under changing environment models many real-world
applications via nonstationary Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), and hence
gains considerable interest. However, theoretical studies on nonstationary MDPs in
the literature have mainly focused on tabular and linear (mixture) MDPs, which
do not capture the nature of unknown representation in deep RL. In this paper,
we make the first effort to investigate nonstationary RL under episodic low-rank
MDPs, where both transition kernels and rewards may vary over time, and the
low-rank model contains unknown representation in addition to the linear state
embedding function. We first propose a parameter-dependent policy optimization
algorithm called PORTAL, and further improve PORTAL to its parameter-free
version of Ada-PORTAL, which is able to tune its hyper-parameters adaptively
without any prior knowledge of nonstationarity. For both algorithms, we provide
upper bounds on the average dynamic suboptimality gap, which show that as long
as the nonstationarity is not significantly large, PORTAL and Ada-PORTAL are
sample-efficient and can achieve arbitrarily small average dynamic suboptimality
gap with polynomial sample complexity.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has gained significant success in real-world applications such as board
games of Go and chess (Silver et al., 2016, 2017, 2018), robotics (Levine et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2017),
recommendation systems (Zhao et al., 2021) and autonomous driving (Bojarski et al., 2016; Ma et al.,
2021). Most theoretical studies on RL have been focused on a stationary environment and evaluated
the performance of an algorithm by comparing against only one best fixed policy (i.e., static regret).
However, in practice, the environment is typically time-varying and nonstationary. As a result, the
transition dynamics, rewards and consequently the optimal policy change over time.
There has been a line of research studies that investigated nonstationary RL. Specifically, Gajane
et al. (2018); Cheung et al. (2020); Mao et al. (2021) studied nonstationary tabular MDPs. To further
overcome the curse of dimensionality, Fei et al. (2020); Zhou et al. (2020) proposed algorithms for
nonstationary linear (mixture) MDPs and established upper bounds on the dynamic regret.
In this paper, we significantly advance this line of research by investigating nonstationary RL
under low-rank MDPs (Agarwal et al., 2020b), where the transition kernel of each MDP admits
a decomposition into a representation function and a state-embedding function that map to low
dimensional spaces. Compared with linear MDPs where the representation is known, the lowrank MDP model contains unknown representation, and is hence much more powerful to capture
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

