p-Poisson surface reconstruction
in curl-free flow from point clouds

Yesom Park1∗ , Taekyung Lee2∗ , Jooyoung Hahn3 , Myungjoo Kang1
1
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Seoul National University
2
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
3
Department of Mathematics and Descriptive Geometry,
Slovak University of Technology in Bratislava
{yeisom, dlxorud1231, mkang}@snu.ac.kr
jooyoung.hahn@stuba.sk

Abstract
The aim of this paper is the reconstruction of a smooth surface from an unorganized point cloud sampled by a closed surface, with the preservation of geometric
shapes, without any further information other than the point cloud. Implicit neural
representations (INRs) have recently emerged as a promising approach to surface
reconstruction. However, the reconstruction quality of existing methods relies on
ground truth implicit function values or surface normal vectors. In this paper, we
show that proper supervision of partial differential equations and fundamental properties of differential vector fields are sufficient to robustly reconstruct high-quality
surfaces. We cast the p-Poisson equation to learn a signed distance function (SDF)
and the reconstructed surface is implicitly represented by the zero-level set of the
SDF. For efficient training, we develop a variable splitting structure by introducing
a gradient of the SDF as an auxiliary variable and impose the p-Poisson equation
directly on the auxiliary variable as a hard constraint. Based on the curl-free property of the gradient field, we impose a curl-free constraint on the auxiliary variable,
which leads to a more faithful reconstruction. Experiments on standard benchmark
datasets show that the proposed INR provides a superior and robust reconstruction.
The code is available at https://github.com/Yebbi/PINC.

1

Introduction

Surface reconstruction from an unorganized point
cloud has been extensively studied for more
than two decades [10, 29, 40, 9, 62] due to its
many downstream applications in computer vision and computer graphics[8, 16, 62, 58]. Classical point cloud or mesh-based representations
are efficient but they do not guarantee a watertight surface and are usually limited to fixed
geometries. Implicit function-based representations of the
 surface [28, 64, 43, 14] as a level
set S = x ∈ R3 | u (x) = c of a continuous
implicit function u : R3 → R, such as signed
distance functions (SDFs) or occupancy functions, have received considerable attention for
providing watertight results and great flexibility
∗

Eikonal

𝑝-Poisson

𝑝-Poisson + curl-free

Figure 1: Comparison of reconstruction using
an eikonal equation (9), the p-Poisson equation
(8), and the proposed p-Poisson equation with the
curl-free condition (11).

Equal contribution authors. Correspondence to: <mkang@snu.ac.kr>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

