Machine learning detects terminal singularities

Tom Coates
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
180 Queen’s Gate
London, SW7 2AZ
UK
t.coates@imperial.ac.uk

Alexander M. Kasprzyk
School of Mathematical Sciences
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, NG7 2RD
UK
a.m.kasprzyk@nottingham.ac.uk

Sara Veneziale∗
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
180 Queen’s Gate
London, SW7 2AZ
UK
s.veneziale21@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Algebraic varieties are the geometric shapes defined by systems of polynomial
equations; they are ubiquitous across mathematics and science. Amongst these
algebraic varieties are Q-Fano varieties: positively curved shapes which have
Q-factorial terminal singularities. Q-Fano varieties are of fundamental importance
in geometry as they are ‘atomic pieces’ of more complex shapes – the process of
breaking a shape into simpler pieces in this sense is called the Minimal Model
Programme.
Despite their importance, the classification of Q-Fano varieties remains unknown.
In this paper we demonstrate that machine learning can be used to understand this
classification. We focus on eight-dimensional positively-curved algebraic varieties
that have toric symmetry and Picard rank two, and develop a neural network
classifier that predicts with 95% accuracy whether or not such an algebraic variety
is Q-Fano. We use this to give a first sketch of the landscape of Q-Fano varieties in
dimension eight.
How the neural network is able to detect Q-Fano varieties with such accuracy
remains mysterious, and hints at some deep mathematical theory waiting to be
uncovered. Furthermore, when visualised using the quantum period, an invariant
that has played an important role in recent theoretical developments, we observe
that the classification as revealed by ML appears to fall within a bounded region,
and is stratified by the Fano index. This suggests that it may be possible to state
and prove conjectures on completeness in the future.
Inspired by the ML analysis, we formulate and prove a new global combinatorial
criterion for a positively curved toric variety of Picard rank two to have terminal
singularities. Together with the first sketch of the landscape of Q-Fano varieties in
higher dimensions, this gives strong new evidence that machine learning can be an
essential tool in developing mathematical conjectures and accelerating theoretical
discovery.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

