Multi-resolution Spectral Coherence for
Graph Generation with Score-based Diffusion

Hyuna Cho

Minjae Jeong Sooyeon Jeon Sungsoo Ahn Won Hwa Kim
POSTECH, South Korea
{hyunacho, minjaetidtid, jsuyeon, sungsoo.ahn, wonhwa}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Successful graph generation depends on the accurate estimation of the joint distribution of graph components such as nodes and edges from training data. While recent
deep neural networks have demonstrated sampling of realistic graphs together
with diffusion models, however, they still suffer from oversmoothing problems
which are inherited from conventional graph convolution and thus high-frequency
characteristics of nodes and edges become intractable. To overcome such issues
and generate graphs with high fidelity, this paper introduces a novel approach that
captures the dependency between nodes and edges at multiple resolutions in the
spectral space. By modeling the joint distribution of node and edge signals in a
shared graph wavelet space, together with a score-based diffusion model, we propose a Wavelet Graph Diffusion Model (Wave-GD) which lets us sample synthetic
graphs with real-like frequency characteristics of nodes and edges. Experimental
results on four representative benchmark datasets validate the superiority of the
Wave-GD over existing approaches, highlighting its potential for a wide range of
applications that involve graph data.

1

Introduction

The flexible representation of graphs lets us investigate a variety of real-world phenomena such as
social networks [8,39], traffic flows [43,45], molecule structure [18,19,34,44], and brain networks [2,
22, 28]. The rich expressive power of graphs inherits from embodying various combinations of nodes
and edges within an irregular structure. However, the analysis of graph data is challenging due to
the arbitrary and heterogeneous structure, as it becomes difficult to characterize robust patterns both
within a graph and across different graphs for a downstream machine learning task.
The same issue arises in graph generation, where the objective is to learn the underlying graph
distribution from training samples and thereby synthetic graphs with similar characteristics to the
training data can be generated, i.e., sampled. For this, accurately estimating the joint distribution
of the measurements from node features and graph structures is essential. Recent graph generative
methods [13, 35, 37] have been successful in sampling realistic node and edge features, however, their
generated samples often fail to embed the true relationships especially given in sparse connections
between nodes. This problem often occurs as existing methods derive separate embeddings of
nodes and edges considering them as different entities [37]. Moreover, successive layers of graph
convolution [13, 35] aggravate this issue by overly averaging signals on graphs, such that local details
(i.e., high-frequency characteristics) become intractable.
Key ideas. Notice that the edge signals, e.g., edge weights and connectivity, should be coherent to
node signals as the edges should properly explain the relationships between the nodes. Based on
this homophily assumption, to address the aforementioned issues, we propose a novel generative
model that precisely captures the dependency between nodes and edges in multiple resolutions on
local-to-global structures. This is realized via spectral graph wavelet transform (SGWT) [9], which
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

