Adaptive Selective Sampling for Online Prediction
with Experts

Rui M. Castro
Eindhoven University of Technology,
Eindhoven Artificial Intelligence Systems Institute (EAISI)
rmcastro@tue.nl

Fredrik Hellström
University College London
f.hellstrom@ucl.ac.uk

Tim van Erven
University of Amsterdam
tim@timvanerven.nl

Abstract
We consider online prediction of a binary sequence with expert advice. For this
setting, we devise label-efficient forecasting algorithms, which use a selective
sampling scheme that enables collecting much fewer labels than standard procedures. For the general case without a perfect expert, we prove best-of-both-worlds
guarantees, demonstrating that the proposed forecasting algorithm always queries
sufficiently many labels in the worst case to obtain optimal regret guarantees, while
simultaneously querying much fewer labels in more benign settings. Specifically,
for a scenario where one expert is strictly better than the others in expectation, we
show that the label complexity of the label-efficient forecaster is roughly upperbounded by the square root of the number of rounds. Finally, we present numerical
experiments empirically showing that the normalized regret of the label-efficient
forecaster can asymptotically match known minimax rates for pool-based active
learning, suggesting it can optimally adapt to benign settings.

1

Introduction

This paper considers online prediction with expert advice in settings where collecting feedback might
be costly or undesirable. In the classical framework of sequence prediction with expert advice, a
forecasting algorithm aims to sequentially predict a stream of labels on the basis of predictions issued
by a number of experts (see, for instance, [1, 2, 3] and references therein). Typically, the forecaster
receives the correct label after making a prediction, and uses that feedback to update its prediction
strategy. There are, however, situations where collecting labels is costly and potentially unnecessary.
In the context of online prediction, this naturally leads to the notion of selective sampling strategies,
also called label-efficient prediction [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. In this line of work, there is a natural tension
between performance (in terms of regret bounds) and label complexity, i.e., the number of labels
collected. For a worst-case scenario, the optimal label-efficient strategy amounts to “flipping a coin”
to decide whether or not to collect feedback, irrespective of past actions and performance [5]. Indeed,
in the worst case, the number of labels that one has to collect is linear in the number of rounds for any
algorithm [10]. This is a rather pessimistic perspective, and can miss the opportunity to reduce label
complexity when prediction is easy. With this in mind, the adaptive selective sampling algorithms we
develop follow naturally from a simple design principle: optimize the label collection probability at
any time while preserving worst-case regret guarantees. This principled perspective leads to a general
way to devise simple but rather powerful algorithms. These are endowed with optimal worst-case
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

