Learning Robust Statistics for Simulation-based
Inference under Model Misspecification

Daolang Huang∗
Aalto University
daolang.huang@aalto.fi
Amauri H. Souza
Aalto University
Federal Institute of Ceará
amauri.souza@aalto.fi

Ayush Bharti∗
Aalto University
ayush.bharti@aalto.fi

Luigi Acerbi
University of Helsinki
luigi.acerbi@helsinki.fi

Samuel Kaski
Aalto University
University of Manchester
samuel.kaski@aalto.fi

Abstract
Simulation-based inference (SBI) methods such as approximate Bayesian computation (ABC), synthetic likelihood, and neural posterior estimation (NPE) rely on
simulating statistics to infer parameters of intractable likelihood models. However,
such methods are known to yield untrustworthy and misleading inference outcomes
under model misspecification, thus hindering their widespread applicability. In
this work, we propose the first general approach to handle model misspecification
that works across different classes of SBI methods. Leveraging the fact that the
choice of statistics determines the degree of misspecification in SBI, we introduce
a regularized loss function that penalizes those statistics that increase the mismatch
between the data and the model. Taking NPE and ABC as use cases, we demonstrate the superior performance of our method on high-dimensional time-series
models that are artificially misspecified. We also apply our method to real data from
the field of radio propagation where the model is known to be misspecified. We
show empirically that the method yields robust inference in misspecified scenarios,
whilst still being accurate when the model is well-specified.

1

Introduction

Bayesian inference traditionally entails characterizing the posterior distribution of parameters assuming that the observed data came from the chosen model family [7]. However, in practice, the true
data-generating process rarely lies within the family of distributions defined by the model, leading to
model misspecification. This can be caused by, among other things, measurement errors or contamination in the observed data that are not included in the model, or when the model fails to capture the
true nature of the physical phenomenon under study. Misspecified scenarios are especially likely for
simulator-based models, where the goal is to describe some complex real-world phenomenon. Such
simulators, also known as implicit generative models [25], have become prevalent in many domains
of science and engineering such as genetics [71], ecology [3], astrophysics [40], economics [29],
telecommunications [8], cognitive science [79], and agent-based modeling [87]. The growing field of
simulation-based inference (SBI) [21, 51] tackles inference for such intractable likelihood models,
where the approach relies on forward simulations from the model, instead of likelihood evaluations,
to estimate the posterior distribution.
Traditional SBI methods include approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) [4, 51, 76], synthetic
likelihood [67, 85] and minimum distance estimation [15]. More recently, the use of neural networks
*

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

