Recovering Unbalanced Communities in the
Stochastic Block Model with Application to
Clustering with a Faulty Oracle∗

Chandra Sekhar Mukherjee †
chandrasekhar.mukherjee@usc.edu

Pan Peng ‡
ppeng@ustc.edu.cn

Jiapeng Zhang †
jiapengz@usc.edu

Abstract
The stochastic block model (SBM) is a fundamental model for studying graph
clustering or community detection in networks. It has received great attention
in the last decade and the balanced case, i.e., assuming all clusters have large
size, has been well studied. However, our understanding of SBM with unbalanced
communities (arguably, more relevant in practice) is still limited. In this paper,
we provide a simple SVD-based algorithm for recovering the communities in the
SBM with communities of varying sizes. We improve upon a result of Ailon, Chen
and Xu [ICML 2013; JMLR 2015] by removing the assumption that there is a
large interval such that the sizes of clusters do not fall in, and also remove the
dependency of the size of the recoverable clusters on the number of underlying
clusters. We further complement our theoretical improvements with experimental
comparisons. Under the planted clique conjecture, the size of the clusters that can
be recovered by our algorithm is nearly optimal (up to poly-logarithmic factors)
when the probability parameters are constant.
As a byproduct, we obtain an efficient clustering algorithm with sublinear query
complexity in a faulty oracle model, which is capable of detecting all clusters larger
√
than Ω̃( n), even in the presence of Ω(n) small clusters in the graph. In contrast,
previous efficient algorithms that use a sublinear number of queries are incapable
of recovering any large clusters if there are more than Ω̃(n2/5 ) small clusters.

1

Introduction

Graph clustering (or community detection) is a fundamental problem in computer science and has
wide applications in many domains, including biology, social science, and physics. Among others, the
stochastic block model (SBM) is one of the most basic models for studying graph clustering, offering
both a theoretical arena for rigorously analyzing the performance of different types of clustering
algorithms, and synthetic benchmarks for evaluating these algorithms in practice. Since the 1980s
(e.g., [19, 8, 15, 7]), there has been much progress towards the understanding of the statistical and
computational tradeoffs for community detection in SBM with various parameter regimes. We refer
to the recent survey [1] for a list of such results.
∗

Authors are in alphabetical order.
Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California. Research supported by
NSF CAREER award 2141536.
‡
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China. Research
supported in part by NSFC grant 62272431 and “the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities”.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

