Spuriosity Didn’t Kill the Classifier: Using Invariant
Predictions to Harness Spurious Features

Andrei L. Nicolicioiu1

Cian Eastwood∗1,2
Shashank Singh∗1
Marin Vlastelica1 Julius von Kügelgen1,3

Bernhard Schölkopf 1

1 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
2 University of Edinburgh

3 University of Cambridge

Abstract
To avoid failures on out-of-distribution data, recent works have sought to extract
features that have an invariant or stable relationship with the label across domains,
discarding “spurious” or unstable features whose relationship with the label changes
across domains. However, unstable features often carry complementary information
that could boost performance if used correctly in the test domain. In this work, we
show how this can be done without test-domain labels. In particular, we prove that
pseudo-labels based on stable features provide sufficient guidance for doing so,
provided that stable and unstable features are conditionally independent given the
label. Based on this theoretical insight, we propose Stable Feature Boosting (SFB),
an algorithm for: (i) learning a predictor that separates stable and conditionallyindependent unstable features; and (ii) using the stable-feature predictions to adapt
the unstable-feature predictions in the test domain. Theoretically, we prove that
SFB can learn an asymptotically-optimal predictor without test-domain labels.
Empirically, we demonstrate the effectiveness of SFB on real and synthetic data.

1

Introduction

Machine learning systems can be sensitive to distribution shift [26]. Often, this sensitivity is due to a
reliance on “spurious” features whose relationship with the label changes across domains, ultimately
leading to degraded performance in the test domain of interest [21]. To avoid this pitfall, recent works
on domain or out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization have sought predictors which only make use of
features that have a stable or invariant relationship with the label across domains, discarding the spurious or unstable features [45, 1, 35, 15]. However, despite their instability, spurious features can often
provide additional or complementary information about the target label. Thus, if a predictor could be
adjusted to use spurious features optimally in the test domain, it would boost performance substantially.
That is, perhaps we don’t need to discard spurious features at all but rather use them in the right way.
As a simple but illustrative example, consider the ColorMNIST or CMNIST dataset [1]. This
transforms the original MNIST dataset into a binary classification task (digit in 0–4 or 5–9) and then:
(i) flips the label with probability 0.25, meaning that, across all 3 domains, digit shape correctly determines the label with probability 0.75; and (ii) colorizes the digit such that digit color (red or green)
is a more informative but spurious feature (see Fig. 1a). Prior work focused on learning an invariant
predictor that uses only shape and avoids using color—a spurious feature whose relationship with
the label changes across domains. However, as shown in Fig. 1b, the invariant predictor is suboptimal
test domains where color can be used in a domain-specific manner to improve performance. We thus
ask: when and how can such informative but spurious features be safely harnessed without labels?
∗ Equal contribution. Correspondence to c.eastwood@ed.ac.uk or shashankssingh44@gmail.com.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

