Exploring Question Decomposition for Zero-Shot VQA
Zaid Khan1

Vijay Kumar BG2

Samuel Schulter2 Manmohan Chandraker2,3
2 NEC Laboratories America
3 UC San Diego
{khan.za,yun.fu}@northeastern.edu
{vijay.kumar, samuel, manu}@nec-labs.com

1 Northeastern University

Yun Fu2

Abstract
Visual question answering (VQA) has traditionally been treated as a single-step
task where each question receives the same amount of effort, unlike natural human
question-answering strategies. We explore a question decomposition strategy for
VQA to overcome this limitation. We probe the ability of recently developed large
vision-language models to use human-written decompositions and produce their
own decompositions of visual questions, finding they are capable of learning both
tasks from demonstrations alone. However, we show that naive application of
model-written decompositions can hurt performance. We introduce a model-driven
selective decomposition approach for second-guessing predictions and correcting
errors, and validate its effectiveness on eight VQA tasks across three domains,
showing consistent improvements in accuracy, including improvements of > 20%
on medical VQA datasets and boosting the zero-shot performance of BLIP-2 above
chance on a VQA reformulation of the challenging Winoground task. Project Site:
https://zaidkhan.me/decomposition-0shot-vqa/

1

Introduction

On a question-answering test, humans are able to answer some questions in a single step, while
other questions require potential deliberation and second-guessing. Visual question answering (VQA)
[1–3] has traditionally been treated as a single-step task. Models only get one chance for each
question, and each question receives equal amounts of computation. This is incongruent to the natural
human approach to such tasks, where simple perceptual questions are quickly answered, while harder
reasoning questions are allocated more time and computation.
The emergence of task decomposition techniques for large language models (LLMs) [4] is a potential
solution to this incongruency. Task decomposition techniques prompt a LLM to break down an
initial complex task into simpler subtasks that can each be solved independently. However, VQA
has not benefited from advances in task decomposition techniques for two reasons. First, many task
decomposition techniques [5, 6] have only been effective in the regime of very large unimodal LLMs
with parameters in the 30B+ range, while the LLMs underlying vision-language models are typically
much smaller, only recently reaching ⇡ 13b parameters for publicly available models[7–9]. Second,
existing methods for prompting vision-language models (VLMs) during VQA tasks focus on other
use cases, such as providing more examples of the input task [10] or more information about the
image [11]. Given the recent emergence of multi-billion scale VLMs, our main research question is:
Can multi-billion scale vision-language models benefit by approaching reasoningheavy VQA as a two-step rather than a single-step problem using decomposition?
To this end, we explore a form of task decomposition called question decomposition as a strategy for
zero-shot visual question answering with large VLMs. Although question decomposition has been
explored for specific unimodal QA[12–14], it has not been explored as a strategy for multimodal
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

