Adaptive Principal Component Regression
with Applications to Panel Data
Anish Agarwal⇤
Department of IEOR
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
aa5194@columbia.edu

Keegan Harris
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
keeganh@cs.cmu.edu

Justin Whitehouse
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
jwhiteho@cs.cmu.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zhiweiw@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Principal component regression (PCR) is a popular technique for fixed-design
error-in-variables regression, a generalization of the linear regression setting in
which the observed covariates are corrupted with random noise. We provide the first
time-uniform finite sample guarantees for online (regularized) PCR whenever data
is collected adaptively. Since the proof techniques for analyzing PCR in the fixed
design setting do not readily extend to the online setting, our results rely on adapting tools from modern martingale concentration to the error-in-variables setting.
As an application of our bounds, we provide a framework for experiment design in
panel data settings when interventions are assigned adaptively. Our framework may
be thought of as a generalization of the synthetic control and synthetic interventions
frameworks, where data is collected via an adaptive intervention assignment policy.

1

Introduction

An omnipresent task in machine learning, statistics, and econometrics is that of making predictions
about outcomes of interest given an action and conditioned on observable covariates. An often
overlooked aspect of the prediction task is that in many settings the learner only has access to
imperfect observations of the covariates, due to e.g. measurement error or inherent randomness in the
problem domain. Such settings are sometimes formulated as error-in-variables regression: a learner
is given access to a collection of data (Zn , an , Yn )n 1 , where Zn 2 Rd are the observed covariates,
an 2 {1, . . . , A} is the action taken, and Yn 2 R is the outcome for each observation n. Typically, the
outcomes are assumed to be generated by a linear model Yn := h✓(an ), Xn i+⇠n and Zn := Xn +✏n ,
where Xn 2 Rd are the true covariates, ✏n 2 Rd is the covariate noise, ✓(an ) 2 Rd is an unknown
slope vector associated with action an , and ⇠n 2 R is the response noise. Note that the learner does not
get to see the true covariates Xn . Observe that when ✏n = 0 we recover the traditional linear regression setting. Such an error-in-variables model can encompass many forms of data corruption including
measurement error, missing values, discretization, and differential privacy—see [10, 5] for details.
Our point of departure from previous work is that we allow the sequence of data (Zn , an , Yn )n 1 to
be chosen adaptively. In other words, we provide bounds for learning in the error-in-variables regres⇤

For part of this work, Anish was a postdoc at Amazon, Core AI.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

