Exposing flaws of generative model evaluation metrics
and their unfair treatment of diffusion models
George Stein∗ Jesse C. Cresswell† Rasa Hosseinzadeh† Yi Sui†
Brendan Leigh Ross‡ Valentin Villecroze‡ Zhaoyan Liu‡
Anthony L. Caterini§ J. Eric T. Taylor§ Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem§
{george, jesse, rasa, amy, brendan, valentin.v,
zhaoyan, anthony, eric, gabriel}@layer6.ai
Layer 6 AI

Abstract
We systematically study a wide variety of generative models spanning semanticallydiverse image datasets to understand and improve the feature extractors and metrics
used to evaluate them. Using best practices in psychophysics, we measure human
perception of image realism for generated samples by conducting the largest
experiment evaluating generative models to date, and find that no existing metric
strongly correlates with human evaluations. Comparing to 17 modern metrics for
evaluating the overall performance, fidelity, diversity, rarity, and memorization of
generative models, we find that the state-of-the-art perceptual realism of diffusion
models as judged by humans is not reflected in commonly reported metrics such as
FID. This discrepancy is not explained by diversity in generated samples, though
one cause is over-reliance on Inception-V3. We address these flaws through
a study of alternative self-supervised feature extractors, find that the semantic
information encoded by individual networks strongly depends on their training
procedure, and show that DINOv2-ViT-L/14 allows for much richer evaluation
of generative models. Next, we investigate data memorization, and find that
generative models do memorize training examples on simple, smaller datasets like
CIFAR10, but not necessarily on more complex datasets like ImageNet. However,
our experiments show that current metrics do not properly detect memorization:
none in the literature is able to separate memorization from other phenomena
such as underfitting or mode shrinkage. To facilitate further development of
generative models and their evaluation we release all generated image datasets,
human evaluation data, and a modular library to compute 17 common metrics for 9
different encoders at https://github.com/layer6ai-labs/dgm-eval.

1

Introduction

The capability of modern generative models to synthesize fake images that are seemingly indistinguishable from real samples has resulted in much public interest [90, 89, 94]. While the evaluation
of such models has a longstanding history [10, 11], the unprecedented fidelity of modern synthetic
images (e.g. [25, 93]) raises the question of whether the current tools in use by researchers are
sufficient to measure the extent to which these models have truly learned the ground truth distribution,
and whether striving to achieve state-of-the-art performance on current metric leaderboards provides
optimal targets to drive further algorithmic progress.
Evaluating a single generated image is straightforward, since humans can act as the “ground truth”
for determining realism. Evaluating the quality of a model as a whole is much more difficult. Beyond
∗†‡§

Authors within each of the four groups contributed equally, see Appendix F for a list of contributions.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

