Three Towers: Flexible Contrastive Learning
with Pretrained Image Models
Jannik Kossen1∇∆ Mark Collier2∇ Basil Mustafa3 Xiao Wang3 Xiaohua Zhai3
Lucas Beyer3 Andreas Steiner3 Jesse Berent2 Rodolphe Jenatton3  Efi Kokiopoulou2 
1

OATML, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
2
Google Research 3 Google DeepMind

Abstract
We introduce Three Towers (3T), a flexible method to improve the contrastive
learning of vision-language models by incorporating pretrained image classifiers.
While contrastive models are usually trained from scratch, LiT [85] has recently
shown performance gains from using pretrained classifier embeddings. However,
LiT directly replaces the image tower with the frozen embeddings, excluding
any potential benefits from training the image tower contrastively. With 3T, we
propose a more flexible strategy that allows the image tower to benefit from both
pretrained embeddings and contrastive training. To achieve this, we introduce
a third tower that contains the frozen pretrained embeddings, and we encourage
alignment between this third tower and the main image-text towers. Empirically,
3T consistently improves over LiT and the CLIP-style from-scratch baseline for
retrieval tasks. For classification, 3T reliably improves over the from-scratch
baseline, and while it underperforms relative to LiT for JFT-pretrained models, it
outperforms LiT for ImageNet-21k and Places365 pretraining.

1

Introduction

Approaches such as CLIP [58] and ALIGN [34] have popularized the contrastive learning of aligned
image and text representations from large scale web-scraped datasets of image-caption pairs. Compared to image-only contrastive learning, e.g. [51, 9, 25], the bi-modal image-text objective allows
these approaches to perform tasks that require language understanding, such as retrieval or zero-shot
classification [42, 58, 34]. Compared to traditional transfer learning from supervised image representations [52, 68, 44, 38], contrastive approaches can forego expensive labelling and instead collect
much larger datasets via inexpensive web-scraping [58, 11, 64]. A growing body of work seeks to
improve upon various aspects of contrastive vision-language modelling, cf. related work in §5.
CLIP and ALIGN train the image and text towers from randomly initialized weights, i.e. ‘from
scratch’. However, strong pretrained models for either image or text inputs are often readily available,
and one may benefit from their use in contrastive learning. Recently, Zhai et al. [85] have shown
that pretrained classifiers can be used to improve downstream task performance. They propose LiT,
short for ‘locked-image text tuning’, which is a variation of the standard CLIP/ALIGN setup that
uses frozen embeddings from a pretrained classifier as the image tower. In other words, the text tower
in LiT is contrastively trained from scratch to match locked and pretrained embeddings in the image
tower. Incorporating knowledge from pretrained models into contrastive learning is an important
research direction, and LiT provides a simple and effective recipe for doing so.
However, a concern with LiT is that it may be overly reliant on the pretrained model, completely
missing out on any potential benefits the image tower might get from contrastive training. Zhai et al.
∇

Equal contribution. ∆ Work done while interning at Google.  Equal advising.
Correspondence to jannik.kossen@cs.ox.ac.uk and markcollier@google.com.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

