The Curious Price of Distributional Robustness
in Reinforcement Learning with a Generative Model

Laixi Shi∗
Caltech

Gen Li†
CUHK

Yuting Wei‡
UPenn

Yuxin Chen‡
UPenn

Matthieu Geist§
Google

Yuejie Chi¶
CMU

Abstract
This paper investigates model robustness in reinforcement learning (RL) via the
framework of distributionally robust Markov decision processes (RMDPs). Despite
recent efforts, the sample complexity of RMDPs is much less understood regardless
of the uncertainty set in use; in particular, there exist large gaps between existing
upper and lower bounds, and it is unclear if distributional robustness bears any
statistical implications when benchmarked against standard RL. In this paper,
assuming access to a generative model, we derive the sample complexity of RMDPs
— when the uncertainty set is measured via either total variation or χ2 divergence
over the full range of uncertainty levels — using a model-based algorithm called
distributionally robust value iteration, and develop minimax lower bounds to
benchmark its tightness. Our results not only strengthen the prior art in both
directions of upper and lower bounds, but also deliver surprising messages that
learning RMDPs is not necessarily easier or more difficult than standard MDPs. In
the case of total variation, we establish the minimax-optimal sample complexity
of RMDPs which is always smaller than that of standard MDPs. In the case of
χ2 divergence, we establish the sample complexity of RMDPs that is tight up to
polynomial factors of the effective horizon, and grows linearly with respect to the
uncertainty level when it approaches infinity.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) deals with the problem of learning to make sequential decisions based on
trial-and-error interactions with some unknown environment. As a fast-growing subfield of artificial
intelligence, it has achieved significant success in a variety of domains such as large language model
alignment (OpenAI, 2023; Ziegler et al., 2019), healthcare (Liu et al., 2019; Fatemi et al., 2021),
robotics and control (Kober et al., 2013; Mnih et al., 2013). Due to the high dimensionality of the
state-action space, achieving sample efficiency lies at the core of modern RL practice, especially
in various sample-starved applications. As a result, a large portion of efforts in RL has been put in
designing sample-efficient algorithms and understanding the fundamental statistical difficulty for
diverse RL problems (Azar et al., 2013; Li et al., 2020).
While standard RL has been heavily invested recently, its use can be significantly hampered in
practice due to the sim-to-real gap, where an agent trained in an ideal, nominal environment might
be extremely sensitive and fail catastrophically when the deployed environment is subject to small
changes in task objectives or unexpected perturbations (Zhang et al., 2020a; Klopp et al., 2017;
Mahmood et al., 2018). Consequently, in addition to maximizing the long-term cumulative reward,
∗

Department of Computing Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, CA, USA.
Department of Statistics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
‡
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA.
§
Google Research, Brain Team, Paris, France.
¶
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, PA, USA.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

