Time-Independent Information-Theoretic
Generalization Bounds for SGLD
Futoshi Futami∗
Osaka University / RIKEN AIP
futami.futoshi.es@osaka-u.ac.jp

Masahiro Fujisawa∗†
RIKEN AIP
masahiro.fujisawa@riken.jp

Abstract
We provide novel information-theoretic generalization bounds for stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) under the assumptions of smoothness and dissipativity, which are widely used in sampling and non-convex optimization studies.
Our bounds are time-independent and decay to zero as the sample size increases,
regardless of the number of iterations and whether the step size is fixed. Unlike
previous studies, we derive the generalization error bounds by focusing on the time
evolution of the Kullback–Leibler divergence, which is related to the stability of
datasets and is the upper bound of the mutual information between output parameters and an input dataset. Additionally, we establish the first information-theoretic
generalization bound when the training and test loss are the same by showing that a
loss function of SGLD is sub-exponential. This bound is also time-independent and
removes the problematic step size dependence in existing work, leading to an improved excess risk bound by combining our analysis with the existing non-convex
optimization error bounds.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimization, including stochastic gradient descent (SGD), is central to realizing practical
large-scale or deep-learning models. There are currently considerable active discussions on accurately
determining the generalization performance of models trained by SGD or its variants. In particular,
stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) [13, 39, 29], a noisy variant of SGD, has garnered
much attention in this type of study since it provides a useful theoretical framework for generalization
error analysis based on the Langevin diffusion context [29]. Our study aims to contribute to a more
accurate understanding and evaluation of the generalization performance for SGLD.
There are two main approaches to generalization analysis in SGLD. One is the information-theoretic
analysis proposed by Russo and Zou [30] and Xu and Raginsky [40], by which a generalization
error bound is derived using the mutual information (MI) between the learned parameters and
the training dataset. Recently, some extensions using gradient information have been made to
investigate the generalization properties of SGLD, for example, upper-bounding the MI with the
norm of gradients [28] and the sum of gradient variances [25, 35, 37, 36]. Information-theoretic
generalization bounds are applicable to a wide range of noisy iterative algorithms such as differentially
private SGD [11] and stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo [5] modified to include a noisy
momentum.
The other approach is stability analysis, by which the effects of changes in the learning algorithm
due to the addition or removal of a single training data point on the generalization performance are
investigated. Raginsky et al. [29] derived the non-asymptotic generalization and excess risk bound
of SGLD via the exponential ergodicity of Langevin diffusion. Starting with the study by Raginsky
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

