IEBins: Iterative Elastic Bins for
Monocular Depth Estimation

Shuwei Shao1 , Zhongcai Pei1 , Xingming Wu1 , Zhong Liu1 , Weihai Chen2,∗ and Zhengguo Li3
1

School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, China
2
School of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Anhui University, China
3
SRO department, Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
*Corresponding author, email:whchen@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation (MDE) is a fundamental topic of geometric computer
vision and a core technique for many downstream applications. Recently, several
methods reframe the MDE as a classification-regression problem where a linear
combination of probabilistic distribution and bin centers is used to predict depth.
In this paper, we propose a novel concept of iterative elastic bins (IEBins) for
the classification-regression-based MDE. The proposed IEBins aims to search for
high-quality depth by progressively optimizing the search range, which involves
multiple stages and each stage performs a finer-grained depth search in the target
bin on top of its previous stage. To alleviate the possible error accumulation during
the iterative process, we utilize a novel elastic target bin to replace the original
target bin, the width of which is adjusted elastically based on the depth uncertainty.
Furthermore, we develop a dedicated framework composed of a feature extractor
and an iterative optimizer that has powerful temporal context modeling capabilities
benefiting from the GRU-based architecture. Extensive experiments on the KITTI,
NYU-Depth-v2 and SUN RGB-D datasets demonstrate that the proposed method
surpasses prior state-of-the-art competitors. The source code is publicly available
at https://github.com/ShuweiShao/IEBins.

1

Introduction

Monocular depth estimation (MDE) is a long-standing and fundamental topic in geometric computer
vision, with many applications in robotics [1], 3D reconstruction [2], scene understanding [3], etc. It
consists in inferring the depth map from a single RGB image, which is ill-posed and has the challenge
of scale ambiguity, because the same 2D image can be projected from infinitely many 3D scenes.
Recently, more and more learning-based approaches have been proposed to promote the development
of MDE [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Without loss of integrity, these methods can be grouped into three
categories: regression, classification and classification-regression [12].
Regression is the most primitive and straightforward formulation [4, 7, 13, 14, 15, 16, 8], which
directly generates continuous pixel-wise depth under the supervision of a regression loss. Despite
its great success as a universal paradigm, the regression-based model suffers from unsatisfactory
results [5]. Classification is proposed in [5] and [17] to formulate the MDE as per-pixel classification
and predict the optimal depth interval. More specifically, it discretizes the full depth range into
multiple intervals (bins) in uniform/Log-uniform space (Fig. 1 (a) and (b)) and takes the bin center
(depth candidate) of classified target bin as the final depth prediction. While the classification makes
the MDE easier and significantly improves the model performance, the poor visual quality with
discontinuity artifacts tends to appear [6].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

