A One-Size-Fits-All Approach to Improving
Randomness in Paper Assignment

1

Yixuan Even Xu1∗ Steven Jecmen2 Zimeng Song3 Fei Fang2
Tsinghua University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Independent Researcher
xuyx20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{sjecmen,feif}@cs.cmu.edu
zmsongzm@gmail.com

Abstract
The assignment of papers to reviewers is a crucial part of the peer review processes
of large publication venues, where organizers (e.g., conference program chairs) rely
on algorithms to perform automated paper assignment. As such, a major challenge
for the organizers of these processes is to specify paper assignment algorithms
that find appropriate assignments with respect to various desiderata. Although
the main objective when choosing a good paper assignment is to maximize the
expertise of each reviewer for their assigned papers, several other considerations
make introducing randomization into the paper assignment desirable: robustness to
malicious behavior, the ability to evaluate alternative paper assignments, reviewer
diversity, and reviewer anonymity. However, it is unclear in what way one should
randomize the paper assignment in order to best satisfy all of these considerations
simultaneously. In this work, we present a practical, one-size-fits-all method for
randomized paper assignment intended to perform well across different motivations for randomness. We show theoretically and experimentally that our method
outperforms currently-deployed methods for randomized paper assignment on several intuitive randomness metrics, demonstrating that the randomized assignments
produced by our method are general-purpose.

1

Introduction

Peer review is the process in which submissions (such as scientific papers) are evaluated by expert
reviewers. It is considered a critical part of the scientific process and is commonly used to determine
which papers get published in journals and conferences. For concreteness, we set this work in the
academic conference setting, although the approach can be generalized to other settings, such as
peer review for grant proposals and peer grading in classrooms. Due to the large scale of modern
conferences like NeurIPS and AAAI, conference program chairs work closely with assignment
algorithms to assign papers to reviewers automatically. Among many other challenges involved in
managing huge numbers of reviewers and submissions, these organizers are faced with the difficult
task of balancing various considerations for the paper assignment. Human-friendly automated paper
assignment algorithms are thus crucial for helping them find desirable paper assignments.
In a standard paper assignment setting, a set P of np papers need to be assigned to a set R of nr
reviewers. To ensure each paper gets enough reviewers and no reviewer is overloaded with papers,
each paper p in P should be assigned to ℓp reviewers and each reviewer r in R should receive no more
than ℓr papers. An assignment is represented as a binary matrix x in {0, 1}np ×nr , where xp,r = 1
indicates that paper p is assigned to reviewer r. The main objective of paper assignment is usually
to maximize the predicted match quality between reviewers and papers [1]. To characterize this,
∗

This work was done when Xu was a visiting intern at Carnegie Mellon University.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

