Contrast Everything: A Hierarchical Contrastive
Framework for Medical Time-Series
Yihe Wang ∗
University of North Carolina - Charlotte
ywang145@uncc.edu

Yu Han∗
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
hanyu21@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Haishuai Wang
Zhejiang University
haishuai.wang@zju.edu.cn

Xiang Zhang
University of North Carolina - Charlotte
xiang.zhang@uncc.edu

Abstract
Contrastive representation learning is crucial in medical time series analysis as it
alleviates dependency on labor-intensive, domain-specific, and scarce expert annotations. However, existing contrastive learning methods primarily focus on one single
data level, which fails to fully exploit the intricate nature of medical time series. To
address this issue, we present COMET, an innovative hierarchical framework that
leverages data consistencies at all inherent levels in medical time series. Our meticulously designed model systematically captures data consistency from four potential
levels: observation, sample, trial, and patient levels. By developing contrastive
loss at multiple levels, we can learn effective representations that preserve comprehensive data consistency, maximizing information utilization in a self-supervised
manner. We conduct experiments in the challenging patient-independent setting.
We compare COMET against six baselines using three diverse datasets, which
include ECG signals for myocardial infarction and EEG signals for Alzheimer’s
and Parkinson’s diseases. The results demonstrate that COMET consistently outperforms all baselines, particularly in setup with 10% and 1% labeled data fractions
across all datasets. These results underscore the significant impact of our framework in advancing contrastive representation learning techniques for medical time
series. The source code is available at https://github.com/DL4mHealth/COMET.

1

Introduction

Time series data is crucial in various real-world applications, ranging from finance [1, 2, 3], engineering [4, 5], to healthcare [6, 7]. Unlike domains such as computer vision [8, 9] and natural language
processing [10, 11], where human recognizable features exist, time series data often lacks readily
discernible patterns, making data labeling challenging. Consequently, the scarcity of labeled data
poses a significant hurdle in effectively utilizing time series for analysis and classification tasks.
To address the paucity of labeled data in time series analysis, self-supervised contrastive learning has
emerged as a promising approach. For example, TimeCLR [12] proposes a DTW data augmentation
for time series data; TS2vec [13] designs a cropping and masking mechanism to form positive pairs;
ExpCLR [14] introduces a novel loss function to utilize continuous expert features. By leveraging the
inherent consistency within unlabeled data, contrastive learning algorithms enable the extraction of
effective representations without relying on explicit labels. This paradigm shift opens up possibilities
for overcoming the data scarcity issue and enhancing the capabilities of time series analysis.
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

