Optimal Unbiased Randomizers for
Regression with Label Differential Privacy

Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru

Badih Ghazi

Pritish Kamath

Ravi Kumar

Google
Mountain View, CA

Google Research
Mountain View, CA

Google Research
Mountain View, CA

Google Research
Mountain View, CA

Ethan Leeman

Pasin Manurangsi

Avinash V Varadarajan

Chiyuan Zhang

Google
Cambridge, MA

Google Research
Bangkok, Thailand

Google
Mountain View, CA

Google Research
Mountain View, CA

Abstract
We propose a new family of label randomizers for training regression models under
the constraint of label differential privacy (DP). In particular, we leverage the tradeoffs between bias and variance to construct better label randomizers depending on
a privately estimated prior distribution over the labels. We demonstrate that these
randomizers achieve state-of-the-art privacy-utility trade-offs on several datasets,
highlighting the importance of reducing bias when training neural networks with
label DP. We also provide theoretical results shedding light on the structural
properties of the optimal unbiased randomizers.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) [DMNS06] has gained significant importance in recent years as a mathematically sound metric for rigorously quantifying the potential disclosure of personal user information
through ML models [ACG+ 16, RE19, TM20]. DP guarantees that the model generated by the
training process remains statistically indistinguishable, even if the data contributed by any individual
user to the training dataset is modified arbitrarily.
In certain scenarios, the training features of a specific example are already accessible to potential
adversaries, while only the training label is considered sensitive. For instance, within the context of
digital advertising, it is typical to train conversion models that aim to predict whether a user, who
interacts with an advertisement on a publisher’s website, will ultimately make a purchase of the
advertised item on the advertiser’s website. The conversion label, which indicates whether the user
completed the purchase or not, is not initially known to the publisher website and is considered
sensitive information that spans multiple websites.1 This particular setting, referred to as label DP,
was initially studied in the work of [CH11]. Subsequently, it has garnered attention in various recent
works, such as [GGK+ 21, MEMP+ 21, EMSV22]2 .
For regression objectives (such as the squared loss and the Poisson log loss), the state-of-the-art is
given by the prior work of [GKK+ 23]. Their algorithm works in the so-called features-oblivious
setting (Figure 1), which consists of a features party that has access to all the features, and a labels
party that has access to all the labels. The labels party applies a mechanism that is DP with respect to
the labels in order to produce the message M (·) that it sends to the features party, who then uses the
1
Given the announcement of various web browsers and mobile platforms regarding the deprecation of
third-party cookies, which were previously employed to track user behavior across different websites, the need
for training models that protect the privacy of labels has become increasingly important.
2
as well as in proposals for industry-wide web and mobile standards [Har23].

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

