Provably Safe Reinforcement Learning with Step-wise
Violation Constraints

1

Nuoya Xiong1,⋆ , Yihan Du2,† , Longbo Huang1,‡,∗
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
⋆
nuoyaxiong@gmail.com
†
yihandu@illinois.edu
‡
longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We investigate a novel safe reinforcement learning problem with step-wise violation
constraints. Our problem differs from existing works in that we focus on stricter
step-wise violation constraints and do not assume the existence of safe actions,
making our formulation more suitable for safety-critical applications that need
to ensure safety in all decision steps but may not always possess safe actions,
e.g., robot control and autonomous
√ driving. We propose an efficient algorithm
O( ST ) or gap-dependent e
O(S/Cgap + S 2 AH 2 )
SUCBVI, which guarantees an√e
e H 3 SAT ) regret. Lower bounds are provided to
step-wise violation and an O(
validate the optimality in both violation and regret performance with respect to
the number of states S and the total number of steps T . Moreover, we further
study an innovative safe reward-free exploration problem with step-wise violation
constraints. For this problem, we design the algorithm SRF-UCRL to find a nearoptimal safe policy, which achieves a nearly state-of-the-art
√ sample complexity
S 2 AH 2
H 4 SA
1
e
e
O(( ε + ε2 )(log( δ ) + S)), and guarantees an O( ST ) violation during
exploration. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our algorithms in
safety performance and corroborate our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) has become a powerful framework
for decision-making and learning in unknown environments. Despite the ground-breaking success of
RL in games (Lanctot et al., 2019), recommendation systems (Afsar et al., 2022) and complex tasks
in simulation environments (Zhao et al., 2020), most existing RL algorithms focus on optimizing
the cumulative reward and do not take into consideration the risk aspect, e.g., the agent runs into
catastrophic situations during control. The lack of strong safety guarantees hinders the application
of RL to broader safety-critical scenarios such as autonomous driving, robotics and healthcare. For
example, for robotic control in complex environments, it is crucial to prevent the robot from getting
into dangerous situations, e.g., hitting walls or falling into water pools, at all times.
To handle the safety requirement, a common approach is to formulate safety as a long-term expected
violation constraint in each episode. This approach focuses on seeking a policy whose cumulative
expected violation in each episode is below a certain threshold. However, for applications where an
agent needs to avoid disastrous situations throughout the decision process, e.g., a robot needs to avoid
hitting obstacles at each step, merely reducing the long-term expected violation is not sufficient to
guarantee safety.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

