UniControl: A Unified Diffusion Model for
Controllable Visual Generation In the Wild
Can Qin†⋆ , Shu Zhang† , Ning Yu† , Yihao Feng† , Xinyi Yang† , Yingbo Zhou† , Huan Wang† , Juan
Carlos Niebles† , Caiming Xiong† , Silvio Savarese† , Stefano Ermon‡ , Yun Fu⋆ , and Ran Xu†
†
Salesforce AI Research, ⋆ Northeastern University, ‡ Stanford Univeristy,
qin.ca@northeastern.edu, ermon@cs.stanford.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu,
{shu.zhang, ning.yu, yihaof, x.yang, yingbo.zhou, huan.wang, jniebles,
cxiong, ssavarese, ran.xu}@salesforce.com

Abstract
Achieving machine autonomy and human control often represent divergent objectives in the design of interactive AI systems. Visual generative foundation models
such as Stable Diffusion show promise in navigating these goals, especially when
prompted with arbitrary languages. However, they often fall short in generating
images with spatial, structural, or geometric controls. The integration of such
controls, which can accommodate various visual conditions in a single unified
model, remains an unaddressed challenge. In response, we introduce UniControl ,
a new generative foundation model that consolidates a wide array of controllable
condition-to-image (C2I) tasks within a singular framework, while still allowing
for arbitrary language prompts. UniControl enables pixel-level-precise image
generation, where visual conditions primarily influence the generated structures
and language prompts guide the style and context. To equip UniControl with the
capacity to handle diverse visual conditions, we augment pretrained text-to-image
diffusion models and introduce a task-aware HyperNet to modulate the diffusion
models, enabling the adaptation to different C2I tasks simultaneously. Trained on
nine unique C2I tasks, UniControl demonstrates impressive zero-shot generation
abilities with unseen visual conditions. Experimental results show that UniControl
often surpasses the performance of single-task-controlled methods of comparable model sizes. This control versatility positions UniControl as a significant
advancement in the realm of controllable visual generation. 1

1

Introduction

Generative foundation models are revolutionizing the ways that humans and AI interact in natural
language processing (NLP) [1–6], computer vision (CV) [7–10], audio processing (AP) [11, 12], and
robotic controls [13–15], to name a few. In NLP, generative foundation models such as InstructGPT or
GPT-4, achieve excellent performance on a wide range of tasks, e.g., question answering, summarization, text generation, or machine translation within a single-unified model. Such multi-tasking ability
is one of the most appealing characteristics of generative foundation models. Furthermore, generative
foundation models can also perform zero-shot or few-shot learning on unseen tasks [3, 16, 17].
For generative models in vision domains [9, 18–20], such multi-tasking ability is less clear. Stable
Diffusion Model (SDM) [9] has established itself as the major cornerstone for text-conditioned image
generation. However, while text descriptions provide a very flexible way to control the generated
images, their ability to provide pixel-level precision for spatial, structural, or geometric controls is
1

Code: https://github.com/salesforce/UniControl

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

