Meek Separators
and Their Applications in Targeted Causal Discovery

Kirankumar Shiragur∗
Eric and Wendy Schmidt Center,
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Jiaqi Zhang∗
LIDS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Caroline Uhler
LIDS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Abstract
Learning causal structures from interventional data is a fundamental problem with
broad applications across various fields. While many previous works have focused
on recovering the entire causal graph, in practice, there are scenarios where learning
only part of the causal graph suffices. This is called targeted causal discovery. In
our work, we focus on two such well-motivated problems: subset search and causal
matching. We aim to minimize the number of interventions in both cases.
Towards this, we introduce the Meek separator, which is a subset of vertices
that, when intervened, decomposes the remaining unoriented edges into smaller
connected components. We then present an efficient algorithm to find Meek
separators that are of small sizes. Such a procedure is helpful in designing various
divide-and-conquer-based approaches. In particular, we propose two randomized
algorithms that achieve logarithmic approximation for subset search and causal
matching, respectively. Our results provide the first known average-case provable
guarantees for both problems. We believe that this opens up possibilities to design
near-optimal methods for many other targeted causal structure learning problems
arising from various applications.

1

Introduction

Discovering the causal structure among a set of variables is an important problem permeating multiple
fields including biology, epidemiology, economics, and social science [FLNP00, RHB00, SGSH00,
Pea03]. A common way to represent the causal structure is through a directed acyclic graph (DAG),
where an arc between two variables encodes a direct causal effect [SGSH00]. The goal of causal
discovery is thus to recover this DAG from data. With observational data, a DAG is generally
only identifiable up to its Markov equivalence class (MEC) [VP90, AMP97]. Identifiability can be
improved by performing interventions on the variables. In particular, a more refined MEC can be
identified with both hard and soft interventions [HB12, YKU18], where a hard intervention eliminates
the dependency between its target variables and their parents in the DAG and a soft intervention
modifies this dependency without removing it [ES07].
As intervention experiments tend to be expensive in practice, a critical problem is to design algorithms
to select interventions that minimize the number of trials needed to learn about the structure. Previous
works have considered both fully identifying the DAG while minimizing the total number/cost
of interventions [HB14, SKDV15, KDV17, GKS+ 19, SMG+ 20] and learning the most about the
∗

Equal contributions. Alphabetical order.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

