Fine-Grained Visual Prompting

Lingfeng Yang1 , Yueze Wang2 , Xiang Li3∗ , Xinlong Wang2 , Jian Yang1∗
1

2

Nanjing University of Science and Technology
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, 3 Nankai University

{yanglfnjust, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, {yzwang, wangxinlong}@baai.ac.cn
xiang.li.implus@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as CLIP, have demonstrated impressive
zero-shot transfer capabilities in image-level visual perception. However, these
models have shown limited performance in instance-level tasks that demand precise
localization and recognition. Previous works have suggested that incorporating
visual prompts, such as colorful boxes or circles, can improve the ability of models
to recognize objects of interest. Nonetheless, compared to language prompting,
visual prompting designs are rarely explored. Existing approaches, which employ
coarse visual cues such as colorful boxes or circles, often result in sub-optimal
performance due to the inclusion of irrelevant and noisy pixels. In this paper, we
carefully study the visual prompting designs by exploring more fine-grained markings, such as segmentation masks and their variations. In addition, we introduce a
new zero-shot framework that leverages pixel-level annotations acquired from a
generalist segmentation model for fine-grained visual prompting. Consequently,
our investigation reveals that a straightforward application of blur outside the target
mask, referred to as the Blur Reverse Mask, exhibits exceptional effectiveness.
This proposed prompting strategy leverages the precise mask annotations to reduce focus on weakly related regions while retaining spatial coherence between
the target and the surrounding background. Our Fine-Grained Visual Prompting
(FGVP) demonstrates superior performance in zero-shot comprehension of referring expressions on the RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg benchmarks.
It outperforms prior methods by an average margin of 3.0% to 4.6%, with a
maximum improvement of 12.5% on the RefCOCO+ testA subset. The part
detection experiments conducted on the PACO dataset further validate the preponderance of FGVP over existing visual prompting techniques. Code is available at
https://github.com/ylingfeng/FGVP.

1

Introduction

The usage of Vision-Language models (VLMs) [42, 31, 1, 30] has become increasingly prominent
in various vision-related tasks, largely due to their notable impact. These models benefit from a
vast amount of training data and parameters, demonstrating powerful performance in the training of
fundamental visual model backbones [34, 15, 51]. Moreover, the transfer learning potential of VLMs
has been employed in tasks such as open vocabulary detection [20, 64], visual grounding [32, 37],
and image editing [6, 5], etc.
In the above-mentioned works, the VLMs generally require additional training, to adapt to each
specific downstream task. However, the utilization of off-the-shelf Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

