Context-guided Embedding Adaptation for
Effective Topic Modeling in Low-Resource Regimes

Yishi Xu∗, Jianqiao Sun∗, Yudi Su, Xinyang Liu, Zhibin Duan, Bo Chen†,
National Key Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, China, 710071
{xuyishi, jianqiaosun}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn
Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin, TX 78712, USA
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Embedding-based neural topic models have turned out to be a superior option for
low-resourced topic modeling. However, current approaches consider static word
embeddings learnt from source tasks as general knowledge that can be transferred
directly to the target task, discounting the dynamically changing nature of word
meanings in different contexts, thus typically leading to sub-optimal results when
adapting to new tasks with unfamiliar contexts. To settle this issue, we provide an
effective method that centers on adaptively generating semantically tailored word
embeddings for each task by fully exploiting contextual information. Specifically,
we first condense the contextual syntactic dependencies of words into a semantic
graph for each task, which is then modeled by a Variational Graph Auto-Encoder
to produce task-specific word representations. On this basis, we further impose a
learnable Gaussian mixture prior on the latent space of words to efficiently learn
topic representations from a clustering perspective, which contributes to diverse
topic discovery and fast adaptation to novel tasks. We have conducted a wealth of
quantitative and qualitative experiments, and the results show that our approach
comprehensively outperforms established topic models.

1

Introduction

The last two decades have witnessed the enduring popularity of topic models along with their many
successful applications in a range of fields [1–7]. And this is predominantly attributed to their ability
to reveal the underlying semantic structure from large volumes of textual data. By identifying a group
of salient themes, topic models represent each document as a mixture of them, providing an intuitive
understanding of the target corpus. Although conventional probabilistic topic models [8–14] have
been widely used, new variants continue to spring up in the era dominated by deep neural networks.
Among the proliferation of new methodologies come both the neural topic models (NTMs) [15–18]
resulting from the development of variational autoencoders (VAEs) and autoencoding variational
Inference (AVI) [19, 20], and the contextualized topic models (CTMs) [21–24] benefiting from the
flourishing of pre-trained language models [25, 26]. However, these recently developed approaches
essentially maintain the assumption of sufficient resources, i.e., with a plethora of documents being
available. Comparatively, little attention has been paid to topic modeling under resource-limited or
resource-poor conditions [27], which plays a significant role in real-world applications.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

