Improving Few-Shot Generalization by Exploring and
Exploiting Auxiliary Data

Alon Albalak
University of California,
Santa Barbara
alon_albalak@ucsb.edu

Colin Raffel
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
craffel@gmail.com

William Yang Wang
University of California,
Santa Barbara
william@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
Few-shot learning is valuable in many real-world applications, but learning a
generalizable model without overfitting to the few labeled datapoints is challenging.
In this work, we focus on Few-shot Learning with Auxiliary Data (FLAD), a
training paradigm that assumes access to auxiliary data during few-shot learning
in hopes of improving generalization. Previous works have proposed automated
methods for mixing auxiliary and target data, but these methods typically scale
linearly (or worse) with the number of auxiliary datasets, limiting their practicality.
In this work we relate FLAD to the explore-exploit dilemma that is central to the
multi-armed bandit setting and derive algorithms whose computational complexity
is independent of the number of auxiliary datasets, allowing us to scale to 100×
more auxiliary datasets than prior methods. We propose two algorithms – EXP3FLAD and UCB1-FLAD – and compare them with prior FLAD methods that either
explore or exploit, finding that the combination of exploration and exploitation is
crucial. Through extensive experimentation we find that our methods outperform
all pre-existing FLAD methods by 4% and lead to the first 3 billion parameter
language models that outperform the 175 billion parameter GPT-3. Overall, our
work suggests that the discovery of better, more efficient mixing strategies for
FLAD may provide a viable path towards substantially improving generalization in
few-shot learning. All of our code is available at github.com/alon-albalak/FLAD.

1

Introduction

Few-shot learning is an attractive learning setting for many reasons: it promises efficiency in cost
and time, and in some scenarios data is simply not available due to privacy concerns or the nature
of the problem. However, few-shot learning is also a challenging setting that requires a delicate
balance between learning the structure of the feature and label spaces while preventing overfitting to
the limited training samples [1, 2, 3]. One approach to improving the generalizability of models in
the few-shot setting is Few-shot Learning with Auxiliary Data (FLAD), where additional auxiliary
datasets are used to improve generalization on the target few-shot task [4, 5, 6, 7].
However, FLAD methods introduce their own challenges, including increased algorithmic and
computational complexity. Specifically, incorporating auxiliary data during training introduces a
large space of design choices (e.g. how and when to train on auxiliary data). Manually designing the
curriculum for training on large quantities of auxiliary data is not feasible due to the combinatorially
large search space, and hand-picking which auxiliary data to use based on heuristics (e.g. from the
same domain or task as the target few-shot dataset) can lead to sub-optimal results [8]. Delegating such
choices to an algorithm can lead to better solutions, as demonstrated in the transfer learning [8, 9, 10],
meta-learning [11, 12], multi-task learning [13, 14, 15, 16], and auxiliary learning literature [4, 17].
However, prior auxiliary learning algorithms often assume that only 1-3 related auxiliary datasets are
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

