AND: Adversarial Neural Degradation for Learning
Blind Image Super-Resolution

Fangzhou Luo
McMaster University
luof1@mcmaster.ca

Xiaolin Wu∗
McMaster University
xwu@ece.mcmaster.ca

Yanhui Guo
McMaster University
guoy143@mcmaster.ca

Abstract
Learnt deep neural networks for image super-resolution fail easily if the assumed
degradation model in training mismatches that of the real degradation source at
the inference stage. Instead of attempting to exhaust all degradation variants in
simulation, which is unwieldy and impractical, we propose a novel adversarial
neural degradation (AND) model that can, when trained in conjunction with a
deep restoration neural network under a minmax criterion, generate a wide range
of highly nonlinear complex degradation effects without any explicit supervision.
The AND model has a unique advantage over the current state of the art in that
it can generalize much better to unseen degradation variants and hence deliver
significantly improved restoration performance on real-world images.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has made great strides in the applications of image restoration. It has demonstrated
superior performances over traditional methods on almost all common image restoration tasks,
including super-resolution [8], denoising [52], compression artifacts removal [6], deblurring [38], etc.
But the margin of performance gains made by deep learning methods of image restoration decreases
sharply if the degradation processes assumed in training mismatch those of the real world images
at inference stage [3]. It is well known that, for any real-world problems, the efficacy of a machine
learning technique relies not only on the design of the technique itself but also, sometimes even more
critically, on the statistical agreement between the training and test data [42].
In reality, it is either intractable or highly expensive to obtain both degraded images and the corresponding latent images (ground truth). The most common practice in literature is to use a degradation
model to generate paired degraded and ground truth images for training the restoration networks [51, 43, 26, 24]. This synthesis approach cannot accurately simulate the realistic digital imaging
pipeline that is affected by multiple complex and compounded degradation sources; for instances,
insufficient sampling rate, color demosaicing errors, sensor noises, camera jitters, compression
distortions and etc. In this paper, we focus on the task of super-resolution, namely assuming that the
dominant degradation cause is insufficient sampling rate, which is compounded by other degradation
sources in the imaging pipeline. The said complex nonlinear phenomena often defy explicit analytical
modeling. A brute force approach may be to build multiple simpler parametric degradation models,
one for each type of degradation (e.g., downsampling, noises, compression, motion, etc.) and apply
them in different combinations, orders and parameter setting to generate training data, in hope to
simulate as wide a range of degradations encountered in practice as possible. This amounts, however,
to fighting a losing battle because it is impossible to exhaust all degradation variants, many of which
are not even known or understood.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

