Corruption-Robust Offline Reinforcement Learning
with General Function Approximation
Chenlu Ye⇤
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
cyeab@connect.ust.hk
Rui Yang⇤
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
ryangam@connect.ust.hk

Quanquan Gu
University of California, Los Angeles
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Tong Zhang
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
tongzhang@ust.hk

Abstract
We investigate the problem of corruption robustness in offline reinforcement learning (RL) with general function approximation, where an adversary can corrupt
each sample in the offline dataset, and the corruption level ⇣
0 quantifies the
cumulative corruption amount over n episodes and H steps. Our goal is to find a
policy that is robust to such corruption and minimizes the suboptimality gap with respect to the optimal policy for the uncorrupted Markov decision processes (MDPs).
Drawing inspiration from the uncertainty-weighting technique from the robust online RL setting [18, 55], we design a new uncertainty weight iteration procedure to
efficiently compute on batched samples and propose a corruption-robust algorithm
for offline RL. Notably, under the assumption of single policy coverage and the
knowledge of ⇣, our proposed algorithm achieves a suboptimality bound that is
b ZnH ))1/2 (C(F,
b µ)) 1/2 n 1 )
worsened by an additive factor of O(⇣ · (CC( , F,
H
due to the corruption. Here CC( , b
F, Zn ) is the coverage coefficient that depends
on the regularization parameter , the confidence set b
F, and the dataset ZnH , and
b
b
C(F, µ) is a coefficient that depends on F and the underlying data distribution µ.
When specialized to linear MDPs, the corruption-dependent error term reduces
to O(⇣dn 1 ) with d being the dimension of the feature map, which matches the
existing lower bound for corrupted linear MDPs. This suggests that our analysis is
tight in terms of the corruption-dependent term.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) has received tremendous attention recently because it can tackle
the limitations of online RL in real-world applications, e.g., healthcare [45] and autonomous driving
[35], where collecting online data is risky, expensive and even infeasible. By leveraging a batch of
pre-collected datasets, offline RL aims to find the optimal policy that is covered by the dataset without
further interaction with the environment. Due to the restriction of the offline dataset, the utilization
of pessimism in the face of uncertainty is widespread [1, 2, 53, 40, 16] and plays a central role in
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

