The Goldilocks of Pragmatic Understanding:
Fine-Tuning Strategy Matters for Implicature
Resolution by LLMs

Laura Ruis∗
University College London
Sara Hooker
Cohere for AI

Akbir Khan
University College London
Tim Rocktäschel
University College London

Stella Biderman
EleutherAI, Booz Allen Hamilton
Edward Grefenstette
University College London

Abstract
Despite widespread use of LLMs as conversational agents, evaluations of performance fail to capture a crucial aspect of communication: interpreting language in
context—incorporating its pragmatics. Humans interpret language using beliefs
and prior knowledge about the world. For example, we intuitively understand
the response “I wore gloves” to the question “Did you leave fingerprints?” as
meaning “No”. To investigate whether LLMs have the ability to make this type
of inference, known as an implicature, we design a simple task and evaluate four
categories of widely used state-of-the-art models. We find that, despite only evaluating on utterances that require a binary inference (yes or no), models in three of
these categories perform close to random. However, LLMs instruction-tuned at
the example-level perform significantly better. These results suggest that certain
fine-tuning strategies are far better at inducing pragmatic understanding in models.
We present our findings as the starting point for further research into evaluating
how LLMs interpret language in context and to drive the development of more
pragmatic and useful models of human discourse.

1

Introduction
User: “Have you seen my phone?”
GPT-3: “Yes, I have seen your phone.”

GPT-3’s response2 is a perfectly fine answer to the question, but a human might answer differently.
They might respond “it’s in your bag," bypassing the obvious follow-up question (“where is it?”).
Giving such a helpful and efficient answer is an example of pragmatic language use that goes
beyond the mere production of semantically plausible and consistent utterances. Meaning is not only
determined by a combination of words, but also context, beliefs, and social institutions (Wittgenstein,
1953; Grice, 1975; Huang, 2017). Consider another exchange where Esther asks her friend Juan “Can
you come to my party on Friday?” and Juan responds “I have to work”. We resolve Juan’s response
as him declining the invitation by using the contextual commonsense knowledge that having to work
on a Friday night precludes attendance. Both these exchanges contain an implicature—utterances that
convey something other than their literal meaning.3 Implicatures illustrate how context contributes to
meaning; distinguishing writing and speaking from communicating (Green, 1996). We cannot fully
∗

Correspondence to laura.ruis.21@ucl.ac.uk
Appendix D contains details on how this completion was obtained from text-davinci-002
3
In Appendix E we present an introduction to implicature.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

