Act As You Wish: Fine-Grained Control of Motion
Diffusion Model with Hierarchical Semantic Graphs

Peng Jin1,4

Yang Wu3∗ Yanbo Fan3

Zhongqian Sun3

Yang Wei3

Li Yuan1,2,4∗

1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 3 Tencent AI Lab, China
4
AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
jp21@stu.pku.edu.cn

dylan.yangwu@qq.com

yuanli-ece@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Most text-driven human motion generation methods employ sequential modeling
approaches, e.g., transformer, to extract sentence-level text representations automatically and implicitly for human motion synthesis. However, these compact
text representations may overemphasize the action names at the expense of other
important properties and lack fine-grained details to guide the synthesis of subtly distinct motion. In this paper, we propose hierarchical semantic graphs for
fine-grained control over motion generation. Specifically, we disentangle motion
descriptions into hierarchical semantic graphs including three levels of motions,
actions, and specifics. Such global-to-local structures facilitate a comprehensive
understanding of motion description and fine-grained control of motion generation.
Correspondingly, to leverage the coarse-to-fine topology of hierarchical semantic
graphs, we decompose the text-to-motion diffusion process into three semantic
levels, which correspond to capturing the overall motion, local actions, and action
specifics. Extensive experiments on two benchmark human motion datasets, including HumanML3D and KIT, with superior performances, justify the efficacy of
our method. More encouragingly, by modifying the edge weights of hierarchical
semantic graphs, our method can continuously refine the generated motion, which
may have a far-reaching impact on the community. Code and pre-trained weights
are available at https://github.com/jpthu17/GraphMotion.

1

Introduction

Human motion generation is a fundamental task in computer animation [54, 4] and has many
practical applications across various industries including gaming, film production, virtual reality,
and robotics [61, 8]. With the progress made in recent years, text-driven human motion generation
has allowed for the synthesis of a variety of human motion sequences based on natural language
descriptions. Therefore, there is a growing interest in generating manipulable, plausible, diverse, and
realistic sequences of human motion from flexible natural language descriptions.
Existing text-to-motion generation methods [42, 61, 8, 1, 63] mainly rely on sentence-level representations of texts and directly learn the mapping from the high-level language space to the motion
sequences. Recently, some works [54, 8, 62] propose conditional diffusion models for human motion
synthesis and further improve the synthesized quality and diversity. Although these methods have
made encouraging progress, they are still deficient in the following two aspects. (i) Imbalance. The
model, which directly uses the transformers [55] to extract text features automatically and implicitly,
may overemphasize the action names at the expense of other important properties like direction and
∗

Corresponding author: Yang Wu, Li Yuan.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

