Improving Adversarial Robustness via
Information Bottleneck Distillation
Huafeng Kuang1 , Hong Liu2∗, YongJian Wu3 , Shin’ichi Satoh2 , Rongrong Ji1†
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
2
National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, 101-8430, Japan
3
Youtu Laboratory, Tencent, Shanghai, 200233, China
skykuang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, lynnliu.xmu@gmail.com
littlekenwu@tencent.com, satoh@nii.ac.jp, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous studies have shown that optimizing the information bottleneck can significantly improve the robustness of deep neural networks. Our study closely examines
the information bottleneck principle and proposes an Information Bottleneck Distillation approach. This specially designed, robust distillation technique utilizes
prior knowledge obtained from a robust pre-trained model to boost information
bottlenecks. Specifically, we propose two distillation strategies that align with the
two optimization processes of the information bottleneck. Firstly, we use a robust
soft-label distillation method to increase the mutual information between latent features and output prediction. Secondly, we introduce an adaptive feature distillation
method that automatically transfers relevant knowledge from the teacher model
to the student model, thereby reducing the mutual information between the input
and latent features. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate our approach’s
robustness against state-of-the-art adversarial attackers such as PGD-attack and
AutoAttack. Our experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in significantly improving adversarial robustness. Our code is available at
https://github.com/SkyKuang/IBD.

1

Introduction

Numerous works have shown that deep neural networks (DNNs) are easily attacked by adversarial
examples [56, 41, 4, 14], which involve adding imperceptible noise to inputs and causing incorrect
outputs. This vulnerability of DNNs raises significant security concerns when deploying DNNs in
safety-critical applications. To address this potential threat, various adversarial defense strategies
have been proposed [44, 41, 72, 43, 72]. Among these defenses, adversarial training (AT) [41, 71] is
a general solution for defending against adversarial attacks by incorporating adversarial examples
generated by an adversarial attack into the training process. While many AT techniques can defend
against sophisticated attacks, such as AutoAttack [14], a big robust generalization gap still exists
between the training data and testing data [12].
Recent years have witnessed the growing popularity of the studies of the use of Information Bottleneck
(IB) [57] in training robust DNNs [54, 2, 64, 68]. IB involves finding a trade-off in intermediate
features Z between relevant information for the prediction Y and nuisance information about input
X. The overall objective of IB is formulated as follows:
max I(Z; Y ) − βI(X; Z),
(1)
∗
†

Project lead
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

