Post Hoc Explanations of Language Models Can
Improve Language Models
Satyapriya Krishna1 , Jiaqi Ma2 , Dylan Slack3 , Asma Ghandeharioun4 , Sameer Singh3 , and
Himabindu Lakkaraju1

arXiv:2305.11426v3 [cs.CL] 7 Dec 2023

1

2

Harvard University
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
University of California, Irvine
4
Google Inc
skrishna@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
performing complex tasks. Moreover, recent research has shown that incorporating
human-annotated rationales (e.g., Chain-of-Thought prompting) during in-context
learning can significantly enhance the performance of these models, particularly on
tasks that require reasoning capabilities. However, incorporating such rationales
poses challenges in terms of scalability as this requires a high degree of human
involvement. In this work, we present a novel framework, Amplifying Model
Performance by Leveraging In-Context Learning with Post Hoc Explanations
(AMPLIFY), which addresses the aforementioned challenges by automating the
process of rationale generation. To this end, we leverage post hoc explanation
methods which output attribution scores (explanations) capturing the influence
of each of the input features on model predictions. More specifically, we
construct automated natural language rationales that embed insights from post
hoc explanations to provide corrective signals to LLMs. Extensive experimentation
with real-world datasets demonstrates that our framework, AMPLIFY, leads to
prediction accuracy improvements of about 10-25% over a wide range of tasks,
including those where prior approaches which rely on human-annotated rationales
such as Chain-of-Thought prompting fall short. Our work makes one of the first
attempts at highlighting the potential of post hoc explanations as valuable tools
for enhancing the effectiveness of LLMs. Furthermore, we conduct additional
empirical analyses and ablation studies to demonstrate the impact of each of the
components of AMPLIFY, which, in turn, lead to critical insights for refining incontext learning.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) [3] have ushered in a new era for machine learning
research. These models are exhibiting emergent capabilities that enable them to excel at complex
tasks that involve sophisticated capabilities such as reasoning and language understanding [34, 5].
Moreover, these models do not only exhibit remarkable performance on tasks they were trained for
but also quickly adapt to other novel and complex tasks. This is made possible through a mechanism
known as in-context learning, which allows these models to learn from a limited number of input
and label pairs, commonly referred to as few-shot prompts[8], provided during test time. Prior
research has also demonstrated that the performance of these models on sophisticated reasoning
tasks can be significantly improved by presenting them with human-annotated rationales alongside
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

