An ε-Best-Arm Identification Algorithm
for Fixed-Confidence and Beyond

Marc Jourdan
marc.jourdan@inria.fr

Rémy Degenne
remy.degenne@inria.fr

Emilie Kaufmann
emilie.kaufmann@univ-lille.fr
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189-CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

Abstract
We propose EB-TCε , a novel sampling rule for ε-best arm identification in stochastic bandits. It is the first instance of Top Two algorithm analyzed for approximate
best arm identification. EB-TCε is an anytime sampling rule that can therefore be
employed without modification for fixed confidence or fixed budget identification
(without prior knowledge of the budget). We provide three types of theoretical
guarantees for EB-TCε . First, we prove bounds on its expected sample complexity in the fixed confidence setting, notably showing its asymptotic optimality in
combination with an adaptive tuning of its exploration parameter. We complement
these findings with upper bounds on its probability of error at any time and for any
error parameter, which further yield upper bounds on its simple regret at any time.
Finally, we show through numerical simulations that EB-TCε performs favorably
compared to existing algorithms, in different settings.

1

Introduction

In pure exploration problems, the goal is to answer a question about a set of unknown distributions
(modelling for example the efficacy of a treatment) from which we can collect samples (measure
its effect), and to provide guarantees on the candidate answer. Practitioners might have different
pre-defined constraints, e.g. the maximal budget might be fixed in advance or the error made should
be smaller than a fixed admissible error. However, in many cases, fixing such constraints in advance
can be challenging since a “good” choice typically depends on unknown quantities. Moreover, while
the budget is limited in clinical trials, it is often not fixed beforehand. The physicians can decide to
stop earlier or might obtain additional fundings for their experiments. In light of those real-world
constraints, regardless of its primal objective any strategy for choosing the next treatment should
ideally come with guarantees on its current candidate answer that hold at any time.
We formalize our investigations in the well-studied stochastic bandit model [4, 29], in which a
learner interacts sequentially with an environment composed of K ∈ N arms, which are unknown
distributions (νi )i∈[K] with finite means (µi )i∈[K] . At each stage n ∈ N, the learner chooses an
arm In ∈ [K] based on the samples previously observed and receives a sample Xn,In , random
variable with conditional distribution νIn given In . It then proceeds to the next stage. An algorithm
for the learner in this interaction is specified by a sampling rule, a procedure that determines In
based on previously observed samples. Formally, the sampling rule defines for all n ∈ N a function
from ([K] × R)n−1 to the probability distribution on [K], which is measurable with respect to the
σ-algebra Fn := σ({It , Xt,It }t∈[n−1] ). We call that σ-algebra history before n.
Identification tasks We focus on best arm identification (BAI). In that task, the goal of the algorithm
is to find which of the arms has the largest mean, and to do so with a small probability of error, as
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

