Optimal Transport for Treatment Effect Estimation

Hao Wang1 Zhichao Chen1 Jiajun Fan2 Haoxuan Li3 Tianqiao Liu4
Weiming Liu1 Quanyu Dai5∗ Yichao Wang5 Zhenhua Dong5 Ruiming Tang5
1
Zhejiang University 2 Tsinghua University 3 Peking University
4
Purdue University 5 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
haohaow@zju.edu.cn
quanyu.dai@connect.polyu.hk

Abstract
Estimating conditional average treatment effect from observational data is highly
challenging due to the existence of treatment selection bias. Prevalent methods
mitigate this issue by aligning distributions of different treatment groups in the
latent space. However, there are two critical problems that these methods fail
to address: (1) mini-batch sampling effects (MSE), which causes misalignment
in non-ideal mini-batches with outcome imbalance and outliers; (2) unobserved
confounder effects (UCE), which results in inaccurate discrepancy calculation due
to the neglect of unobserved confounders. To tackle these problems, we propose
a principled approach named Entire Space CounterFactual Regression (ESCFR),
which is a new take on optimal transport in the context of causality. Specifically,
based on the framework of stochastic optimal transport, we propose a relaxed masspreserving regularizer to address the MSE issue and design a proximal factual
outcome regularizer to handle the UCE issue. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our proposed ESCFR can successfully tackle the treatment selection bias and
achieve significantly better performance than state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

The estimation of the conditional average treatment effect (CATE) through randomized controlled
trials serves as a cornerstone in causal inference, finding applications in diverse fields such as health
care [63], e-commerce [2, 43, 81], and education [15]. Although randomized controlled trials are
often considered the gold standard for CATE estimation [38, 53], the associated financial and ethical
constraints can make them infeasible in practice [39, 79]. Therefore, alternative approaches that
rely on observational data have gained prominence. For instance, drug developers could utilize
post-marketing monitoring reports to assess the efficacy of new medications rather than conducting
costly clinical A/B trials. With the growing access to observational data, estimating CATE from
observational data has attracted intense research interest [41, 80, 84].
Estimating CATE with observational data has two main challenges: (1) missing counterfactuals, i.e.,
only one factual outcome out of all potential outcomes can be observed; (2) treatment selection bias,
i.e., individuals have different propensities for treatment, leading to non-random treatment assignments and a resulting covariate shift between the treated and untreated groups [77, 79]. Traditional
meta-learners [36] handle the issue of missing counterfactuals by breaking down the CATE estimation
into more tractable sub-problems of factual outcome estimation. However, the covariate shift makes
it difficult to generalize the factual outcome estimators trained within respective treatment groups to
the entire population and thus biases the derived CATE estimator.
Beginning with counterfactual regression [67] and its remarkable performance, there are various
attempts that handle the selection bias by minimizing the distribution discrepancy between the
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

