Learning with Explanation Constraints

Rattana Pukdee∗
Carnegie Mellon University
rpukdee@cs.cmu.edu

Dylan Sam∗
Carnegie Mellon University
dylansam@andrew.cmu.edu

Maria-Florina Balcan
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University
Bosch Center for AI
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Pradeep Ravikumar
Carnegie Mellon University
pkr@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
As larger deep learning models are hard to interpret, there has been a recent focus
on generating explanations of these black-box models. In contrast, we may have
apriori explanations of how models should behave. In this paper, we formalize this
notion as learning from explanation constraints and provide a learning theoretic
framework to analyze how such explanations can improve the learning of our
models. One may naturally ask, “When would these explanations be helpful?” Our
first key contribution addresses this question via a class of models that satisfies these
explanation constraints in expectation over new data. We provide a characterization
of the benefits of these models (in terms of the reduction of their Rademacher
complexities) for a canonical class of explanations given by gradient information
in the settings of both linear models and two layer neural networks. In addition, we
provide an algorithmic solution for our framework, via a variational approximation
that achieves better performance and satisfies these constraints more frequently,
when compared to simpler augmented Lagrangian methods to incorporate these
explanations. We demonstrate the benefits of our approach over a large array of
synthetic and real-world experiments.

1

Introduction

There has been a considerable recent focus on generating explanations of complex black-box models
so that humans may better understand their decisions. These can take the form of feature importance
[31, 35], counterfactuals [31, 35], influential training samples [18, 43], etc. But what if humans were
able to provide explanations for how these models should behave? We are interested in the question of
how to learn models given such apriori explanations. A recent line of work incorporates explanations
as a regularizer, penalizing models that do not exhibit apriori given explanations [33, 32, 15, 36].
For example, Rieger et al. [32] penalize the feature importance of spurious patches on a skin-cancer
classification task. These methods lead to models that inherently satisfy “desirable” properties and,
thus, are more trustworthy. In addition, some of these empirical results suggest that constraining
models via explanations also leads to higher accuracy and robustness to changing test environments.
However, there is no theoretical analysis to explain this phenomenon.
We note that such explanations can arise from domain experts and domain knowledge, but also other
large “teacher” models that might have been developed for related tasks. An attractive facet of the
latter is that we can automatically generate model-based explanations given unlabeled data points.
For instance, we can use segmentation models to select the background pixels of images solely on
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

