Sample Complexity for Quadratic Bandits: Hessian
Dependent Bounds and Optimal Algorithms

Qian Yu
Princeton University
qy4628@princeton.edu
Baihe Huang
University of California, Berkeley
baihe_huang@berkeley.edu

Yining Wang
University of Texas at Dallas
yining.wang@utdallas.edu
Qi Lei
New York University
ql518@nyu.edu

Jason D. Lee
Princeton University
Jasondl@princeton.edu

Abstract
In stochastic zeroth-order optimization, a problem of practical relevance is understanding how to fully exploit the local geometry of the underlying objective function.
We consider a fundamental setting in which the objective function is quadratic, and
provide the first tight characterization of the optimal Hessian-dependent sample
complexity. Our contribution is twofold. First, from an information-theoretic point
of view, we prove tight lower bounds on Hessian-dependent complexities by introducing a concept called energy allocation, which captures the interaction between
the searching algorithm and the geometry of objective functions. A matching upper
bound is obtained by solving the optimal energy spectrum. Then, algorithmically,
we show the existence of a Hessian-independent algorithm that universally achieves
the asymptotic optimal sample complexities for all Hessian instances. The optimal
sample complexities achieved by our algorithm remain valid for heavy-tailed noise
distributions, which are enabled by a truncation method.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimization in the zeroth order (gradient-free) setting has attracted significant attention
in recent decades. It naturally arises in various applications such as autonomous driving [12], AI
gaming [22], robotics [14], healthcare [23], and education [13]. This setting is particularly important
when the gradient of the objective function cannot be directly evaluated or is expensive.
An important case of interest in the zeroth order setting is the bandit optimization of smooth and
strongly-convex functions. Although there are ample results regarding the minimax rates of this
problem [1, 8, 21, 6, 3, 24], little is known about how its complexity depends on the geometry of
the objective function f near the global optimum x∗ , as specified by the quadratic approximation
1
∗ ⊤ 2
∗
∗
2 (x − x ) ∇ f (x )(x − x ). As an initial step, we investigate the following natural questions:
• For zeorth-order bandit optimization problems of quadratic functions of the form 12 (x −
x0 )⊤ A(x − x0 ), what is the optimal instance-dependent upper bound with respect to A?
• Is there an algorithm that universally achieves the optimal instance-dependent bounds for all
quadratic functions, but without the knowledge of Hessian?
As our main contributions, we fully addressed the above questions as follows. First, we established
the tight Hessian-dependent upper and lower bounds of the simple regret. Our bounds indicate
1
asymptotic sample complexity bounds of Tr2 (A− 2 )/ (2ϵ) to achieve ϵ accuracy. This covers the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

