Finding Local Minima Efficiently in
Decentralized Optimization

Wenhan Xian
Computer Science
University of Maryland College Park
wxian1@umd.edu

Heng Huang ∗
Computer Science
University of Maryland College Park
heng@umd.edu

Abstract
In this paper we study the second-order optimality of decentralized stochastic
algorithm that escapes saddle point efficiently for nonconvex optimization problems. We propose a new pure gradient-based decentralized stochastic algorithm
PEDESTAL with a novel convergence analysis framework to address the technical challenges unique to the decentralized stochastic setting. Our method is the
first decentralized stochastic algorithm to achieve second-order optimality with
non-asymptotic analysis. We provide theoretical guarantees with the gradient com√
plexity of Õ(ϵ−3 ) to find O(ϵ, ϵ)-second-order stationary point, which matches
state-of-the-art results of centralized counterparts or decentralized methods to find
first-order stationary point. We also conduct two decentralized tasks in our experiments, a matrix sensing task with synthetic data and a matrix factorization task
with a real-world dataset to validate the performance of our method.

1

Introduction

Decentralized optimization is a class of distributed optimization that trains models in parallel across
multiple worker nodes over a decentralized communication network. Decentralized optimization has
recently attracted increased attention in machine learning and emerged as a promising framework to
solve large-scale tasks because of its capability to reduce communication costs. In the conventional
centralized paradigm, all worker nodes need to communicate with the central node, which results in
high communication cost on the central node when the number of nodes is large or the transmission
between the center and some remote nodes suffers network latency. Conversely, decentralized
optimization avoids these issues since each worker node only communicates with its neighbors.
Although decentralized optimization has shown advantageous performance in many previous works
(Lian et al. [2017], Tang et al. [2018]), the study of second-order optimality for decentralized
stochastic optimization algorithms is still limited. Escaping saddle point and finding local minima is
a core problem in nonconvex optimization since saddle point is a category of first-order stationary
point that can be reached by many gradient-based optimizers such as gradient descent but it is not the
expected point to minimize the objective function.
Perturbed gradient descent (Jin et al. [2017]) and negative curvature descent (Xu et al. [2018],
Allen-Zhu and Li [2018]) are two primary pure gradient-based methods (not involving second-order
derivatives) to achieve second-order optimality. Typically, perturbed gradient descent method is
composed of a descent phase and an escaping phase. If the norm of gradient is large, the algorithm
will run the descent phase as normal. Otherwise it will run the escaping phase to discriminate whether
the candidate first-order stationary point is a saddle point or local minimum. Negative curvature
∗
This work was partially supported by NSF IIS 1838627, 1837956, 1956002, 2211492, CNS 2213701, CCF
2217003, DBI 2225775.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

