Causal de Finetti: On the Identification of Invariant
Causal Structure in Exchangeable Data
Siyuan Guo12⇤ Viktor Tóth1⇤ Bernhard Schölkopf2 Ferenc Huszár1
1
University of Cambridge 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
{syg26,fh277}@cam.ac.uk toth.viktor7400@gmail.com
bs@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Constraint-based causal discovery methods leverage conditional independence tests
to infer causal relationships in a wide variety of applications. Just as the majority
of machine learning methods, existing work focuses on studying independent and
identically distributed data. However, it is known that even with infinite i.i.d. data,
constraint-based methods can only identify causal structures up to broad Markov
equivalence classes, posing a fundamental limitation for causal discovery. In this
work, we observe that exchangeable data contains richer conditional independence
structure than i.i.d. data, and show how the richer structure can be leveraged
for causal discovery. We first present causal de Finetti theorems, which state
that exchangeable distributions with certain non-trivial conditional independences
can always be represented as independent causal mechanism (ICM) generative
processes. We then present our main identifiability theorem, which shows that
given data from an ICM generative process, its unique causal structure can be
identified through performing conditional independence tests. We finally develop
a causal discovery algorithm and demonstrate its applicability to inferring causal
relationships from multi-environment data. Our code and models are publicly
available at: https://github.com/syguo96/Causal-de-Finetti

1

Introduction

Learning causal structure from observational data is a key step towards causally robust predictions
in machine learning. Most existing causal discovery theory (Pearl, 2009) focuses on the study
of independent and identically distributed (i. i. d.) data. Indeed, a majority of practical methods
(Chickering, 2002; Spirtes et al., 2000a,b) based on i.i.d. data only allows us to determine causal
structure up to broad equivalence classes, and going beyond that is known to be impossible without
further constraints (Pearl, 2009). For example, the basic task of identifying a bivariate cause-effect
relationship (i.e. X causes Y or Y causes X) on i.i.d. data is known to be impossible. Current
methods impose additional restrictions, e.g., linearity assumptions (Hoyer et al., 2012; Shimizu et al.,
2006, 2011) or assumptions about the additive nature of noise (Hoyer et al., 2008a; Peters et al., 2014;
Zhang and Hyvärinen, 2009) to ensure identification.
A more recent line of work relaxes the i.i.d. assumption and considers inferring causal structure from
grouped or multi-environment data (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Heinze-Deml et al., 2018; Huang et al.,
2020; Peters and Meinshausen, 2016; Rojas-Carulla et al., 2018; Tian and Pearl, 2001). Our key
observation is that studying grouped data is akin to relaxing the assumption on the data generating
process from i.i.d. to exchangeable. In this work, we study causal structure learning in exchangeable
data and show unique causal structure identification is enabled by the richer conditional independence
structure of exchangeable processes.
*

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

