Curriculum Learning for Graph Neural Networks:
Which Edges Should We Learn First
†

Zheng Zhang† Junxiang Wang♢ Liang Zhao†
Emory University, Atlanta, GA ♢ NEC Labs America, Princeton, NJ
{zheng.zhang,liang.zhao}@emory.edu
{junxiang.wang}@alumni.emory.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved great success in representing data
with dependencies by recursively propagating and aggregating messages along
the edges. However, edges in real-world graphs often have varying degrees of
difficulty, and some edges may even be noisy to the downstream tasks. Therefore,
existing GNNs may lead to suboptimal learned representations because they usually
treat every edge in the graph equally. On the other hand, Curriculum Learning
(CL), which mimics the human learning principle of learning data samples in a
meaningful order, has been shown to be effective in improving the generalization
ability and robustness of representation learners by gradually proceeding from easy
to more difficult samples during training. Unfortunately, existing CL strategies are
designed for independent data samples and cannot trivially generalize to handle
data dependencies. To address these issues, we propose a novel CL strategy to
gradually incorporate more edges into training according to their difficulty from
easy to hard, where the degree of difficulty is measured by how well the edges
are expected given the model training status. We demonstrate the strength of our
proposed method in improving the generalization ability and robustness of learned
representations through extensive experiments on nine synthetic datasets and nine
real-world datasets. The code for our proposed method is available at https:
//github.com/rollingstonezz/Curriculum_learning_for_GNNs.

1

Introduction

Inspired by cognitive science studies [8, 33] that humans can benefit from the sequence of learning
basic (easy) concepts first and advanced (hard) concepts later, curriculum learning (CL) [2] suggests
training a machine learning model with easy data samples first and then gradually introducing more
hard samples into the model according to a designed pace, where the difficulty of samples can usually
be measured by their training loss [25]. Many previous studies have shown that this easy-to-hard
learning strategy can effectively improve the generalization ability of the model [2, 19, 15, 11, 35, 46],
and some studies [19, 15, 11] have shown that CL strategies can also increase the robustness of the
learned model against noisy training samples. An intuitive explanation is that in CL settings noisy
data samples correspond to harder samples, and CL learner spends less time with the harder (noisy)
samples to achieve better generalization performance and robustness.
Although CL strategies have achieved great success in many fields such as computer vision and
natural language processing, existing methods are designed for independent data (such as images)
while designing effective CL methods for data with dependencies has been largely underexplored.
For example, in a citation network, two researchers with highly related research topics (e.g. machine
learning and data mining) are more likely to collaborate with each other, while the reason behind
a collaboration of two researchers with less related research topics (e.g. computer architecture and
social science) might be more difficult to understand. Prediction on one sample impacts that of another,
forming a graph structure that encompasses all samples connected by their dependencies. There are
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

