Adjustable Robust Reinforcement Learning for Online
3D Bin Packing

Yuxin Pan1 Yize Chen2∗ Fangzhen Lin3∗
EMIA, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
AI Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
CSE, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
yuxin.pan@connect.ust.hk yizechen@ust.hk flin@cs.ust.hk
1

Abstract
Designing effective policies for the online 3D bin packing problem (3D-BPP)
has been a long-standing challenge, primarily due to the unpredictable nature of
incoming box sequences and stringent physical constraints. While current deep
reinforcement learning (DRL) methods for online 3D-BPP have shown promising
results in optimizing average performance over an underlying box sequence distribution, they often fail in real-world settings where some worst-case scenarios can
materialize. Standard robust DRL algorithms tend to overly prioritize optimizing
the worst-case performance at the expense of performance under normal problem instance distribution. To address these issues, we first introduce a permutation-based
attacker to investigate the practical robustness of both DRL-based and heuristic
methods proposed for solving online 3D-BPP. Then, we propose an adjustable
robust reinforcement learning (AR2L) framework that allows efficient adjustment
of robustness weights to achieve the desired balance of the policy’s performance
in average and worst-case environments. Specifically, we formulate the objective
function as a weighted sum of expected and worst-case returns, and derive the
lower performance bound by relating to the return under a mixture dynamics. To
realize this lower bound, we adopt an iterative procedure that searches for the associated mixture dynamics and improves the corresponding policy. We integrate this
procedure into two popular robust adversarial algorithms to develop the exact and
approximate AR2L algorithms. Experiments demonstrate that AR2L is versatile in
the sense that it improves policy robustness while maintaining an acceptable level
of performance for the nominal case.

1

Introduction

The offline 3D bin packing problem (3D-BPP) is a classic NP-hard combinatorial optimization
problem (COP) (de Castro Silva et al., 2003), which aims to optimally assign cuboid-shaped items with
varying sizes to the minimum number of containers while satisfying physical constraints (Martello
et al., 2000). In such a setting, a range of physical constraints can be imposed to meet diverse
packing requirements and preferences (Gzara et al., 2020). The primary constraint requires items to
be packed stably, without any overlaps, and kept within the bin. The online counterpart of 3D-BPP
is more prevalent and practical in logistics and warehousing (Wang and Hauser, 2020), as it does
not require complete information about all the unpacked items in advance. In this setting, only a
limited number of upcoming items on a conveyor can be observed, and items must be packed after
the preceding items are allocated (Seiden, 2002). Thus, besides physical constraints already present
∗

Co-corresponding Authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

