Graph Mixture of Experts: Learning on Large-Scale
Graphs with Explicit Diversity Modeling

Haotao Wang1∗, Ziyu Jiang2∗, Yuning You2 , Yan Han1 , Gaowen Liu3 , Jayanth Srinivasa3
Ramana Rao Kompella3 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
University of Texas at Austin
Texas A&M University2
Cisco Systems3
{htwang, yh9442, atlaswang}@utexas.edu, {jiangziyu, yuning.you}@tamu.edu,
{gaoliu, jasriniv, rkompell}@cisco.com

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have found extensive applications in learning
from graph data. However, real-world graphs often possess diverse structures and
comprise nodes and edges of varying types. To bolster the generalization capacity
of GNNs, it has become customary to augment training graph structures through
techniques like graph augmentations and large-scale pre-training on a wider array
of graphs. Balancing this diversity while avoiding increased computational costs
and the notorious trainability issues of GNNs is crucial. This study introduces
the concept of Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) to GNNs, with the aim of augmenting
their capacity to adapt to a diverse range of training graph structures, without
incurring explosive computational overhead. The proposed Graph Mixture of
Experts (GMoE) model empowers individual nodes in the graph to dynamically
and adaptively select more general information aggregation experts. These experts
are trained to capture distinct subgroups of graph structures and to incorporate
information with varying hop sizes, where those with larger hop sizes specialize
in gathering information over longer distances. The effectiveness of GMoE is
validated through a series of experiments on a diverse set of tasks, including
graph, node, and link prediction, using the OGB benchmark. Notably, it enhances
ROC-AUC by 1.81% in ogbg-molhiv and by 1.40% in ogbg-molbbbp, when
compared to the non-MoE baselines. Our code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/VITA-Group/Graph-Mixture-of-Experts.

1

Introduction

Graph learning has found extensive use in various real-world applications, including recommendation
systems [1], traffic prediction [2], and molecular property prediction [3]. Real-world graph data
typically exhibit diverse graph structures and heterogeneous nodes and edges. In graph-based
recommendation systems, for instance, a node can represent a product or a customer, while an edge
can indicate different interactions such as view, like, or purchase. Similarly in biochemistry tasks,
datasets can comprise molecules with various biochemistry properties and thherefore various graph
structures. Moreover, purposefully increasing the diversity of graph data structures in training sets has
become a crucial aspect of GNN training. Techniques such as graph data augmentations [4, 5] and
large-scale pre-training on diverse graphs [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] have been widely adopted to allow GNNs for
extracting more robust and generalizable features. Meanwhile, many real-world GNN applications,
such as recommendation systems and molecule virtual screening, usually involve processing a vast
number of candidate samples and therefore demand computational efficiency. That invites the key
∗

The first two authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

