Crystal Structure Prediction
by Joint Equivariant Diffusion

Rui Jiao1,2 Wenbing Huang3,4∗ Peijia Lin5 Jiaqi Han6 Pin Chen5 Yutong Lu5 Yang Liu1,2∗
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua University
2
Institute for AIR, Tsinghua University
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
5
National Supercomputer Center in Guangzhou,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
6
Stanford University

Abstract
Crystal Structure Prediction (CSP) is crucial in various scientific disciplines. While
CSP can be addressed by employing currently-prevailing generative models (e.g.
diffusion models), this task encounters unique challenges owing to the symmetric geometry of crystal structures—the invariance of translation, rotation, and
periodicity. To incorporate the above symmetries, this paper proposes DiffCSP,
a novel diffusion model to learn the structure distribution from stable crystals.
To be specific, DiffCSP jointly generates the lattice and atom coordinates for
each crystal by employing a periodic-E(3)-equivariant denoising model, to better
model the crystal geometry. Notably, different from related equivariant generative
approaches, DiffCSP leverages fractional coordinates other than Cartesian coordinates to represent crystals, remarkably promoting the diffusion and the generation
process of atom positions. Extensive experiments verify that our DiffCSP significantly outperforms existing CSP methods, with a much lower computation cost
in contrast to DFT-based methods. Moreover, the superiority of DiffCSP is also
observed when it is extended for ab initio crystal generation. Code is available at
https://github.com/jiaor17/DiffCSP.

1

Introduction

Crystal Structure Prediction (CSP), which returns the stable 3D structure of a compound based solely
on its composition, has been a goal in physical sciences since the 1950s [1]. As crystals are the
foundation of various materials, estimating their structures in 3D space determines the physical and
chemical properties that greatly influence the application to various academic and industrial sciences,
such as the design of drugs, batteries, and catalysts [2]. Conventional methods towards CSP mostly
apply the Density Functional Theory (DFT) [3] to compute the energy at each iteration, guided by
optimization algorithms (such as random search [4], Bayesian optimization [5], etc.) to iteratively
search for the stable state corresponding to the local minima of the energy surface [6].
The DFT-based approaches are computationally-intensive. Recent attention has been paid to deep
generative models, which directly learn the distribution from the training data consisting of stable
structures [7, 8]. More recently, diffusion models, a special kind of deep generative models are
employed for crystal generation [9], encouraged by their better physical interpretability and enhanced
performance than other generative models. Intuitively, by conducting diffusion on stable structures,
∗

Wenbing Huang and Yang Liu are corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

