Loss Dynamics of Temporal Difference
Reinforcement Learning

Blake Bordelon, Paul Masset, Henry Kuo & Cengiz Pehlevan
John Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Center for Brain Science,
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural & Artificial Intelligence,
Harvard University
Cambridge MA, 02138
blake_bordelon@g.harvard.edu, cpehlevan@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning has been successful across several applications in which
agents have to learn to act in environments with sparse feedback. However, despite
this empirical success there is still a lack of theoretical understanding of how the
parameters of reinforcement learning models and the features used to represent
states interact to control the dynamics of learning. In this work, we use concepts
from statistical physics, to study the typical case learning curves for temporal
difference learning of a value function with linear function approximators. Our
theory is derived under a Gaussian equivalence hypothesis where averages over
the random trajectories are replaced with temporally correlated Gaussian feature
averages and we validate our assumptions on small scale Markov Decision Processes. We find that the stochastic semi-gradient noise due to subsampling the
space of possible episodes leads to significant plateaus in the value error, unlike
in traditional gradient descent dynamics. We study how learning dynamics and
plateaus depend on feature structure, learning rate, discount factor, and reward
function. We then analyze how strategies like learning rate annealing and reward
shaping can favorably alter learning dynamics and plateaus. To conclude, our
work introduces new tools to open a new direction towards developing a theory of
learning dynamics in reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a general paradigm which allows agents to learn from experience the
relative value of states in their environment and to take actions that maximize long term rewards [1].
RL algorithms have been successfully applied in a number of real world scenarios such as strategic
games like backgammon and Go, autonomous vehicles, and fine tuning language models [2–7].
Despite these empirical successes, a theoretical understanding of the learning dynamics and inductive
biases of RL algorithms is currently lacking [8]. A large fraction of the theoretical work has focused
on proving convergence and deriving bounds both in the asymptotic [9–14] and non-asymptotic
[15–17] limits, but do not provide a full picture of the evolution of the learning dynamics.
A desired feature of a candidate theory is to characterize the influence of function approximation
to RL dynamics and its performance. Early versions of RL operated in a tabular setting, similar to
dynamic programming [18], where all the states in the environment could be mapped one-to-one to a
specific value and policy. In large and complex environments, it is not possible to enumerate all the
states in the environment necessitating the use of function approximation for the target value and
policy functions. Indeed, the recent success of many RL algorithms relies on deep reinforcement
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

