Generalized Semi-Supervised Learning via
Self-Supervised Feature Adaptation

Jiachen Liang1,2 , Ruibing Hou1 , Hong Chang1,2 , Bingpeng Ma2 , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
jiachen.liang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {houruibing, changhong, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn, bpma@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Traditional semi-supervised learning (SSL) assumes that the feature distributions of
labeled and unlabeled data are consistent which rarely holds in realistic scenarios.
In this paper, we propose a novel SSL setting, where unlabeled samples are drawn
from a mixed distribution that deviates from the feature distribution of labeled
samples. Under this setting, previous SSL methods tend to predict wrong pseudolabels with the model fitted on labeled data, resulting in noise accumulation. To
tackle this issue, we propose Self-Supervised Feature Adaptation (SSFA), a generic
framework for improving SSL performance when labeled and unlabeled data come
from different distributions. SSFA decouples the prediction of pseudo-labels from
the current model to improve the quality of pseudo-labels. Particularly, SSFA
incorporates a self-supervised task into the SSL framework and uses it to adapt
the feature extractor of the model to the unlabeled data. In this way, the extracted
features better fit the distribution of unlabeled data, thereby generating high-quality
pseudo-labels. Extensive experiments show that our proposed SSFA is applicable
to various pseudo-label-based SSL learners and significantly improves performance
in labeled, unlabeled, and even unseen distributions.

1

Introduction

Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) uses a small amount of labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled
data to alleviate the pressure of data labeling and improve the generalization ability of the model.
Traditional SSL methods [21, 43, 32, 28, 22, 30, 5, 6] usually assume that the feature distribution of
unlabeled data is consistent with that of labeled one. However, in many real scenarios, this assumption
may not hold due to different data sources. When unlabeled data is sampled from distributions different from labeled data, traditional SSL algorithms will suffer from severe performance degradation,
which greatly limits their practical application.
In real-world scenarios, it is quite common to observe feature distribution mismatch between labeled
and unlabeled samples. On the one hand, unlabeled samples could contain various corruptions. For
example, in automatic driving, the annotated images used for training can hardly cover all driving
scenes, and a plethora of images under varying weather and camera conditions are captured during
real driving. Similarly, in medical diagnosis, individual differences and shooting conditions among
patients could incur various disturbances in unlabeled data. On the other hand, unlabeled samples
could contain unseen styles. For example, in many tasks, the labeled samples are typically real-world
photos, while unlabeled data collected from the Internet usually contain more styles that are not
present in the labeled data, such as cartoons or sketches. Notably, although the distributions of these
unlabeled data may differ from the labeled data, there is implicit common knowledge between them
that can compensate for the diversity and quantity of training data. Therefore, it is crucial to enlarge
the SSL scope to effectively utilize unlabeled data from different distributions.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

