Polynomial-Time Linear-Swap Regret Minimization
in Imperfect-Information Sequential Games

Gabriele Farina
MIT
gfarina@mit.edu

Charilaos Pipis
MIT
chpipis@mit.edu

Abstract
No-regret learners seek to minimize the difference between the loss they cumulated through the actions they played, and the loss they would have cumulated in
hindsight had they consistently modified their behavior according to some strategy
transformation function. The size of the set of transformations considered by the
learner determines a natural notion of rationality. As the set of transformations
each learner considers grows, the strategies played by the learners recover more
complex game-theoretic equilibria, including correlated equilibria in normal-form
games and extensive-form correlated equilibria in extensive-form games. At the
extreme, a no-swap-regret agent is one that minimizes regret against the set of
all functions from the set of strategies to itself. While it is known that the noswap-regret condition can be attained efficiently in nonsequential (normal-form)
games, understanding what is the strongest notion of rationality that can be attained
efficiently in the worst case in sequential (extensive-form) games is a longstanding
open problem. In this paper we provide a positive result, by showing that it is
possible, in any sequential game, to retain polynomial-time (in the game tree size)
iterations while achieving sublinear regret with respect to all linear transformations
of the mixed strategy space, a notion called no-linear-swap regret. This notion of
hindsight rationality is as strong as no-swap-regret in nonsequential games, and
stronger than no-trigger-regret in sequential games—thereby proving the existence
of a subset of extensive-form correlated equilibria robust to linear deviations, which
we call linear-deviation correlated equilibria, that can be approached efficiently.

1

Introduction

The framework of regret minimization provides algorithms that players can use to gradually improve
their strategies in a repeated game, enabling learning strong strategies even when facing unknown and
potentially adversarial opponents. One of the appealing properties of no-regret learning algorithms
is that they are uncoupled, meaning that each player refines their strategy based on their own
payoff function, and on other players’ strategies, but not on the payoff functions of other players.
Nonetheless, despite their uncoupled nature and focus on local optimization of each player’s utility,
it is one of the most celebrated results in the theory of learning in games that in many cases, when
all players are learning using these algorithms, the empirical play recovers appropriate notions of
equilibrium—a global notion of game-theoretic optimality. Strategies constructed via no-regret
learning algorithms (or approximations thereof) have been key components in constructing humanlevel and even superhuman AI agents in a variety of adversarial games, including Poker [Moravčı́k
et al., 2017, Brown and Sandholm, 2018, 2019], Stratego [Perolat et al., 2022], and Diplomacy
[Bakhtin et al., 2023].
In regret minimization, each learning agent seeks to minimize the difference between the loss
(opposite of reward) they accumulated through the actions they played, and the loss they would have
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

