A Competitive Algorithm for Agnostic Active Learning

Yihan Zhou
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
joeyzhou@cs.utexas.edu

Eric Price
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
ecprice@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
For some hypothesis classes and input distributions, active agnostic learning needs
exponentially fewer samples than passive learning; for other classes and distributions, it offers little to no improvement. The most popular algorithms for agnostic
active learning express their performance in terms of a parameter called the disagreement coefficient, but it is known that these algorithms are inefficient on some
inputs.
We take a different approach to agnostic active learning, getting an algorithm that
is competitive with the optimal algorithm for any binary hypothesis class H and
distribution DX over X. In particular, if any algorithm can use m∗ queries to
get O(η) error, then our algorithm uses O(m∗ log |H|) queries to get O(η) error.
Our algorithm lies in the vein of the splitting-based approach of Dasgupta [2004],
which gets a similar result for the realizable (η = 0) setting.
We also show that it is NP-hard to do better than our algorithm’s O(log |H|)
overhead in general.

1

Introduction

Active learning is motivated by settings where unlabeled data is cheap but labeling it is expensive. By carefully choosing which points to label, one can often achieve significant reductions
in label complexity [Cohn et al., 1994]. A canonical example with exponential improvement is
one-dimensional threshold functions hτ (x) := 1x≥τ : in the noiseless
 setting, an active learner can
1
use binary search
to
find
an
ε-approximation
solution
in
O
log
ε queries, while a passive learner

1
needs Θ ε samples [Cohn et al., 1994, Dasgupta, 2005, Nowak, 2011].
In this paper we are concerned with agnostic binary classification. We are given a hypothesis class H
of binary hypotheses h : X → {0, 1} such that some h∗ ∈ H has err(h∗ ) ≤ η, where the error
err(h) :=

Pr [h(x) ̸= y]
(x,y)∼D

is measured with respect to an unknown distribution D over X ×{0, 1}. In our active setting, we
also know the marginal distribution DX of x, and can query any point x of our choosing to receive a
sample y ∼ (Y | X = x) for (X, Y ) ∼ D. The goal is to output some b
h with err(b
h) ≤ η + ε, using
as few queries as possible.
The first interesting results for agnostic active learning were shown by Balcan et al. [2006], who
gave an algorithm called Agnostic
Active (A2 ) that gets logarithmic dependence on ε in some natural

1
e
settings: it needs O log ε samples for the 1d linear threshold setting (binary search), as long as

e d2 log 1 samples for d-dimensional linear thresholds when DX is the uniform
as ε > 16η, and O
ε
√
sphere and ε > dη. This stands in contrast to the polynomial dependence on ε necessaryin the

2
passive setting. The bound’s requirement that ε ≳ η is quite natural given a lower bound of Ω d ηε2
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

