FABind: Fast and Accurate Protein-Ligand Binding

Qizhi Pei1,5∗ , Kaiyuan Gao2∗, Lijun Wu3† , Jinhua Zhu4 , Yingce Xia3 ,
Shufang Xie1 , Tao Qin3 , Kun He2 , Tie-Yan Liu3 , Rui Yan1,6†
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Microsoft Research AI4Science
4
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
5
Engineering Research Center of Next-Generation Intelligent Search
and Recommendation, Ministry of Education
6
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
{qizhipei,shufangxie,ruiyan}@ruc.edu.cn, {im_kai,brooklet60}@hust.edu.cn
{lijuwu,yinxia,taoqin,tyliu}@microsoft.com, teslazhu@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Modeling the interaction between proteins and ligands and accurately predicting
their binding structures is a critical yet challenging task in drug discovery. Recent
advancements in deep learning have shown promise in addressing this challenge,
with sampling-based and regression-based methods emerging as two prominent
approaches. However, these methods have notable limitations. Sampling-based
methods often suffer from low efficiency due to the need for generating multiple
candidate structures for selection. On the other hand, regression-based methods
offer fast predictions but may experience decreased accuracy. Additionally, the
variation in protein sizes often requires external modules for selecting suitable
binding pockets, further impacting efficiency. In this work, we propose FABind, an
end-to-end model that combines pocket prediction and docking to achieve accurate
and fast protein-ligand binding. FABind incorporates a unique ligand-informed
pocket prediction module, which is also leveraged for docking pose estimation. The
model further enhances the docking process by incrementally integrating the predicted pocket to optimize protein-ligand binding, reducing discrepancies between
training and inference. Through extensive experiments on benchmark datasets, our
proposed FABind demonstrates strong advantages in terms of effectiveness and
efficiency compared to existing methods. Our code is available at Github3 .

1

Introduction

Biomolecular interactions are vital in the human body as they perform various functions within
organisms [44, 2]. For example, protein-ligand binding [35], protein-protein interaction [17], proteinDNA interaction [18], and so on. Among these, drug-like small molecules (ligands) binding to
protein is important and widely studied in interactions as they can facilitate drug discovery. Therefore,
molecular docking, which involves predicting the conformation of a ligand when it binds to a target
protein, serves as a crucial task, the resulting docked protein-ligand complex can provide valuable
insights for drug development.
∗

Equal contribution. This work was done during their internship at Microsoft Research AI4Science.
Corresponding authors: Rui Yan (ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn) and Lijun Wu (lijuwu@microsoft.com).
3
https://github.com/QizhiPei/FABind

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

