Lift Yourself Up: Retrieval-augmented Text
Generation with Self-Memory

Xin Cheng1

Di Luo2
1

Xiuying Chen3

Lemao Liu4

Dongyan Zhao1

Rui Yan2

Peking University 2 Remin University of China
3
KAUST 4 Tencent AI Lab
chengxin1998@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
With direct access to human-written reference as memory, retrieval-augmented
generation has achieved much progress in a wide range of text generation tasks.
Since better memory would typically prompt better generation (we define this as
primal problem). The traditional approach for memory retrieval involves selecting
memory that exhibits the highest similarity to the input. However, this method
is constrained by the quality of the fixed corpus from which memory is retrieved.
In this paper, by exploring the duality of the primal problem: better generation
also prompts better memory, we propose a novel framework, Selfmem, which
addresses this limitation by iteratively employing a retrieval-augmented generator
to create an unbounded memory pool and using a memory selector to choose one
output as memory for the subsequent generation round. This enables the model
to leverage its own output, referred to as self-memory, for improved generation.
We evaluate the effectiveness of Selfmem on three distinct text generation tasks:
neural machine translation, abstractive text summarization, and dialogue generation,
under two generation paradigms: fine-tuned small model and few-shot LLM.
Our approach achieves state-of-the-art results in four directions in JRC-Acquis
translation dataset, 50.3 ROUGE-1 in XSum, and 62.9 ROUGE-1 in BigPatent,
demonstrating the potential of self-memory in enhancing retrieval-augmented
generation models. Furthermore, we conduct thorough analyses of each component
in the Selfmem framework to identify current system bottlenecks and provide
insights for future research1 .

1

Introduction

In recent years, retrieval-augmented text generation has attracted growing interest across various
fields, including neural machine translation[28, 17, 2], dialogue response generation[81, 6, 46], and
language modeling[36, 77, 19]. This innovative generation paradigm initially equips a fine-tuned
small model or a large language model (LLM) with access to an external database (typically the
training corpus) using information retrieval techniques. Subsequently, the generation process is
conducted based on both the input text and the retrieved memory.
In this paradigm, the guiding principle for memory retrieval is to find the memory that exhibits
the highest similarity to the current input [36, 96, 49]. This aligns with the human intuition that a
more similar demonstration sample typically offers more hints. As demonstrated in Figure 1, for a
retrieval-augmented translation model, the memory similarity alone exhibits a strong correlation with
the final translation quality, regardless of other factors that may influence translation quality (e.g.,
1

Code and data available at: https://github.com/Hannibal046/SelfMemory

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

