M5HisDoc: A Large-scale Multi-style Chinese
Historical Document Analysis Benchmark

Yongxin Shi, Chongyu Liu, Dezhi Peng, Cheng Jian, Jiarong Huang, Lianwen Jin∗
South China University of Technology
yongxin_shi@foxmail.com, liuchongyu1996@gmail.com
pengdzscut@foxmail.com, eechengjian@mail.scut.edu.cn,
jiarong_huang@outlook.com, eelwjin@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Recognizing and organizing text in correct reading order plays a crucial role in
historical document analysis and preservation. While existing methods have shown
promising performance, they often struggle with challenges such as diverse layouts,
low image quality, style variations, and distortions. This is primarily due to the
lack of consideration for these issues in the current benchmarks, which hinders
the development and evaluation of historical document analysis and recognition
(HDAR) methods in complex real-world scenarios. To address this gap, this paper
introduces a complex multi-style Chinese historical document analysis benchmark,
named M5 HisDoc. The M5 indicates five properties of style, ie., Multiple layouts,
Multiple document types, Multiple calligraphy styles, Multiple backgrounds, and
Multiple challenges. The M5 HisDoc dataset consists of two subsets, M5 HisDoc-R
(Regular) and M5 HisDoc-H (Hard). The M5 HisDoc-R subset comprises 4,000
historical document images. To ensure high-quality annotations, we meticulously
perform manual annotation and triple-checking. To replicate real-world conditions for historical document analysis applications, we incorporate image rotation,
distortion, and resolution reduction into M5 HisDoc-R subset to form a new challenging subset named M5 HisDoc-H, which contains the same number of images as
M5 HisDoc-R. The dataset exhibits diverse styles, significant scale variations, dense
texts, and an extensive character set. We conduct benchmarking experiments on
five tasks: text line detection, text line recognition, character detection, character
recognition, and reading order prediction. We also conduct cross-validation with
other benchmarks. Experimental results demonstrate that the M5 HisDoc dataset
can offer new challenges and great opportunities for future research in this field,
thereby providing deep insights into the solution for HDAR. The dataset is available
at https://github.com/HCIILAB/M5HisDoc.

1

Introduction

Historical documents are invaluable carriers of human cultural heritage, containing important information about human history, culture, and literary arts. Therefore, the preservation and analysis of
historical documents are considered an urgent research topic. As the digital version of historical documents is easier to disseminate and retrieve, designing a digitization system [1] of historical documents
is an effective way to make use of historical documents without causing irreversible damage. With the
rapid development of Optical Character Recognition (OCR) technologies, significant progress [2, 3, 4]
has been made in understanding historical documents, and some benchmarks [5, 6, 7] have been
established. However, real-world scenarios present various challenges such as diverse page layouts,
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

