Improvements on Uncertainty Quantification for Node
Classification via Distance-Based Regularization

Russell Alan Hart
The University of Texas at Dallas
rah150030@utdallas.edu

Linlin Yu
The University of Texas at Dallas
linlin.yu@utdallas.edu

Yifei Lou
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
yflou@unc.edu

Feng Chen ∗
The University of Texas at Dallas
feng.chen@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have achieved significant success in the last decades, but
they are not well-calibrated and often produce unreliable predictions. A large
number of literature relies on uncertainty quantification to evaluate the reliability
of a learning model, which is particularly important for applications of out-ofdistribution (OOD) detection and misclassification detection. We are interested in
uncertainty quantification for interdependent node-level classification. We start our
analysis based on graph posterior networks (GPNs) that optimize the uncertainty
cross-entropy (UCE)-based loss function. We describe the theoretical limitations
of the widely-used UCE loss. To alleviate the identified drawbacks, we propose a
distance-based regularization that encourages clustered OOD nodes to remain clustered in the latent space. We conduct extensive comparison experiments on eight
standard datasets and demonstrate that the proposed regularization outperforms the
state-of-the-art in both OOD detection and misclassification detection.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely used in various fields [10, 28].
However, some neural networks provide under-confident [36] or over-confident [14] predictions,
limiting their practical applications in risk-constrained and safety-critical fields, such as drug discovery
[38], autonomous driving [30], and medical diagnosis [2]. Take autonomous drug design for an
example. Uncertainty estimation on the reliability of model predictions helps to support molecular
reasoning and experimental design by saving considerable time and resources [23]. It is important to
estimate the predictive uncertainty of a DNN, i.e., indicating when its predictions are likely incorrect.
There are two main types of uncertainty: epistemic uncertainty (knowledge uncertainty) and aleatoric
uncertainty (data uncertainty) [9]. Epistemic uncertainty is due to the lack of knowledge about
unseen data. Aleatoric uncertainty is caused by the inherent complexity of the data, which cannot
be reduced by increasing the training data, including sources of noise such as homoscedastic or
heteroscedastic noise [17]. These two uncertainty types are typically used for out-of-distribution
(OOD) and misclassification detection, respectively.
Most models have been introduced for uncertainty estimation on i.i.d. inputs, such as image and
tabular data. However, the uncertainty estimation for classifying interdependent nodes in attributed
graph data, such as social networks and citation networks, is under-explored. This work focuses on
the node classification tasks with great potential to generalize to others with interdependent inputs.
∗

corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

