H Y T REL: Hypergraph-enhanced
Tabular Data Representation Learning

Pei Chen1∗ , Soumajyoti Sarkar2 , Leonard Lausen2 ,
Balasubramaniam Srinivasan2 , Sheng Zha2 , Ruihong Huang1 , George Karypis2
1
Texas A&M University, 2 Amazon Web Services
{chenpei,huangrh}@tamu.edu,
{soumajs,lausen,srbalasu,zhasheng,gkarypis}@amazon.com

Abstract
Language models pretrained on large collections of tabular data have demonstrated
their effectiveness in several downstream tasks. However, many of these models
do not take into account the row/column permutation invariances, hierarchical
structure, etc. that exist in tabular data. To alleviate these limitations, we propose
H Y T REL, a tabular language model, that captures the permutation invariances and
three more structural properties of tabular data by using hypergraphs–where the
table cells make up the nodes and the cells occurring jointly together in each row,
column, and the entire table are used to form three different types of hyperedges.
We show that H Y T REL is maximally invariant under certain conditions for tabular
data, i.e., two tables obtain the same representations via H Y T REL iff the two tables
are identical up to permutations. Our empirical results demonstrate that H Y T REL
consistently outperforms other competitive baselines on four downstream tasks
with minimal pretraining, illustrating the advantages of incorporating the inductive
biases associated with tabular data into the representations. Finally, our qualitative
analyses showcase that H Y T REL can assimilate the table structures to generate
robust representations for the cells, rows, columns, and the entire table. 1

1

Introduction

Tabular data that is organized in bi-dimensional matrices are widespread in webpages, documents,
and databases. Understanding tables can benefit many tasks such as table type classification, table
similarity matching, and knowledge extraction from tables (e.g., column annotations) among others.
Inspired by the success of pretrained language models in natural language tasks, recent studies [Yin
et al., 2020, Yang et al., 2022] proposed Tabular Language Models (TaLMs) that perform pretraining
on tables via self-supervision to generate expressive representations of tables for downstream tasks.
Among the TaLMs, many works [Herzig et al., 2020, Yin et al., 2020, Deng et al., 2020, Iida
et al., 2021] serialize tables to a sequence of tokens for leveraging existing pretrained language
model checkpoints and textual self-supervised objectives like the Masked Language Modeling.
However, due to the linearization of tables to strings, these models do not explicitly incorporate the
structural properties of a table, e.g., the invariances to arbitrary permutations of rows and columns
(independently). Our work focuses on obtaining representations of tables that take table structures
into account. We hypothesize that incorporating such properties into the table representations will
benefit many downstream table understanding tasks.
* Work done as an intern at Amazon Web Services.
1

Code is available at: https://github.com/awslabs/hypergraph-tabular-lm

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

