A generative model of the hippocampal formation
trained with theta driven local learning rules

Caswell Barry

2

Tom M George1
Kimberly Stachenfeld3,4 Claudia Clopath5,1

Tomoki Fukai6

Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, UCL, UK 2 Dept. of Cell and Developmental Biology, UCL, UK
3
Google DeepMind, London, UK 4 Columbia University, New York, NY
5
Bioengineering Dept., Imperial College, UK 6 Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, Japan
1

tom.george.20@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Advances in generative models have recently revolutionised machine learning.
Meanwhile, in neuroscience, generative models have long been thought fundamental to animal intelligence. Understanding the biological mechanisms that support
these processes promises to shed light on the relationship between biological and
artificial intelligence. In animals, the hippocampal formation is thought to learn
and use a generative model to support its role in spatial and non-spatial memory.
Here we introduce a biologically plausible model of the hippocampal formation
tantamount to a Helmholtz machine that we apply to a temporal stream of inputs.
A novel component of our model is that fast theta-band oscillations (5-10 Hz)
gate the direction of information flow throughout the network, training it akin to a
high-frequency wake-sleep algorithm. Our model accurately infers the latent state
of high-dimensional sensory environments and generates realistic sensory predictions. Furthermore, it can learn to path integrate by developing a ring attractor
connectivity structure matching previous theoretical proposals and flexibly transfer
this structure between environments. Whereas many models trade-off biological
plausibility with generality, our model captures a variety of hippocampal cognitive
functions under one biologically plausible local learning rule.

1

Introduction

Generative models seek to create new data samples which are similar to those from the training
set. To do so they must learn the probability distribution of the training data, comprising a rich,
generalisable and accurate model of the world. Many of the recent advances in AI have involved types
of generative models: VAEs [1], GANs [2], diffusion models [3] and autoregressive models [4] have
seeded improvements in AI capabilities ranging from data compression [5] to image generation [6]
and natural language [7]. In neuroscience, the animal brain has long been known to exploit generative
models [8, 9]. The ability to generate representative sensory data samples can be used directly, for
example during offline planning or memory recall. It can also be used indirectly to aid training of
inference networks with the goal of processing rich, noisy and high dimensional streams of incoming
sensory stimuli, as discussed in the predictive coding literature [10]. In a sentence: “What I cannot
create [generate], I do not understand [inference]” (R. Feynman).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

