AdaptSSR: Pre-training User Model with
Augmentation-Adaptive Self-Supervised Ranking

Yang Yu1,2 , Qi Liu1,2∗ , Kai Zhang1,2 , Yuren Zhang1,2 , Chao Song3 , Min Hou4
Yuqing Yuan3 , Zhihao Ye3 , Zaixi Zhang1,2 , Sanshi Lei Yu1,2
1
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
3
OPPO Research Institute 4 Hefei University of Technology
{yflyl613, kkzhang0808, yr160698, zaixi}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{songchao12, yuanyuqing, yezhihao3}@oppo.com
qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn, {hmhoumin, meet.leiyu}@gmail.com

Abstract
User modeling, which aims to capture users’ characteristics or interests, heavily
relies on task-specific labeled data and suffers from the data sparsity issue. Several
recent studies tackled this problem by pre-training the user model on massive
user behavior sequences with a contrastive learning task. Generally, these methods
assume different views of the same behavior sequence constructed via data augmentation are semantically consistent, i.e., reflecting similar characteristics or interests
of the user, and thus maximizing their agreement in the feature space. However, due
to the diverse interests and heavy noise in user behaviors, existing augmentation
methods tend to lose certain characteristics of the user or introduce noisy behaviors.
Thus, forcing the user model to directly maximize the similarity between the augmented views may result in a negative transfer. To this end, we propose to replace
the contrastive learning task with a new pretext task: Augmentation-Adaptive SelfSupervised Ranking (AdaptSSR), which alleviates the requirement of semantic
consistency between the augmented views while pre-training a discriminative user
model. Specifically, we adopt a multiple pairwise ranking loss which trains the
user model to capture the similarity orders between the implicitly augmented view,
the explicitly augmented view, and views from other users. We further employ an
in-batch hard negative sampling strategy to facilitate model training. Moreover,
considering the distinct impacts of data augmentation on different behavior sequences, we design an augmentation-adaptive fusion mechanism to automatically
adjust the similarity order constraint applied to each sample based on the estimated
similarity between the augmented views. Extensive experiments on both public and
industrial datasets with six downstream tasks verify the effectiveness of AdaptSSR.

1

Introduction

User modeling aims to capture the user’s characteristics or interests and encode them into a dense user
representation for a specific user-oriented task, such as user profiling, personalized recommendation,
and click-through rate prediction [24, 39, 50, 59]. In the past decade, extensive methods [5, 9, 12,
22, 53] have been proposed to model users based on their historical behaviors. Despite their great
success in various tasks, these methods usually rely on a large amount of task-specific labeled data to
train accurate user models, which makes them suffer from the data sparsity problem [17, 36, 57].
∗

Qi Liu is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

