Neural Processes with Stability

Huafeng Liu, Liping Jing, Jian Yu
Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University
The School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
{hfliu1, lpjing, jianyu}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Unlike traditional statistical models depending on hand-specified priors, neural
processes (NPs) have recently emerged as a class of powerful neural statistical
models that combine the strengths of neural networks and stochastic processes. NPs
can define a flexible class of stochastic processes well suited for highly non-trivial
functions by encoding contextual knowledge into the function space. However,
noisy context points introduce challenges to the algorithmic stability that small
changes in training data may significantly change the models and yield lower
generalization performance. In this paper, we provide theoretical guidelines for
deriving stable solutions with high generalization by introducing the notion of
algorithmic stability into NPs, which can be flexible to work with various NPs and
achieves less biased approximation with theoretical guarantees. To illustrate the
superiority of the proposed model, we perform experiments on both synthetic and
real-world data, and the results demonstrate that our approach not only helps to
achieve more accurate performance but also improves model robustness.

1

Introduction

Neural processes (NPs) [9, 10] constitute a family of variational approximation models for stochastic
processes with promising properties in computational efficiency and uncertainty quantification.
Different from traditional statistical modeling for which a user typically hand-specifies a prior
(e.g., smoothness of functions quantified by a Gaussian distribution in Gaussian process [25]), NPs
implicitly define a broad class of stochastic processes with neural networks in a data-driven manner.
When appropriately trained, NPs can define a flexible class of stochastic processes well suited for
highly non-trivial functions that are not easily represented by existing stochastic processes.
NPs meta-learn a distribution over predictors and provide a way to select an inductive bias from data
to adapt quickly to a new task. Incorporating the data prior into the model as an inductive bias, NPs
can reduce the model complexity and improve model generalization. Usually, an NP predictor is
described as predicting a set of data (target set) given a set of labeled data (context set). However,
the number of noise in data introduces challenges to the algorithmic stability. In NPs, models are
biased to the meta-datasets (a dataset of datasets), so small changes in the dataset (noisy or missing)
may significantly change the models. As demonstrated in previous work [9, 10, 14, 11], existing NPs
cannot provide stable predictions under noisy conditions, which may introduce high training error
variance, and minimizing the training error may not guarantee consistent error reduction on the test
set, i.e. low generalization performance [2]. In this case, algorithmic stability and generalization
performance have strong connections and an unstable NP model has low generalization performance.
A stable model is one for which the learned solution does not change much with small changes in
training set [2]. In general, heuristic techniques, such as cross-validation and ensemble learning,
can be adopted to improve the generalization performance. Cross-validation needs to sacrifice
the limited training data, while ensemble learning is computationally expensive on training submodels. Recently, there are several improved NPs focused on considering model stability and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

