Reinforcement-Enhanced Autoregressive Feature
Transformation: Gradient-steered Search in
Continuous Space for Postfix Expressions

Dongjie Wang∗
Department of CS
University of Central Florida
dongjie.wang@ucf.edu
Pengfei Wang
CNIC, CAS
University of CAS
wpf@cnic.cn

Meng Xiao∗
CNIC, CAS
University of CAS
shaow@cnic.cn
Yuanchun Zhou
CNIC, CAS
University of CAS
zyc@cnic.cn

Min Wu
Institute for Infocomm Research
A*STAR
wumin@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
Yanjie Fu†
School of Computing and AI
Arizona State University
yanjiefu@asu.edu

Abstract
Feature transformation aims to generate new pattern-discriminative feature space
from original features to improve downstream machine learning (ML) task performances. However, the discrete search space for the optimal feature explosively
grows on the basis of combinations of features and operations from low-order
forms to high-order forms. Existing methods, such as exhaustive search, expansion
reduction, evolutionary algorithms, reinforcement learning, and iterative greedy,
suffer from large search space. Overly emphasizing efficiency in algorithm design
usually sacrifices stability or robustness. To fundamentally fill this gap, we reformulate discrete feature transformation as a continuous space optimization task and
develop an embedding-optimization-reconstruction framework. This framework
includes four steps: 1) reinforcement-enhanced data preparation, aiming to prepare
high-quality transformation-accuracy training data; 2) feature transformation operation sequence embedding, intending to encapsulate the knowledge of prepared
training data within a continuous space; 3) gradient-steered optimal embedding
search, dedicating to uncover potentially superior embeddings within the learned
space; 4) transformation operation sequence reconstruction, striving to reproduce
the feature transformation solution to pinpoint the optimal feature space. Finally,
extensive experiments and case studies are performed to demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed method. The code and data are publicly
accessible https://www.dropbox.com/sh/imh8ckui7va3k5u/AACulQegVx0MuywYyoCqSdVPa?dl=0.

1

Introduction

Feature transformation aims to derive a new feature space by mathematically transforming the original
features to enhance the downstream ML task performances. However, feature transformation is
usually manual, time-consuming, labor-intensive, and requires domain knowledge. These limitations
motivate us to accomplish Automated Feature Transformation (AFT). AFT is a fundamental task
because AFT can 1) reconstruct distance measures, 2) form a feature space with discriminative
patterns, 3) ease machine learning, and 4) overcome complex and imperfect data representation.
There are two main challenges in solving AFT: 1) efficient feature transformation in a massive
discrete search space; 2) robust feature transformation in an open learning environment. Firstly, it
∗
†

These authors have contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

