Structure Learning with Adaptive Random
Neighborhood Informed MCMC

Alberto Caron∗
The Alan Turing Institute
London, UK
acaron@turing.ac.uk

Xitong Liang∗
Department of Statistical Sciences
University College London
London, UK
xitong.liang.18@ucl.ac.uk

Samuel Livingstone
Department of Statistical Sciences
University College London
London, UK
samuel.livingstone@ucl.ac.uk

Jim Griffin
Department of Statistical Sciences
University College London
London, UK
j.griffin@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel MCMC sampler, PARNI-DAG, for a fullyBayesian approach to the problem of structure learning under observational data.
Under the assumption of causal sufficiency, the algorithm allows for approximate sampling directly from the posterior distribution on Directed Acyclic Graphs
(DAGs). PARNI-DAG performs efficient sampling of DAGs via locally informed,
adaptive random neighborhood proposal that results in better mixing properties. In
addition, to ensure better scalability with the number of nodes, we couple PARNIDAG with a pre-tuning procedure of the sampler’s parameters that exploits a
skeleton graph derived through some constraint-based or scoring-based algorithms.
Thanks to these novel features, PARNI-DAG quickly converges to high-probability
regions and is less likely to get stuck in local modes in the presence of high correlation between nodes in high-dimensional settings. After introducing the technical
novelties in PARNI-DAG, we empirically demonstrate its mixing efficiency and
accuracy in learning DAG structures on a variety of experiments.1

1

Introduction

Structure Learning and Causal Discovery are concerned with reconstructing a graphical model
underlying a set of random variables from data, in the form of a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG),
provided that causal identifiability assumptions hold [Pearl, 2009, Drton and Maathuis, 2017, Glymour
et al., 2019]. Causal relations can typically be inferred if randomized experiments are carried out
[Pearl, 2009]. However, in many relevant applied fields (e.g. biology, genomics, ecology, etc.), only
observational data are accessible, as performing interventions is usually costly or simply unfeasible.
Structure learning from observational data is a challenging problem, with the space of possible DAGs
growing super-exponentially in the number of nodes [Robinson, 1977].
Related work. Early contributions on structure learning algorithms include constraint-based
methods [Spirtes et al., 2000, Pearl, 2009], such as PC and FCI, that utilize conditional independence
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Code to implement the PARNI-DAG proposal and replicate the experimental sections is available at
https://github.com/XitongLiang/The-PARNI-scheme/tree/main/Structure-Learning.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

