Enhancing Sharpness-Aware Optimization
Through Variance Suppression

Bingcong Li

Georgios B. Giannakis

University of Minnesota - Twin Cities
Minneapolis, MN, USA
{lixx5599, georgios}@umn.edu

Abstract
Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) has well documented merits in enhancing
generalization of deep neural networks, even without sizable data augmentation.
Embracing the geometry of the loss function, where neighborhoods of ‘flat minima’ heighten generalization ability, SAM seeks ‘flat valleys’ by minimizing the
maximum loss caused by an adversary perturbing parameters within the neighborhood. Although critical to account for sharpness of the loss function, such an
‘over-friendly adversary’ can curtail the outmost level of generalization. The novel
approach of this contribution fosters stabilization of adversaries through variance
suppression (VaSSO) to avoid such friendliness. VaSSO’s provable stability safeguards its numerical improvement over SAM in model-agnostic tasks, including
image classification and machine translation. In addition, experiments confirm that
VaSSO endows SAM with robustness against high levels of label noise. Code is
available at https://github.com/BingcongLi/VaSSO.

1

Introduction

Despite deep neural networks (DNNs) have advanced the concept of “learning from data,” and
markedly improved performance across several applications in vision and language (Devlin et al.,
2018; Tom et al., 2020), their overparametrized nature renders the tendency to overfit on training data
(Zhang et al., 2021). This has led to concerns in generalization, which is a practically underscored
perspective yet typically suffers from a gap relative to the training performance.
Improving generalizability is challenging. Common approaches include (model) regularization and
data augmentation (Srivastava et al., 2014). While it is the default choice to integrate regularization
such as weight decay and dropout into training, these methods are often insufficient for DNNs
especially when coping with complicated network architectures (Chen et al., 2022). Another line
of effort resorts to suitable optimization schemes attempting to find a generalizable local minimum.
For example, SGD is more preferable than Adam on certain overparameterized problems since it
converges to maximum margin solutions (Wilson et al., 2017). Decoupling weight decay from
Adam also empirically facilitates generalizability (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017). Unfortunately, the
underlying mechanism remains unclear, and whether the generalization merits carry over to other
intricate learning tasks calls for additional theoretical elaboration.
Our main focus, sharpness aware minimization/optimization (SAM), is a highly compelling optimization approach that facilitates state-of-the-art generalizability by exploiting sharpness of loss landscape
(Foret et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022). A high-level interpretation of sharpness is how violently the
loss fluctuates within a neighborhood. It has been shown through large-scale empirical studies that
sharpness-based measures highly correlate with generalization (Jiang et al., 2019). Several works
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

