Evaluating Self-Supervised Learning for
Molecular Graph Embeddings

Hanchen Wang1⋆ Jean Kaddour2⋆ Shengchao Liu3,4⋆ Jian Tang3,5,6 Joan Lasenby1 Qi Liu7
1
Cambridge 2 UCL 3 MILA 4 UdeM 5 HEC 6 CIFAR 7 HKU ⋆ Equal Contribution

Abstract
Graph Self-Supervised Learning (GSSL) provides a robust pathway for acquiring
embeddings without expert labelling, a capability that carries profound implications for molecular graphs due to the staggering number of potential molecules
and the high cost of obtaining labels. However, GSSL methods are designed not
for optimisation within a specific domain but rather for transferability across a
variety of downstream tasks. This broad applicability complicates their evaluation. Addressing this challenge, we present "Molecular Graph Representation
Evaluation" (M OL G RAPH E VAL), generating detailed profiles of molecular graph
embeddings with interpretable and diversified attributes. M OL G RAPH E VAL offers a suite of probing tasks grouped into three categories: (i) generic graph,
(ii) molecular substructure, and (iii) embedding space properties. By leveraging M OL G RAPH E VAL to benchmark existing GSSL methods against both current
downstream datasets and our suite of tasks, we uncover significant inconsistencies
between inferences drawn solely from existing datasets and those derived from
more nuanced probing. These findings suggest that current evaluation methodologies fail to capture the entirety of the landscape.

1

Introduction

Learning neural embeddings of molecular
graphs has become of paramount importance in
computer-aided drug discovery [1, 2]. For instance, a molecular property prediction (MPP)
model can expedite and economise the design
process by reducing the need for synthesising
and measuring molecules. Thereby, such models can be immensely useful in the hit-to-lead
and early lead optimisation phase of a drug discovery project [3]. However, obtaining labels
of molecule properties is expensive and timeconsuming, especially since the size of potential pharmacologically active molecules is estimated to be in the order of 1060 [4, 5].

1.Molecular
Graphs

2. SSL
3.Embedding
Pre-Training Extraction

4.Probe
Models

5.Evaluation
Metrics
Topology
Substructure
Embedding
Space
…

Figure 1: Overview of M OL G RAPH E VAL. Given
molecular graphs, we train GNNs to predict SSL
proxy objectives. We then extract embeddings of
(possibly unseen) graphs using pre-trained models, which form the inputs for probe models,
Graph Self-Supervised Learning (GSSL) paves trained and evaluated on the designed metrics.
the way for learning molecular graph embeddings without human annotations that are transferable
to various downstream datasets. Unfortunately, the evaluation of such general-purpose embeddings
is fundamentally complex. Different proxy objectives will place different demands on them, and
no single downstream dataset can be definitive. Moreover, many of the previously proposed GSSL
works are disconnected in terms of the tasks they target and the datasets they use for evaluation,
making direct comparison difficult.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

