Towards Data-Algorithm Dependent Generalization:
a Case Study on Overparameterized Linear Regression

Jing Xu∗
IIIS, Tsinghua University
xujing21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Yang Yuan
IIIS, Tsinghua University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
yuanyang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Jiaye Teng∗
IIIS, Tsinghua University
tjy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Andrew Chi-Chih Yao
IIIS, Tsinghua University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
andrewcyao@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
One of the major open problems in machine learning is to characterize generalization in the overparameterized regime, where most traditional generalization
bounds become inconsistent even for overparameterized linear regression [46]. In
many scenarios, this failure can be attributed to obscuring the crucial interplay
between the training algorithm and the underlying data distribution. This paper
demonstrate that the generalization behavior of overparameterized model should
be analyzed in a both data-relevant and algorithm-relevant manner. To make a
formal characterization, We introduce a notion called data-algorithm compatibility,
which considers the generalization behavior of the entire data-dependent training
trajectory, instead of traditional last-iterate analysis. We validate our claim by
studying the setting of solving overparameterized linear regression with gradient
descent. Specifically, we perform a data-dependent trajectory analysis and derive
a sufficient condition for compatibility in such a setting. Our theoretical results
demonstrate that if we take early stopping iterates into consideration, generalization
can hold with significantly weaker restrictions on the problem instance than the
previous last-iterate analysis.

1

Introduction

Although deep neural networks achieve great success in practice [13, 14, 63], their remarkable
generalization ability is still among the essential mysteries in the deep learning community. One
of the most intriguing features of deep neural networks is overparameterization, which confers a
level of tractability to the training problem, but leaves traditional generalization theories failing to
work. In generalization analysis, both the training algorithm and the data distribution play essential
roles [23, 28]. For instance, a line of work [46, 74] highlights the role of the algorithm by showing
that the algorithm-irrelevant uniform convergence bounds can become inconsistent in deep learning
regimes. Another line of work [8, 68] on benign overfitting emphasizes the role of data distribution
via profound analysis of specific overparameterized models.
Despite the significant role of data and algorithm in generalization analysis, existing theories usually
focus on either the data factor (e.g., uniform convergence [46] and last iterate analysis [8, 68]) or the
algorithm factor (e.g., stability-based bounds [24]). Combining both data and algorithm factor into
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

