Adaptive Contextual Perception: How to Generalize
to New Backgrounds and Ambiguous Objects

Zhuofan Ying1,2
Peter Hase1
Mohit Bansal1
1
2
UNC Chapel Hill
Columbia University
{zfying, peter, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Biological vision systems make adaptive use of context to recognize objects in
new settings with novel contexts as well as occluded or blurry objects in familiar
settings [3, 35]. In this paper, we investigate how vision models adaptively use
context for out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization and leverage our analysis results to improve model OOD generalization. First, we formulate two distinct OOD
settings where the contexts are either irrelevant (BACKGROUND -I NVARIANCE)
or beneficial (O BJECT-D ISAMBIGUATION), reflecting the diverse contextual challenges faced in biological vision. We then analyze model performance in these two
different OOD settings and demonstrate that models that excel in one setting tend to
struggle in the other. Notably, prior works on learning causal features improve on
one setting but hurt in the other. This underscores the importance of generalizing
across both OOD settings, as this ability is crucial for both human cognition and
robust AI systems. Next, to better understand the model properties contributing to
OOD generalization, we use representational geometry analysis and our own probing methods to examine a population of models, and we discover that those with
more factorized representations and appropriate feature weighting are more successful in handling BACKGROUND -I NVARIANCE and O BJECT-D ISAMBIGUATION
tests. We further validate these findings through causal intervention, manipulating
representation factorization and feature weighting to demonstrate their causal effect
on performance. These results show that interpretability-based model metrics can
predict OOD generalization and are causally connected to model generalization.
Motivated by our analysis results, we propose new data augmentation methods
aimed at enhancing model generalization. The proposed methods outperform
strong baselines, yielding improvements in both in-distribution and OOD tests. We
conclude that, in order to replicate the generalization abilities of biological vision,
computer vision models must have factorized object vs. background representations
and appropriately weight both kinds of features.1

1

Introduction

Humans can recognize objects even when the objects appear in novel settings like new viewpoints,
lighting, and background conditions [6, 17]. This kind of generalization has been the subject of many
studies in computer vision, where past methods have optimized models to avoid relying on “spurious
correlations” (such as the object’s background) in order to encourage generalization [46, 2, 38].
However, human vision can also generalize to settings where objects are occluded, blurred, or
otherwise distorted, as illustrated by the blurred keyboard in Fig. 1. In fact, research in psychology
shows that humans accomplish this task largely by relying on background information, which helps
disambiguate the identity of the foreground object [24, 53, 39, 23].
1

Our code is available at: https://github.com/zfying/AdaptiveContext

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

