Common Ground in Cooperative Communication

1

Xiaoran Hao1,⇤, Yash Jhaveri1,⇤ , & Patrick Shafto1,2
Department of Math and Computer Science, Rutgers University–Newark
2
School of Mathematics, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton

Abstract
Cooperative communication plays a fundamental role in theories of human-human
interaction–cognition, culture, development, language, etc.–as well as human-robot
interaction. The core challenge in cooperative communication is the problem of
common ground: having enough shared knowledge and understanding to successfully communicate. Prior models of cooperative communication, however,
uniformly assume the strongest form of common ground, perfect and complete
knowledge sharing, and, therefore, fail to capture the core challenge of cooperative
communication. We propose a general theory of cooperative communication that
is mathematically principled and explicitly defines a spectrum of common ground
possibilities, going well beyond that of perfect and complete knowledge sharing, on
spaces that permit arbitrary representations of data and hypotheses. Our framework
is a strict generalization of prior models of cooperative communication. After
considering a parametric form of common ground and viewing the data selection
and hypothesis inference processes of communication as encoding and decoding,
we establish a connection to variational autoencoding, a powerful model in modern
machine learning. Finally, we carry out a series of empirical simulations to support
and elaborate on our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

The cooperative communication problem is a problem among two agents; their goal is to find a pair
of plans that successfully map beliefs to communicative acts and back. This problem is fundamental
in two-party interaction, whether human-human, human-machine, or (expectantly) machine-machine
interaction. In human-human interaction, cooperative information sharing has long been viewed as a
foundation of, for example, human language (Frank and Goodman, 2012; Goodman and Stuhlmüller,
2013), cognitive development (Bonawitz et al., 2011; Jara-Ettinger et al., 2016), and cultural evolution
(Tomasello, 1999). In human-machine interaction, this problem’s appearance is, of course, more
recent, but still its significance has been observed in, for instance, social robotics (Fisac et al., 2017),
machine teaching (Zhu, 2015, 2013), reinforcement learning (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016; Ho et al.,
2016), and deep learning (Laskey et al., 2017). Researchers have proposed a number of models of
cooperative communication (Shafto and Goodman, 2008; Frank et al., 2009; Shafto et al., 2012; Yang
et al., 2018) and, most recently, mathematical formalizations that enable the unification and analysis
of prior models (Wang et al., 2020).
The major challenge for any two agents in cooperative communication is having enough shared
understanding to successfully communicate, a problem known as common ground (Clark et al., 1991).
Because meaning is inferred from communicative acts, each agent must take into account what the
other knows. So models of cooperative communication must make assumptions about the form and
strength of common ground. Despite the impossibility of knowing exactly what another knows,
prior models of cooperative communication uniformly assume omniscient agents (Wang et al., 2020).
Ironically, this assumption with respect to common ground trivializes cooperative communication.
⇤

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

