Trajectory Alignment: Understanding the Edge of
Stability Phenomenon via Bifurcation Theory

Minhak Song
KAIST ISysE/Math
minhaksong@kaist.ac.kr

Chulhee Yun
KAIST AI
chulhee.yun@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Cohen et al. (2021) empirically study the evolution of the largest eigenvalue
of the loss Hessian, also known as sharpness, along the gradient descent (GD)
trajectory and observe the Edge of Stability (EoS) phenomenon. The sharpness
increases at the early phase of training (referred to as progressive sharpening),
and eventually saturates close to the threshold of 2/(step size). In this paper, we
start by demonstrating through empirical studies that when the EoS phenomenon
occurs, different GD trajectories (after a proper reparameterization) align on a
specific bifurcation diagram independent of initialization. We then rigorously
prove this trajectory alignment phenomenon for a two-layer fully-connected linear
network and a single-neuron nonlinear network trained with a single data point.
Our trajectory alignment analysis establishes both progressive sharpening and EoS
phenomena, encompassing and extending recent findings in the literature.

1

Introduction

It is widely believed that implicit bias or regularization of gradient-based methods plays a key role in
generalization of deep learning (Vardi, 2022). There is a growing literature (Gunasekar et al., 2017,
2018; Soudry et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2018, 2019; Ji and Telgarsky, 2019a; Woodworth et al., 2020;
Chizat and Bach, 2020; Yun et al., 2021) studying how the choice of optimization methods induces an
implicit bias towards specific solutions among the many global minima in overparameterized settings.
Cohen et al. (2021) identify a surprising implicit bias of gradient descent (GD) towards global minima
with a certain sharpness1 value depending on the step size η. Specifically, for reasonable choices of η,
(a) the sharpness of the loss at the GD iterate gradually increases throughout training until it reaches
the stability threshold2 of 2/η (known as progressive sharpening), and then (b) the sharpness saturates
close to or above the threshold for the remainder of training (known as Edge of Stability (EoS)). These
findings have sparked a surge of research aimed at developing a theoretical understanding of the
progressive sharpening and EoS phenomena (Arora et al., 2022; Lyu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022;
Ahn et al., 2023; Chen and Bruna, 2023; Zhu et al., 2023). In this paper, we study these phenomena
through the lens of bifurcation theory, both empirically and theoretically.
Motivating observations: Figure 1 illustrates the GD trajectories with different initializations
and fixed step sizes trained on three types of two-dimensional functions: (a) log(cosh(xy)),
(b) 12 (tanh(x)y)2 , and (c) 12 (ELU(x)y)2 , where x and y are scalars. The functions L : R2 → R
have sharpness y 2 at the global minimum (0, y) for all three models. These toy models can be viewed
as examples of single-neuron models, where (a) represents a linear network with log-cosh loss, while
(b) and (c) represent nonlinear networks with squared loss. These simple models can capture some
interesting aspects of neural network training in the EoS regime, which are summarized below:
1
2

Throughout this paper, the term “sharpness” means the maximum eigenvalue of the training loss Hessian.
For quadratic loss, GD becomes unstable if the sharpness is larger than a threshold of 2/(step size).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

