Directed Cyclic Graph for Causal Discovery from
Multivariate Functional Data
Saptarshi Roy
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
roys8001@stat.tamu.edu

Raymond K. W. Wong
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
raywong@tamu.edu

Yang Ni
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
yni@stat.tamu.edu

Abstract
Discovering causal relationship using multivariate functional data has received
a significant amount of attention very recently. In this article, we introduce a
functional linear structural equation model for causal structure learning when
the underlying graph involving the multivariate functions may have cycles. To
enhance interpretability, our model involves a low-dimensional causal embedded
space such that all the relevant causal information in the multivariate functional
data is preserved in this lower-dimensional subspace. We prove that the proposed
model is causally identifiable under standard assumptions that are often made in
the causal discovery literature. To carry out inference of our model, we develop
a fully Bayesian framework with suitable prior specifications and uncertainty
quantification through posterior summaries. We illustrate the superior performance
of our method over existing methods in terms of causal graph estimation through
extensive simulation studies. We also demonstrate the proposed method using a
brain EEG dataset.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Multivariate functional data arise in many fields such as biomedical research [Wei and
Li, 2008, Chiou and Müller, 2016], environmental science [Korte-Stapff et al., 2022], finance [Kowal
et al., 2017], plant science [Wong et al., 2019, Park et al., 2022], and sport science [Volkmann et al.,
2021] where multiple variables are measured over time or other domains. The increasing availability
of functional data in these fields provides us with great opportunities to discover causal relationships
among random functions for the better understanding of complex systems, which is helpful for various
machine learning and statistics tasks such as representation learning [Schölkopf et al., 2021], fairness
[Tang et al., 2023], transfer learning [Rojas-Carulla et al., 2018], and reinforcement learning [Zeng
et al., 2023]. One motivating example is electroencephalography (EEG) where electrical activity from
the brain is recorded non-invasively from electrode channels by placing them on the scalp or directly
on the surface of the brain. Given its continuous nature and the short time separation between the
adjacent measuring points, it is natural to treat the data at each brain location/region as a function over
time. A relevant scientific goal is to estimate brain effective connectivity among different regions,
which will potentially allow us to make better decisions, design more effective interventions, and
avoid unintended consequences. However, existing structural equation model (SEM) based causal
discovery methods assume acyclic relationships among the random functions by imposing a directed
acyclic graph (DAG) structure, which may be too restrictive for many real applications. For example,
there are strong indications that in brain effective connectivity studies, due to reciprocal polysynaptic
connections, the brain regions are far from exhibiting acyclicity [Friston, 2011, Markov et al., 2012],
and that in genetic pathways, due to the presence of multiple upstream regulators and downstream
targets for every signaling component, feedback loops/directed cycles are regular motifs [Brandman
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

