Nearest Neighbour with Bandit Feedback

Stephen Pasteris
The Alan Turing Institute
London UK
spasteris@turing.ac.uk

Chris Hicks
The Alan Turing Institute
London UK
c.hicks@turing.ac.uk

Vasilios Mavroudis
The Alan Turing Institute
London UK
vmavroudis@turing.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper we adapt the nearest neighbour rule to the contextual bandit problem.
Our algorithm handles the fully adversarial setting in which no assumptions at all
are made about the data-generation process. When combined with a sufficiently
fast data-structure for (perhaps approximate) adaptive nearest neighbour search,
such as a navigating net, our algorithm is extremely efficient - having a per trial
running time polylogarithmic in both the number of trials and actions, and taking
only quasi-linear space. We give generic regret bounds for our algorithm and
further analyse them when applied to the stochastic bandit problem in euclidean
space. We note that our algorithm can also be applied to the online classification
problem.

1

Introduction

In this paper we adapt the classic nearest neighbour rule to the contextual bandit problem and develop
an extremely efficient algorithm. The problem proceeds in trials, where on trial t: (1) a context xt is
revealed to us, (2) we must select an action at , and (3) the loss ℓt,at ∈ [0, 1] of action at on trial t is
revealed to us. We assume that the contexts are points in a metric space and the distance between two
contexts represents their similarity. A policy is a mapping from contexts to actions and the inductive
bias of our algorithm is towards learning policies that typically map similar contexts to similar actions.
Our main result has absolutely no assumptions whatsoever about the generation of the context/loss
sequence and has no restriction on what policies we can compare our algorithm to.
Our algorithm requires, as a subroutine, a data-structure that performs c-nearest neighbour search.
This data-structure must be adaptive - in that new contexts can be inserted into it over time. An
example of such a data-structure is the Navigating net [17] which, given mild conditions on our
metric and dataset, performs both search and insertion in polylogarithmic time. When utilising a
data-structure of this speed our algorithm is extremely efficient - with a per-trial time complexity
polylogarithmic in both the number of trials and actions, and requiring only quasi-linear space.
As an example we will apply our methodology to the special case of the contextual bandit problem
in which the context sequence is drawn i.i.d. from a probability distribution over the d-dimensional
hypercube. In this case, for any policy ŷ with a finite-volume decision boundary, our algorithm
achieves Õ α̂T d/(d+1) K 1/(d+1) regret w.r.t. ŷ, where α̂ measures the magnitude of what is
essentially the part of the decision boundary of ŷ that lies in the support of the probability distribution.
In the course of this paper we develop some novel algorithmic techniques, including a new algorithmic framework C AN P ROP and efficient algorithms for searching in trees, which may find further
application.
We now describe related works. The bandit problem [20] was first introduced in [28] but was
originally studied in the stochastic setting in which all losses are drawn i.i.d. at random [18], [1],
[3]. However, our world is very often not i.i.d. stochastic. The work of [4] introduced the seminal
E XP 3 algorithm which handled the case in which the losses were selected arbitrarily. This work also
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

