Towards Accelerated Model Training via
Bayesian Data Selection

Zhijie Deng1∗, Peng Cui2∗, Jun Zhu2†
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084 China
zhijied@sjtu.edu.cn, xpeng.cui@gmail.com, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Mislabeled, duplicated, or biased data in real-world scenarios can lead to prolonged
training and even hinder model convergence. Traditional solutions prioritizing
easy or hard samples lack the flexibility to handle such a variety simultaneously.
Recent work has proposed a more reasonable data selection principle by examining the data’s impact on the model’s generalization loss. However, its practical
adoption relies on less principled approximations and additional holdout data. This
work solves these problems by leveraging a lightweight Bayesian treatment and
incorporating off-the-shelf zero-shot predictors built on large-scale pre-trained
models. The resulting algorithm is efficient and easy to implement. We perform
extensive empirical studies on challenging benchmarks with considerable data
noise and imbalance in the online batch selection scenario, and observe superior
training efficiency over competitive baselines. Notably, on the challenging WebVision benchmark, our method can achieve similar predictive performance with
significantly fewer training iterations than leading data selection methods.

1

Introduction

The past year has witnessed significant breakthroughs in deep learning research and applications,
with Stable Diffusion [38], ChatGPT [32], and SAM [22] as representative examples. Practitioners
have realized that the quality of data used to fuel AI systems is critical in unlocking their full potential.
Unfortunately, real-world scenarios often present mislabeled, duplicated, or biased data. As a result,
it is paramount to develop methods that can prioritize valuable training data to enable more efficient
model training and even improved model convergence.
Data selection for accelerating the training of deep models is gaining increasing interest. Some
studies, such as curriculum learning, advocate prioritizing easy samples in the early training stages [1],
but these samples quickly become redundant once they have been learned, making continued training
on them a waste of time. On the other hand, online batch selection methods [26, 19, 17] prioritize
hard samples with high training loss or gradient norm to avoid duplicate training. Nevertheless, in
practice, the hardness of samples often arises from pathologies such as improper annotations, inherent
ambiguity, or unusual patterns, rendering it problematic to prioritize such samples [31].
The reducible hold-out loss selection (RHO-LOSS) approach [31] addresses these issues by quantifying the usefulness of a sample based on its marginal influence on the model’s generalization loss,
forming a theoretically grounded and universal objective for data selection. However, the estimation
of this objective is non-trivial, and RHO-LOSS has to rely on less principled approximations for
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

