Distribution Learnability and Robustness∗

Shai Ben-David
University of Waterloo, Vector Institute
shai@uwaterloo.ca

Alex Bie
University of Waterloo
yabie@uwaterloo.ca

Gautam Kamath
University of Waterloo, Vector Institute
g@csail.mit.edu

Tosca Lechner
University of Waterloo
tlechner@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
We examine the relationship between learnability and robust (or agnostic) learnability for the problem of distribution learning. We show that learnability of a
distribution class implies robust learnability with only additive corruption, but not if
there may be subtractive corruption. Thus, contrary to other learning settings (e.g.,
PAC learning of function classes), realizable learnability does not imply agnostic
learnability. We also explore related implications in the context of compression
schemes and differentially private learnability.

1

Introduction

Distribution learning (sometimes called density estimation) refers to the following statistical task:
given i.i.d. samples from some (unknown) distribution p, produce an estimate of p. This is one of the
most fundamental and well-studied questions in both statistics [DL01] and computer science [Dia16],
often equivalent to classic problems of parameter estimation (e.g., mean estimation) in parametric
settings. It is easy to see that no learner can meaningfully approximate any given p without having
some prior knowledge. The problem then becomes: assuming the sample generating distribution
p belongs to a given class of distributions C, and given parameters ε, δ ∈ (0, 1), output some
distribution p̂ such that with probability at least 1 − δ, the statistical distance between p and p̂
is at most ε. Specifically, we employ total variation distance, the most studied metric in density
estimation [DL01, Dia16], using dTV (p, q) to denote the distance between distributions p and q. This
case, when p ∈ C, is often called the realizable setting. If, for some particular class C, this is doable
with a finite number of samples n(ε, δ), then we say the distribution class is (ε, δ)-learnable.1 A
class is learnable if it is (ε, δ)-learnable for every (ε, δ) ∈ (0, 1)2 . A significant amount of work has
focused on proving bounds on n(ε, δ) for a number of classes C of interest – for example, one can
consider the class C of all Gaussian distributions N (µ, Σ) in some Euclidean space Rd .
However, this framework is restrictive in the sense that it requires the unknown distribution to be
exactly a member of the class C of interest. This may not be the case for a variety of possible reasons,
including some innocuous and some malicious. As one example, while it is a common modelling
assumption to posit that data comes from a Gaussian distribution, Nature rarely samples exactly from
Gaussians, we consider this only to be a convenient approximation. More generally, the class C that
the learner assumes can be thought of as reflecting some prior knowledge about the task at hand.
Such prior knowledge is almost always only an approximation of reality. Alternatively, we may be in
an adversarial setting, where a malicious actor has the ability to modify an otherwise well-behaved
∗
1

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
For the sake of exposition, we defer formal definitions of our learnability notions to Section 1.1.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

