T2T: From Distribution Learning in Training
to Gradient Search in Testing for
Combinatorial Optimization

Yang Li, Jinpei Guo, Runzhong Wang, Junchi Yan∗
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Key Lab of AI
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yanglily, jinpei, runzhong.wang, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Extensive experiments have gradually revealed the potential performance bottleneck of modeling Combinatorial Optimization (CO) solving as neural solution
prediction tasks. The neural networks, in their pursuit of minimizing the average
objective score across the distribution of historical problem instances, diverge from
the core target of CO of seeking optimal solutions for every test instance. This calls
for an effective search on each problem instance, while the model should serve
to provide supporting knowledge that benefits the search. To this end, we propose
T2T (Training to Testing) framework that first leverages the generative modeling
to estimate the high-quality solution distribution for each instance during training,
and then conducts a gradient-based search within the solution space during testing.
The proposed neural search paradigm consistently leverages generative modeling,
specifically diffusion, for graduated solution improvement. It disrupts the local
structure of the given solution by introducing noise and reconstructs a lower-cost
solution guided by the optimization objective. Experimental results on Traveling
Salesman Problem (TSP) and Maximal Independent Set (MIS) show the significant
superiority of T2T, demonstrating an average performance gain of 49.15% for TSP
solving and 17.27% for MIS solving compared to the previous state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning (ML) for Combinatorial Optimization (CO)2 , abbreviated as ML4CO [1; 2; 3; 4],
is a rapidly growing area, lying at the intersection between the two well-established communities.
CO problems are essential in operational research as well as computer science, in both theory and
practice. However, due to the inherent computational difficulty, e.g. NP-hardness, (approximately)
solving these problems with effectiveness and efficiency poses significant challenges. Compared with
traditional heuristic-based solvers, ML has recently shown its promising potential to automatically
learn heuristics in a data-driven scheme [1; 2; 3; 4], or meanwhile with the aid of human knowledge
which would normally improve the sample-efficiency [5; 6; 7; 8; 9]. Moreover, the introduction of
neural networks also allows for the speedup by parallel matrix computation in forward inference.
A popular framework in ML4CO is developing neural networks to directly predict a solution or
generate a solution with the aid of neural predictions, such that the corresponding objective score is
minimized [10; 11; 12; 13]. However, the neural network can only fit limited mappings from problem
∗

Correspondence author. This work was partly supported by National Key Research and Development
Program of China (2020AAA0107600), NSFC (62222607) and STCSM (22511105100).
2
In this paper, CO problems mainly refer to optimization problems on graphs [1] with an objective function.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

