Statistical Knowledge Assessment
for Large Language Models

Qingxiu Dong1 , Jingjing Xu2 , Lingpeng Kong3 , Zhifang Sui1 and Lei Li4
1
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Shanghai AI Lab 3 The University of Hong Kong 4 Carnegie Mellon University
dqx@stu.pku.edu.cn, {jingjingxu, szf}@pku.edu.cn, lpk@cs.hku.hk, leili@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Given varying prompts regarding a factoid question, can a large language model
(LLM) reliably generate factually correct answers? Existing LLMs may generate
distinct responses for different prompts. In this paper, we study the problem of
quantifying knowledge contained in an LLM regarding a given set of facts. We
propose KaRR, a statistical approach to assess factual knowledge for LLMs. The
main idea is to estimate the ratio of LLM generating text corresponding to the
answer entity given diverse prompts of the subject and the querying relation, versus
it generating by random chances. Our assessment suite contains a comprehensive
set of 994,123 entities and 600 relations, with 1,395,905 text aliases. We use our
method to evaluate 20 LLMs of various sizes, including LLaMA, Alpaca, OPT, etc.
Experiments show that our results have a strong correlation (0.43 Kendall’s τ ) with
the results of human assessment on LLMs. Our results reveal that the knowledge in
LLMs with the same backbone architecture adheres to the scaling law, while tuning
on instruction-following data sometimes compromises the model’s capability to
generate factually correct text reliably.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved impressive performance on many tasks including text
generation, question answering, and dialog generation [Brown et al., 2020, Thoppilan et al., 2022,
Bubeck et al., 2023]. Previous studies have shown that pretrained language models store factual
knowledge in parameters [Roberts et al., 2020, Dai et al., 2022a,b, Singhal et al., 2023], demonstrating
considerable potential as assistants for responding to user questions based on their stored knowledge.
Despite the remarkable success of LLMs, critical concerns arise — LLMs often generate unreliable
answers given varying prompts [Ji et al., 2023, Maharana et al., 2023, Chang and Bergen, 2023, Chen
et al., 2023]. As shown in Fig. 1, reliability refers to the ability to consistently generate knowledgecorrect text, posing a higher standard than accuracy. For example, although Alpaca-7B [Taori et al.,
2023] generates accurately (playwright) given a prompt of “William Shakespeare’s job”, it generates
incorrect text (boatman) given a prompt of “the job of Swan of Avon is”1 . ChatGPT [OpenAI, 2022]
correctly generates playwright and teacher. However, it answers “No” for the prompt “Is William
Shakespeare a teacher?” In this paper, we assess the knowledge contained in an LLM and investigate
whether an LLM is able to consistently generate factually correct answers given varying prompts.
Knowledge assessment is a critical problem for LLMs. The assessment results directly affect the
people’s trust in the LLM generated content. Once we identify inconsistency of LLM generation,
we could potentially correct such knowledge in LLMs [De Cao et al., 2021, Zhao et al., 2021, Dong
et al., 2022].
1

Swan of Avon is a nickname of Shakespeare.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

