Inconsistency, Instability, and Generalization Gap of
Deep Neural Network Training

Rie Johnson
RJ Research Consulting
New York, USA
riejohnson@gmail.com

Tong Zhang∗
HKUST
Hong Kong
tozhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
As deep neural networks are highly expressive, it is important to find solutions with
small generalization gap (the difference between the performance on the training
data and unseen data). Focusing on the stochastic nature of training, we first present
a theoretical analysis in which the bound of generalization gap depends on what
we call inconsistency and instability of model outputs, which can be estimated on
unlabeled data. Our empirical study based on this analysis shows that instability
and inconsistency are strongly predictive of generalization gap in various settings.
In particular, our finding indicates that inconsistency is a more reliable indicator of
generalization gap than the sharpness of the loss landscape. Furthermore, we show
that algorithmic reduction of inconsistency leads to superior performance. The
results also provide a theoretical basis for existing methods such as co-distillation
and ensemble.

1

Introduction

As deep neural networks are highly expressive, the generalization gap (the difference between the
performance on the training data and unseen data) can be a serious issue. There has been intensive
effort to improve generalization, concerning, for example, network architectures [15, 11], the training
objective [10], strong data augmentation and mixing [6, 41, 39]. In particular, there has been extensive
effort to understand the connection between generalization and the sharpness of the loss landscape
surrounding the model [14, 20, 16, 18, 10]. [18] conducted large-scale experiments with a number of
metrics and found that the sharpness-based metrics predicted the generalization gap best. [10] has
shown that the sharpness measured by the maximum loss difference around the model (m-sharpness)
correlates well to the generalization gap, which justifies their proposed method sharpness-aware
minimization (SAM), designed to reduce the m-sharpness.
This paper studies generalization gap from a different perspective. Noting that the standard procedure
for neural network training is stochastic so that a different instance leads to a different model, we
first present a theoretical analysis in which the bound of generalization gap depends on inconsistency
and instability of model outputs, conceptually described as follows. Let P be a stochastic training
procedure, e.g., minimization of the cross-entropy loss by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) starting
from random initialization with a certain combination of hyperparameters. It can be regarded as a
random function that maps a set of labeled training data as its input to model parameter as its output.
We say procedure P has high inconsistency of model outputs if the predictions made by the models
trained with P using the same training data are very different from one another in expectation over
the underlying (but unknown) data distribution. We also say P has high instability of model outputs
if different sampling of training data changes the expected predictions a lot over the underlying
data distribution. Although both quantities are discrepancies of model outputs, the sources of the
∗

This work was done when the second author was jointly with Google Research.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

