Hierarchical VAEs provide a normative account of
motion processing in the primate brain

Hadi Vafaii1
vafaii@umd.edu
1

Jacob L. Yates2
yates@berkeley.edu

University of Maryland, College Park

Daniel A. Butts1
dab@umd.edu
2

UC Berkeley

Abstract
The relationship between perception and inference, as postulated by Helmholtz in
the 19th century, is paralleled in modern machine learning by generative models
like Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) and their hierarchical variants. Here, we
evaluate the role of hierarchical inference and its alignment with brain function
in the domain of motion perception. We first introduce a novel synthetic data
framework, Retinal Optic Flow Learning (ROFL), which enables control over
motion statistics and their causes. We then present a new hierarchical VAE and test
it against alternative models on two downstream tasks: (i) predicting ground truth
causes of retinal optic flow (e.g., self-motion); and (ii) predicting the responses of
neurons in the motion processing pathway of primates. We manipulate the model
architectures (hierarchical versus non-hierarchical), loss functions, and the causal
structure of the motion stimuli. We find that hierarchical latent structure in the
model leads to several improvements. First, it improves the linear decodability
of ground truth factors and does so in a sparse and disentangled manner. Second,
our hierarchical VAE outperforms previous state-of-the-art models in predicting
neuronal responses and exhibits sparse latent-to-neuron relationships. These results
depend on the causal structure of the world, indicating that alignment between
brains and artificial neural networks depends not only on architecture but also
on matching ecologically relevant stimulus statistics. Taken together, our results
suggest that hierarchical Bayesian inference underlines the brain’s understanding
of the world, and hierarchical VAEs can effectively model this understanding.

1

Introduction

Intelligent interactions with the world require representation of its underlying composition. This
inferential process has long been postulated to underlie human perception [1–9], and is paralleled
in modern machine learning by generative models [10–17], which learn latent representations of
their sensory inputs. The question of what constitutes a “good” representation has no clear answer
[18, 19], but several desirable features have been proposed. In the field of neuroscience, studies
focused on object recognition have suggested that effective representations “untangle” the various
factors of variation in the input, rendering them linearly decodable [20, 21]. This intuitive notion of
linear decodability has emerged in the machine learning community under different names such as
“informativeness” [22] or “explicitness” [23]. Additionally, it has been suggested that “disentangled”
representations are desirable, wherein distinct, informative factors of variations in the data are
separated [24–29]. Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are also increasingly evaluated based on their
alignment with biological neural processing [30–38], because of the shared goals of ANNs and the
brain’s sensory processing [25, 39, 40]. Such alignment also provides the possibility of gaining
insights into the brain by understanding the operations within an ANN [41–47].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

