VideoComposer: Compositional Video Synthesis
with Motion Controllability

Xiang Wang1∗ Hangjie Yuan1∗ Shiwei Zhang1∗ Dayou Chen1∗ Jiuniu Wang1
Yingya Zhang1 Yujun Shen2 Deli Zhao1 Jingren Zhou1
1

Alibaba Group 2 Ant Group
{xiaolao.wx, yuanhangjie.yhj, zhangjin.zsw}@alibaba-inc.com
{dayou.cdy, wangjiuniu.wjn, yingya.zyy, jingren.zhou}@alibaba-inc.com
{shenyujun0302, zhaodeli}@gmail.com

Abstract
The pursuit of controllability as a higher standard of visual content creation has
yielded remarkable progress in customizable image synthesis. However, achieving
controllable video synthesis remains challenging due to the large variation of
temporal dynamics and the requirement of cross-frame temporal consistency. Based
on the paradigm of compositional generation, this work presents VideoComposer
that allows users to flexibly compose a video with textual conditions, spatial
conditions, and more importantly temporal conditions. Specifically, considering
the characteristic of video data, we introduce the motion vector from compressed
videos as an explicit control signal to provide guidance regarding temporal
dynamics. In addition, we develop a Spatio-Temporal Condition encoder (STCencoder) that serves as a unified interface to effectively incorporate the spatial
and temporal relations of sequential inputs, with which the model could make
better use of temporal conditions and hence achieve higher inter-frame consistency.
Extensive experimental results suggest that VideoComposer is able to control
the spatial and temporal patterns simultaneously within a synthesized video in
various forms, such as text description, sketch sequence, reference video, or even
simply hand-crafted motions. The code and models are publicly available at
https://videocomposer.github.io.

1

Introduction

Driven by the advances in computation, data scaling and architectural design, current visual generative
models, especially diffusion-based models, have made remarkable strides in automating content
creation, empowering designers to generate realistic images or videos from a textual prompt as
input [24, 48, 53, 62]. These approaches typically train a powerful diffusion model [48] conditioned
by text [23] on large-scale video-text and image-text datasets [2, 51], reaching unprecedented levels
of fidelity and diversity. However, despite this impressive progress, a significant challenge remains in
the limited controllability of the synthesis system, which impedes its practical applications.
Most existing methods typically achieve controllable generation mainly by introducing new
conditions, such as segmentation maps [48, 65], inpainting masks [72] or sketches [38, 79], in addition
to texts. Expanding upon this idea, Composer [28] proposes a new generative paradigm centered
on the concept of compositionality, which is capable of composing an image with various input
conditions, leading to remarkable flexibility. However, Composer primarily focuses on considering
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

