Resilient Multiple Choice Learning: A learned scoring
scheme with application to audio scene analysis
Victor Letzelter1,2
Mickael Chen1

Mathieu Fontaine2

Patrick Pérez1

Slim Essid2

Gaël Richard2

valeo.ai, Paris, France
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
1

2

Abstract
We introduce Resilient Multiple Choice Learning (rMCL), an extension of the
MCL approach for conditional distribution estimation in regression settings where
multiple targets may be sampled for each training input. Multiple Choice Learning
is a simple framework to tackle multimodal density estimation, using the WinnerTakes-All (WTA) loss for a set of hypotheses. In regression settings, the existing
MCL variants focus on merging the hypotheses, thereby eventually sacrificing
the diversity of the predictions. In contrast, our method relies on a novel learned
scoring scheme underpinned by a mathematical framework based on Voronoi tessellations of the output space, from which we can derive a probabilistic interpretation.
After empirically validating rMCL with experiments on synthetic data, we further
assess its merits on the sound source localization task, demonstrating its practical
usefulness and the relevance of its interpretation.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are commonly trained to produce, for any given input, a single prediction.
In most cases, for instance, when minimizing the empirical risk with quadratic loss, this prediction
can be interpreted as the conditional output expectation given the input. However, there are many
tasks for which the conditional output distribution can be multimodal, either by the nature of the task
or due to various sources of uncertainty. Temporal tracking and forecasting, for instance, are problems
of this type [5, 32, 44]. In such cases, the mean might fall in a low-density region of the conditional
probability function, and it would be beneficial to predict multiple hypotheses instead [34, 20]. In
this context, Multiple Choice Learning (MCL) has emerged as a simple pragmatic solution [17, 29].
Thanks to a network architecture with multiple heads, MCL models can produce multiple hypotheses,
one per head. During supervised training, the gradients are only computed for the head that provides
the best prediction given the current input sample. This Winner-Takes-All (WTA) training scheme
allows each head to specialize in a region of the output space. Accordingly, Rupprecht et al. [34]
have proposed a probabilistic interpretation of MCL based on Voronoi tessellations.
On that account, MCL suffers from two significant issues: hypotheses collapse and overconfidence.
Hypotheses collapse occurs during training when a head takes the lead, the others being almost never
selected under WTA and thus not updated. This leads to a situation where most heads are not trained
effectively and produce meaningless outputs during inference. Overconfidence can also be observed
at inference time when looking at MCL under the lens of its probabilistic interpretation. Hypotheses
that correspond to rare events tend to be over-represented, thus not reflecting the true distribution of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

