ELDEN: Exploration via Local Dependencies

Zizhao Wang∗
University of Texas at Austin
zizhao.wang@utexas.edu

Jiaheng Hu∗
University of Texas at Austin
jhu@cs.utexas.edu

Peter Stone†
University of Texas at Austin, Sony AI
pstone@cs.utexas.edu

Roberto Martín-Martín†
University of Texas at Austin
robertomm@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Tasks with large state space and sparse rewards present a longstanding challenge to
reinforcement learning. In these tasks, an agent needs to explore the state space
efficiently until it finds a reward. To deal with this problem, the community has
proposed to augment the reward function with intrinsic reward, a bonus signal that
encourages the agent to visit interesting states. In this work, we propose a new
way of defining interesting states for environments with factored state spaces and
complex chained dependencies, where an agent’s actions may change the value
of one entity that, in order, may affect the value of another entity. Our insight
is that, in these environments, interesting states for exploration are states where
the agent is uncertain whether (as opposed to how) entities such as the agent or
objects have some influence on each other. We present ELDEN, Exploration via
Local DepENdencies, a novel intrinsic reward that encourages the discovery of
new interactions between entities. ELDEN utilizes a novel scheme — the partial
derivative of the learned dynamics to model the local dependencies between entities
accurately and computationally efficiently. The uncertainty of the predicted dependencies is then used as an intrinsic reward to encourage exploration toward new
interactions. We evaluate the performance of ELDEN on four different domains
with complex dependencies, ranging from 2D grid worlds to 3D robotic tasks. In
all domains, ELDEN correctly identifies local dependencies and learns successful
policies, significantly outperforming previous state-of-the-art exploration methods.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in recent years in tasks where a
well-shaped dense reward function is easy to define, such as playing video games [33, 18, 4] and
controlling robots [9, 2, 15, 16]. However, for many real-world tasks, defining a dense reward function
is non-trivial, yet a sparse reward function based on success or failure is directly available. For such
reward functions, learning good policies is often challenging, as it requires efficient exploration of
the state space.
To address this challenge, RL researchers proposed the use of an intrinsic reward, an additional
task-agnostic signal given to the agent for visiting interesting states. Intrinsic reward methods can be
roughly classified into two main paradigms: curiosity [20, 25, 6] and empowerment [29, 27, 14] ,
where the agent is rewarded either for visiting novel states or for obtaining maximal control over the
environment, respectively.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Equal supervision

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

