SEEDS: Exponential SDE Solvers for Fast
High-Quality Sampling from Diffusion Models

Martin Gonzalez∗
IRT SystemX

Nelson Fernandez
Air Liquide

Thuy Tran
IRT SystemX

Elies Gherbi
IRT SystemX

Hatem Hajri
IRT SystemX
& Safran

Nader Masmoudi
New York University

Abstract
A potent class of generative models known as Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DPMs) has become prominent. A forward diffusion process adds gradually noise
to data, while a model learns to gradually denoise. Sampling from pre-trained
DPMs is obtained by solving differential equations (DE) defined by the learnt
model, a process which has shown to be prohibitively slow. Numerous efforts on
speeding-up this process have consisted on crafting powerful ODE solvers. Despite
being quick, such solvers do not usually reach the optimal quality achieved by
available slow SDE solvers. Our goal is to propose SDE solvers that reach optimal
quality without requiring several hundreds or thousands of NFEs to achieve that
goal. We propose Stochastic Explicit Exponential Derivative-free Solvers (SEEDS),
improving and generalizing Exponential Integrator approaches to the stochastic
case on several frameworks. After carefully analyzing the formulation of exact
solutions of diffusion SDEs, we craft SEEDS to analytically compute the linear part
of such solutions. Inspired by the Exponential Time-Differencing method, SEEDS
use a novel treatment of the stochastic components of solutions, enabling the
analytical computation of their variance, and contains high-order terms allowing
to reach optimal quality sampling ∼ 3-5× faster than previous SDE methods.
We validate our approach on several image generation benchmarks, showing that
SEEDS outperform or are competitive with previous SDE solvers. Contrary to
the latter, SEEDS are derivative and training free, and we fully prove strong
convergence guarantees for them. Our code is publicly available in this link.

1

Introduction

Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) [32, 12] have emerged as a powerful category of generative
models and have proven to quickly become SOTA for generative tasks such as image, video, audio
generation [8, 24, 13, 3, 4], and more [29, 36]. These models employ a forward diffusion process
where noise is gradually added to the data, and the model learns to remove the noise progressively.
However, sampling from most pre-trained DPMs is done by simulating the trajectories of associated
differential equations (DE) and has been found to be prohibitively slow [34]. Previous attempts
to accelerate this process have mainly focused on developing efficient ODE solvers. On one hand,
training-based methods speed-up sampling by using auxiliary training such as Progressive Distillation
[31] and Fourier Neural Operators [42], learning the noise schedule, scaling, variance, or trajectories.
On the other hand, training-free methods [16, 22, 15, 40, 23] are slower but are more versatile for
∗

Corresponding author: martin.gonzalez@irt-systemx.fr

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

