No-Regret Learning in Dynamic Competition with
Reference Effects Under Logit Demand

Mengzi Amy Guo
IEOR Department
UC Berkeley
mengzi_guo@berkeley.edu

Donghao Ying
IEOR Department
UC Berkeley
donghaoy@berkeley.edu

Javad Lavaei
IEOR Department
UC Berkeley
lavaei@berkeley.edu

Zuo-Jun Max Shen
IEOR Department
UC Berkeley
maxshen@berkeley.edu

Abstract
This work is dedicated to the algorithm design in a competitive framework, with
the primary goal of learning a stable equilibrium. We consider the dynamic
price competition between two firms operating within an opaque marketplace,
where each firm lacks information about its competitor. The demand follows
the multinomial logit (MNL) choice model, which depends on the consumers’
observed price and their reference price, and consecutive periods in the repeated
games are connected by reference price updates. We use the notion of stationary
Nash equilibrium (SNE), defined as the fixed point of the equilibrium pricing
policy for the single-period game, to simultaneously capture the long-run market
equilibrium and stability. We propose the online projected gradient ascent algorithm
(OPGA), where the firms adjust prices using the first-order derivatives of their
log-revenues that can be obtained from the market feedback mechanism. Despite
the absence of typical properties required for the convergence of online games,
such as strong monotonicity and variational stability, we demonstrate that under
diminishing step-sizes, the price and reference price paths generated by OPGA
converge to the unique SNE, thereby achieving the no-regret learning and a stable
market. Moreover, with appropriate step-sizes, we prove that this convergence
exhibits a rate of O(1/t).

1

Introduction

The memory-based reference effect is a well-studied strategic consumer behavior in marketing and
economics literature, which refers to the phenomenon that consumers shape their price expectations
(known as reference prices) based on the past encounters and then use them to judge the current price
(see [1] for a review). A substantial body of empirical research has shown that the current demand
is significantly influenced by the historical prices through reference effects (see, e.g., [2, 3, 4, 5]).
Driven by the ubiquitous evidence, many studies have investigated various pricing strategies in the
presence of reference effects [6, 7, 8, 9]. However, the aforementioned works have all focused on the
case with a monopolistic seller, leaving the understanding of how the reference effect functions in a
competition relatively limited compared to its practical importance. This issue becomes even more
pronounced with the surge of e-commerce, as the increased availability of information incentivizes
consumers to make comparisons among different retailers.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

