Brain encoding models based on multimodal
transformers can transfer across language and vision
Jerry Tang
UT Austin
jerrytang@utexas.edu

Meng Du
Intel Labs, UCLA
mengdu@ucla.edu

Vasudev Lal
Intel Labs
vasudev.lal@intel.com

Vy A. Vo
Intel Labs
vy.vo@intel.com

Alexander G. Huth
UT Austin
huth@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Encoding models have been used to assess how the human brain represents concepts in language and vision. While language and vision rely on similar concept
representations, current encoding models are typically trained and tested on brain
responses to each modality in isolation. Recent advances in multimodal pretraining
have produced transformers that can extract aligned representations of concepts
in language and vision. In this work, we used representations from multimodal
transformers to train encoding models that can transfer across fMRI responses to
stories and movies. We found that encoding models trained on brain responses to
one modality can successfully predict brain responses to the other modality, particularly in cortical regions that represent conceptual meaning. Further analysis of
these encoding models revealed shared semantic dimensions that underlie concept
representations in language and vision. Comparing encoding models trained using
representations from multimodal and unimodal transformers, we found that multimodal transformers learn more aligned representations of concepts in language and
vision. Our results demonstrate how multimodal transformers can provide insights
into the brain’s capacity for multimodal processing.

1

Introduction

Encoding models predict brain responses from quantitative features of the stimuli that elicited them
[1]. In recent years, fitting encoding models to data from functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) experiments has become a powerful approach for understanding information processing in the
brain. While many studies have shown that encoding models achieve good performance when trained
and tested on brain responses to a single stimulus modality, such as language [2–9] or vision [10–15],
the human brain is remarkable in its ability to integrate information across multiple modalities. There
is growing evidence that this capacity for multimodal processing is supported by aligned cortical
representations of the same concepts in different modalities—for instance, hearing “a dog is chasing
a cat” and seeing a dog chasing a cat may elicit similar patterns of brain activity [16–21].
In this work, we investigated the alignment between language and visual representations in the
brain by training encoding models on fMRI responses to one modality and testing them on fMRI
responses to the other modality. Encoding models that successfully transfer across modalities can
provide insights into how the two modalities are related [20]. Although previous work has compared
language and vision encoding models, human annotations were required to map language and visual
stimuli into a shared semantic space [20]. To our knowledge, cross-modality transfer has yet to be
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

