The Benefits of Being Distributional:
Small-Loss Bounds for Reinforcement Learning

Kaiwen Wang

Kevin Zhou Runzhe Wu Nathan Kallus Wen Sun
Cornell University
{kw437,klz23,rw646,kallus,ws455}@cornell.edu

Abstract
While distributional reinforcement learning (DistRL) has been empirically effective,
the question of when and why it is better than vanilla, non-distributional RL has
remained unanswered. This paper explains the benefits of DistRL through the
lens of small-loss bounds, which are instance-dependent bounds that scale with
optimal achievable cost. Particularly, our bounds converge much faster than those
from non-distributional approaches if the optimal cost is small. As warmup, we
propose a distributional contextual bandit (DistCB) algorithm, which we show
enjoys small-loss regret bounds and empirically outperforms the state-of-the-art
on three real-world tasks. In online RL, we propose a DistRL algorithm that
constructs confidence sets using maximum likelihood estimation. We prove that
our algorithm enjoys novel small-loss PAC bounds in low-rank MDPs. As part of
our analysis, we introduce the ℓ1 distributional eluder dimension which may be of
independent interest. Then, in offline RL, we show that pessimistic DistRL enjoys
small-loss PAC bounds that are novel to the offline setting and are more robust to
bad single-policy coverage.

1

Introduction

The goal of reinforcement learning (RL) is to learn a policy that minimizes/maximizes the mean
loss/return (i.e., cumulative costs/rewards) along its trajectory. Classical approaches, such as Qlearning [Mnih et al., 2015] and policy gradients [Kakade, 2001], often learn Q-functions via
least square regression, which represent the mean loss-to-go and act greedily with respect to these
estimates. By Bellman’s equation, Q-functions suffice for optimal decision-making and indeed these
approaches have vanishing regret bounds, suggesting we only need to learn means well [Sutton and
Barto, 2018]. Since the seminal work of Bellemare et al. [2017], however, numerous developments
showed that learning the whole loss distribution can actually yield state-of-the-art performance in
stratospheric balloon navigation [Bellemare et al., 2020], robotic grasping [Bodnar et al., 2020],
algorithm discovery [Fawzi et al., 2022] and game playing benchmarks [Hessel et al., 2018, Dabney
et al., 2018a, Barth-Maron et al., 2018]. In both online [Yang et al., 2019] and offline RL [Ma
et al., 2021], distributional RL (DistRL) algorithms often perform better and use fewer samples in
challenging tasks when compared to standard approaches that directly estimate the mean.
Despite learning the whole loss distribution, DistRL algorithms use only the mean of the learned
distribution for decision making, not extracting any additional information such as higher moments.
In other words, DistRL is simply employing a different and seemingly roundabout way of learning the
mean: first, learn the loss-to-go distribution via distributional Bellman equations, and then, compute
the mean of the learned distribution. Lyle et al. [2019] provided some empirical explanations of
the benefits of this two-step approach, showing that learning the distribution, e.g., its moments or
quantiles, is an auxiliary task that leads to better representation learning. However, the theoretical
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

