A Closer Look at the Robustness of Contrastive
Language-Image Pre-Training (CLIP)

1

Weijie Tu1 Weijian Deng1 Tom Gedeon2,3
The Australian National University 2 Curtin University 3 University of ÓBuda
firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

firstname.lastname@curtin.edu.au

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) models have demonstrated remarkable generalization capabilities across multiple challenging distribution shifts.
However, there is still much to be explored in terms of their robustness to the
variations of specific visual factors. In real-world applications, reliable and safe
systems must consider other safety objectives beyond classification accuracy, such
as predictive uncertainty. Yet, the effectiveness of CLIP models on such safetyrelated features is less-explored. Driven by the above, this work comprehensively
investigates the safety objectives of CLIP models, specifically focusing on three
key properties: resilience to visual factor variations, calibrated uncertainty estimations, and the ability to detect anomalous inputs. To this end, we study 83 CLIP
models and 127 ImageNet classifiers. They are diverse in architecture, (pre)training
distribution and training strategies. We consider 10 visual factors (e.g., shape and
pattern), 5 types of out-of-distribution data, and 8 natural and challenging test
conditions with different shift types, such as texture, style, and perturbation shifts.
Our study has unveiled several previously unknown insights into CLIP models. For
instance, they are not consistently more calibrated than other ImageNet models,
which contradicts existing findings. Additionally, our analysis underscores the
significance of training source design by showcasing its profound influence on the
three safety-related properties. We believe our comprehensive study can shed light
on and help guide the development of more robust and reliable CLIP models.

1

Introduction

By leveraging natural language supervision, CLIP has made significant progress in enhancing
the zero-shot capabilities of models, unleashing their potential for remarkable out-of-distribution
generalization performance [1, 2]. For example, CLIP models perform zero-shot classification without
being explicitly trained on the target dataset, and they exhibit strong robustness to challenging natural
distributional shifts [3–7]. Understanding such behavior of CLIP models is critical for advancing the
next generation of image-text foundation models. Current research on this topic has explored various
aspects of CLIP models, including dataset creation [8], reproducible scaling law [9], fine-tuning
approaches [10], and training distribution [11].
In this work, we conduct an in-depth analysis of the safety-related properties of CLIP models,
with a particular emphasis on their robustness and reliability across diverse testing environments.
Specifically, we delve into the three critical safety-related properties, namely: 1) robustness to
visual factors, to assess whether CLIP models can maintain robust when encountering varying visual
factors, such as pose, size, color, lighting, and occlusions; 2) out-of-distribution (OOD) detection, to
evaluate the capability of CLIP models to detect instances with labels that are not part of the training
distribution; and 3) predictive uncertainty, to investigate whether CLIP models can provide calibrated
predictions that accurately reflect their uncertainty in different testing conditions.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

