DesCo: Learning Object Recognition with Rich
Language Descriptions

Liunian Harold Li∗
Zi-Yi Dou∗ Nanyun Peng Kai-Wei Chang
University of California, Los Angeles
{liunian.harold.li,zdou,violetpeng,kwchang}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Recent development in vision-language approaches has instigated a paradigm
shift in learning visual recognition models from language supervision. These
approaches align objects with language queries (e.g. “a photo of a cat”) and
thus improve the models’ adaptability to novel objects and domains. Recent
studies have attempted to query these models with complex language expressions
that include specifications of fine-grained details, such as colors, shapes, and
relations. However, simply incorporating language descriptions into queries does
not guarantee accurate interpretation by the models. In fact, our experiments
show that GLIP, a state-of-the-art vision-language model for object detection,
often disregards contextual information in the language descriptions and instead
relies heavily on detecting objects solely by their names. To tackle the challenge,
we propose a new description-conditioned (DesCo) paradigm of learning object
recognition models with rich language descriptions consisting of two innovations:
1) we employ a large language model as a commonsense knowledge engine to
generate rich language descriptions of objects; 2) we design context-sensitive
queries to improve the model’s ability in deciphering intricate nuances embedded
within descriptions and enforce the model to focus on context rather than object
names alone. On two novel object detection benchmarks, LVIS and OminiLabel,
under the zero-shot detection setting, our approach achieves 34.8 APr minival (+9.1)
and 29.3 AP (+3.6), respectively, surpassing the prior state-of-the-art models, GLIP
and FIBER, by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Training visual recognition models to classify or detect objects with a fixed set of pre-defined
categories has been the convention for a long time. However, models trained using this approach
often encounter difficulties when adapting to unfamiliar concepts and domains. Recently, there has
been a paradigm shift towards training visual recognition models with language supervision, using
a contrastive objective on a large amount of image-text data containing a diverse range of visual
concepts. These models can then be transferred to downstream tasks via language queries. For
example, CLIP [36] can perform image classification using a template query such as “a photo of
{class name}”; GLIP [25] can perform object detection by querying the model with “Detect: person,
cat, dog · · · ”.
Early applications of these models typically utilize simple language queries that consist of object
names. However, language queries can convey much richer and more comprehensive information,
such as object attributes, shapes, textures, and relations. These pieces of information can be especially
useful for identifying novel visual concepts that do not appear in the training corpus or specifying
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

