Mip-Grid: Anti-aliased Grid Representations for
Neural Radiance Fields
Seungtae Nam1

Daniel Rho2
Jong Hwan Ko1,3
1,3∗
Eunbyung Park
1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University
2
AI2XL, KT
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University

Abstract
Despite the remarkable achievements of neural radiance fields (NeRF) in representing 3D scenes and generating novel view images, the aliasing issue, rendering
“jaggies” or “blurry” images at varying camera distances, remains unresolved in
most existing approaches. The recently proposed mip-NeRF has addressed this
challenge by rendering conical frustums instead of rays. However, it relies on
MLP architecture to represent the radiance fields, missing out on the fast training
speed offered by the latest grid-based methods. In this work, we present mip-Grid,
a novel approach that integrates anti-aliasing techniques into grid-based representations for radiance fields, mitigating the aliasing artifacts while enjoying fast
training time. The proposed method generates multi-scale grids by applying simple
convolution operations over a shared grid representation and uses the scale-aware
coordinate to retrieve features at different scales from the generated multi-scale
grids. To test the effectiveness, we integrated the proposed method into the two
recent representative grid-based methods, TensoRF and K-Planes. Experimental
results demonstrate that mip-Grid greatly improves the rendering performance
of both methods and even outperforms mip-NeRF on multi-scale datasets while
achieving significantly faster training time. For code and demo videos, please see
https://stnamjef.github.io/mipgrid.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Neural radiance fields (NeRF [19]) have been remarkably successful in modeling and reconstructing
3D scenes. Since its seminal contributions to novel view synthesis, researchers have investigated
potential applications of NeRF across various domains in 3D computer vision and graphics, such
as dynamic scene representation [43, 24, 25, 15], multi-view image generation [30, 6, 29, 32], 3D
surface reconstruction [14], 3D content creation [26, 16, 18, 17], and SLAM [33, 47, 28].
In a typical neural rendering setup, NeRF represents a particular scene, mapping input coordinates
(x, d), where x is the spatial coordinate, and d is the view direction, to its corresponding RGB colors
and density values (r, g, b, σ). Due to its one-to-one mapping, NeRF suffers from aliasing effects
when rendering scenes of varying image resolutions; it is incapable of producing different values for
different resolutions given the same input coordinates. Mip-NeRF [1] has addressed this issue by
introducing integrated positional encoding (IPE), which takes the volume of 3D conical frustums into
account. This allows MLPs to reason about the size and shape of each conical frustum, eliminating
the inherent ambiguity present in the original NeRF. While this approach provides a successful
multi-scale representation, using a variant of positional encoding necessitates MLP architectures for
the scene representations, which often leads to a long training time, even with contemporary GPUs.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

