Knowledge Distillation Performs
Partial Variance Reduction
Mher Safaryan
IST Austria
mher.safaryan@ista.ac.at

Alexandra Peste
IST Austria
alexandra.peste@ista.ac.at

Dan Alistarh
IST Austria
dan.alistarh@ista.ac.at

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is a popular approach for enhancing the performance of
“student” models, with lower representational capacity, by taking advantage of
more powerful “teacher” models. Despite its apparent simplicity and widespread
use, the underlying mechanics behind knowledge distillation (KD) are still not
fully understood. In this work, we shed new light on the inner workings of this
method, by examining it from an optimization perspective. We show that, in the
context of linear and deep linear models, KD can be interpreted as a novel type
of stochastic variance reduction mechanism. We provide a detailed convergence
analysis of the resulting dynamics, which hold under standard assumptions for both
strongly-convex and non-convex losses, showing that KD acts as a form of partial
variance reduction, which can reduce the stochastic gradient noise, but may not
eliminate it completely, depending on the properties of the “teacher” model. Our
analysis puts further emphasis on the need for careful parametrization of KD, in
particular w.r.t. the weighting of the distillation loss, and is validated empirically
on both linear models and deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Distillation (KD) [13, 3] is a standard tool for transferring information between a machine
learning model of lower representational capacity–usually called the student–and a more accurate
and powerful teacher model. In the context of classification using neural networks, it is common
to consider the student to be a smaller network [2], whereas the teacher is a network that is larger
and more computationally-heavy, but also more accurate. Assuming a supervised classification task,
distillation consists in training the student to minimize the cross-entropy with respect to the teacher’s
logits on every given sample, in addition to minimizing the standard cross-entropy loss with respect
to the ground truth labels.
Since its introduction [3], distillation has been developed and applied in a wide variety of settings,
from obtaining compact high-accuracy encodings of model ensembles [14], to boosting the accuracy
of compressed models [50, 39, 32], to reinforcement learning [51, 43, 36, 5, 7, 46] and learning with
privileged information [52]. Given its apparent simplicity, there has been significant interest in finding
explanations for the effectiveness of distillation [2, 14, 38]. For instance, one hypothesis [2, 14] is that
the smoothed labels resulting from distillation present the student with a decision surface that is easier
to learn than the one presented by the categorical (one-hot) outputs. Another hypothesis [2, 14, 52]
starts from the observation that the teacher’s outputs have higher entropy than the ground truth
labels, and therefore, higher information content. Despite this work, we still have a limited analytical
understanding regarding why knowledge distillation is so effective [38]. Specifically, very little is
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

