DoReMi: Optimizing Data Mixtures
Speeds Up Language Model Pretraining
Sang Michael Xie1,2 , Hieu Pham1 , Xuanyi Dong1 , Nan Du1 , Hanxiao Liu1 , Yifeng Lu1 ,
Percy Liang2 , Quoc V. Le1 , Tengyu Ma2 , and Adams Wei Yu1
1
2

Google DeepMind
Stanford University

Abstract
The mixture proportions of pretraining data domains (e.g., Wikipedia, books, web
text) greatly affect language model (LM) performance. In this paper, we propose
Domain Reweighting with Minimax Optimization (DoReMi), which first trains a
small proxy model using group distributionally robust optimization (Group DRO)
over domains to produce domain weights (mixture proportions) without knowledge
of downstream tasks. We then resample a dataset with these domain weights and
train a larger, full-sized model. In our experiments, we use DoReMi on a 280Mparameter proxy model to set the domain weights for training an 8B-parameter model
(30x larger) more efficiently. On The Pile, DoReMi improves perplexity across all
domains, even when it downweights a domain. DoReMi improves average few-shot
downstream accuracy by 6.5% points over a baseline model trained using The Pile’s
default domain weights and reaches the baseline accuracy with 2.6x fewer training
steps. On the GLaM dataset, DoReMi, which has no knowledge of downstream tasks,
even matches the performance of using domain weights tuned on downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Datasets for training language models (LMs) are typically sampled from a mixture of many
domains [17; 13; 10; 9]. For example, The Pile [17], a large publicly available dataset, is composed
of 24% web data, 9% Wikipedia, 4% GitHub, etc.1 The composition of the pretraining data greatly
affects the effectiveness of an LM [13; 20; 55]. However, it is unclear how much of each domain to
include to produce a model that performs well for a wide variety of downstream tasks.
Existing works determine domain weights (the sampling probabilities for each domain) by using
intuition or a set of downstream tasks. For example, The Pile uses heuristically-chosen domain weights,
which could be suboptimal. On the other hand, existing LMs such as PaLM [10] and GLaM [13] tune
the domain weights based on a set of downstream tasks, but requires training potentially thousands
of LMs on different domain weights and risks overfitting to the particular set of downstream tasks.
Instead of optimizing domain weights based on a set of downstream tasks, our approach aims to find
domain weights which lead to models that perform well on all domains by minimizing the worst-case
excess loss over domains, following Oren et al. [35]; Mindermann et al. [30]. The excess loss is the
loss gap between the model being evaluated and a pretrained reference model.
This motivates our algorithm, Domain Reweighting with Minimax Optimization (DoReMi), which
leverages distributionally robust optimization (DRO) to tune the domain weights without knowledge
of downstream tasks (Figure 1). First, DoReMi trains a small reference model (e.g., 280M parameters)
1

The domain weights, which are based on token count in this paper, varies by tokenizer; see Appendix C.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

