Generating Images with Multimodal Language Models

Jing Yu Koh
Carnegie Mellon University
jingyuk@cs.cmu.edu

Daniel Fried
Carnegie Mellon University
dfried@cs.cmu.edu

Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Carnegie Mellon University
rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose a method to fuse frozen text-only large language models (LLMs)
with pre-trained image encoder and decoder models, by mapping between their
embedding spaces. Our model demonstrates a wide suite of multimodal capabilities:
image retrieval, novel image generation, and multimodal dialogue. Ours is the first
approach capable of conditioning on arbitrarily interleaved image and text inputs
to generate coherent image (and text) outputs. To achieve strong performance
on image generation, we propose an efficient mapping network to ground the
LLM to an off-the-shelf text-to-image generation model. This mapping network
translates hidden representations of text into the embedding space of the visual
models, enabling us to leverage the strong text representations of the LLM for visual
outputs. Our approach outperforms baseline generation models on tasks with longer
and more complex language. In addition to novel image generation, our model is
also capable of image retrieval from a prespecified dataset, and decides whether to
retrieve or generate at inference time. This is done with a learnt decision module
which conditions on the hidden representations of the LLM. Our model exhibits a
wider range of capabilities compared to prior multimodal language models. It can
process image-and-text inputs, and produce retrieved images, generated images,
and generated text — outperforming non-LLM based generation models across
several text-to-image tasks that measure context dependence.

1

Introduction

Autoregressive language models (LMs) and large language models (LLMs) trained on text corpora
have shown impressive abilities to efficiently adapt to other modalities. Prior work showcased the
effectiveness of grounding text-only LMs to images for vision-and-language tasks [56, 4, 29, 33,
31, 35], to embodied settings for robotics [3, 18], offline reinforcement learning [48], and more.
These methods typically keep most of the LLM weights frozen. This allows them to leverage the
capabilities that the LLM learns during large scale text-only pretraining, such as the ability to learn
from in-context examples [9], more effectively process longer context, and condition on inputs more
strongly.
In this work, we tackle the task of extending multimodal language models to generate novel images.
Our approach, Generating Images with Large Language Models (GILL), is capable of processing
arbitrarily interleaved image-and-text inputs to generate text, retrieve images, and generate novel
images (Fig. 1). Our findings show that it is possible to efficiently map the output embedding space
of a frozen text-only LLM to that of a frozen generation model (in this work, Stable Diffusion [49])
despite both models using entirely different text encoders. We achieve this by finetuning a small
number of parameters on image-caption pairs [52], in contrast to other methods which require
interleaved image-text data [4, 2]. Our approach is computationally efficient and does not require
running the image generation model at training time. To achieve strong image generation performance,
we propose efficient architectural changes to learn the LLM-to-generation mapping effectively with
the GILLMapper module. GILLMapper is a lightweight Transformer [57] conditioned on special
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

