Analyzing Generalization of Neural Networks
through Loss Path Kernels

Yilan Chen
UCSD CSE
yilan@ucsd.edu
Charlotte Loh
MIT EECS
cloh@mit.edu

Wei Huang
RIEKN AIP
wei.huang.vr@riken.jp

Hao Wang
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
hao@ibm.com

Akash Srivastava
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
akash.srivastava@ibm.com

Lam M. Nguyen
IBM Research
LamNguyen.MLTD@ibm.com

Tsui-Wei Weng∗
UCSD HDSI
lweng@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been increasingly used in real-world applications,
making it critical to ensure their ability to adapt to new, unseen data. In this paper,
we study the generalization capability of neural networks trained with (stochastic)
gradient flow. We establish a new connection between the loss dynamics of
gradient flow and general kernel machines by proposing a new kernel, called
loss path kernel. This kernel measures the similarity between two data points by
evaluating the agreement between loss gradients along the path determined by the
gradient flow. Based on this connection, we derive a new generalization upper
bound that applies to general neural network architectures. This new bound is tight
and strongly correlated with the true generalization error. We apply our results to
guide the design of neural architecture search (NAS) and demonstrate favorable
performance compared with state-of-the-art NAS algorithms through numerical
experiments.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have been increasingly used in applications with significant societal impact.
Therefore, it is crucial to ensure that these models perform well not only on the training data but also
on the new and unseen data. Classical learning theory attributes the generalization ability of machine
learning (ML) models to the small complexity of the hypothesis class [56]. However, modern ML
models, such as deep neural networks (NNs), can have billions of parameters yet still exhibit strong
generalization abilities [26, 9]. This is because various elements of the learning algorithms, including
optimization methods, training data, and neural architectures, can all influence the inductive bias,
which in turn shapes the generalization abilities of neural networks [29, 40]. While the overall
hypothesis class may be large, the “effective domain” of this class, which ultimately determines the
model’s generalization abilities, is often much smaller [54, 24, 50, 15]. Hence, it is vital to develop
algorithmic generalization bounds to capture this effective domain of the hypothesis class.
There has been significant work investigating the generalization of neural networks in their infinitewidth regime through kernel methods [28, 3, 32, 2, 11]. They showed that an infinite-width NN
∗

Correspondence to: Yilan Chen and Tsui-Wei Weng.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

