Global Identifiability of ℓ1-based Dictionary Learning
via Matrix Volume Optimization

Jingzhou Hu
Kejun Huang
Department of Computer and Information Science and Engineering
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 32611
(jingzhouhu,kejun.huang)@ufl.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel formulation for dictionary learning that minimizes the determinant of the dictionary matrix, also known as its volume, subject to the constraint
that each row of the sparse coefficient matrix has unit ℓ1 norm. The main motivation for the proposed formulation is that it provides global identifiability guarantee
of the groundtruth dictionary and sparse coefficient matrices, up to the inherent
and inconsequential permutation and scaling ambiguity, if a set of vectors obtained
from the coefficient matrix lies inside the ℓ∞ norm ball but contains the ℓ2 norm
ball in their convex hull. Unlike existing work on identifiability of dictionary
learning, our result is global, meaning that a globally optimal solution to our proposed formulation has to be a permuted and rescaled version of the groundtruth
factors. Another major improvement in our result is that there is no additional
assumption on the dictionary matrix other than it is nonsingular, unlike most other
works that require the atoms of the dictionary to be mutually incoherent. We also
provide a probabilistic analysis and show that if the sparse coefficient matrix is
generated from the widely adopted Bernoulli-Gaussian model, then it is globally
identifiable if the sample size is bigger than a constant times 𝑘 log 𝑘 , where 𝑘 is
the number of atoms in the dictionary, with overwhelming probability. The bound
is essentially the same as those local identifiability results, but we show that it is
also global. Finally, we propose algorithms to solve the new proposed formulation, specifically one based on the linearized-ADMM with efficient per-iteration
updates. The proposed algorithms exhibit surprisingly effective performance in
correctly and efficiently recovering the dictionary, as demonstrated in the numerical
experiments.

1

Introduction

Dictionary learning is a famous unsupervised learning problem [Tošić and Frossard, 2011] that also
goes by the name sparse coding [Olshausen and Field, 1997] or sparse component analysis [Georgiev
et al., 2005]. It stems from the intuition that samples from a data set can all be approximately
represented as a sparse combination of atoms from a complete or overcomplete dictionary, or
𝒙 𝑖 = 𝑨𝒔 𝑖 for 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑛, where 𝒙 𝑖 ∈ R𝑚 are the given data points, columns of 𝑨 ∈ R𝑚 ×𝑘 represents
atoms of a dictionary, and 𝒔 𝑖 ∈ R𝑘 are the sparse representations of 𝒙 𝑖 , indicating that 𝒙 𝑖 is linearly
dependent on only a few atoms from the dictionary 𝑨 with coefficients given in the nonzeros of
𝒔 𝑖 . Staking 𝒙 𝑖 as columns of 𝑿 ∈ R𝑚 ×𝑛 and 𝒔 𝑖 as columns of 𝑺 ∈ R𝑘 ×𝑛 , it can be written as a
matrix factorization model 𝑿 = 𝑨𝑺 . Although in some cases there exist known dictionaries that
admit good-quality sparse representations, such as the DCT or wavelet basis for image compression,
sometimes it is better to learn a sparse-inducing dictionary from data in an unsupervised fashion,
hence the task of dictionary learning that tries to estimate 𝑨 and 𝑺 jointly. In most cases, people
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

