Outlier-Robust Wasserstein DRO
Sloan Nietert
Cornell University
nietert@cs.cornell.edu

Ziv Goldfeld
Cornell University
goldfeld@cornell.edu

Soroosh Shafiee
Cornell University
shafiee@cornell.edu

Abstract
Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) is an effective approach for data-driven
decision-making in the presence of uncertainty. Geometric uncertainty due to sampling or localized perturbations of data points is captured by Wasserstein DRO
(WDRO), which seeks to learn a model that performs uniformly well over a Wasserstein ball centered around the observed data distribution. However, WDRO fails
to account for non-geometric perturbations such as adversarial outliers, which
can greatly distort the Wasserstein distance measurement and impede the learned
model. We address this gap by proposing a novel outlier-robust WDRO framework
for decision-making under both geometric (Wasserstein) perturbations and nongeometric (total variation (TV)) contamination that allows an ε-fraction of data to
be arbitrarily corrupted. We design an uncertainty set using a certain robust Wasserstein ball that accounts for both perturbation types and derive minimax optimal
excess risk bounds for this procedure that explicitly capture the Wasserstein and
TV risks. We prove a strong duality result that enables tractable convex reformulations and efficient computation of our outlier-robust WDRO problem. When the
loss function depends only on low-dimensional features of the data, we eliminate
certain dimension dependencies from the risk bounds that are unavoidable in the
general setting. Finally, we present experiments validating our theory on standard
regression and classification tasks.

1

Introduction

The safety and effectiveness of various operations rely on making informed, data-driven decisions
in uncertain environments. Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) has emerged as a powerful
framework for decision-making in the presence of uncertainties. In particular, Wasserstein DRO
(WDRO) captures uncertainties of geometric nature, e.g., due to sampling or localized (adversarial)
perturbations of the data points. The WDRO problem is a two-player zero-sum game between a
learner (decision-maker), who chooses a decision θ ∈ Θ, and Nature (adversary), who chooses a
distribution ν from an ambiguity set defined as the p-Wasserstein ball of a prescribed radius around
the observed data distribution µ̃. Namely, WDRO is given by1
inf

sup

θ∈Θ ν: Wp (ν,µ̃)≤ρ

EZ∼ν [ℓ(θ, Z)],

(1)

whose solution θ̂ ∈ Θ is chosen to minimize risk over the Wasserstein ball with respect to (w.r.t.) the
loss function ℓ. WDRO has received considerable attention in many fields, including machine learning
[6, 22, 45, 48, 59], estimation and filtering [36, 37, 46], and chance constraint programming [12, 55].
In many practical scenarios, the observed data may be contaminated by non-geometric perturbations,
such as adversarial outliers. Unfortunately, the WDRO problem from (1) is not suited for handling this
1/p
R
Here, Wp (µ, ν) := inf π∈Π(µ,ν)
∥x − y∥p dπ(x, y)
is the p-Wasserstein metric between µ and ν,
where Π(µ, ν) is the set of all their couplings.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

