Max-Sliced Mutual Information
Dor Tsur
Ben-Gurion University

Ziv Goldfeld
Cornell University

Kristjan Greenewald
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Quantifying dependence between high-dimensional random variables is central to
statistical learning and inference. Two classical methods are canonical correlation
analysis (CCA), which identifies maximally correlated projected versions of the
original variables, and Shannon’s mutual information, which is a universal dependence measure that also captures high-order dependencies. However, CCA only
accounts for linear dependence, which may be insufficient for certain applications,
while mutual information is often infeasible to compute/estimate in high dimensions. This work proposes a middle ground in the form of a scalable informationtheoretic generalization of CCA, termed max-sliced mutual information (mSMI).
mSMI equals the maximal mutual information between low-dimensional projections of the high-dimensional variables, which reduces back to CCA in the Gaussian
case. It enjoys the best of both worlds: capturing intricate dependencies in the data
while being amenable to fast computation and scalable estimation from samples.
We show that mSMI retains favorable structural properties of Shannon’s mutual
information, like variational forms and identification of independence. We then
study statistical estimation of mSMI, propose an efficiently computable neural
estimator, and couple it with formal non-asymptotic error bounds. We present
experiments that demonstrate the utility of mSMI for several tasks, encompassing
independence testing, multi-view representation learning, algorithmic fairness, and
generative modeling. We observe that mSMI consistently outperforms competing
methods with little-to-no computational overhead.

1

Introduction

Dependence measures between random variables are fundamental in statistics and machine learning
for tasks spanning independence testing [1–3], clustering [4, 5], representation learning [6, 7], and
self-supervised learning [8–10]. There is a myriad of measures quantifying different notions of
dependence, with varying statistical and computational complexities. The simplest is the Pearson correlation coefficient [11], which only captures linear dependencies. At the other extreme is Shannon’s
mutual information [12], which is a universal dependence measure that is able to identify arbitrarily intricate dependencies. Despite its universality and favorable properties, accurately estimating
mutual information from data is infeasible in high-dimensional settings. First, mutual information
estimation rates suffers from the curse of dimensionality, whereby convergence rates deteriorate
exponentially with dimension [13]. Additionally, computing mutual information requires integrating
a log-likelihood ratio over a high-dimensional space, which is generally intractable.
Between these two extremes is the popular canonical correlation analysis (CCA) [14], which identifies
maximally correlated linear projections of variables. Nevertheless, classical CCA still only captures
linear dependence, which has inspired nonlinear extensions such as Hirschfeld–Gebelein–Rényi
(HGR) maximum correlation [15–17], kernel CCA [18, 19], deep CCA [20, 7], and various other
generalizations [21–24]. However, HGR is computationally infeasible, while kernel and deep CCA
can be burdensome in high dimensions, as they require optimization over reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces or deep neural networks, respectively. To overcome these shortcomings, this work proposes
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

