RETVec: Resilient and Efficient Text Vectorizer
Elie Bursztein
Google
elieb@google.com

Marina Zhang
Google
marinazh@google.com

Xinyu Jia
Google
jiaxinyu@google.com

Owen Vallis
Google
ovallis@google.com

Alexey Kurakin
Google
kurakin@google.com

Abstract
This paper describes RETVec, an efficient, resilient, and multilingual text vectorizer designed for neural-based text processing. RETVec combines a novel
character encoding with an optional small embedding model to embed words
into a 256-dimensional vector space. The RETVec embedding model is pretrained using pair-wise metric learning to be robust against typos and characterlevel adversarial attacks. In this paper, we evaluate and compare RETVec to
state-of-the-art vectorizers and word embeddings on popular model architectures and datasets. These comparisons demonstrate that RETVec leads to competitive, multilingual models that are significantly more resilient to typos and
adversarial text attacks. RETVec is available under the Apache 2 license at
https://github.com/google-research/retvec.

1

Introduction

Researchers have proposed many techniques for converting text into dense representations suitable
for training neural networks, from the early use of character bi-grams and tri-grams to more modern
semantic word embeddings and state-of-the-art subword vectorizers. Each of these approaches aims
to mitigate issues caused by out-of-vocabulary (OOV) tokens, including intentional text perturbations
such as adversarial attacks and unintentional ones such as typos. These approaches leverage techniques such as subword-level tokenization [17] and decomposing unknown words into n-grams [4].
However, we find that each of these approaches suffers from at least one of following drawbacks:
• They have insufficient resilience against typos and adversarial attacks [21].
• They require large dictionaries and embedding lookup tables.
• They exhibit poor performance on certain languages or in multilingual settings.
RETVec addresses these issues by combining a novel UTF-8 character encoder with an optional
small model (230k parameters). This model projects encoded words into a 256 dimensional syntactic
metric embedding as detailed in Section 3. RETVec embeddings are trained using pair-wise metric
learning [30], ensuring that words containing typos are embedded close to the the original word.
RETVec does not require dataset pre-processing and does not have OOV tokens because it accepts all
valid UTF-8 characters. RETVec’s embedding model is trained on a word dataset with more than 157
languages. RETVec is also space-efficient (<1MB) since it does not require a large embedding lookup
table. This reduces model memory footprints, making RETVec-based models ideal candidates for
on-device model deployment where storage, bandwidth, and memory resources are scarce. Through
a series of extensive experiments on different model architectures, and on a wide range of datasets,
we demonstrate that RETVec outperforms or is comparable to state-of-the-art vectorizers and word
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

