On the Convergence of No-Regret Learning Dynamics
in Time-Varying Games

Ioannis Anagnostides
Carnegie Mellon University
ianagnos@cs.cmu.edu

Ioannis Panageas
University of California Irvine
ipanagea@ics.uci.edu

Gabriele Farina
MIT
gfarina@mit.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Carnegie Mellon University
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Most of the literature on learning in games has focused on the restrictive setting
where the underlying repeated game does not change over time. Much less is
known about the convergence of no-regret learning algorithms in dynamic multiagent settings. In this paper, we characterize the convergence of optimistic gradient
descent (OGD) in time-varying games. Our framework yields sharp convergence
bounds for the equilibrium gap of OGD in zero-sum games parameterized on
natural variation measures of the sequence of games, subsuming known results for
static games. Furthermore, we establish improved second-order variation bounds
under strong convexity-concavity, as long as each game is repeated multiple
times. Our results also extend to time-varying general-sum multi-player games
via a bilinear formulation of correlated equilibria, which has novel implications
for meta-learning and for obtaining refined variation-dependent regret bounds,
addressing questions left open in prior papers. Finally, we leverage our framework
to also provide new insights on dynamic regret guarantees in static games.

1

Introduction

Most of the classical results in the literature on learning in games—exemplified by, among others, the
work of Hart and Mas-Colell [49], Foster and Vohra [42], Freund and Schapire [43]—rest on the assumption that the underlying repeated game remains invariant. Yet, in many paradigmatic learning environments that is unrealistic [35, 93, 17, 59]. One such class is settings where the underlying game is
actually changing, such as routing problems on the internet [58], online advertising auctions [55], and
dynamic mechanism design [67, 31]. Another such class consists of settings in which many similar
games need to be solved [48]. For example, one may want to solve variations of a game for the purpose
of sensitivity analysis with respect to the modeling assumptions used to construct the game model.
Despite the considerable interest in such dynamic multiagent environments, much less is known
about the convergence of no-regret learning algorithms in time-varying games. No-regret dynamics
are natural learning algorithms that have desirable convergence properties in static settings. Also, the
state-of-the-art algorithms for finding minimax equilibria in two-player zero-sum games are based
on advanced forms of no-regret dynamics [37, 11]. Indeed, all the superhuman milestones in poker
have used them in the equilibrium-finding module of their architectures [8, 10, 12].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

