Label Robust and Differentially Private Linear
Regression: Computational and Statistical Efficiency

Xiyang Liu
Paul Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
xiyangl@cs.washington.edu
Weihao Kong
Google Research
weihaokong@google.com

Prateek Jain
Google Research
prajain@google.com

Sewoong Oh
Paul Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington, and Google Research
sewoong@cs.washington.edu
Arun Sai Suggala
Google Research
arunss@google.com

Abstract
We study the canonical problem of linear regression under (ε, δ)-differential privacy
when the datapoints are sampled i.i.d. from a distribution and a fraction of response
variables are adversarially corrupted. We provide the first provably efficient – both
computationally and statistically – method for this problem, assuming standard
assumptions on the data distribution. Our algorithm is a variant of the popular
differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) algorithm with two
key innovations: a full-batch gradient descent to improve sample complexity and
a novel adaptive clipping to guarantee robustness. Our method requires only
linear time in input size, and still matches the information theoretical optimal
sample complexity up to a data distribution dependent condition number factor.
Interestingly, the same algorithm, when applied to a setting where there is no
adversarial corruption, still improves upon the existing state-of-the-art and achieves
a near optimal sample complexity.

1

Introduction

Differential Privacy (DP) [33] is a standard notion of privacy widely adopted by both industry
and government [76, 35, 36, 2]. With widespread usage of ML and statistical techniques, DP
becomes even more critical to ensure private information of participating individuals is not revealed
in any form via the learned model. An statistical estimator is said to be (ε, δ)-differentially private
if presence/absence of an individual’s data point in the dataset does not significantly change the
estimated output. Smaller ε > 0 and δ ∈ [0, 1] imply stronger privacy guarantees.
While privacy preserving statistical estimators have been studied extensively in recent past, several
critical questions remain open (see App. A for a survey). Consider the canonical statistical task
of linear regression with n i.i.d. samples, {(xi ∈ Rd , yi ∈ R)}ni=1 , drawn from xi ∼ N (0, Σ),
∗
2
∗
d
yi = x⊤
i w + zi , zi ∼ N (0, σ ) and E[xi zi ] = 0 for some true parameter w ∈ R . The error is
∗
1/2
∗
measured in (1/σ)∥ŵ − w ∥Σ := (1/σ)∥Σ (ŵ − w )∥, which correctly accounts for the signalto-noise ratio in each direction; in the direction of large eigenvalue of Σ, we have larger signal in xi
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

