Intelligent Knee Sleeves: A Real-time Multimodal
Dataset for 3D Lower Body Motion Estimation Using
Smart Textile
Wenwen Zhang1∗, Arvin Tashakori12 , Zenan Jiang12 ,Amir Servati2 , Harishkumar Narayana2 ,
Saeid Soltanian2 , Rou Yi Yeap2 , Meng Han Ma2 , Lauren Toy2 , Peyman Servati12∗
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia
2
Texavie Technologies Inc.
{wenwenzhang, arvin, jiang, peymans}@ece.ubc.ca
{aservati, harishkumar, ssoltanian, ryeap, meganma, ltoy}@texavie.com

Abstract
The kinematics of human movements and locomotion are closely linked to the
activation and contractions of muscles. To investigate this, we present a multimodal
dataset with benchmarks collected using a novel pair of Intelligent Knee Sleeves
(Texavie MarsWear Knee Sleeves) for human pose estimation. Our system utilizes
synchronized datasets that comprise time-series data from the Knee Sleeves and the
corresponding ground truth labels from visualized motion capture camera system.
We employ these to generate 3D human models solely based on the wearable data
of individuals performing different activities. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of this camera-free system and machine learning algorithms in the assessment of
various movements and exercises, including extension to unseen exercises and
individuals. The results show an average error of 7.21 degrees across all eight
lower body joints when compared to the ground truth, indicating the effectiveness
and reliability of the Knee Sleeve system for the prediction of different lower body
joints beyond knees. The results enable human pose estimation in a seamless
manner without being limited by visual occlusion or the field of view of cameras.
Our results show the potential of multimodal wearable sensing in a variety of
applications from home fitness to sports, healthcare, and physical rehabilitation
focusing on pose and movement estimation.

1

Introduction

Attributed to the widespread adoption of machine learning (ML) methods in various domains, the
field of computer vision has witnessed remarkable progress in the area of pose estimation [1].
These achievements, in turn, facilitate the development of activity recognition [2–4], point-to-point
healthcare applications [5–7], augmented reality (AR) [8], and human-computer interactions [9].
Images and videos are usually the main sources for ML models to extract human pose, with major
challenges including multi-person pose estimation, occlusion, and limited field of view (FoV) of
cameras [10]. Moreover, concerns for data privacy in camera-based methods also encourage nonvision-based frameworks [11, 12] for human pose estimation that can provide more private data
gathering. Since human motion must involve muscle activation, stretching, and contraction, we
propose a pair of Smart Knee Sleeves with embedded yarn stretch sensors and Inertial Measurement
Units (IMUs) to detect muscle contractions and joint movements, reflecting human movements.
Recent advances in flexible electronics have demonstrated the feasibility of advanced wearable sensor
∗

Corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

