Exploring the Optimal Choice for Generative
Processes in Diffusion Models: Ordinary vs Stochastic
Differential Equations

Yu Cao ∗

Jingrun Chen †

Yixin Luo ‡

Xiang Zhou §

Abstract
The diffusion model has shown remarkable success in computer vision, but it remains unclear whether the ODE-based probability flow or the SDE-based diffusion
model is more superior and under what circumstances. Comparing the two is
challenging due to dependencies on data distributions, score training, and other
numerical issues. In this paper, we study the problem mathematically for two
limiting scenarios: the zero diffusion (ODE) case and the large diffusion case. We
first introduce a pulse-shape error to perturb the score function and analyze error accumulation of sampling quality, followed by a thorough analysis for generalization
to arbitrary error. Our findings indicate that when the perturbation occurs at the
end of the generative process, the ODE model outperforms the SDE model with a
large diffusion coefficient. However, when the perturbation occurs earlier, the SDE
model outperforms the ODE model, and we demonstrate that the error of sample
generation due to such a pulse-shape perturbation is exponentially suppressed
as the diffusion term’s magnitude increases to infinity. Numerical validation of
this phenomenon is provided using Gaussian, Gaussian mixture, and Swiss roll
distribution, as well as realistic datasets like MNIST and CIFAR-10.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in various artificial intelligence context generation
tasks, particularly in computer vision [13]. This technique is rapidly evolving with industrial-level
products like DALL·E series. The diffusion model was first proposed and studied by Sohl-Dickstein
et al. [26] in 2015. Later, Song and Ermon [29] proposed score matching with Langevin dynamics
(SMLD) and Ho et al. [16] further explored the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM).
Both formalisms can be interpreted as time-discretization of stochastic differential equations (SDEs)
[30]. Since the publication of these seminal works, many techniques have been proposed to improve
the efficiency and accuracy of diffusion models, such as DDIM [28], Analytic-DPM [4], gDDIM
[36], EDM [19], and consistency model [31], among others.
The score-based diffusion model involves two steps [30, 17]. Firstly, one estimates the score function,
which is the gradient of the logarithm of the probability density function, in the form of a neural
network. This step uses trajectories of an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process starting with given data
∗
Institute of Natural Sciences and School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200240, China, yucao@sjtu.edu.cn
†
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China; Suzhou Institute of Advanced
Research, University of Science and Technology of China, Suzhou 215123, China, jingrunchen@ustc.edu.cn
‡
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China; Suzhou Institute of Advanced
Research, University of Science and Technology of China, Suzhou 215123, China, seeing@mail.ustc.edu.cn
§
School of Data Science and Department of Mathematics, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong
Kong SAR, xizhou@cityu.edu.hk

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

