Large Language Models are Fixated by Red Herrings:
Exploring Creative Problem Solving and Einstellung
Effect using the Only Connect Wall Dataset

Saeid Alavi Naeini1,3,4 Raeid Saqur2,4 Mozhgan Saeidi2,4,6 John Giorgi2,4,5 Babak Taati1,2,3,4
1
Kite Research Institute, Toronto Rehabilitation Institute, University Health Network
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
3
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto 4 Vector Institute for AI
5
Donnelly Centre for Cellular & Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto
6
Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University
{saeid.alavi, john.giorgi}@mail.utoronto.ca
raeidsaqur@cs.toronto.edu, mozhgans@stanford.edu, babak.taati@uhn.ca

Abstract
The quest for human imitative AI has been an enduring topic in AI research since
its inception. The technical evolution and emerging capabilities of the latest cohort
of large language models (LLMs) have reinvigorated the subject beyond academia
to the cultural zeitgeist. While recent NLP evaluation benchmark tasks test some aspects of human-imitative behavior (e.g., BIG-bench’s ‘human-like behavior’ tasks),
few, if not none, examine creative problem solving abilities. Creative problem solving in humans is a well-studied topic in cognitive neuroscience with standardized
tests that predominantly use the ability to associate (heterogeneous) connections
among clue words as a metric for creativity. Exposure to misleading stimuli —
distractors dubbed red herrings — impede human performance in such tasks via the
fixation effect and Einstellung paradigm. In cognitive neuroscience studies, such
fixations are experimentally induced by pre-exposing participants to orthographically similar incorrect words to subsequent word-fragments or clues. The popular
British quiz show Only Connect’s Connecting Wall segment essentially mimics
Mednick’s Remote Associates Test (RAT) formulation with built-in, deliberate
red herrings, which makes it an ideal proxy task to explore and study the fixation
effect and Einstellung paradigm from cognitive neuroscience in LLMs. In this
paper, we present the novel Only Connect Wall (OCW) dataset and report results
from our evaluation of selected pre-trained language models and LLMs on creative
problem solving tasks like grouping clue words by heterogeneous connections and
identifying correct open knowledge domain connections in respective groups. We
synthetically generate two additional datasets: OCW-Randomized, OCW-WordNet
to further analyze our red-herrings hypothesis in language models. The code and
link to the dataset are available at https://github.com/TaatiTeam/OCW.

1

Introduction

The remarkable capabilities of state-of-the-art large language models (LLMs) [91], across a variety
of domains and downstream tasks [78, 10], have spurred their comparisons with artificial general
intelligence (AGI) [5, 14] and human-imitative AI [31] systems. The extraordinary leap in capabilities
of these LLMs over a short span — from the advent of transformer-based [69] pre-trained, contextaware language models (PLMs) [52, 17, 40, 36, 53] circa 2018 to 2020, to the current and latest
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

