Information-guided Planning: An Online Approach
for Partially Observable Problems

Matheus Aparecido do Carmo Alves
Lancaster University
Lancaster, United Kingdom
m.a.docarmoalves@lancaster.ac.uk
Yehia Elkhatib
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, United Kingdom
yehia.elkhatib@glasgow.ac.uk

Amokh Varma
Indian Institute of Technology
Delhi, India
amokhvarma@gmail.com
Leandro Soriano Marcolino
Lancaster University
Lancaster, United Kingdom
l.marcolino@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper presents IB-POMCP, a novel algorithm for online planning under
partial observability. Our approach enhances the decision-making process by
using estimations of the world belief’s entropy to guide a tree search process and
surpass the limitations of planning in scenarios with sparse reward configurations.
By performing what we denominate as an information-guided planning process,
the algorithm, which incorporates a novel I-UCB function, shows significant
improvements in reward and reasoning time compared to state-of-the-art baselines
in several benchmark scenarios, along with theoretical convergence guarantees.

1

Introduction

Decision-making agents are increasingly being used under uncertainty in nontrivial systems [17].
Based on the available information, such agents must evaluate potential decisions in the current
environment to build a robust plan that either accomplishes the task or leads to a better situation.
Consider, for instance, a scenario in which drones are deployed to rescue people in a hazardous
environment. Drones need to quickly identify critical locations where they can offer support and save
lives. If no clear target is found, they must rapidly formulate a plan based on their current knowledge
and observable information to find an area in need of assistance from their current position.
The above context describes a partial observability problem that is recurrent in the literature [2, 7, 12].
The Partially Observable Monte-Carlo Planning (POMCP) [32] algorithm is commonly suggested
as a method to address these problems because it enables agents to perform planning in an online
manner while handling uncertainty [6, 36, 38]. However, several state-of-the-art solutions that rely
on POMCP often struggle when rewards are delivered sparsely in time or outside their reasoning
horizon. For example, in foraging, there may be no clear target to spot from the current observation
and/or estimated map so far. Here, we find a fundamental academic challenge: How can we improve
agent performance when rewards are delivered sparsely in time or out of their reasoning horizon?
Every time an agent makes an observation of the world, it gains information that can be used to
improve its internal planning process. Based on this, some works improve the traditional planning
process by handling the lack of prior information using the approximation of the world’s dynamic
models [16, 27], embedding supportive planning methods within the tree [2, 7], extracting non-explicit
information from the observations [6, 16], enhancing the method’s inner calculations [1, 8, 26] or
employing neural networks-based techniques to improve the search quality [18, 37].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

