Domain Agnostic Fourier Neural Operators

Ning Liu∗
Global Engineering and
Materials, Inc.
Princeton, NJ 08540
ningliu@umich.edu

Siavash Jafarzadeh∗
Department of Mathematics
Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA 18015
sij222@lehigh.edu

Yue Yu†
Department of Mathematics
Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA 18015
yuy214@lehigh.edu

Abstract
Fourier neural operators (FNOs) can learn highly nonlinear mappings between
function spaces, and have recently become a popular tool for learning responses
of complex physical systems. However, to achieve good accuracy and efficiency,
FNOs rely on the Fast Fourier transform (FFT), which is restricted to modeling
problems on rectangular domains. To lift such a restriction and permit FFT on
irregular geometries as well as topology changes, we introduce domain agnostic
Fourier neural operator (DAFNO), a novel neural operator architecture for learning
surrogates with irregular geometries and evolving domains. The key idea is to
incorporate a smoothed characteristic function in the integral layer architecture of
FNOs, and leverage FFT to achieve rapid computations, in such a way that the
geometric information is explicitly encoded in the architecture. In our empirical
evaluation, DAFNO has achieved state-of-the-art accuracy as compared to baseline
neural operator models on two benchmark datasets of material modeling and airfoil
simulation. To further demonstrate the capability and generalizability of DAFNO
in handling complex domains with topology changes, we consider a brittle material
fracture evolution problem. With only one training crack simulation sample,
DAFNO has achieved generalizability to unseen loading scenarios and substantially
different crack patterns from the trained scenario. Our code and data accompanying
this paper are available at https://github.com/ningliu-iga/DAFNO.

1

Introduction

Deep learning surrogate models provide a useful data-driven paradigm to accelerate the PDE-solving
and calibration process of scientific modeling and computing problems. Among others, a wide range
of scientific computing applications entail the learning of solution operators, i.e., the learning of
infinite dimensional function mappings between any parametric dependence to the solution field.
A prototypical instance is the case of solving Navier-Stokes equations in fluid mechanics, where
the initial input needs to be mapped to a temporal sequence of nonlinear parametric solutions. The
demand for operator learning has sparked the development of neural operator based methods (Li
et al., 2020a,b,c; You et al., 2022a,b,c; Goswami et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2021; Lu
et al., 2019; Cao, 2021; Hao et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022b; Yin et al., 2022c), with one of the most
popular architectures being Fourier Neural Operators (FNOs) (Li et al., 2020c; You et al., 2022c).
The success of FNOs can be mostly attributed to its convolution-based integral kernel that learns in a
resolution-invariant manner and the computationally efficient evaluation achieved via Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) (Brigham, 1988). While learning in the spectral domain is fast, the latter comes at a
cost: the computational domain of the underlying problem needs to be rectangular with uniformly
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

