Hyperbolic VAE via Latent Gaussian Distributions

Seunghyuk Cho
POSTECH GSAI
shhj1998@postech.ac.kr

Juyong Lee
KAIST AI
agi.is@kaist.ac.kr

Dongwoo Kim
POSTECH GSAI & CSED
dongwoo.kim@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a Gaussian manifold variational auto-encoder (GM-VAE) whose latent
space consists of a set of Gaussian distributions. It is known that the set of the univariate Gaussian distributions with the Fisher information metric form a hyperbolic
space, which we call a Gaussian manifold. To learn the VAE endowed with the
Gaussian manifolds, we propose a pseudo-Gaussian manifold normal distribution
based on the Kullback-Leibler divergence, a local approximation of the squared
Fisher-Rao distance, to define a density over the latent space. We demonstrate the
efficacy of GM-VAE on two different tasks: density estimation of image datasets
and state representation learning for model-based reinforcement learning. GMVAE outperforms the other variants of hyperbolic- and Euclidean-VAEs on density
estimation tasks and shows competitive performance in model-based reinforcement
learning. We observe that our model provides strong numerical stability, addressing
a common limitation reported in previous hyperbolic-VAEs. The implementation
is available at https://github.com/ml-postech/GM-VAE.

1

Introduction

The geometry of latent space in generative models, such as variational auto-encoders (VAE) (Kingma
& Welling, 2013), reflects the structure of the data representations. Mathieu et al. (2019); Nagano
et al. (2019); Cho et al. (2022) show that employing hyperbolic space as the latent space improves
the preservation of the hierarchical structure within the data. The theoretical background for adopting
hyperbolic space lies in the analysis of Sarkar (2011); the tree-structured data can be embedded with
arbitrary low distortion in hyperbolic space, while Euclidean space requires extensive dimensions.
Previously proposed hyperbolic VAEs rely on Poincaré normal distribution (Mathieu et al., 2019)
or hyperbolic wrapped normal distribution Nagano et al. (2019) for the prior and variational distributions. Unlike the Gaussian distribution in Euclidean space, however, these distributions suffer
from several shortcomings, including the absence of closed-form Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence,
numerical instability (Mathieu et al., 2019; Skopek et al., 2019), and high computational cost in
sampling (Mathieu et al., 2019).
Meanwhile, we can form a Riemannian manifold from the set of univariate Gaussian distributions
by equipping the Fisher information metric (FIM). It is known that the FIM of univariate Gaussian
distributions is akin to that of the metric tensor of the Poincaré half-plane model (Costa et al., 2015),
providing a perspective of viewing the points in hyperbolic space as univariate Gaussian distributions.
In other words, a Gaussian distribution can be mapped to a single point in the open half-plane
manifold as shown in Figure 1, where the FIM forms the shortest geodesic distance between two
Gaussian distributions. Noting that the numerical issue of Poincaré normal arises from the geodesic
distance of hyperbolic space, we question whether this perspective can lead us to define a new
distribution with better analytic properties.
In this work, inspired by the fact that KL divergence itself is a statistical distance that locally
approximates the geodesic distance (Tifrea et al., 2018), we propose a hyperbolic distribution by
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

