MixFormerV2: Efficient Fully Transformer Tracking

Yutao Cui† Tianhui Song† Gangshan Wu Limin Wang∗
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
https://github.com/MCG-NJU/MixFormerV2

Abstract
Transformer-based trackers have achieved high accuracy on standard benchmarks.
However, their efficiency remains an obstacle to practical deployment on both GPU
and CPU platforms. In this paper, to mitigate this issue, we propose a fully transformer tracking framework based on the successful MixFormer tracker [14], coined
as MixFormerV2, without any dense convolutional operation or complex score
prediction module. We introduce four special prediction tokens and concatenate
them with those from target template and search area. Then, we apply a unified
transformer backbone on these mixed token sequence. These prediction tokens are
able to capture the complex correlation between target template and search area
via mixed attentions. Based on them, we can easily predict the tracking box and
estimate its confidence score through simple MLP heads. To further improve the
efficiency of MixFormerV2, we present a new distillation-based model reduction
paradigm, including dense-to-sparse distillation and deep-to-shallow distillation.
The former one aims to transfer knowledge from the dense-head based MixViT
to our fully transformer tracker, while the latter one is for pruning the backbone
layers. We instantiate two MixForemrV2 trackers, where the MixFormerV2-B
achieves an AUC of 70.6% on LaSOT and AUC of 56.7% on TNL2k with a high
GPU speed of 165 FPS, and the MixFormerV2-S surpasses FEAR-L by 2.7%
AUC on LaSOT with a real-time CPU speed.

1

Introduction

Visual object tracking has been a fundamental and long-standing task in computer vision, which aims
to locate the object in a video sequence, given its initial bounding box. It has a wide range of practical
applications, which often require for low computational latency. So it is important to design a more
efficient tracking architecture while maintaining high accuracy.
Recently, the transformer-based one-stream trackers [7, 14, 55] attain excellent tracking accuracy
than the previous Siamese-based ones [2, 10, 11], due to the unified modeling of feature extraction
and target integration within a transformer block, which allows both components to benefit from
the transformer development (e.g. ViT [18], self-supervised pre-training [24] or contrastive pretraining [43]). However for these trackers, inference efficiency, especially on CPU, is still the main
obstacle to practical deployment. Taking the state-of-the-art tracker MixViT [15] as an instance, its
pipeline contains i) transformer backbone on the token sequence from target template and search
area, ii) dense corner head on the 2D search region for regression and iii) extra complex score
prediction module for classification (i.e., estimating the box quality for reliable online samples
selection). To achieve a high-efficiency tracker, there are still several issues on the design of MixViT.
First, the dense convolutional corner head still exhibits a time-consuming design, as implied in Tab 1.
This is because it densely estimates the probability distribution of the box corners through a total of
† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

