Going Beyond Linear Mode Connectivity:
The Layerwise Linear Feature Connectivity

1

Zhanpeng Zhou1 , Yongyi Yang2 , Xiaojiang Yang1 , Junchi Yan1∗, Wei Hu2†
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Dept. of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, University of Michigan
{zzp1012,yangxiaojiang,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
{yongyi,vvh}@umich.edu

Abstract
Recent work has revealed many intriguing empirical phenomena in neural network
training, despite the poorly understood and highly complex loss landscapes and
training dynamics. One of these phenomena, Linear Mode Connectivity (LMC),
has gained considerable attention due to the intriguing observation that different
solutions can be connected by a linear path in the parameter space while maintaining
near-constant training and test losses. In this work, we introduce a stronger notion
of linear connectivity, Layerwise Linear Feature Connectivity (LLFC), which
says that the feature maps of every layer in different trained networks are also
linearly connected. We provide comprehensive empirical evidence for LLFC
across a wide range of settings, demonstrating that whenever two trained networks
satisfy LMC (via either spawning or permutation methods), they also satisfy
LLFC in nearly all the layers. Furthermore, we delve deeper into the underlying
factors contributing to LLFC, which reveal new insights into the permutation
approaches. The study of LLFC transcends and advances our understanding of
LMC by adopting a feature-learning perspective. We released our source code at
https://github.com/zzp1012/LLFC.

1

Introduction

Despite the successes of modern deep neural networks, theoretical understanding of them still lags
behind. Efforts to understand the mechanisms behind deep learning have led to significant interest in
exploring the loss landscapes and training dynamics. While the loss functions used in deep learning
are often regarded as complex black-box functions in high dimensions, it is believed that these
functions, particularly the parts encountered in practical training trajectories, contain intricate benign
structures that play a role in facilitating the effectiveness of gradient-based training [36, 4, 39]. Just
like in many other scientific disciplines, a crucial step toward formulating a comprehensive theory of
deep learning lies in meticulous empirical investigations of the learning pipeline, intending to uncover
quantitative and reproducible nontrivial phenomena that shed light on the underlying mechanisms.
One intriguing phenomenon discovered in recent work is Mode Connectivity [10, 5, 11]: Different
optima found by independent runs of gradient-based optimization are connected by a simple path in
the parameter space, on which the loss or accuracy is nearly constant. This is surprising as different
optima of a non-convex function can very well reside in different and isolated “valleys” and yet
this does not happen for optima found in practice. More recently, an even stronger form of mode
∗

Corresponding author. SJTU authors are partly supported by NSFC(62222607, 61972250, U19B2035) and
Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project (2021SHZDZX0102).
†
Wei Hu acknowledges support from the Google Research Scholar Program.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

