Collapsed Inference for Bayesian Deep Learning

Zhe Zeng
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
zhezeng@cs.ucla.edu

Guy Van den Broeck
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) provide a formalism to quantify and calibrate
uncertainty in deep learning. Current inference approaches for BNNs often resort
to few-sample estimation for scalability, which can harm predictive performance,
while its alternatives tend to be computationally prohibitively expensive. We tackle
this challenge by revealing a previously unseen connection between inference on
BNNs and volume computation problems. With this observation, we introduce a
novel collapsed inference scheme that performs Bayesian model averaging using
collapsed samples. It improves over a Monte-Carlo sample by limiting sampling to
a subset of the network weights while pairing it with some closed-form conditional
distribution over the rest. A collapsed sample represents uncountably many models
drawn from the approximate posterior and thus yields higher sample efficiency.
Further, we show that the marginalization of a collapsed sample can be solved
analytically and efficiently despite the non-linearity of neural networks by leveraging existing volume computation solvers. Our proposed use of collapsed samples
achieves a balance between scalability and accuracy. On various regression and
classification tasks, our collapsed Bayesian deep learning approach demonstrates
significant improvements over existing methods and sets a new state of the art in
terms of uncertainty estimation as well as predictive performance.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty estimation is crucial for decision making. Deep learning models, including those in safetycritical domains, tend to estimate uncertainty poorly. To overcome this issue, Bayesian deep learning
obtains a posterior distribution over the model parameters hoping to improve predictions and provide
reliable uncertainty estimates. Among Bayesian inference procedures with neural networks, Bayesian
model averaging (BMA) is particularly compelling (Wasserman, 2000; Fragoso et al., 2018; Maddox
et al., 2019). However, computing BMAs is distinctly challenging since it involves marginalizing over
posterior parameters, which possess some unusual topological properties such as mode-connectivity
(Izmailov et al., 2021). We show that even with simple low-dimensional approximate parameter
posteriors as uniform distributions, doing BMA requires integrating over highly non-convex and
multi-modal distributions with discontinuities arising from non-linear activations (cf. Figure 1a).
Accurately approximating the BMA can achieve significant performance gains (Izmailov et al., 2021).
Existing methods mainly focus on general-purpose MCMC, which can fail to converge, or provides
inaccurate few-sample predictions (Kristiadi et al., 2022), because running longer sampling chains is
computationally expensive, and variational approaches that typically use a mean-field approximation
that ignores correlations induced by activations (Jospin et al., 2022).
In this work, we are interested in developing collapsed samplers, also known as cutset or RaoBlackwellised samplers for BMA. A collapsed sampler improves over classical particle-based methods
by limiting sampling to a subset of variables and further pairing each sample with a closed-form
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

