A Robust Exact Algorithm for the Euclidean Bipartite
Matching Problem
Akshaykumar G. Gattani1 , Sharath Raghvendra1 , and Pouyan Shirzadian1
1

Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech

Abstract
Algorithms for the minimum-cost bipartite matching can be used to estimate
Wasserstein distance between two distributions. Given two sets A and B of n
points in a 2-dimensional Euclidean space, one can use a fast implementation of
the Hungarian method to compute a minimum-cost bipartite matching of A and B
in Õ(n2 ) time. Let ∆ be the spread, i.e., the ratio of the distance of the farthest to
the closest pair of points in A ∪ B. In this paper, we present a new algorithm to
compute a minimum-cost bipartite matching of A and B with a similar worst-case
execution time of Õ(n2 log ∆). However, when A and B are drawn independently
and identically from a fixed distribution that is not known to the algorithm, the
execution time of our algorithm is, in expectation, Õ(n7/4 log ∆).
To the best of our knowledge, our algorithm is the first one to achieve a subquadratic execution time even for stochastic point sets with real-valued coordinates.
1
Our algorithm extends to any dimension d, where it runs in Õ(n2− 2d Φ(n)) time
for stochastic point sets A and B; here Φ(n) is the query/update time of a dynamic weighted nearest neighbor data structure. Our algorithm can be seen as a
careful adaptation of the Hungarian method in the geometric divide-and-conquer
framework.

1

Introduction

Given two distributions µ and ν defined on the sets Sµ , Sν ⊆ Rd , respectively, and an integer p ≥ 1,
the p-Wasserstein distance between µ and ν is the minimum cost required to transport mass from
one to the other. More formally, let Γ(µ, ν) be the set of all probability measures on Sµ × Sν with
marginal distributions µ and ν. The p-Wasserstein distance between µ and ν is defined as
!1/p
Z
Wp (µ, ν) =

∥s1 − s2 ∥p dγ(s1 , s2 )

inf
γ∈Γ(µ,ν)

,

Sµ ×Sν

where ∥s1 − s2 ∥ denotes the Euclidean distance of s1 and s2 .
In many applications, the distribution µ (resp. ν) may not be known, but one may have access to n
i.i.d samples A (resp. B) from µ (resp. ν). The empirical distribution µn (resp. νn ) is a discrete
distribution with A (resp. B) as support, where each sample has a mass of 1/n. The empirical
p-Wasserstein distance is simply the p-Wasserstein distance between the empirical distributions
µn and νn . As n → ∞, the empirical p-Wasserstein distance between µ and ν converges to the
real p-Wasserstein distance between them [7, 15, 16, 46] with several results showing sharp upper
and lower bounds on the empirical p-Wasserstein distances [10, 17, 19, 45, 49]. See also [36]
∗

Following convention from Theoretical Computer Science, all authors are ordered alphabetically.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

