Diffusion Model for Graph Inverse Problems: Towards
Effective Source Localization on Complex Networks

1

Xin Yan1,∗ Hui Fang2,∗ Qiang He1,†
College of Medicine and Biological Information Engineering, Northeastern University, China
2
RIIS & SIME, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, China
yanx_in@outlook.com,fang.hui@mail.shufe.edu.cn,heqiangcai@gmail.com

Abstract
Information diffusion problems, such as the spread of epidemics or rumors, are
widespread in society. The inverse problems of graph diffusion, which involve
locating the sources and identifying the paths of diffusion based on currently
observed diffusion graphs, are crucial to controlling the spread of information.
The problem of localizing the source of diffusion is highly ill-posed, presenting
a major obstacle in accurately assessing the uncertainty involved. Besides, while
comprehending how information diffuses through a graph is crucial, there is a
scarcity of research on reconstructing the paths of information propagation. To
tackle these challenges, we propose a probabilistic model called DDMSL (Discrete
Diffusion Model for Source Localization). Our approach is based on the natural
diffusion process of information propagation over complex networks, which can
be formulated using a message-passing function. First, we model the forward
diffusion of information using Markov chains. Then, we design a reversible
residual network to construct a denoising-diffusion model in discrete space for both
source localization and reconstruction of information diffusion paths. We provide
rigorous theoretical guarantees for DDMSL and demonstrate its effectiveness
through extensive experiments on five real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Information diffusion is a pervasive phenomenon in our daily lives. Data scientists have conducted extensive research on information diffusion along the direction of entropy increase, such as maximizing
the influence of nodes in social networks [15, 3], and developing control policies to curb the scale of
epidemics in disease transmission networks [53]. However, merely comprehending the mechanism of
forward diffusion is insufficient. When destructive information spreads across a network, it can cause
huge damage on the entire system. For example, the rapid spread of rumors in social networks can
cause harm to society [54], and the spread of computer viruses on the Internet can paralyze a system
consisting of millions of users [1]. Additionally, pandemics such as SARS and COVID-19 in human
interaction networks pose serious challenges to human health and social functioning [31]. Therefore,
accurately identifying the sources of transmission and cutting off their possible transmission paths in
time is crucial. This can help limit the spread of negative information and maintain the stability of
the network.
Common information dissemination models like SIR (Susceptible-Infected-Recovered) and SI
(Susceptible-Infected) [19] are subject to uncertainties during the process of information diffusion. As illustrated in Figure 1, the diffusion graph of information should follow a non-explicit
distribution, implying that a single diffusion source may correspond to multiple different diffusion
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

