Reinforcement Learning with Simple Sequence Priors

Tankred Saanum1†
1

Noémi Éltető1

Peter Dayan1,2

Marcel Binz1

Eric Schulz1

Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, 2 University of Tübingen
†
tankred.saanum@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
In reinforcement learning (RL), simplicity is typically quantified on an actionby-action basis – but this timescale ignores temporal regularities, like repetitions,
often present in sequential strategies. We therefore propose an RL algorithm that
learns to solve tasks with sequences of actions that are compressible. We explore
two possible sources of simple action sequences: Sequences that can be learned
by autoregressive models, and sequences that are compressible with off-the-shelf
data compression algorithms. Distilling these preferences into sequence priors,
we derive a novel information-theoretic objective that incentivizes agents to learn
policies that maximize rewards while conforming to these priors. We show that
the resulting RL algorithm leads to faster learning, and attains higher returns than
state-of-the-art model-free approaches in a series of continuous control tasks from
the DeepMind Control Suite. These priors also produce a powerful informationregularized agent that is robust to noisy observations and can perform open-loop
control.

1

Introduction

Simplicity is a powerful inductive bias [1–3]. In
science, we strive to build parsimonious theories and algorithms that involve repetitions of the
same basic steps. Simplicity is also important in
the context of reinforcement learning (RL). Policies that are simple are often easier to execute,
and practical to implement even with limited
computational resources [4, 5]. Many control
problems have solutions that are compressible:
Motor behaviors like running and walking involve moving our legs in a periodic, alternating
fashion (Fig. 1). Here it is the sequence of actions selected that is compressible. Sequences
with repetitive, periodic elements are easier to
predict and can be compressed more than seFigure 1: Action sequences produced by a bipedal quences that lack such structure. In the current
walker become more compressible with learning. work, we augment RL agents with a prior that
Our algorithm learns policies that solve tasks with their action sequences should be simple: If sosimple action sequences, leading to decreased com- lutions to control problems are generally complexity and higher returns.
pressible, one should consider only the set of
simple solutions to a problem rather than the set
of all solutions. In a series of experiments, we show that RL with simple sequence priors produces
policies that perform better and more robustly than state-of-the-art approaches without such priors.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

