Consistent Aggregation of Objectives with Diverse
Time Preferences Requires Non-Markovian Rewards

Silviu Pitis
University of Toronto and Vector Institute
spitis@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
As the capabilities of artificial agents improve, they are being increasingly deployed
to service multiple diverse objectives and stakeholders. However, the composition
of these objectives is often performed ad hoc, with no clear justification. This paper
takes a normative approach to multi-objective agency: from a set of intuitively
appealing axioms, it is shown that Markovian aggregation of Markovian reward
functions is not possible when the time preference (discount factor) for each
objective may vary. It follows that optimal multi-objective agents must admit
rewards that are non-Markovian with respect to the individual objectives. To this
end, a practical non-Markovian aggregation scheme is proposed, which overcomes
the impossibility with only one additional parameter for each objective. This
work offers new insights into sequential, multi-objective agency and intertemporal
choice, and has practical implications for the design of AI systems deployed to
serve multiple generations of principals with varying time preference.

1

Introduction

The idea that we can associate human preferences with scalar utility values traces back hundreds
of years and has found usage in numerous applications [9, 71, 28, 49]. One of the most recent, and
perhaps most important, is the design of artificial agents. In the field of reinforcement learning
(RL), this idea shows up as the reward hypothesis [74, 67, 10], which lets us define objectives in
terms of a discounted sum of Markovian rewards. While foundational results from decision theory
[81, 62] and inverse RL [52, 54] justify the reward hypothesis when a single objective or principal is
considered, complexities arise in multi-objective scenarios [61, 77]. The literature on social choice
is largely defined by impossibilities [5], and multi-objective composition in the RL and machine
learning literature is typically restrictive [68, 51], applied without clear justification [29], or based
on subjective evaluations of empirical efficacy [21]. Addressing these limitations is crucial for the
development of artificial agents capable of effectively serving the needs of diverse stakeholders.
This paper extends previous normative work in RL by adopting an axiomatic approach to the
aggregation of objectives. The approach is based on a set of intuitively appealing axioms: the
von Neumann-Morgenstern (VNM) axioms, which provide a foundation for rational choice under
uncertainty; Pareto indifference, which efficiently incorporates individual preferences; and dynamic
consistency, which ensures time-consistent decision-making. From these axioms, an impossibility is
derived, leading to the conclusion that optimal multi-objective agents with diverse time preferences
must have rewards that are non-Markovian with respect to the individual objectives. To address this
challenge, a practical state space expansion is proposed, which allows for the Markovian aggregation
of objectives requiring only one parameter per objective. The results prompt an interesting discussion
on dynamic preferences and intertemporal choice, leading to a novel “historical discounting” strategy
that trades off dynamic consistency for intergenerational fairness. Finally, it is shown how both our
results can be extended (albeit non-normatively) to stochastic policies.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

