Feature Learning for Interpretable, Performant
Decision Trees
Jack H. Good, Torin Kovach, Kyle Miller, Artur Dubrawski
Carnegie Mellon University
{jhgood,tkovach,mille856,awd}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Decision trees are regarded for high interpretability arising from their hierarchical
partitioning structure built on simple decision rules. However, in practice, this is
not realized because axis-aligned partitioning of realistic data results in deep trees,
and because ensemble methods are used to mitigate overfitting. Even then, model
complexity and performance remain sensitive to transformation of the input, and
extensive expert crafting of features from the raw data is common. We propose
the first system to alternate sparse feature learning with differentiable decision
tree construction to produce small, interpretable trees with good performance. It
benchmarks favorably against conventional tree-based models and demonstrates
several notions of interpretability of a model and its predictions.

1

Introduction

In recent years, AI has made its way into increasingly critical applications, leading to the popularization of the topic of Trustworthy AI; AI should not only perform well in its primary task, but
exhibit properties that earn trust, such as robustness, provable adherence to safety specifications, and
interpretability to humans. For example, predictors that assist medical diagnosis are more useful and
more likely to be trusted if their predictions are easily understood by medical personnel.
Interpretability is highly subjective and application-dependent by nature, and there is no universal
standard of what makes a system highly interpretable. However, within machine learning (ML), there
are some generally agreed-upon rules of thumb; for example, smaller models are considered more
interpretable than structurally similar but larger ones, and rule-based representations such as decision
trees are considered more interpretable than “black box” models such as neural networks.
Decision trees in particular are often used as the quintessential example of interpretable ML; they
can be interpreted holistically (also called global interpretation) as a hierarchical partitioning of the
input based on simple decision rules, and individual predictions can be interpreted (also called called
local interpretation) as a series of such rules on a path from the tree’s root to a leaf. Conventionally,
these decision rules have the form xi < t for some feature i of input vector x and decision threshold
t, thus representing axis-aligned hyperplanes
P in the input space, but many other decision rules are
possible. For example, rules of the form i ai xi < b for some a, b are called oblique splits, and the
trees using them oblique decision trees (ODTs).
In practice, however, there are barriers to the practical application of decision trees as interpretable
models. First, due to various factors such as greedy growth, axis-aligned decision rules, and the
lack of any objective to promote robust, large-margin predictions, they tend to generalize poorly to
yet-unseen data; while this can be somewhat alleviated by pruning, the most effective and popular
solution is to use large ensembles with strategies such as bagging as in Random Forests [9], random
thresholds as in ExtraTrees [22], or boosting as in XGBoost [11]. In addition, decision trees often
grow quite deep and use many decision rules for any given prediction, even for extremely simple
data. Together, these make both global and local interpretation much more difficult.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

