Opening the Vocabulary of Egocentric Actions

Dibyadip Chatterjee 1 Fadime Sener 2 Shugao Ma 2 Angela Yao 1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Meta Reality Labs Research
{dibyadip, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg
{famesener, shugao}@meta.com
https://dibschat.github.io/openvocab-egoAR/

Abstract
Human actions in egocentric videos often feature hand-object interactions composed of a verb (performed by the hand) applied to an object. Despite their
extensive scaling up, egocentric datasets still face two limitations — sparsity of
action compositions and a closed set of interacting objects. This paper proposes a
novel open vocabulary action recognition task. Given a set of verbs and objects
observed during training, the goal is to generalize the verbs to an open vocabulary of actions with seen and novel objects. To this end, we decouple the verb
and object predictions via an object-agnostic verb encoder and a prompt-based
object encoder. The prompting leverages CLIP representations to predict an open
vocabulary of interacting objects. We create open vocabulary benchmarks on the
EPIC-KITCHENS-100 and Assembly101 datasets; whereas closed-action methods
fail to generalize, our proposed method is effective. In addition, our object encoder
significantly outperforms existing open-vocabulary visual recognition methods in
recognizing novel interacting objects.

1

Introduction

Egocentric or first-person videos captured from body-mounted cameras often feature the person
manipulating objects with one or both hands. An action is thus conveniently defined as the composition of a verb performed by the hand with an interacting object, e.g., the action “slicing apple” is
defined as “slice” and “apple”. Egocentric datasets [17, 8, 51] have scaled up by increasing the
variety of verbs and objects. Theoretically, the increase in feasible actions should be quadratic, yet
actually observed compositions are sparse, e.g., EPIC-KITCHENS-100 [8] has 97 verbs and 300
objects, but only 14% of possible verb-object compositions are observed as actions. Although not
all compositions are feasible, e.g., “eat dishwasher”, many feasible actions are not observed, e.g.,
“serve chicken”, “crush ice”.
We observe that the verbs in egocentric datasets tend to be domain-agnostic. For example, even
though EPIC100 is set in the kitchen, its verbs like pull, remove, and shake are also applicable outside
of the kitchen. Ideally, we want to learn the verb concepts and generalize the verb to any object. Yet
the dataset bounds the type and number of objects and the capture environment, e.g., EPIC100 has
cooking utensils and food, whereas Assembly101 [51] has toy vehicle parts. Simply put, the objects
restrict the subsequent action space of the dataset.
Existing action recognition models [61, 11, 43, 48, 22] are designed for a closed set of actions. A
few works have studied open-set action recognition [4, 65], but they simply reject actions not seen
during training. Inspired by the recent success of open vocabulary object detection [63, 18, 68], a
more practical objective would be to provide novel actions as text inputs during inference. To that
end, we address this problem of open vocabulary action recognition where a video model trained on
a base vocabulary of actions needs to recognize novel actions outside of that vocabulary.
We tackle open vocabulary action recognition as two problems – (1) generalizing verbs to novel
objects and (2) recognizing novel objects from egocentric videos. Note that this differs from a zeroshot setup, where some actions are not observed during training. These unobserved actions are not
novel because the vocabulary is known and fixed during training, hence closed. More recently, [25, 57]
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

