Universal Online Learning with Gradient Variations:
A Multi-layer Online Ensemble Approach
Yu-Hu Yan, Peng Zhao, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{yanyh, zhaop, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an online convex optimization approach with two different levels of adaptivity. On a higher level, our approach is agnostic to the unknown types and curvatures of the online functions, while at a lower level, it can
exploit the unknown niceness of the environments and attain problem-dependent
√
guarantees. Specifically, we obtain O(log VT ), O(d log VT ) and b
O( VT ) regret
bounds for strongly convex, exp-concave and convex loss functions, respectively,
where d is the dimension, VT denotes problem-dependent gradient variations and
b
the O(·)-notation
omits log VT factors. Our result not only safeguards the worstcase guarantees but also directly implies the small-loss bounds in analysis. Moreover, when applied to adversarial/stochastic convex optimization and game theory
problems, our result enhances the existing universal guarantees. Our approach is
based on a multi-layer online ensemble framework incorporating novel ingredients, including a carefully designed optimism for unifying diverse function types
and cascaded corrections for algorithmic stability. Notably, despite its multi-layer
structure, our algorithm necessitates only one gradient query per round, making it
favorable when the gradient evaluation is time-consuming. This is facilitated by a
novel regret decomposition equipped with carefully designed surrogate losses.

1

Introduction

Online convex optimization (OCO) is a versatile model that depicts the interaction between a learner
and the environments over time [Hazan, 2016, Orabona, 2019]. In each round t ∈ [T ], the learner
selects a decision xt from a convex compact set X ⊆ Rd , and simultaneously the environments
choose a convex loss function ft : X 7→ R. Subsequently, the learner incurs a loss ft (xt ), obtains
information about the online function, and updates the decision to xt+1 , aiming to optimize the
game-theoretical performance measure known as regret [Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006]:
R EGT ≜

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈X

T
X

ft (x),

(1.1)

t=1

which represents the learner’s excess loss compared to the best fixed comparator in hindsight.
In OCO, the type and curvature of online functions significantly impact the minimax regret
√ bounds.
Specifically, for convex functions, online gradient descent (OGD) can achieve an O( T ) regret
guarantee [Zinkevich, 2003]. For α-exp-concave functions, online Newton step (ONS), with prior
knowledge of the curvature coefficient α, attains an O(d log T ) regret [Hazan et al., 2007]. For
λ-strongly convex functions, OGD with prior knowledge of the curvature coefficient λ and a different parameter configuration enjoys an O(log T ) regret [Hazan et al., 2007]. Note that the above
∗

Correspondence: Peng Zhao <zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

