Adapting to Continuous Covariate Shift via
Online Density Ratio Estimation
Yu-Jie Zhang1 , Zhen-Yu Zhang2 , Peng Zhao3 , Masashi Sugiyama2,1
1

The University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan
2
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan
3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China

Abstract
Dealing with distribution shifts is one of the central challenges for modern machine
learning. One fundamental situation is the covariate shift, where the input distributions of data change from the training to testing stages while the input-conditional
output distribution remains unchanged. In this paper, we initiate the study of a
more challenging scenario — continuous covariate shift — in which the test data
appear sequentially, and their distributions can shift continuously. Our goal is to
adaptively train the predictor such that its prediction risk accumulated over time can
be minimized. Starting with the importance-weighted learning, we theoretically
show the method works effectively if the time-varying density ratios of test and
train inputs can be accurately estimated. However, existing density ratio estimation
methods would fail due to data scarcity at each time step. To this end, we propose
an online density ratio estimation method that can appropriately reuse historical
information. Our method is proven to perform well by enjoying a dynamic regret
bound, which finally leads to an excess risk guarantee for the predictor. Empirical
results also validate the effectiveness.

1

Introduction

How to deal with distribution shifts is one of the central challenges for modern machine learning [1, 2],
which is also the key requirement of robust artificial intelligence in open and dynamic environments [3,
4]. Covariate shift is a representative problem setup and has attracted much attention [5, 6], where the
input density D(x) varies from training data to test data but their input-conditional output D(y | x)
remains unchanged. On the one hand, covariate shift serves as a foundational setup for theoretically
understanding general distribution shifts [7], and on the other hand, it can encompass many real-world
tasks such as brain-computer interface [8], speaker identification [9] and audio processing [10].
Existing works of coping with covariate shift mainly focused on the “one-step” adaptation, where
the learner aims to train a model well-performed on a fixed testing distribution. To mitigate the
distribution discrepancy, a common and classic solution is the importance-weighting framework [6],
where one assigns an appropriate importance weight to each labeled training sample and then conducts
weighted empirical risk minimization. The importance weight, also known as the density ratio of test
and training inputs, usually needs to be estimated via a reasonable amount of unlabeled data sampled
from the testing distribution [11, 12]. However, the one-step adaptation can be insufficient in many
real-world covariate shift scenarios, especially when data are accumulated in an online fashion such
that testing environments continuously shift and only a few unlabeled samples are observed at each
time. For instance, in the speaker identification task, the speech features vary over time due to session
∗

Correspondence: Yu-Jie Zhang <yujie.zhang@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp> and Peng Zhao <zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

