Private Federated Frequency Estimation:
Adapting to the Hardness of the Instance

Jingfeng Wu∗
Johns Hopkins University
uuujf@jhu.edu

Wennan Zhu
Google Research
wennanzhu@google.com

Peter Kairouz
Google Research
kairouz@google.com

Vladimir Braverman
Rice University
vb21@rice.edu

Abstract
In federated frequency estimation (FFE), multiple clients work together to estimate
the frequencies of their collective data by communicating with a server that respects
the privacy constraints of Secure Summation (SecSum), a cryptographic multiparty computation protocol that ensures that the server can only access the sum
of client-held vectors. For single-round FFE, it is known that count sketching is
nearly information-theoretically optimal for achieving the fundamental accuracycommunication trade-offs [Chen et al., 2022]. However, we show that under the
more practical multi-round FEE setting, simple adaptations of count sketching are
strictly sub-optimal, and we propose a novel hybrid sketching algorithm that is
provably more accurate. We also address the following fundamental question: how
should a practitioner set the sketch size in a way that adapts to the hardness of
the underlying problem? We propose a two-phase approach that allows for the
use of a smaller sketch size for simpler problems (e.g. near-sparse or light-tailed
distributions). We conclude our work by showing how differential privacy can be
added to our algorithm and verifying its superior performance through extensive
experiments conducted on large-scale datasets.

1

Introduction

In many distributed learning applications, a server seeks to compute population information about
data that is distributed across multiple clients (users). For example, consider a distributed frequency
estimation problem where there are n clients, each holding a local data from a domain of size d,
and a server that aims to estimate the frequency of the items from the n clients with the minimum
communication cost. This task can be done efficiently by letting each client binary encode their data
and send the encoding to the server, at a local communication bandwidth cost of log(d) bits. With the
binary encoding, the server can faithfully decode each local data and compute the global frequency
vector (i.e., the normalized histogram vector).
However, the local data could be sensitive or private, and the clients may wish to keep it hidden
from the server. The above binary encoding communication method, unfortunately, allows the server
to observe each individual local data, and therefore may not satisfy the users’ privacy concerns.
Federated Analytics (FA) [Ramage and Mazzocchi, 2020, Zhu et al., 2020] addresses this issue by
developing new methods that enable the server to learn population information about the clients
while preventing the server from prying on any individual local data. In particular, a cryptographic
∗

Work done during an internship at Google Research

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

