Diffusion-SS3D: Diffusion Model for Semi-supervised
3D Object Detection

Cheng-Ju Ho1
1

Chen-Hsuan Tai1

Yen-Yu Lin1

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

2

Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3

Yi-Hsuan Tsai3

University of California at Merced

3

Google

Abstract
Semi-supervised object detection is crucial for 3D scene understanding, efficiently
addressing the limitation of acquiring large-scale 3D bounding box annotations.
Existing methods typically employ a teacher-student framework with pseudolabeling to leverage unlabeled point clouds. However, producing reliable pseudolabels in a diverse 3D space still remains challenging. In this work, we propose
Diffusion-SS3D, a new perspective of enhancing the quality of pseudo-labels via
the diffusion model for semi-supervised 3D object detection. Specifically, we
include noises to produce corrupted 3D object size and class label distributions,
and then utilize the diffusion model as a denoising process to obtain bounding
box outputs. Moreover, we integrate the diffusion model into the teacher-student
framework, so that the denoised bounding boxes can be used to improve pseudolabel generation, as well as the entire semi-supervised learning process. We conduct
experiments on the ScanNet and SUN RGB-D benchmark datasets to demonstrate
that our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance against existing methods.
We also present extensive analysis to understand how our diffusion model design
affects performance in semi-supervised learning. The source code will be available
at https://github.com/luluho1208/Diffusion-SS3D.

1

Introduction

3D object detection is a crucial computer vision task that predicts oriented bounding boxes and
semantic classes of 3D objects for geometrical scene understanding, and thus it is essential to 3D
applications such as autonomous driving, AR/VR, and robot navigation. Recent works [26, 30, 35,
39, 40, 41, 54, 59, 65] have made significant progress in the field of 3D object detection. However,
most existing approaches heavily rely on labeled 3D point clouds, which requires substantial manual
annotations. To overcome this limitation, semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods for 3D object
detection have emerged, utilizing unlabeled 3D point clouds to supplement scarce labeled data and
further improve detector performance.
Existing semi-supervised learning methods for 3D object detection [16, 53, 55, 60, 63] focus on
generating pseudo-labels for 3D bounding boxes as supervisory signals on unlabeled data. However,
different from the 2D cases where pseudo-labels are limited to the 2D image coordinates [7, 22, 25,
43, 44, 57, 64], the potential object locations in the 3D geometric space can be more diverse, causing
the difficulty in generating high-quality pseudo-labels (i.e., pseudo bounding boxes) for 3D object
detection. Consequently, an ensuing question arises: Is there an effective approach for generating
pseudo-labels that account for the vast 3D space in the realm of semi-supervised 3D object detection?
As shown in Figure 1(a), existing methods [16, 53, 63] usually adopt a teacher-student framework to
provide pseudo-labels. In this case, bounding box candidates are solely based on model predictions,
making it challenging to adjust pseudo bounding boxes, e.g., their sizes. In addition, pseudo-label
quality may not be satisfactory when the model fails to output sufficient predictions (i.e., lower recall
rate).
To mitigate this problem, we consider other sources to produce more reliable pseudo-labels for
unlabeled data, and hence propose to denoise bounding boxes corrupted by random noise via the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

