A Bounded Ability Estimation for Computerized
Adaptive Testing
Yan Zhuang1,2 , Qi Liu1,2∗, GuanHao Zhao1,2 , Zhenya Huang1,2 ,
Weizhe Huang1,2 , Zachary A. Pardos3 , Enhong Chen1,2 , Jinze Wu2,4 , Xin Li2,4
1: Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application,
University of Science and Technology of China
2: State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
3: University of California, Berkeley
4: iFLYTEK Co., Ltd
{zykb,ghzhao0223,hwz871982879,hxwjz}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{qiliuql,huangzhy,cheneh,leexin}@ustc.edu.cn, pardos@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Computerized adaptive testing (CAT), as a tool that can efficiently measure student’s ability, has been widely used in various standardized tests (e.g., GMAT and
GRE). The adaptivity of CAT refers to the selection of the most informative questions for each student, reducing test length. Existing CAT methods do not explicitly
target ability estimation accuracy since there is no student’s true ability as ground
truth; therefore, these methods cannot be guaranteed to make the estimate converge
to the true with such limited responses. In this paper, we analyze the statistical
properties of estimation and find a theoretical approximation of the true ability:
the ability estimated by full responses to question bank. Based on this, a Bounded
Ability Estimation framework for CAT (BECAT) is proposed in a data-summary
manner, which selects a question subset that closely matches the gradient of the
full responses. Thus, we develop an expected gradient difference approximation
to design a simple greedy selection algorithm, and show the rigorous theoretical
and error upper-bound guarantees of its ability estimate. Experiments on both realworld and synthetic datasets, show that it can reach the same estimation accuracy
using 15% less questions on average, significantly reducing test length.

1

Introduction

As the landscape of education is changing rapidly, especially after COVID-19, many schools and
institutions move from in-class to online platforms, providing individualized education, such as educational measurement and recommendation. They are looking to “right-size” the learning experience
of students according to their ability level [1, 2]. To this end, Computerized Adaptive Testing (CAT)
[3] becomes an indispensable tool to efficiently measure student’s ability in the areas of standardized
testing, computer tutoring, and online courses, through automatically selecting best-suited questions
for individual students. Compared with the time-consuming and burdensome paper-and-pencil tests,
CAT has been proven to require fewer questions to reach the same measurement accuracy [4, 2].
A typical CAT system is shown in Figure 1: At test step t, the Cognitive Diagnosis Model, e.g., Item
Response Theory (IRT), as the user model based on psychology, first uses student’s previous t item
answer responses to estimate his/her current ability θt . IRT family has been used for ability estimation
in several state assessments, such as OECD/PISA Project [5, 6]. Next, the selection algorithm selects
the next item from the entire question bank according to some criteria [7, 8, 9]. Most of them are
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

