A Generalized Alternating Method for Bilevel
Optimization under the Polyak-Łojasiewicz Condition

Quan Xiao
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY, USA
xiaoq5@rpi.edu

Songtao Lu
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
songtao@ibm.com

Tianyi Chen
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY, USA
chentianyi19@gmail.com

Abstract
Bilevel optimization has recently regained interest owing to its applications in
emerging machine learning fields such as hyperparameter optimization, metalearning, and reinforcement learning. Recent results have shown that simple
alternating (implicit) gradient-based algorithms can match the convergence rate
of single-level gradient descent (GD) when addressing bilevel problems with a
strongly convex lower-level objective. However, it remains unclear whether this
result can be generalized to bilevel problems beyond this basic setting. In this
paper, we first introduce a stationary metric for the considered bilevel problems,
which generalizes the existing metric, for a nonconvex lower-level objective that
satisfies the Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL) condition. We then propose a Generalized
ALternating mEthod for bilevel opTimization (GALET) tailored to BLO with
convex PL LL problem and establish that GALET achieves an ϵ-stationary point
for the considered problem within Õ(ϵ−1 ) iterations, which matches the iteration
complexity of GD for single-level smooth nonconvex problems.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization (BLO) is a hierarchical optimization framework that aims to minimize the
upper-level (UL) objective, which depends on the optimal solutions of the lower-level (LL) problem.
Since its introduction in the 1970s [5], BLO has been extensively studied in operations research,
mathematics, engineering, and economics communities [14], and has found applications in image
processing [12] and wireless communications [8]. Recently, BLO has regained interests as a unified
framework of modern machine-learning applications, including hyperparameter optimization [49, 21,
22, 54], meta-learning [20], representation learning [3], reinforcement learning [62, 59], continual
learning [55, 4], adversarial learning [73] and neural architecture search [39]; see [41].
In this paper, we consider BLO in the following form
min

x∈Rdx ,y∈S(x)

f (x, y)

s.t. S(x) ≜ arg min g(x, y)

(1)

y∈Rdy

where both the UL objective f (x, y) and LL objective g(x, y) are differentiable, and the LL solution
set S(x) is not necessarily a singleton. For ease of notation, we denote the optimal function value of
the LL objective as g ∗ (x) := miny g(x, y) and call it value function.
Although BLO is powerful for modeling hierarchical decision-making processes, solving generic
BLO problems is known to be NP-hard due to their nested structure [31]. As a result, the majority
of recent works in optimization theory of BLO algorithms are centered on nonconvex UL problems
with strongly convex LL problems (nonconvex-strongly-convex), which permit the development of
efficient algorithms; see e.g. [24, 27, 32, 9, 35, 10, 34, 67, 66]. The strong convexity assumption for
LL ensures the uniqueness of the minimizer and a simple loss landscape of the LL problem, but it
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

