Exact Verification of ReLU Neural Control Barrier
Functions
Hongchao Zhang
Electrical & Systems Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
hongchao@wustl.edu

Junlin Wu
Computer Science & Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
junlin.wu@wustl.edu

Yevgeniy Vorobeychik
Computer Science & Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
yvorobeychik@wustl.edu

Andrew Clark
Electrical & Systems Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO 63130
andrewclark@wustl.edu

Abstract
Control Barrier Functions (CBFs) are a popular approach for safe control of
nonlinear systems. In CBF-based control, the desired safety properties of the system
are mapped to nonnegativity of a CBF, and the control input is chosen to ensure that
the CBF remains nonnegative for all time. Recently, machine learning methods that
represent CBFs as neural networks (neural control barrier functions, or NCBFs)
have shown great promise due to the universal representability of neural networks.
However, verifying that a learned CBF guarantees safety remains a challenging
research problem. This paper presents novel exact conditions and algorithms for
verifying safety of feedforward NCBFs with ReLU activation functions. The key
challenge in doing so is that, due to the piecewise linearity of the ReLU function, the
NCBF will be nondifferentiable at certain points, thus invalidating traditional safety
verification methods that assume a smooth barrier function. We resolve this issue
by leveraging a generalization of Nagumo’s theorem for proving invariance of sets
with nonsmooth boundaries to derive necessary and sufficient conditions for safety.
Based on this condition, we propose an algorithm for safety verification of NCBFs
that first decomposes the NCBF into piecewise linear segments and then solves a
nonlinear program to verify safety of each segment as well as the intersections of the
linear segments. We mitigate the complexity by only considering the boundary of
the safe region and by pruning the segments with Interval Bound Propagation (IBP)
and linear relaxation. We evaluate our approach through numerical studies with
comparison to state-of-the-art SMT-based methods. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/HongchaoZhang-HZ/exactverif-reluncbf-nips23.

1

Introduction

Safety is a critical property for autonomous systems, including unmanned ground, aerial, and space
vehicles [1] and robotic manipulators [2]. The importance of safety has motivated extensive research
into verification and synthesis of safe control strategies [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Control barrier function
(CBF)-based algorithms [8] ensure safety by constructing a CBF that is nonnegative if the system is
safe and synthesizing a control policy that ensures that the CBF is nonnegative for all time. Control
barrier functions provide a high degree of flexibility, since any control policy that satisfies the control
barrier function constraint is provably safe, and have been demonstrated in applications including
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

