Grammar Prompting for Domain-Specific Language
Generation with Large Language Models
Bailin Wang⋄ Zi Wang† Xuezhi Wang† Yuan Cao‡ Rif A. Saurous† Yoon Kim⋄
⋄
Massachusetts Institute of Technology † Google DeepMind ‡ Google Research
{bailinw, yoonkim}@mit.edu, {wangzi, xuezhiw, yuancao, rif}@google.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) can learn to perform a wide range of natural
language tasks from just a handful of in-context examples. However, for generating
strings from highly structured languages (e.g., semantic parsing to complex domainspecific languages), it is challenging for the LLM to generalize from just a few
exemplars. We propose grammar prompting, a simple approach to enable LLMs
to use external knowledge and domain-specific constraints, expressed through
a grammar in Backus–Naur Form (BNF), during in-context learning. Grammar
prompting augments each demonstration example with a specialized grammar that
is minimally sufficient for generating the particular output example, where the
specialized grammar is a subset of the full DSL grammar. For inference, the LLM
first predicts a BNF grammar given a test input, and then generates the output
according to the rules of the grammar. Experiments demonstrate that grammar
prompting can enable LLMs to perform competitively on a diverse set of DSL
generation tasks, including semantic parsing (SMCalFlow, Overnight, GeoQuery),
PDDL planning, and SMILES-based molecule generation.

1

Introduction

Prompting large language models (LLMs) with demonstrations optionally combined with natural
language instructions has been shown to be an effective approach for surfacing their myriad capabilities acquired through pretraining [10]. This approach is however inadequate for applications where
the task specifications cannot be fully delineated through just a handful of exemplars, for example
in semantic parsing where an LLM must translate a natural language utterance to an executable
program in a domain-specific language (DSL). DSLs often incorporate domain-specific abstractions
and semantics that are difficult to characterize via just a few demonstrations. And unlike generalpurpose programming languages, DSLs are by definition specialized and thus unlikely to have been
encountered often enough (or at all) during pretraining for the LLM to acquire its full syntax.
How can we draw on the few-shot learning capabilities of LLMs to generate structured strings that are
substantially different from those seen during pretraining? This work explores grammar prompting
as a simple approach for data-efficient generation of structured languages where an output string in
the language can be derived through a series of symbolic manipulations. We exploit the fact that
constraints over a structured output space can often be succinctly described by a context-free grammar
in Backus–Naur Form (BNF), which is commonly used to define the syntax of a language. Grammar
prompting augments each in-context example (x, y) with a specialized BNF grammar G[y] that is
minimally sufficient for generating y. Given a new input, the LLM first predicts the specialized BNF
grammar and then generates the answer conditioned on the grammar.
Grammar prompting follows the recent line of work which enhances the few-shot reasoning capabilities of LLMs by interleaving intermediate “reasoning” steps between each in-context input and
Code and data available at: https://github.com/berlino/grammar-prompting.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

