DIN-SQL: Decomposed In-Context Learning of
Text-to-SQL with Self-Correction
Mohammadreza Pourreza
Department of Computer Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, CA
pourreza@ualberta.ca

Davood Rafiei
Department of Computer Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, CA
drafiei@ualberta.ca

Abstract
There is currently a significant gap between the performance of fine-tuned models
and prompting approaches using Large Language Models (LLMs) on the challenging task of text-to-SQL, as evaluated on datasets such as Spider. To improve the
performance of LLMs in the reasoning process, we study how decomposing the
task into smaller sub-tasks can be effective. In particular, we show that breaking
down the generation problem into sub-problems and feeding the solutions of those
sub-problems into LLMs can be an effective approach for significantly improving
their performance. Our experiments with three LLMs show that this approach
consistently improves their simple few-shot performance by roughly 10%, pushing
the accuracy of LLMs towards SOTA or surpassing it. On the holdout test set of
Spider, the SOTA, in terms of execution accuracy, was 79.9 and the new SOTA at
the time of this writing using our approach is 85.3. Our approach with in-context
learning beats many heavily fine-tuned models by at least 5%. Additionally, when
evaluated on the BIRD benchmark, our approach achieved an execution accuracy
of 55.9%, setting a new SOTA on its holdout test set.

1

Introduction

Natural language interfaces to databases aim at making it easier for end users to access data in a
relational database. For example, given the utterance “find employees who make more than their
managers” and the schema of tables employees and manages, one may want to generate a query in
SQL that retrieves those employees from a database. Over the past two decades, research in this
field has progressed through several phases, with early systems being domain-specific, supporting
controlled natural language [Popescu et al., 2003, 2004, Li et al., 2007, Li and Jagadish, 2014] or
relying on rule-based approaches [Stratica et al., 2005] while more recent systems offering greater
domain-independence using supervised models trained on diverse domains and datasets [Zhong
et al., 2017, Yu et al., 2018] and more recently deep neural models trained on large text and code
repositories [Dong and Lapata, 2016, Devlin et al., 2018].
The latest development in this progression is the use of Large Language Models (LLMs) under
zero-shot and few-shot prompting [Rajkumar et al., 2022, Liu et al., 2023a]. It has been shown that
LLMs provide strong baselines using only a few demonstrations and no fine-tuning [Chen et al.,
2021, Brown et al., 2020, Liu et al., 2023b]. However, these models fall behind on commonly used
benchmarks (e.g., Spider) compared to well-designed and fine-tuned models. Table 1 shows the
performance of two latest LLMs, CodeX and GPT-4, on the development set of the Spider dataset.
Despite a strong performance, LLMs fall behind, compared to existing methods [Scholak et al., 2021,
Li et al., 2023a], especially on medium and complex queries. The question investigated in this paper
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

