Efficient Subgame Refinement
for Extensive-form Games
Zhenxing Ge
Nanjing University
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
zhenxingge@smail.nju.edu.cn
Tianyu Ding
Microsoft Corporation
Redmond, Washington, USA
tianyuding@microsoft.com

Zheng Xu
Nanjing University
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
xuzhengcs@smail.nju.edu.cn

Wenbin Li∗
Nanjing University
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
liwenbin@nju.edu.cn

Yang Gao∗
Nanjing University
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
gaoy@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Subgame solving is an essential technique in addressing large imperfect information
games, with various approaches developed to enhance the performance of refined
strategies in the abstraction of the target subgame. However, directly applying
existing subgame solving techniques may be difficult, due to the intricate nature
and substantial size of many real-world games. To overcome this issue, recent
subgame solving methods allow for subgame solving on limited knowledge order
subgames, increasing their applicability in large games; yet this may still face
obstacles due to extensive information set sizes. To address this challenge, we
propose a generative subgame solving (GS2) framework, which utilizes a generation
function to identify a subset of the earliest-reached nodes, reducing the size of
the subgame. Our method is supported by a theoretical analysis and employs a
diversity-based generation function to enhance safety. Experiments conducted on
research games as well as the challenging large game of GuanDan demonstrate a
significant improvement over the blueprint.

1

Introduction

Subgame solving is a standard technique commonly adopted by superhuman AIs to play in
games [Campbell et al., 2002, Silver et al., 2016]. This approach takes advantage of the fact
that for perfect information games (where both players have complete knowledge about the state
of the game), finding optimal strategies at any given decision node only requires knowledge of the
subgames rooted at that node [Brown and Sandholm, 2017]. Therefore, AI agents can make use
of this fact to improve their own strategies while playing with others, which proves significantly
beneficial for large games, e.g., Chess [Campbell et al., 2002] and Go [Silver et al., 2017].
Recent advancements in subgame-solving techniques have proven to be highly successful in imperfect
information games, such as no-limit Texas hold’em poker [Moravčík et al., 2017, Brown and
Sandholm, 2018, 2019], Mahjoog [Li et al., 2020], and dark chess [Zhang and Sandholm, 2021].
However, state-of-the-art subgame solving algorithms suffer from the efficiency of constructing
and solving large games. This limitation hinders their practicality for performing subgame-solving
on large subgame trees, thus restricting their application in games such as DouDiZhu [Zha et al.,
2021, Jiang et al., 2019] and GuanDan [Lu et al., 2022], which have average information set sizes
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

