Non-Asymptotic Analysis of a UCB-based
Top Two Algorithm

Marc Jourdan
marc.jourdan@inria.fr
Rémy Degenne
remy.degenne@inria.fr
1

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189-CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

Abstract
A Top Two sampling rule for bandit identification is a method which selects the
next arm to sample from among two candidate arms, a leader and a challenger. Due
to their simplicity and good empirical performance, they have received increased
attention in recent years. However, for fixed-confidence best arm identification,
theoretical guarantees for Top Two methods have only been obtained in the asymptotic regime, when the error level vanishes. In this paper, we derive the first
non-asymptotic upper bound on the expected sample complexity of a Top Two
algorithm, which holds for any error level. Our analysis highlights sufficient properties for a regret minimization algorithm to be used as leader. These properties
are satisfied by the UCB algorithm, and our proposed UCB-based Top Two algorithm simultaneously enjoys non-asymptotic guarantees and competitive empirical
performance.

1

Introduction

Faced with a collection of items (“arms”) with unknown probability distributions, a question that
arises in many applications is to find the distribution with the largest mean, which is referred to as
the best arm. Different approaches have been considered depending on the data collection process.
Sequential hypothesis testing [10, 37] encompasses situations where there is no control on the
collected samples. Experimental design [7, 35] aims at choosing the data collection scheme a priori.
In the multi-armed bandit [4, 20] and the ranking and selection [18] literature, an algorithm chooses
sequentially the distribution from which it will collect an additional sample based on past data.
In order to have theoretical guarantees for this identification problem, one should adopt a statistical
model on the underlying distributions. While parametric models are reasonable for applications such
as A/B testing [28], they are unrealistic in other fields such as agriculture [21]. Despite the restricted
scope of its applications, studying the identification task for Gaussian distributions is a natural first
step. Hopefully the insights gained will then be generalized to wider classes of distributions.
In the fixed confidence identification problem, an algorithm aims at identifying the best arm with
an error of at most δ ∈ (0, 1) while using as few samples as possible. Since each sample has a cost,
those algorithms should provide an upper bound on the expected number of samples used by the
algorithm before stopping. For those guarantees to be useful in practice, they should hold for any δ,
which is referred to as the non-asymptotic (or moderate) regime. In contrast, the asymptotic regime
considers vanishing error level, i.e. δ → 0. For Gaussian distributions, Top Two algorithms [36, 39]
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

