Is Distance Matrix Enough for Geometric Deep
Learning?

Zian Li1,2 , Xiyuan Wang1,2 , Yinan Huang1 , Muhan Zhang1,∗
1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are often used for tasks involving the 3D geometry
of a given graph, such as molecular dynamics simulation. While incorporating
Euclidean distance into Message Passing Neural Networks (referred to as Vanilla
DisGNN) is a straightforward way to learn the geometry, it has been demonstrated
that Vanilla DisGNN is geometrically incomplete. In this work, we first construct
families of novel and symmetric geometric graphs that Vanilla DisGNN cannot
distinguish even when considering all-pair distances, which greatly expands the
existing counterexample families. Our counterexamples show the inherent limitation of Vanilla DisGNN to capture symmetric geometric structures. We then
propose k-DisGNNs, which can effectively exploit the rich geometry contained
in the distance matrix. We demonstrate the high expressive power of k-DisGNNs
from three perspectives: 1. They can learn high-order geometric information
that cannot be captured by Vanilla DisGNN. 2. They can unify some existing
well-designed geometric models. 3. They are universal function approximators
from geometric graphs to scalars (when k ≥ 2) and vectors (when k ≥ 3). Most
importantly, we establish a connection between geometric deep learning (GDL)
and traditional graph representation learning (GRL), showing that those highly
expressive GNN models originally designed for GRL can also be applied to GDL
with impressive performance, and that existing complicated, equivariant models
are not the only solution. Experiments verify our theory. Our k-DisGNNs achieve
many new state-of-the-art results on MD17.

1

Introduction

Many real-world tasks are relevant to learning the geometric structure of a given graph, such as
molecular dynamics simulation, physical simulation, drug designing and protein structure prediction [Schmitz et al., 2019, Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020, Jumper et al., 2021, Guo et al., 2020].
Usually in these tasks, the coordinates of nodes and their individual properties, such as atomic
numbers, are given. The goal is to accurately predict both invariant properties, such as the energy of
the molecule, and equivariant properties, such as the force acting on each atom. This kind of graphs
is also referred to as geometric graphs by researchers [Bronstein et al., 2021, Han et al., 2022].
In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved outstanding performance on such
tasks, as they can learn a representation for each graph or node in an end-to-end fashion, rather than
relying on handcrafted features. In such setting, a straightforward idea is to incorporate Euclidean
distance, the most basic geometric feature, into Message Passing Neural Network [Gilmer et al.,
2017] (we call these models Vanilla DisGNN) [Schütt et al., 2018, Kearnes et al., 2016]. While
Vanilla DisGNN is simple yet powerful when considering all-pair distances (we assume all-pair
∗

Corresponding author: Muhan Zhang (muhan@pku.edu.cn).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

