CORL: Research-oriented Deep Offline Reinforcement
Learning Library

Denis Tarasov
Tinkoff
den.tarasov@tinkoff.ai

Alexander Nikulin
Tinkoff
a.p.nikulin@tinkoff.ai

Vladislav Kurenkov
Tinkoff
v.kurenkov@tinkoff.ai

Dmitry Akimov
Tinkoff
d.akimov@tinkoff.ai

Sergey Kolesnikov
Tinkoff
s.s.kolesnikov@tinkoff.ai

Abstract
CORL1 is an open-source library that provides thoroughly benchmarked single-file
implementations of both deep offline and offline-to-online reinforcement learning
algorithms. It emphasizes a simple developing experience with a straightforward
codebase and a modern analysis tracking tool. In CORL, we isolate methods
implementation into separate single files, making performance-relevant details
easier to recognize. Additionally, an experiment tracking feature is available to
help log metrics, hyperparameters, dependencies, and more to the cloud. Finally,
we have ensured the reliability of the implementations by benchmarking commonly
employed D4RL datasets providing a transparent source of results that can be
reused for robust evaluation tools such as performance profiles, probability of
improvement, or expected online performance.

1

Introduction

Deep Offline Reinforcement Learning (Levine et al., 2020) has been showing significant advancements
in numerous domains such as robotics (Smith et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2021), autonomous driving
(Diehl et al., 2021) and recommender systems (Chen et al., 2022). Due to such rapid development,
many open-source offline RL solutions2 emerged to help RL practitioners understand and improve
well-known offline RL techniques in different fields. On the one hand, they introduce offline RL
algorithms standard interfaces and user-friendly APIs, simplifying offline RL methods incorporation
into existing projects. On the other hand, introduced abstractions may hinder the learning curve for
newcomers and the ease of adoption for researchers interested in developing new algorithms. One
needs to understand the modularity design (several files on average), which (1) can be comprised of
thousands of lines of code or (2) can hardly fit for a novel method3 .
In this technical report, we take a different perspective on an offline RL library and also incorporate
emerging interest in the offline-to-online setup. We propose CORL (Clean Offline Reinforcement
Learning) – minimalistic and isolated single-file implementations of deep offline and offline-to-online
RL algorithms, supported by open-sourced D4RL (Fu et al., 2020) benchmark results. The uncomplicated design allows practitioners to read and understand the implementations of the algorithms
straightforwardly. Moreover, CORL supports optional integration with experiments tracking tools
such as Weighs&Biases (Biewald, 2020), providing practitioners with a convenient way to analyze
1

CORL Repository: https://github.com/corl-team/CORL
https://github.com/hanjuku-kaso/awesome-offline-rl#oss
3
https://github.com/takuseno/d3rlpy/issues/141
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

