Bypassing spike sorting: Density-based decoding using
spike localization from dense multielectrode probes

Yizi Zhang1∗ Tianxiao He1,2∗ Julien Boussard1 Charlie Windolf1 Olivier Winter3
Eric Trautmann1 Noam Roth4 Hailey Barrell4 Mark Churchland1 Nicholas A. Steinmetz4
The International Brain Laboratory3 Erdem Varol2 Cole Hurwitz1 Liam Paninski1
1

Columbia University

2
4

New York University 3 The International Brain Laboratory
University of Washington in Seattle

Abstract
Neural decoding and its applications to brain computer interfaces (BCI) are essential for understanding the association between neural activity and behavior. A
prerequisite for many decoding approaches is spike sorting, the assignment of
action potentials (spikes) to individual neurons. Current spike sorting algorithms,
however, can be inaccurate and do not properly model uncertainty of spike assignments, therefore discarding information that could potentially improve decoding
performance. Recent advances in high-density probes (e.g., Neuropixels) and
computational methods now allow for extracting a rich set of spike features from
unsorted data; these features can in turn be used to directly decode behavioral correlates. To this end, we propose a spike sorting-free decoding method that directly
models the distribution of extracted spike features using a mixture of Gaussians
(MoG) encoding the uncertainty of spike assignments, without aiming to solve the
spike clustering problem explicitly. We allow the mixing proportion of the MoG
to change over time in response to the behavior and develop variational inference
methods to fit the resulting model and to perform decoding. We benchmark our
method with an extensive suite of recordings from different animals and probe
geometries, demonstrating that our proposed decoder can consistently outperform
current methods based on thresholding (i.e. multi-unit activity) and spike sorting.
Open source code is available at https://github.com/yzhang511/density_decoding.

1

Introduction

Decoding methods for large-scale neural recordings are opening up new ways to understand the
neural mechanisms underlying cognition and behavior in diverse species (Urai et al., 2022). The
emergence of high-density multi-electrode array (HD-MEA) devices introduced a tremendous
increase in the number of extracellular channels that can be recorded simultaneously (Jun et al.,
2017; Steinmetz et al., 2021), leading to scalable and high-bandwith brain computer interfaces (BCI)
systems (Musk et al., 2019; Paulk et al., 2022).
Traditional neural decoding methods assume that spiking activity has already been correctly
spike-sorted. As a result, these methods are not appropriate for situations where sorting cannot be
performed with high precision. Despite intensive efforts towards automation, current spike sorting
algorithms still require manual supervision to ensure sorting quality (Steinmetz et al., 2018). Even
after careful curation, current spike sorters suffer from many sources of errors including erroneous
spike assignment (Deng et al., 2015). The dense spatial resolution of HD probes makes some known
issues of spike sorting even more evident. With the increased density of the recording channels, the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

