Transformed Low-Rank Parameterization Can Help
Robust Generalization for Tensor Neural Networks
Andong Wang
RIKEN AIP
andong.wang@riken.jp

Chao Li
RIKEN AIP
chao.li@riken.jp

Zhong Jin
China University of Petroleum-Beijing at Karamay
zhongjin@cupk.edu.cn

Mingyuan Bai
RIKEN AIP
mingyuan.bai@riken.jp

Guoxu Zhou∗
Guangdong University of Technology
gx.zhou@gdut.edu.cn

Qibin Zhao∗
RIKEN AIP
qibin.zhao@riken.jp

Abstract
Multi-channel learning has gained significant attention in recent applications, where
neural networks with t-product layers (t-NNs) have shown promising performance
through novel feature mapping in the transformed domain. However, despite the
practical success of t-NNs, the theoretical analysis of their generalization remains
unexplored. We address this gap by deriving upper bounds on the generalization error of t-NNs in both standard and adversarial settings. Notably, it reveals that t-NNs
compressed with exact transformed low-rank parameterization can achieve tighter
adversarial generalization bounds compared to non-compressed models. While
exact transformed low-rank weights are rare in practice, the analysis demonstrates
that through adversarial training with gradient flow, highly over-parameterized
t-NNs with the ReLU activation can be implicitly regularized towards a transformed low-rank parameterization under certain conditions. Moreover, this paper
establishes sharp adversarial generalization bounds for t-NNs with approximately
transformed low-rank weights. Our analysis highlights the potential of transformed
low-rank parameterization in enhancing the robust generalization of t-NNs, offering
valuable insights for further research and development.

1

Introduction

Multi-channel learning is a task to extract representations from the data with multiple channels, such
as multispectral images, time series, and multi-view videos, in an efficient and robust manner [24, 39,
60, 61]. Among the methods tackling this task, neural networks with t-product layers (t-NNs, see
Eq. (5) for a typical example) [12, 36] came to the stage very recently with remarkable efficiency and
robustness in various applications such as graph learning, remote sensing, and more [1, 11, 14, 32,
38, 39, 53, 58]. What distinguishes t-NNs from other networks is the inclusion of t-product layers,
founded on the algebraic framework of tensor singular value decomposition (t-SVD) [19, 40, 60, 61].
Unlike traditional tensor decompositions, t-SVD explores the transformed low-rankness, i.e., the
low-rank structure of a tensor in the transformed domain under an invertible linear transform [18].
The imposed transform in t-product layers provides additional expressivity to neural networks, while
∗

Qibin Zhao and Guoxu Zhou are the corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

