Nearly Tight Bounds For
Differentially Private Multiway Cut

Mina Dalirrooyfard∗
Machine Learning Research
Morgan Stanley
mina.dalirrooyfard@morganstanley.com

Slobodan Mitrovic∗
Department of Computer Science
UC Davis
smitrovic@ucdavis.edu

Yuriy Nevmyvaka
Machine Learning Research
Morgan Stanley
yuriy.nevmyvaka@morganstanley.com

Abstract
Finding min s-t cuts in graphs is a basic algorithmic tool, with applications in
image segmentation, community detection, reinforcement learning, and data clustering. In this problem, we are given two nodes as terminals and the goal is to
remove the smallest number of edges from the graph so that these two terminals
are disconnected. We study the complexity of differential privacy for the min
s-t cut problem and show nearly tight lower and upper bounds where we achieve
privacy at no cost for running time efficiency. We also develop a differentially
private algorithm for the multiway k-cut problem, in which we are given k nodes
as terminals that we would like to disconnect. As a function of k, we obtain privacy
guarantees that are exponentially more efficient than applying the advanced composition theorem to known algorithms for multiway k-cut. Finally, we empirically
evaluate the approximation of our differentially private min s-t cut algorithm and
show that it almost matches the quality of the output of non-private ones.

1

Introduction

Min s-t cut, or more generally Multiway k-cut, is a fundamental problem in graph theory and
occupies a central place in combinatorial optimization. Given a weighted graph and k terminals,
the multiway k-cut problem asks to divide the nodes of the graph into k partitions such that (1)
each partition has exactly one terminal, and (2) the sum of the weights of edges between partitions,
known as the cut value, is minimized [9]. Multiway k-cut is a clustering method used in a large
variety of applications, including energy minimization [21] and image segmentation [27, 32] in vision,
reinforcement learning [25], community detection [33, 29] and many other learning and clustering
tasks [4, 5, 30, 23].
The above applications are carried on large data sets, and more and more frequently those applications
are executed on sensitive data. Hence, designing algorithms that preserve the privacy of data has
been given substantial attention recently. A widely used and conservative standard of data privacy is
differential privacy (DP) developed by Dwork [12] which indicates that an algorithm is differentially
private if, given two neighboring databases, it produces statistically indistinguishable outputs. When
DP is applied to graph data, two variants of DP were introduced [19]: in edge DP, two neighboring
graphs differ in only one edge, and in node DP, two graphs are neighboring if one graph is obtained
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

