Beyond Black-Box Advice: Learning-Augmented
Algorithms for MDPs with Q-Value Predictions
Tongxin Li
School of Data Science
CUHK-SZ, China
litongxin@cuhk.edu.cn
Shaolei Ren
Electrical & Computer Engineering
UC Riverside, USA
shaolei@ucr.edu

Yiheng Lin
Computing + Mathematical Sciences
Caltech, USA
yihengl@caltech.edu
Adam Wierman
Computing + Mathematical Sciences
Caltech, USA
adamw@caltech.edu

Abstract
We study the tradeoff between consistency and robustness in the context of a
single-trajectory time-varying Markov Decision Process (MDP) with untrusted
machine-learned advice. Our work departs from the typical approach of treating
advice as coming from black-box sources by instead considering a setting where
additional information about how the advice is generated is available. We prove a
first-of-its-kind consistency and robustness tradeoff given Q-value advice under a
general MDP model that includes both continuous and discrete state/action spaces.
Our results highlight that utilizing Q-value advice enables dynamic pursuit of the
better of machine-learned advice and a robust baseline, thus result in near-optimal
performance guarantees, which provably improves what can be obtained solely
with black-box advice.

1

Introduction

Machine-learned predictions and hand-crafted algorithmic advice are both crucial in online decisionmaking problems, driving a growing interest in learning-augmented algorithms [1, 2] that exploit
the benefits of predictions to improve the performance for typical problem instances while bounding
the worst-case performance [3, 4]. To this point, the study of learning-augmented algorithms has
primarily viewed machine-learned advice as potentially untrusted information generated by black-box
models. Yet, in many real-world problems, additional knowledge of the machine learning models
used to produce advice/predictions is often available and can potentially improve the performance of
learning-augmented algorithms.
A notable example that motivates our work is the problem of minimizing costs (or maximizing
rewards) in a single-trajectory Markov Decision Process (MDP). More concretely, a value-based
machine-learned policy ⇡
e can be queried to provide suggested actions as advice to the agent at each
step [5–7]. Typically, the suggested actions are chosen to minimize (or maximize, in case of rewards)
estimated cost-to-go functions (known as Q-value predictions) based on the current state.

Naturally, in addition to suggested actions, the Q-value function itself can also provide additional
information (e.g., the long-term impact of choosing a certain action) potentially useful to the design
of a learning-augmented algorithm. Thus, this leads to two different designs for learning-augmented
algorithms in MDPs: black-box algorithms and grey-box algorithms. A learning-augmented algorithm
using ⇡
e is black-box if ⇡
e provides only the suggested action u
e to the learning-augmented algorithm,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

