ReMaX: Relaxing for Better Training on Efficient
Panoptic Segmentation

Shuyang Sun1∗ Weijun Wang2 Qihang Yu† Andrew Howard2 Philip Torr1 Liang-Chieh Chen†
1
University of Oxford 2 Google Research

Abstract
This paper presents a new mechanism to facilitate the training of mask transformers
for efficient panoptic segmentation, democratizing its deployment. We observe that
due to the high complexity in the training objective of panoptic segmentation, it will
inevitably lead to much higher penalization on false positive. Such unbalanced loss
makes the training process of the end-to-end mask-transformer based architectures
difficult, especially for efficient models. In this paper, we present ReMaX that adds
relaxation to mask predictions and class predictions during the training phase for
panoptic segmentation. We demonstrate that via these simple relaxation techniques
during training, our model can be consistently improved by a clear margin without
any extra computational cost on inference. By combining our method with efficient
backbones like MobileNetV3-Small, our method achieves new state-of-the-art
results for efficient panoptic segmentation on COCO, ADE20K and Cityscapes.
Code and pre-trained checkpoints will be available at https://github.com/
google-research/deeplab2.

1

Introduction

Panoptic segmentation [36] aims to provide a holistic scene understanding [63] by unifying instance
segmentation [21] and semantic segmentation [24]. The comprehensive understanding of the scene is
obtained by assigning each pixel a label, encoding both semantic class and instance identity. Prior
works adopt separate segmentation modules, specific to instance and semantic segmentation, followed
by another fusion module to resolve the discrepancy [71, 12, 35, 70, 53, 42]. More recently, thanks
to the transformer architecture [64, 4], mask transformers [66, 13, 76, 43, 72, 14, 73] are proposed
for end-to-end panoptic segmentation by directly predicting class-labeled masks.
Although the definition of panoptic segmentation only permits each pixel to be associated with
just one mask entity, some recent mask transformer-based methods [13, 76, 14, 40] apply sigmoid
cross-entropy loss (i.e., not enforcing a single prediction via softmax cross-entropy loss) for mask
supervision. This allows each pixel to be associated with multiple mask predictions, leading to an
extremely unbalanced loss during training. As shown in Figure 1, when using the sigmoid crossentropy loss to supervise the mask branch, the false-positive (FP) loss can be even 103 × larger than
the false-negative (FN) loss. Surprisingly, such unbalanced loss leads to better results than using
softmax cross-entropy, which indicates that the gradients produced by the FP loss are still helpful for
better performance.
However, the radical imbalance in the losses makes it difficult for the network to produce confident
predictions, especially for efficient backbones [28, 57, 27], as they tend to make more mistakes given
the smaller model size. Meanwhile, the training process will also become unstable due to the large
scale loss fluctuation. To address this issue, recent approaches [4, 13, 14, 40] need to carefully clip
∗
†

Work done during internship at Google Research. Correspondence to: kevinsun@robots.ox.ac.uk
Work done while at Google.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

