On the Overlooked Pitfalls of Weight Decay and How
to Mitigate Them: A Gradient-Norm Perspective
Zeke Xie1,2 , Zhiqiang Xu3 , Jingzhao Zhang4 , Issei Sato1 , and Masashi Sugiyama2,1
1

The University of Tokyo
RIKEN Center for AIP
3
MBZUAI
4
Tsinghua University
Correspondence: zekexie16@gmail.com, Zhiqiang.Xu@mbzuai.ac.ae
2

Abstract
Weight decay is a simple yet powerful regularization technique that has been very
widely used in training of deep neural networks (DNNs). While weight decay has
attracted much attention, previous studies fail to discover some overlooked pitfalls
on large gradient norms resulted by weight decay. In this paper, we discover that,
weight decay can unfortunately lead to large gradient norms at the final phase (or
the terminated solution) of training, which often indicates bad convergence and
poor generalization. To mitigate the gradient-norm-centered pitfalls, we present
the first practical scheduler for weight decay, called the Scheduled Weight Decay
(SWD) method that can dynamically adjust the weight decay strength according to
the gradient norm and significantly penalize large gradient norms during training.
Our experiments also support that SWD indeed mitigates large gradient norms and
often significantly outperforms the conventional constant weight decay strategy for
Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam).

1

Introduction

Deep learning [25] has achieved great success in numerous fields over the last decade. Weight decay
is the most popular regularization technique for training deep neural networks that generalize well
[24]. In deep learning, there exist two types of “weight decay”: L2 regularization and weight decay.
People commonly use the first type of L2 regularization for training of deep neural networks as
θt = θt−1 − ηt ∇(L(θt−1 ) + λL2 ∥θt−1 ∥2 ), where ∇ is the gradient operator, ∥ · ∥ is the L2 -norm, t
is the index of iterations, θ denotes the model weights, ηt is the learning rate, L(θ) is the training
loss, and λL2 is the L2 regularization hyperparameter. In principle, the L2 regularization strength is
chosen to be constant during training of DNNs and people do not need to schedule L2 regularization
like learning rate decay. The second type of weight decay was first proposed by Hanson and Pratt
[13] to directly regularize the weight norm:
θt = (1 − λ′ )θt−1 − ηt

∂L(θt−1 )
,
∂θ

(1)

where λ′ is the (vanilla) weight decay hyperparameter.
While the two types of “weight decay” seem similar to Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), Loshchilov
and Hutter [32] reported that they can make huge differences in adaptive gradient methods, such
as Adam [22]. Adam often generalizes worse and finds sharper minima than SGD [40, 56, 46] for
popular convolutional neural networks (CNNs), where the flat minima have been argued to be closely
related with good generalization [16, 17, 14, 51, 21]. Understanding and bridging the generalization
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

