Exploring and Interacting with the Set of Good Sparse
Generalized Additive Models
Chudi Zhong1∗ Zhi Chen1∗ Jiachang Liu1

Margo Seltzer2

Cynthia Rudin1

1
Duke University 2 The University of British Columbia
{chudi.zhong, zhi.chen1, jiachang.liu}@duke.edu
mseltzer@cs.ubc.ca, cynthia@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
In real applications, interaction between machine learning models and domain
experts is critical; however, the classical machine learning paradigm that usually
produces only a single model does not facilitate such interaction. Approximating
and exploring the Rashomon set, i.e., the set of all near-optimal models, addresses
this practical challenge by providing the user with a searchable space containing
a diverse set of models from which domain experts can choose. We present
algorithms to efficiently and accurately approximate the Rashomon set of sparse,
generalized additive models with ellipsoids for fixed support sets and use these
ellipsoids to approximate Rashomon sets for many different support sets. The
approximated Rashomon set serves as a cornerstone to solve practical challenges
such as (1) studying the variable importance for the model class; (2) finding models
under user-specified constraints (monotonicity, direct editing); and (3) investigating
sudden changes in the shape functions. Experiments demonstrate the fidelity of the
approximated Rashomon set and its effectiveness in solving practical challenges.

1

Introduction

A key ingredient for trust in machine learning models is interpretability; it is more difficult to trust
a model whose computations we do not understand. However, building interpretable models is not
easy; even if one creates a model that is sparse and monotonic in the right variables, it likely is still
not what a domain expert is looking for. In fact, domain experts often cannot fully articulate the
constraints their problem requires. This leads to an often painful iterative process where a machine
learning algorithm, which is typically designed to produce only one model, is now asked to produce
another, and possibly many more after that. Hence, the classical machine learning paradigm is broken,
because it was not designed to facilitate choice among models. In other words, the classical machine
learning paradigm was not designed for the real-world situation in which domain experts see and
understand a model, identify shortcomings in it, and change it interactively in a specific way. There is
instead an interaction bottleneck.
We work in a new paradigm where an algorithm produces many models from which to choose, instead
of just one [1–3]. Algorithms in this new paradigm produce or approximate the Rashomon set of
a given function class. The Rashomon set is the set of models that are approximately as good as
the best model in the class. That is, it is the set of all good models. Rashomon sets for many real
problems are surprisingly large [4–6], and there are theoretical reasons why we expect many simple,
good models to exist [3]. The question we ask here is how to explicitly find the Rashomon set for the
class of sparse generalized additive models (sparse GAMs).
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

