The Distortion of Binomial Voting Defies Expectation∗

Yannai A. Gonczarowski†

Gregory Kehne‡

Ben Schiffer¶

Ariel D. Procaccia§

Shirley Zhang∥

Abstract
In computational social choice, the distortion of a voting rule quantifies the degree
to which the rule overcomes limited preference information to select a socially
desirable outcome. This concept has been investigated extensively, but only
through a worst-case lens. Instead, we study the expected distortion of voting
rules with respect to an underlying distribution over voter utilities. Our main
contribution is the design and analysis of a novel and intuitive rule, binomial voting,
which provides strong distribution-independent guarantees for both expected
distortion and expected welfare.

1

Introduction

In an election, voters report their preferences by casting ballots. Under the ubiquitous plurality rule,
each voter names a single alternative, whereas other rules — such as the badly named ranked-choice
voting,7 whose adoption is rapidly expanding in the United States — require voters to rank the
alternatives. However, even these ostensibly expressive ordinal ballots (whereby voters rank the
alternatives) fail to capture voters’ intensity of preference under truthful reporting.
If voters could report utility functions that are comparable to each other, then we would want to select
socially desirable alternatives with respect to these utilities, but it is typically impractical to expect
voters to compute and report such utilities. This creates a tension between the limited information
available to the voting rule (through the report of ordinal ballots only) and its goal (good outcomes
with respect to latent cardinal utilities).
A significant body of work in computational social choice aims to understand and alleviate this
tension [Anshelevich et al., 2021]. It revolves around the notion of distortion, defined as the
worst-case ratio between the utilitarian social welfare (sum of utilities) of the voting rule’s outcome
and that of the welfare-maximizing alternative. The worst case is taken over rankings, which serve
as input to the voting rule, and over utilities that are consistent with these rankings.
∗
Gonczarowski gratefully acknowledges research support by the Harvard FAS Inequality in America
Initiative. Procaccia gratefully acknowledges research support by the National Science Foundation under
grants IIS-2147187, IIS-2229881 and CCF-2007080; and by the Office of Naval Research under grant
N00014-20-1-2488. Schiffer was supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship. Zhang was supported
by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship.
†
Department of Economics and Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
| E-mail: yannai@gonch.name.
‡
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin | E-mail: gkehne@utexas.edu.
§
Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University | E-mail: arielpro@seas.harvard.edu.
¶
Department of Statistics, Harvard University | E-mail: bschiffer1@g.harvard.edu.
∥
Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University | E-mail: szhang2@g.harvard.edu.
7
Also known as “instant-runoff voting” or “alternative vote.”

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

