C-E VAL: A Multi-Level Multi-Discipline Chinese
Evaluation Suite for Foundation Models
Yuzhen Huang∗1
Tangjun Su1

Yuzhuo Bai∗2 Zhihao Zhu1 Junlei Zhang1 Jinghan Zhang1
Junteng Liu1 Chuancheng Lv2 Yikai Zhang1 Jiayi Lei1
Yao Fu3 Maosong Sun2 Junxian He†4
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Tsinghua University 3 University of Edinburgh
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
ceval.benchmark@gmail.com
https://cevalbenchmark.com

Abstract
New NLP benchmarks are urgently needed to align with the rapid development of
large language models (LLMs). We present C-E VAL , the first comprehensive Chinese evaluation suite designed to assess advanced knowledge and reasoning abilities
of foundation models in a Chinese context. C-E VAL comprises multiple-choice
questions across four difficulty levels: middle school, high school, college, and
professional. The questions span 52 diverse disciplines, ranging from humanities
to science and engineering. C-E VAL is accompanied by C-E VAL H ARD, a subset
of very challenging subjects in C-E VAL that requires advanced reasoning abilities
to solve. We conduct a comprehensive evaluation of the most advanced LLMs on
C-E VAL, including both English- and Chinese-oriented models. Results indicate
that only GPT-4 could achieve an average accuracy of over 60%, suggesting that
there is still significant room for improvement for current LLMs. We anticipate
C-E VAL will help analyze important strengths and shortcomings of foundation
models, and foster their development and growth for Chinese users.1

1

Introduction

Evaluation benchmarks are at the core role for AI development. While traditional NLP benchmarks
were mostly designed to measure specific and relatively simple abilities, large language models
(LLMs), or foundation models, have demonstrated various new capabilities and shifted the evaluation
focus to more general and intricate skills, such as broad world knowledge and complex reasoning. To
align with the new era of LLMs, new benchmarks are proposed recently to probe a diverse set of LLM
abilities. For example, MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021a), BIG-bench (Srivastava et al., 2022), and
HELM (Liang et al., 2022) benchmarks attempt to aggregate a wide range of NLP tasks for holistic
evaluation. Some other benchmarks specifically focus on advanced LLM abilities that emerge with
scale, such as reasoning (Cobbe et al., 2021), hard math problem-solving (Hendrycks et al., 2021b),
and coding (Chen et al., 2021). While traditional NLP benchmarks are becoming obsolete, these new
ones are extensively used in recent research to drive development of the latest LLMs (Taylor et al.,
2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023).
However, these modern benchmarks primarily target English language, resulting in limited understanding of LLMs’ capabilities in other languages. In this work, we focus on evaluating the advanced
abilities of foundation models in a Chinese context, one of the most widely spoken language in the
∗

Equal Contribution. Full list of individual contributions is detailed in Appendix A.
Correspondence to Junxian He <junxianh@cse.ust.hk>. Work done while affiliated with SJTU.
1
The C-E VAL data and evaluation code are available at https://github.com/hkust-nlp/ceval.

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

