Computing Optimal Equilibria and Mechanisms via
Learning in Zero-Sum Extensive-Form Games

Brian Hu Zhang∗
Carnegie Mellon University
bhzhang@cs.cmu.edu

Gabriele Farina∗
MIT
gfarina@mit.edu

Federico Cacciamani
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
federico.cacciamani@polimi.it

Ioannis Anagnostides
Carnegie Mellon University
ianagnos@cs.cmu.edu

Stephen McAleer
Carnegie Mellon University
smcaleer@cs.cmu.edu

Andrea Celli
Bocconi University
andrea.celli2@unibocconi.it
Vincent Conitzer
Carnegie Mellon University
conitzer@cs.cmu.edu

Andreas Haupt
MIT
haupt@mit.edu

Nicola Gatti
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
nicola.gatti@polimi.it
Tuomas Sandholm
Carnegie Mellon University
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new approach for computing optimal equilibria and mechanisms
via learning in games. It applies to extensive-form settings with any number of
players, including mechanism design, information design, and solution concepts
such as correlated, communication, and certification equilibria. We observe that
optimal equilibria are minimax equilibrium strategies of a player in an extensiveform zero-sum game. This reformulation allows us to apply techniques for learning in zero-sum games, yielding the first learning dynamics that converge to optimal equilibria, not only in empirical averages, but also in iterates. We demonstrate
the practical scalability and flexibility of our approach by attaining state-of-the-art
performance in benchmark tabular games, and by computing an optimal mechanism for a sequential auction design problem using deep reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

What does it mean to solve a game? This is one of the central questions addressed in game
theory, leading to a variety of different solution concepts. Perhaps first and foremost, there are
various notions of equilibrium, strategically stable points from which no rational individual would
be inclined to deviate. But is it enough to compute, or indeed learn, just any one equilibrium
of a game? In two-player zero-sum games, one can make a convincing argument that a single
equilibrium in fact constitutes a complete solution to the game, based on the celebrated minimax
theorem of von Neumann [97]. Indeed, approaches based on computing minimax equilibria in
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

