Differentiable Clustering with
Perturbed Spanning Forests

Lawrence Stewart∗
ENS & INRIA
Paris, France

Francis Bach
ENS & INRIA
Paris, France

Felipe Llinares-López
Google DeepMind
Paris, France

Quentin Berthet
Google DeepMind
Paris, France

Abstract
We introduce a differentiable clustering method based on stochastic perturbations
of minimum-weight spanning forests. This allows us to include clustering in end-toend trainable pipelines, with efficient gradients. We show that our method performs
well even in difficult settings, such as data sets with high noise and challenging
geometries. We also formulate an ad hoc loss to efficiently learn from partial
clustering data using this operation. We demonstrate its performance on several
data sets for supervised and semi-supervised tasks.2 .

1

Introduction

Clustering is one of the most classical tasks in data processing, and one of the fundamental methods in
unsupervised learning (Hastie et al., 2009). In most formulations, the problem consists in partitioning
a collection of n elements into k clusters, in a manner that optimizes some criterion, such as intracluster proximity, or some resemblance criterion, such as a pairwise similarity matrix. This procedure
is naturally related to other tasks in machine learning, either by using these induced classes in
supervised problems, or by either evaluating or looking for well-clustered representations (Caron
et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2016). Its performance and flexibility on a wide range of natural dataset,
that makes it a good downstream or preprocessing task, also make it a a very important candidate to
learn representations in a supervised fashion. Yet, it is a fundamentally “combinatorial” problem,
representing a discrete decision, much like many classical algorithmic methods (e.g., sorting, taking
nearest neighbours, dynamic programming).
For these reasons, it is extremely challenging to learn through clustering. As a function, the solution
of a clustering problem is piece-wise constant with respect to its inputs (such as a similarity or
distance matrix), and its gradient would therefore be zero almost everywhere. This operation is
therefore naturally ill-suited to the use of gradient-based approaches to minimize an objective, which
are at the center of optimization procedures for machine learning. It does not have the convenient
properties of commonly used operations in end-to-end differentiable systems, such as smoothness
and differentiability. Another challenge of using clustering as part of a learning pipeline is perhaps its
ambiguity: even for a given notion of distance or similarity between elements, there are several valid
definitions of clustering, with criteria adapted to different uses. Popular methods include k-means,
whose formulation is NP-hard in general even in simple settings (Drineas et al., 2004), and relies on
heuristics that depend heavily on their initialization (Arthur and Vassilvitskii, 2007; Bubeck et al.,
2012). Several of them rely on proximity to a centroid, or prototype, i.e., a vector representing each
cluster. These fail on challenging geometries, e.g., interlaced clusters with no linear separation.
We propose a new method for differentiable clustering that efficiently addresses these difficulties. It
is a principled, deterministic operation: it is based on minimum-weight spanning forests, a variant
∗
2

All correspondence should be addressed to lawrence.stewart@ens.fr.
Code base: https://github.com/LawrenceMMStewart/DiffClust_NeurIPS2023

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

