VaRT: Variational Regression Trees

Sebastian Salazar Escobedo
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
sebastian.salazar@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Decision trees are a well-established tool in machine learning for classification
and regression tasks. In this paper, we introduce a novel non-parametric Bayesian
model that uses variational inference to approximate a posterior distribution over
the space of stochastic decision trees. We evaluate the model’s performance on 18
datasets and demonstrate its competitiveness with other state-of-the-art methods in
regression tasks. We also explore its application to causal inference problems. We
provide a fully vectorized implementation of our algorithm in PyTorch.

1

Introduction and Related Work

The use of binary trees for classification and regression problems is widespread in the Machine
Learning community (see Breiman [2001], Criminisi [2011]). Chipman et al. [1998] proposed the
Bayesian CART method, which offers a fully Bayesian treatment of the problem, aiming to learn a
distribution over trees as opposed to a single tree. This innovation led to the development of more
sophisticated algorithms, such as Bayesian Additive Regression Trees (BART) (see Chipman et al.
[2010]), which has stood the test of time and still shows competitive performance to this day. Both
BART and Bayesian CART approximate the posterior distribution over trees through the use of
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods.
In the period following the inception of the Bayesian CART methodology, the field has witnessed
significant advancements in approximate Bayesian Inference. This paper explores approximating a
posterior distribution over the space of trees via variational inference, a compelling MCMC alternative
based on an optimization problem as elaborated in Blei et al. [2017]. Our approach introduces a
unique stochastic process over the space of trees, serving as a model prior. Notably, despite the
infinite parameter specification of this stochastic process, we show that variational inference remains
feasible.
This paper is also related to work on soft decision trees (Kontschieder et al. [2015]), where the goal is
to learn a stochastic decision tree of a fixed structure by minimizing some sort of loss function (see
Section 2.1). In this paper, we adopt a fully Bayesian perspective to this problem and instead learn a
distribution over soft decision trees of varying structure. A fully Bayesian approach has the advantage
in that it allows us to naturally quantify the uncertainty of the predictions made by our model.
Overall, our contributions in this paper include a novel stochastic process over the space of trees,
a variational inference algorithm for approximating the posterior distribution over trees, and a
demonstration of the performance of our model on both regression and causal inference tasks.
We believe that this work opens up new avenues for future research in the area of Bayesian Nonparametrics and decision trees.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

