Sample-Efficient and Safe Deep Reinforcement
Learning via Reset Deep Ensemble Agents

Woojun Kim1,∗ , Yongjae Shin2,∗ , Jongeui Park2 , Youngchul Sung2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 KAIST
woojunk@andrew.cmu.edu {yongjae.shin, jongeui.park, ycsung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in solving
complex tasks through its integration with deep neural networks (DNNs) as function
approximators. However, the reliance on DNNs has introduced a new challenge
called primacy bias, whereby these function approximators tend to prioritize early
experiences, leading to overfitting. To mitigate this primacy bias, a reset method
has been proposed, which performs periodic resets of a portion or the entirety of a
deep RL agent while preserving the replay buffer. However, the use of the reset
method can result in performance collapses after executing the reset, which can be
detrimental from the perspective of safe RL and regret minimization. In this paper,
we propose a new reset-based method that leverages deep ensemble learning to
address the limitations of the vanilla reset method and enhance sample efficiency.
The proposed method is evaluated through various experiments including those in
the domain of safe RL. Numerical results show its effectiveness in high sample
efficiency and safety considerations.

1

Introduction

With the remarkable success of deep learning in diverse fields such as image classification [10], the
integration of reinforcement learning (RL) with deep learning, called deep RL, has been considered
a promising approach to solving complex control tasks. In particular, using deep neural networks
(DNNs) as function approximators enables the representation of state-action value function over a
huge state-action space without requiring large storage as in tabular methods, which is often infeasible
in complex tasks [12]. Despite its effectiveness, however, DNN-based function approximators in deep
RL can lead to an overfitting problem called primacy bias, which was first investigated in Nikishin
et al. [13]. Primacy bias means that DNN-based function approximators in RL may overfit to early
experiences, impeding their ability as function approximators for subsequent later experiences. This
phenomenon basically results from the use of an replay buffer in deep RL serving as a dynamic dataset
to which experience samples are added during the training process so that experiences collected
early in the training process are sampled more in training than those collected later [6]. Due to this
primacy bias, it has been shown that performance tends to deteriorate as the replay ratio, defined as
the number of updates per environment interaction, increases [6, 13].
To mitigate the primacy bias, Nikishin et al. [13] recently proposed a simple but effective method
based on resetting. The reset method periodically resets either a portion or the entirety of a deep RL
agent while preserving the replay buffer. This method enhances both the steady-state performance
and sample efficiency by allowing the deep RL agent to increase the replay ratio, whereas the
performance of the vanilla deep RL agent deteriorates with the increasing replay ratio. Despite its
potential as a means to solve primacy bias, the reset method has a problem. That is, it causes periodic
*

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Youngchul Sung <ycsung@kaist.ac.kr>

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

