ComSL: A Composite Speech-Language Model for
End-to-End Speech-to-Text Translation
Chenyang Le⇤
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
nethermanpro@sjtu.edu.cn
Long Zhou
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China
lozhou@microsoft.com

Yao Qian
Microsoft Cloud and AI
Redmond, WA, US
yaoqian@microsoft.com

Shujie Liu
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China
shujliu@microsoft.com

Michael Zeng
Microsoft Cloud and AI
Redmond, WA, US
nzeng@microsoft.com

Yanmin Qian
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
yanminqian@sjtu.edu.cn

Xuedong Huang
Microsoft Cloud and AI
Redmond, WA, US
xdh@microsoft.com

Abstract
Joint speech-language training is challenging due to the large demand for training
data and GPU consumption, as well as the modality gap between speech and
language. We present ComSL, a speech-language model built atop a composite
architecture of public pretrained speech-only and language-only models and optimized data-efficiently for spoken language tasks. Particularly, we propose to
incorporate cross-modality learning into transfer learning and conduct them simultaneously for downstream tasks in a multi-task learning manner. Our approach has
demonstrated effectiveness in end-to-end speech-to-text translation tasks, achieving
a new state-of-the-art average BLEU score of 31.5 on the multilingual speech to
English text translation task for 21 languages, as measured on the public CoVoST2
evaluation set.2

1

Introduction

In recent years, an end-to-end (E2E) modeling approach has been widely applied to spoken language
tasks, e.g., speech translation, speech summarization, speech understanding, etc. It enables us
to train a single model by E2E optimization with spoken language task-oriented metrics. The
conventional pipeline design generally contains two modules: speech model decodes the input speech
into text and language model infers the recognized text to target language in translation task, topic
sentence in summarization or intent in understanding task. These two modules are trained using their
own respective criteria, which may not be optimal for each other. The cascaded process probably
propagates errors that occurred in the current module to the following module. In addition, other
information such as prosodic features contained in the speech signal, which are difficult to quantize
using language symbols, can also be beneficial for spoken language tasks.
⇤

2

The first author conducted this work during internship at Microsoft.
The code is available at https://github.com/nethermanpro/ComSL.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

