Context-lumpable stochastic bandits

Chung-Wei Lee∗
University of Southern California
leechung@usc.edu
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori
Google DeepMind
yadkori@google.com

Qinghua Liu
Princeton University
qinghual@princeton.edu

Chi Jin
Princeton University
chij@princeton.edu

Tor Lattimore
Google DeepMind
lattimore@google.com

Csaba Szepesvári
Google DeepMind and University of Alberta
szepesva@ualberta.ca

Abstract
We consider a contextual bandit problem with S contexts and K actions. In each
round t = 1, 2, . . . the learner observes a random context and chooses an action
based on its past experience. The learner then observes a random reward whose
mean is a function of the context and the action for the round. Under the assumption
that the contexts can be lumped into r ≤ min{S, K} groups such that the mean
reward for the various actions is the same for any two contexts that are in the
same group, we give an algorithm that outputs an ε-optimal policy after using
e
+ K)/ε2 ) samples with high probability and provide a matching
at most O(r(S
Ω(r(S + K)/ε2 ) lower bound. In the regret minimization setting,
p we give an
e r3 (S + K)T ).
algorithm whose cumulative regret up to time T is bounded by O(
To the best of our knowledge, we arepthe first to show the near-optimal sample
e poly(r)(S + K)T ) minimax regret in the
complexity in the PAC setting and O(
online setting for this problem. We also show our algorithms can be applied to
more general low-rank bandits and get improved regret bounds in some scenarios.

1

Introduction

Consider a recommendation platform that interacts with a finite set of users in an online fashion.
Users arrive at the platform and receive a recommendation. If they engage with the recommendation
(e.g., they “click”) then the platform receives a reward, otherwise no reward is obtained. Assume that
the users can be partitioned into a small number of groups such that users in the same group have the
same preferences.
We ask whether there exist algorithms that can take advantage of the lumpability of users into a few
groups, even when the identity of the group a user belongs to is unknown and only learnable because
they share preferences with other users in the group.
A slightly more general version of this problem can be formalized as follows: Viewing users as
“contexts” and recommendations as “actions” (or arms), assume that there are S contexts and K
actions. In round t = 1, 2, . . . the learner first receives a context it , sampled from an unknown
∗

most works were done when interning at DeepMind.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

