TaskMet: Task-Driven Metric Learning for Model Learning

Dishank Bansal∗ Ricky T. Q. Chen Mustafa Mukadam
Meta

Brandon Amos

Abstract
Deep learning models are often used with some downstream task. Models solely
trained to achieve accurate predictions may struggle to perform well on the desired downstream tasks. We propose using the task loss to learn a metric which
parameterizes a loss to train the model. This approach does not alter the optimal
prediction model itself, but rather changes the model learning to emphasize the
information important for the downstream task. This enables us to achieve the best
of both worlds: a prediction model trained in the original prediction space while
also being valuable for the desired downstream task. We validate our approach
through experiments conducted in two main settings: 1) decision-focused model
learning scenarios involving portfolio optimization and budget allocation, and 2)
reinforcement learning in noisy environments with distracting states. The source
code to reproduce our experiments is available here.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models for prediction are typically trained
to maximize the likelihood on a training dataset. While the
models are capable of universally approximating the underlying data generating process to predict the output, they are
prone to approximation errors due to limited training data and
model capacity. These errors lead to suboptimal performance
in downstream tasks where the models are used. Furthermore,
even though a model may appear to have reasonable predictive
performance on the metric and training data it was trained on,
such as the mean squared error, employing the model for a
downstream task may require the model to focus on different
parts of the data that were not emphasized in the training for
predictive performance. Overcoming the discrepancy between
the model’s prediction task and performance on a downstream
task is the focus of our paper.

l
ask

oss

t

mod
el s
pac
e
DFL

TaskMet
true model

MSE

Figure 1: The MSE results in a model
close to the true model in the prediction space, but may give poor task performance. Decision-focused learning
(DFL) methods optimize the task loss,
but may deviate from the prediction
space. TaskMet optimizes the task loss
while retaining the prediction task.

Examples of settings where the model’s prediction loss Lpred is mis-matched from the downstream
task Ltask include the following, which table 1 also summarizes:
1. the portfolio optimization setting from Wilder et al. [2019], which predicts the expected
returns from stocks for a financial portfolio. Here, the Lpred is the MSE and Ltask is from the
regret of running a portfolio optimization problem on the output;
2. the allocation setting from Wilder et al. [2019], which predicts the value of items that are
being allocated, e.g. click-through-rates for recommender systems. Here, Lpred is the MSE
and Ltask measures the result of allocating the highest-value items.
∗

Work done as part of the Meta AI residency program.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

