Masked Two-channel Decoupling Framework for
Incomplete Multi-view Weak Multi-label Learning

Chengliang Liu1 , Jie Wen1∗, Yabo Liu1 , Chao Huang2 , Zhihao Wu1 ,
Xiaoling Luo3 , Yong Xu1*
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University (Shenzhen Campus)
3
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
{liucl1996, horatio_ng}@163.com, {jiewen_pr, huangchao_08}@126.com,
yaboliu.ug@gmail.com, xiaolingluoo@outlook.com, yongxu@ymail.com

Abstract
Multi-view learning has become a popular research topic in recent years, but
research on the cross-application of classic multi-label classification and multi-view
learning is still in its early stages. In this paper, we focus on the complex yet highly
realistic task of incomplete multi-view weak multi-label learning and propose a
masked two-channel decoupling framework based on deep neural networks to solve
this problem. The core innovation of our method lies in decoupling the singlechannel view-level representation, which is common in deep multi-view learning
methods, into a shared representation and a view-proprietary representation. We
also design a cross-channel contrastive loss to enhance the semantic property of the
two channels. Additionally, we exploit supervised information to design a labelguided graph regularization loss, helping the extracted embedding features preserve
the geometric structure among samples. Inspired by the success of masking
mechanisms in image and text analysis, we develop a random fragment masking
strategy for vector features to improve the learning ability of encoders. Finally,
it is important to emphasize that our model is fully adaptable to arbitrary view
and label absences while also performing well on the ideal full data. We have
conducted sufficient and convincing experiments to confirm the effectiveness and
advancement of our model.

1

Introduction

With the increasing popularity of multi-view learning, researchers have discovered that heterogeneous
multi-source features obtained from multiple sensors or techniques can provide a richer and more
diverse description of samples [1–4]. For example, features can be extracted using scale-invariant
feature transform (SIFT) operator and deep neural networks from different perspectives of an image,
or features can be extracted from multimedia data, such as images and texts, to express higher-level
semantic objects [5–7]. Many multi-view learning methods are based on the assumptions of multiview semantic consistency and feature complementarity [8, 9]. They aim to obtain unique sample
labels from multi-source features to maintain the unity of multiple views at the semantic level and
to leverage the unique advantages of each view to compensate for the limitations of single-view
observation [10–12]. For instance, Nie et al. emphasized the importance of learning a cross-view
similarity matrix in their work [13]. Li et al. proposed to learn a common graph in the spectral
embedding space for final clustering [14]. Han et al. attempted to compute confidence scores
of samples on each view to facilitate classification predictions across multiple views [15]. Lin et
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

