A Comprehensive Study on Text-attributed Graphs:
Benchmarking and Rethinking

Hao Yan1∗ , Chaozhuo Li2∗, Ruosong Long3 , Chao Yan4 , Jianan Zhao6 , Wenwen Zhuang1
Jun Yin1 , Peiyan Zhang5 , Weihao Han7 , Hao Sun7 , Weiwei Deng7 , Qi Zhang7 ,
Lichao Sun8 , Xing Xie2 , Senzhang Wang1†
1
Central South University, 2 Microsoft Research Asia, 3 University of Birmingham
4
Peking University, 5 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
6
Université de Montréal, 7 Microsoft, 8 Lehigh University

Abstract
Text-attributed graphs (TAGs) are prevalent in various real-world scenarios, where
each node is associated with a text description. The cornerstone of representation
learning on TAGs lies in the seamless integration of textual semantics within individual nodes and the topological connections across nodes. Recent advancements in
pre-trained language models (PLMs) and graph neural networks (GNNs) have facilitated effective learning on TAGs, garnering increased research interest. However,
the absence of meaningful benchmark datasets and standardized evaluation procedures for TAGs has impeded progress in this field. In this paper, we propose CSTAG, a comprehensive and diverse collection of challenging benchmark datasets for
TAGs. The CS-TAG datasets are notably large in scale and encompass a wide range
of domains, spanning from citation networks to purchase graphs. In addition to
building the datasets, we conduct extensive benchmark experiments over CS-TAG
with various learning paradigms, including PLMs, GNNs, PLM-GNN co-training
methods, and the proposed novel topological pre-training of language models. In
a nutshell, we provide an overview of the CS-TAG datasets, standardized evaluation procedures, and present baseline experiments. The entire CS-TAG project is
publicly accessible at https://github.com/sktsherlock/TAG-Benchmark.

1

Introduction

Graphs are ubiquitous in modeling the relational and structural aspects of real-world objects across
various domains, such as social networks, transportation system networks, and biological proteinprotein networks [1, 2, 3, 4]. In many real-world graphs, nodes are often associated with text
attributes, giving rise to the text-attributed graphs (TAGs) [5, 6]. TAGs are prevalent in various
scenarios, such as social graphs where each user is accompanied by a textual description and paper
citation graphs where textual content is linked to each respective paper [7, 8]. The exploration of
learning methodologies applied to TAGs has emerged as a prominent research area within multiple
fields, including graph learning, information retrieval, and natural language processing [9].
The nucleus of learning on TAGs lies in the effective integration of both the node attributes (textual
semantics) and graph topology (structural connections) to facilitate the learning of node representations. The textual information associated with each node offers a wealth of semantic content,
enabling the characterization of individual node properties, which could be captured by the pretrained language models (PLMs) [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. Meanwhile, the structural information encoded
∗
†

Equal contribution and co-first authors.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

