How does GPT-2 compute greater-than?: Interpreting
mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model

Michael Hanna∗
ILLC
University of Amsterdam
m.w.hanna@uva.nl

Ollie Liu∗
University of
Southern California
zliu2898@usc.edu

Alexandre Variengien†
Redwood Research
alexandre.variengien@gmail.com

Abstract
Pre-trained language models can be surprisingly adept at tasks they were not explicitly trained on, but how they implement these capabilities is poorly understood.
In this paper, we investigate the basic mathematical abilities often acquired by
pre-trained language models. Concretely, we use mechanistic interpretability techniques to explain the (limited) mathematical abilities of GPT-2 small. As a case
study, we examine its ability to take in sentences such as “The war lasted from the
year 1732 to the year 17”, and predict valid two-digit end years (years > 32). We
first identify a circuit, a small subset of GPT-2 small’s computational graph that
computes this task’s output. Then, we explain the role of each circuit component,
showing that GPT-2 small’s final multi-layer perceptrons boost the probability of
end years greater than the start year. Finally, we find related tasks that activate
our circuit. Our results suggest that GPT-2 small computes greater-than using a
complex mechanism that activates across diverse contexts.

1

Introduction

As pre-trained language models (LMs) have grown in both size and effectiveness, their abilities have
expanded to include a wide range of tasks, even without fine-tuning [6]. Such abilities can range
from translation to text classification and multi-step reasoning [52]. Yet despite heavy study of these
models [41, 42, 26], how LMs implement these abilities is still poorly understood.
In this paper, we study one such LM ability, performing mathematics. Mathematical ability has long
been of interest in natural language processing: models have been trained to perform tasks such as
simple arithmetic and word problems [51, 46]. Researchers have also fine-tuned pre-trained LMs on
these tasks, instead of training from scratch [18, 25]. Recently, however, LMs seem to have acquired
significant mathematical abilities without explicit training on such tasks [6, 34, 8, 16].
How these mathematical abilities arise in LMs is largely unknown. While studies have investigated
pre-trained LMs’ mathematical abilities [32, 38], existing work is behavioral: it explains what models
can do, rather than how they do it. Most work that delves into model internals does so using models
trained directly on such tasks: Hupkes et al. [23] probe such models for hierarchical structure, while
Liu et al. [27] and Nanda et al. [31] study toy models trained on modular addition. Some studies do
examine the structure of number representations in pre-trained models [30, 49]; however, they do not
provide a causal explanation about how these models leverage these representations to perform math.
The mechanisms underlying pre-trained LMs’ mathematical abilities thus remain unclear.
∗
†

Work performed as part of Redwood Research’s REMIX program
Work performed during an internship. Now at Conjecture

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

