CommonScenes: Generating Commonsense 3D Indoor
Scenes with Scene Graph Diffusion

Guangyao Zhai1,2∗ Evin Pınar Örnek1,2∗ Shun-Cheng Wu1 Yan Di1†
Federico Tombari1,3 Nassir Navab1,2 Benjamin Busam1,2
{guangyao.zhai,evin.oernek,yan.di}@tum.de
1

Technical University of Munich

2

Munich Center for Machine Learning

3

Google

https://sites.google.com/view/commonscenes

Abstract
Controllable scene synthesis aims to create interactive environments for numerous
industrial use cases. Scene graphs provide a highly suitable interface to facilitate
these applications by abstracting the scene context in a compact manner. Existing
methods, reliant on retrieval from extensive databases or pre-trained shape
embeddings, often overlook scene-object and object-object relationships, leading
to inconsistent results due to their limited generation capacity. To address this issue,
we present CommonScenes, a fully generative model that converts scene graphs into
corresponding controllable 3D scenes, which are semantically realistic and conform
to commonsense. Our pipeline consists of two branches, one predicting the overall
scene layout via a variational auto-encoder and the other generating compatible
shapes via latent diffusion, capturing global scene-object and local inter-object
relationships in the scene graph while preserving shape diversity. The generated
scenes can be manipulated by editing the input scene graph and sampling the noise
in the diffusion model. Due to the lack of a scene graph dataset offering highquality object-level meshes with relations, we also construct SG-FRONT, enriching
the off-the-shelf indoor dataset 3D-FRONT with additional scene graph labels.
Extensive experiments are conducted on SG-FRONT, where CommonScenes shows
clear advantages over other methods regarding generation consistency, quality, and
diversity. Codes and the dataset are available on the website.

1

Introduction

Controllable Scene Synthesis (CSS) refers to the process of generating or synthesizing scenes in a
way that allows for specific entities of the scene to be controlled or manipulated. Existing methods
operate on images [62] or 3D scenes [34] varying by controlling mechanisms from input scene
graphs [24] or text prompts [5]. Along with the development of deep learning techniques, CSS
demonstrates great potential in applications like the film and video game industry [7], augmented and
virtual reality [65], and robotics [72, 68]. For these applications, scene graphs provide a powerful
tool to abstract scene content, including scene context and object relationships.
This paper investigates scene graph-based CSS for generating coherent 3D scenes characterized
by layouts and object shapes consistent with the input scene graph. To achieve this goal, recent
methods propose two lines of solutions. The first line of works optimizes scene layouts [35] and
retrieves objects [16] from a given database (see Figure 1 (a)). Such retrieval-based approaches are
∗

The first two authors contributed equally. † Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

