What Do Deep Saliency Models Learn about Visual
Attention?
Shi Chen
Ming Jiang
Qi Zhao
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Minnesota
{chen4595, mjiang, qzhao}@umn.edu

Abstract
In recent years, deep saliency models have made significant progress in predicting
human visual attention. However, the mechanisms behind their success remain
largely unexplained due to the opaque nature of deep neural networks. In this paper,
we present a novel analytic framework that sheds light on the implicit features
learned by saliency models and provides principled interpretation and quantification of their contributions to saliency prediction. Our approach decomposes these
implicit features into interpretable bases that are explicitly aligned with semantic
attributes and reformulates saliency prediction as a weighted combination of probability maps connecting the bases and saliency. By applying our framework, we
conduct extensive analyses from various perspectives, including the positive and
negative weights of semantics, the impact of training data and architectural designs,
the progressive influences of fine-tuning, and common failure patterns of state-ofthe-art deep saliency models. Additionally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
our framework by exploring visual attention characteristics in various application
scenarios, such as the atypical attention of people with autism spectrum disorder,
attention to emotion-eliciting stimuli, and attention evolution over time. Our code is
publicly available at https://github.com/szzexpoi/saliency_analysis.

1

Introduction

Attention deployment is a complex and fundamental process that enables humans to selectively attend
to important sensory data in the visual environment. Scientists have been fascinated by the question
of what drives human visual attention for decades. Understanding the mechanisms of visual attention
not only sheds light on the human visual system but also helps computational methods to localize
critical sensory inputs more efficiently.
One approach to predicting human attention is through saliency models, which have received considerable research attention. A saliency model predicts the most visually important regions in an image
that are likely to capture attention. Earlier models follow a feature integration approach [1, 2, 3, 4] and
extract low-level features (e.g., colors, intensity, orientations) or higher-level features (e.g., objects,
semantics) from the input image to infer saliency [5, 6, 7]. While these models show initial success,
their performance is limited by the difficulty of engineering relevant visual features. In contrast,
recent saliency models [8, 9, 10, 11] follow a data-driven approach, leveraging large datasets [12] and
deep neural networks [13, 14, 15] to learn discriminative features. These models achieve human-level
performance on several saliency benchmarks [12, 16, 17], thanks to their accurate detection of
important objects and high-level semantics [18, 19]. However, due to the lack of transparency, it is
still unclear what semantic features these models have captured to predict visual saliency.
To understand how deep neural networks predict visual saliency, in this paper, we develop a principled
analytic framework and address several key questions through comprehensive analyses:
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

