Computing Approximate ℓp Sensitivities

Swati Padmanabhan
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
pswt@mit.edu

David P. Woodruff
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Qiuyi (Richard) Zhang
Google Research
qiuyiz@google.com

Abstract
Recent works in dimensionality reduction for regression tasks have introduced
the notion of sensitivity, an estimate of the importance of a specific datapoint in
a dataset, offering provable guarantees on the quality of the approximation after
removing low-sensitivity datapoints via subsampling. However, fast algorithms
for approximating sensitivities, which we show is equivalent to approximate
regression, are known for only the ℓ2 setting, in which they are popularly termed
leverage scores. In this work, we provide the first efficient algorithms for
approximating ℓp sensitivities and related summary statistics of a given matrix.
In particular, for a given n × d matrix, we compute α-approximation to its ℓ1
sensitivities at the cost of O(n/α) sensitivity computations. For estimating the
total ℓp sensitivity (i.e. the sum of ℓp sensitivities), we provide an algorithm based
on importance sampling of ℓp Lewis weights, which computes a √
constant factor
approximation to the total sensitivity at the cost of roughly O( d) sensitivity
√
computations. Furthermore, we estimate the maximum ℓ1 sensitivity, up to a d
factor, using O(d) sensitivity computations. We generalizeall these results to ℓp
norms for p > 1. Lastly, we experimentally show that for a wide class of matrices
in real-world datasets, the total sensitivity can be quickly approximated and is
significantly smaller than the theoretical prediction, demonstrating that real-world
datasets have low intrinsic effective dimensionality.

1

Introduction

Many modern large-scale machine learning datasets comprise tall matrices A ∈ Rn×d with d features
and n ≫ d training examples, often making it computationally expensive to run them through even basic algorithmic primitives. Therefore, many applications spanning dimension reduction, privacy, and
fairness aim to estimate the importance of a given datapoint as a first step. Such importance estimates
afford us a principled approach to focus our attention on a subset of only the most important examples.
In view of this benefit, several sampling approaches have been extensively developed in the machine
learning literature. One of the simplest such methods prevalent in practice is uniform sampling.
Prominent examples of this technique include variants of stochastic gradient descent methods [1–4]
such as [5–14] developed for the “finite-sum minimization” problem
Pn
minimizeθ∈X
(1.1)
i=1 fi (θ).
where, in the context of empirical risk minimization, each fi : X 7→ R≥0 in (1.1) measures the loss
incurred by the i-th data point from the training set, and in generalized linear models, each fi represents a link function applied to a linear predictor evaluated at the i-th data point. The aforementioned
algorithms randomly sample a function fi and make progress via gradient estimation techniques.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

