Functional Rényi Differential Privacy for
Generative Modeling

Dihong Jiang1,2 , Sun Sun1,3 and Yaoliang Yu1,2
School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo1
Vector Institute2
National Research Council Canada3
{dihong.jiang,sun.sun,yaoliang.yu}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Differential privacy (DP) has emerged as a rigorous notion to quantify data privacy. Subsequently, Rényi differential privacy (RDP) has become an alternative
to the ordinary DP notion in both theoretical and empirical studies, because of
its convenient compositional rules and flexibility. However, most mechanisms
with DP (RDP) guarantees are essentially based on randomizing a fixed, finitedimensional vector output. In this work, following Hall et al. [12] we further extend
RDP to functional outputs, where the output space can be infinite-dimensional,
and develop all necessary tools, e.g. (subsampled) Gaussian mechanism, composition, and post-processing rules, to facilitate its practical adoption. As an
illustration, we apply functional RDP (f-RDP) to functions in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) to develop a differentially private generative
model (DPGM), where training can be interpreted as iteratively releasing loss
functions (in an RKHS) with DP guarantees. Empirically, the new training
paradigm achieves a significant improvement in privacy-utility trade-off compared to existing alternatives, especially when ϵ = 0.2. Our code is available at
https://github.com/dihjiang/DP-kernel.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning has achieved impressive success thanks to the availability of big data and
computing resources. However, there are increasing privacy concerns when training with personal or
sensitive data. Differential privacy [DP, 8] has become the de-facto standard technique for releasing
statistics of sensitive databases, which is designed to bound the output change of a randomized
mechanism M given an incremental input deviation, such that M does not depend too much on any
individual point in the dataset. Recently, Mironov [23] generalizes DP to Rényi differential privacy
(RDP) through α-Rényi divergence [26], which shares many properties with the ordinary DP, yet
with tighter and easier composition analysis, thereby attracts more attention in practice.
The popular mechanisms (e.g. Gaussian or Laplace) towards DP or RDP essentially randomize a
finite-dimensional vector output with (Gaussian or Laplace) noises. However, if we want to privately
release a function, vector-based DP mechanisms are not readily amenable, because a function over
a real-valued domain is characterized by infinitely many points [12], which will lead to ∞ bound
on the L2/L1-sensitivity if we follow the same sensitivity analysis in Dwork and Roth [9] for the
vector output, and will effectively lead to infinitely large Gaussian/Laplacian noise and is impractical.
Moreover, it is unclear how to add noise to an infinite-dimensional output. Examples that require a
functional DP mechanism include privately releasing the reward function in reinforcement learning
[32], the kernel function in kernel density estimation and kernel support vector machine (SVM) [12],
and the kernel function in DPGM in this work.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

