Doubly Constrained Fair Clustering
John Dickerson1,2 , Seyed A. Esmaeili3 , Jamie Morgenstern4 , and Claire Jie Zhang4
1

University of Maryland, College Park
2
Arthur
3
Simons Laufer Mathematical Sciences Institute
4
University of Washington

Abstract
The remarkable attention which fair clustering has received in the last few years
has resulted in a significant number of different notions of fairness. Despite the
fact that these notions are well-justified, they are often motivated and studied in
a disjoint manner where one fairness desideratum is considered exclusively in
isolation from the others. This leaves the understanding of the relations between
different fairness notions as an important open problem in fair clustering. In this
paper, we take the first step in this direction. Specifically, we consider the two
most prominent demographic representation fairness notions in clustering: (1)
Group Fairness (GF), where the different demographic groups are supposed to
have close to population-level representation in each cluster and (2) Diversity in
Center Selection (DS), where the selected centers are supposed to have close to
population-level representation of each group. We show that given a constant
approximation algorithm for one constraint (GF or DS only) we can obtain a
constant approximation solution that satisfies both constraints simultaneously.
Interestingly, we prove that any given solution that satisfies the GF constraint
can always be post-processed at a bounded degradation to the clustering cost
to additionally satisfy the DS constraint while the reverse is not true given a
solution that satisfies DS instead. Furthermore, we show that both GF and DS are
incompatible (having an empty feasibility set in the worst case) with a collection
of other distance-based fairness notions. Finally, we carry experiments to validate
our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Algorithms’ deployment in consequential settings, from their use in selecting interview candidates
during hiring, to criminal justice systems for risk assessment, to making decisions about where public
resources should be allocated [39, 28, 11, 18, 12], have led to an explosion in interest of developing
classification and regression algorithms designed to have equitable predictions. More recently, these
questions have been extended to unsupervised settings, with the recognition that algorithms which
behave as subroutines may have downstream impacts on the ability of a system to make equitable
decisions. For example, while personalized advertising seems to be a much lower-risk application
than those mentioned above, the advertisements in question might pertain to lending, employment, or
housing. For this reason, understanding the impact of unsupervised data pre-processing, including
dimensionality reduction and clustering, have been of recent interest, despite the fact that many
mathematical operationalizations of fairness do not behave nicely under composition [19].
Clustering is a canonical problem in unsupervised learning and arguably the most fundamental. It
is also among the classical problems in operations research and used heavily in facility location
as well as customer segmentation. As a result, fairness in clustering has also been well-studied
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

