AbdomenAtlas-8K: Annotating 8,000 CT Volumes for
Multi-Organ Segmentation in Three Weeks

Chongyu Qu1 Tiezheng Zhang1 Hualin Qiao2 Jie Liu3
Yucheng Tang4 Alan L. Yuille1 Zongwei Zhou1,∗
1

Johns Hopkins University 2 Rutgers University
3
City University of Hong Kong 4 NVIDIA

Code & Data: https://github.com/MrGiovanni/AbdomenAtlas

Abstract
Annotating medical images, particularly for organ segmentation, is laborious
and time-consuming. For example, annotating an abdominal organ requires an
estimated rate of 30–60 minutes per CT volume based on the expertise of an
annotator and the size, visibility, and complexity of the organ. Therefore, publicly
available datasets for multi-organ segmentation are often limited in data size and
organ diversity. This paper proposes an active learning procedure to expedite
the annotation process for organ segmentation and creates the largest multi-organ
dataset (by far) with the spleen, liver, kidneys, stomach, gallbladder, pancreas,
aorta, and IVC annotated in 8,448 CT volumes, equating to 3.2 million slices. The
conventional annotation methods would take an experienced annotator up to 1,600
weeks (or roughly 30.8 years) to complete this task. In contrast, our annotation
procedure has accomplished this task in three weeks (based on an 8-hour workday,
five days a week) while maintaining a similar or even better annotation quality.
This achievement is attributed to three unique properties of our method: (1) label
bias reduction using multiple pre-trained segmentation models, (2) effective error
detection in the model predictions, and (3) attention guidance for annotators to make
corrections on the most salient errors. Furthermore, we summarize the taxonomy of
common errors made by AI algorithms and annotators. This allows for continuous
improvement of AI and annotations, significantly reducing the annotation costs
required to create large-scale datasets for a wider variety of medical imaging tasks.

1

Introduction

Medical segmentation is a rapidly advancing task that plays a vital role in diagnosing, treating, and
radiotherapy planning [37, 10, 32, 103, 40]. Building datasets of a substantial number of annotated
medical images is critical for training and testing artificial intelligence (AI) models1 [104, 52, 70].
However, medical datasets carefully annotated by an annotator are infeasible to create at a huge scale
using conventional annotation methods [65] because performing per-voxel annotations is expensive
and time-consuming [89, 55, 53]. As a result, publicly available datasets for multi-organ segmentation
are often limited in data size (a few hundred) and organ diversity2 as reviewed in Figure 1(a).
∗

Corresponding author: Zongwei Zhou (ZZHOU 82@ JH . EDU)
While some of the abdominal organs can be automatically segmented by state-of-the-art AI models with
fairly high accuracy, many other organs and anatomical structures remain suboptimal or unknown [55].
2
TotalSegmentator [89] annotated a diverse set of classes for 1,024 CT volumes, but a majority of volumes
were largely annotated only by pre-trained nnU-Nets [37]. As a result, their annotations are highly biased to the
specific architecture (see §5); also, their procedure does not consider inconsistency across different AI models.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

