How2comm: Communication-Efficient and
Collaboration-Pragmatic Multi-Agent Perception

Dingkang Yang1,2†
Kun Yang1†
Yuzheng Wang1
Jing Liu1
1
5
1,2∗
Zhi Xu
Rongbin Yin
Peng Zhai
Lihua Zhang1,2,3,4∗
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
Cognition and Intelligent Technology Laboratory (CIT Lab)
3
Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Ministry of Education
4
AI and Unmanned Systems Engineering Research Center of Jilin Province
5
FAW (Nanjing) Technology Development Company Ltd
{dkyang20, kungyang20, pzhai, lihuazhang}@fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Multi-agent collaborative perception has recently received widespread attention as
an emerging application in driving scenarios. Despite the advancements in previous
efforts, challenges remain due to various dilemmas in the perception procedure,
including communication redundancy, transmission delay, and collaboration heterogeneity. To tackle these issues, we propose How2comm, a collaborative perception
framework that seeks a trade-off between perception performance and communication bandwidth. Our novelties lie in three aspects. First, we devise a mutual
information-aware communication mechanism to maximally sustain the informative features shared by collaborators. The spatial-channel filtering is adopted to
perform effective feature sparsification for efficient communication. Second, we
present a flow-guided delay compensation strategy to predict future characteristics
from collaborators and eliminate feature misalignment due to temporal asynchrony.
Ultimately, a pragmatic collaboration transformer is introduced to integrate holistic
spatial semantics and temporal context clues among agents. Our framework is
thoroughly evaluated on several LiDAR-based collaborative detection datasets in
real-world and simulated scenarios. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority of How2comm and the effectiveness of all its vital components. The
code will be released at https://github.com/ydk122024/How2comm.

1

Introduction

Precise perception of complex and changeable driving environments is essential to ensure the safety
and reliability of intelligent agents [25, 46], e.g., autonomous vehicles (AVs). With the emergence of
learning-based technologies, remarkable single-agent perception systems are extensively explored
for several in-vehicle tasks, such as instance segmentation [19, 58] and object detection [26, 49].
Nevertheless, single-agent perception suffers from various shortcomings due to the isolated view,
such as unavoidable occlusions [55], restricted detection ranges [56], and sparse sensor observations [57]. Recently, multi-agent collaborative perception [39, 54] has provided promising solutions
as an emerging application for vehicle-to-vehicle/everything (V2V/X) communications. The impressive studies [7, 14, 16, 17, 31, 32, 33, 38, 40, 51] have progressively presented to aggregate
valuable information and complementary perspectives among on-road agents, resulting in a more
†

Equal contributions . The two first authors thank Runsheng Xu for providing constructive suggestions.

* Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

