Global Optimality in Bivariate Gradient-based
DAG Learning

Chang Deng†∗ Kevin Bello†,‡ Pradeep Ravikumar‡ Bryon Aragam†
†
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637
‡
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Abstract
Recently, a new class of non-convex optimization problems motivated by the
statistical problem of learning an acyclic directed graphical model from data
has attracted significant interest. While existing work uses standard first-order
optimization schemes to solve this problem, proving the global optimality of such
approaches has proven elusive. The difficulty lies in the fact that unlike other
non-convex problems in the literature, this problem is not “benign”, and possesses
multiple spurious solutions that standard approaches can easily get trapped in. In
this paper, we prove that a simple path-following optimization scheme globally
converges to the global minimum of the population loss in the bivariate setting.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, non-convex optimization has become a major topic of research within the
machine learning community, in part due to the successes of training large-scale models with simple
first-order methods such as gradient descent—along with their stochastic and accelerated variants—
in spite of the non-convexity of the loss function. A large part of this research has focused on
characterizing which problems have benign loss landscapes that are amenable to the use of gradientbased methods, i.e., there are no spurious local minima, or they can be easily avoided. By now,
several theoretical results have shown this property for different non-convex problems such as:
learning a two hidden unit ReLU network [48], learning (deep) over-parameterized quadratic neural
networks [43, 27], low-rank matrix recovery [19, 13, 3], learning a two-layer ReLU network with
a single non-overlapping convolutional filter [6], semidefinite matrix completion [4, 20], learning
neural networks for binary classification with the addition of a single special neuron [30], and learning
deep networks with independent ReLU activations [26, 11], to name a few.
Recently, a new class of non-convex optimization problems due to Zheng et al. [51] have emerged in
the context of learning the underlying structure of a structural equation model (SEM) or Bayesian
network. This underlying structure is typically represented by a directed acyclic graph (DAG), which
makes the learning task highly complex due to its combinatorial nature. In general, learning DAGs is
well-known to be NP-complete [8, 10]. The key innovation in Zheng et al. [51] was the introduction
of a differentiable function h, whose level set at zero exactly characterizes DAGs. Thus, replacing the
challenges of combinatorial optimization by those of non-convex optimization. Mathematically, this
class of non-convex problems take the following general form:
min f (Θ) subject to h(W (Θ)) = 0,
Θ

(1)

where Θ ∈ Rl represents the model parameters, f : Rl → R is a (possibly non-convex) smooth loss
function (sometimes called a score function) that measures the fitness of Θ, and h : Rd×d → [0, ∞)
∗

changdeng@chicagobooth.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

