DICES Dataset:
Diversity in Conversational AI Evaluation for Safety
Lora Aroyo1 , Alex S. Taylor2 , Mark Díaz1 , Christopher M. Homan1 , Alicia Parrish1 ,
Greg Serapio-García3 , Vinodkumar Prabhakaran1 , and Ding Wang1
1

Google Research, 2 City, University of London, 3 University of Cambridge

Abstract
Machine learning approaches often require training and evaluation datasets with a
clear separation between positive and negative examples. This risks simplifying
and even obscuring the inherent subjectivity present in many tasks. Preserving such
variance in content and diversity in datasets is often expensive and laborious. This
is especially troubling when building safety datasets for conversational AI systems,
as safety is both socially and culturally situated. To demonstrate this crucial
aspect of conversational AI safety, and to facilitate in-depth model performance
analyses, we introduce the DICES (Diversity In Conversational AI Evaluation for
Safety) dataset that contains fine-grained demographic information about raters,
high replication of ratings per item to ensure statistical power for analyses, and
encodes rater votes as distributions across different demographics to allow for indepth explorations of different aggregation strategies. In short, the DICES dataset
enables the observation and measurement of variance, ambiguity, and diversity in
the context of conversational AI safety. We also illustrate how the dataset offers
a basis for establishing metrics to show how raters’ ratings can intersects with
demographic categories such as racial/ethnic groups, age groups, and genders. The
goal of DICES is to be used as a shared resource and benchmark that respects
diverse perspectives during safety evaluation of conversational AI systems.

1

Introduction

As conversational AI systems built on large language models (LLMs) have become increasing
prevalent, it is clear that their safety should be of paramount importance [29, 39]. Safety, in this
context, speaks to the character of automatically generated content and its capacity to cause dangers to
downstream users/communities, propagate mis/dis-information, and violate social norms in respectful
communication. While advances in conversational AI capabilities are being propelled by access to
web-scale, unlabelled training data [10] and innovative modelling approaches [40], such forms of
safety continue to demand robust evaluation data and careful fine-tuning to align with social norms
[39] and achieve the responsible practices rightly demanded across the tech sector [31, 14]. In other
words, carefully curated data remains crucial to ensuring safe deployment of conversational AI [45].
Recent research has investigated approaches to efficiently fine tune language model outputs using
safety annotated datasets [37, 39, 24, 15, 19, 28, 46]. Much less work, however, has gone into
understanding the inevitable complexities associated with building datasets that capture the range of
views of safety across diverse populations. Existing resources have typically disregarded the varied
and subjective ideas of safety in conversation held by diverse user groups; instead, they adopt a
simplified notion of a single ground truth for safety in order to facilitate technical solutions – an
approach that can have unwanted or even disastrous effects in real-world settings [5, 21]. Specifically,
much of the work addressing safety has neglected the variation between different populations that
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

