DRAUC: An Instance-wise Distributionally Robust
AUC Optimization Framework
Siran Dai1,2
Qianqian Xu3∗
Zhiyong Yang4
5
Xiaochun Cao
Qingming Huang4,3,6∗
1

SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Tech., CAS
4
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
School of Cyber Science and Tech., Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
6
BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2

daisiran@iie.ac.cn
xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn
yangzhiyong21@ucas.ac.cn
caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn
qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
The Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) is a widely employed metric in long-tailed
classification scenarios. Nevertheless, most existing methods primarily assume that
training and testing examples are drawn i.i.d. from the same distribution, which
is often unachievable in practice. Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO)
enhances model performance by optimizing it for the local worst-case scenario,
but directly integrating AUC optimization with DRO results in an intractable
optimization problem. To tackle this challenge, methodically we propose an
instance-wise surrogate loss of Distributionally Robust AUC (DRAUC) and build
our optimization framework on top of it. Moreover, we highlight that conventional
DRAUC may induce label bias, hence introducing distribution-aware DRAUC as
a more suitable metric for robust AUC learning. Theoretically, we affirm that the
generalization gap between the training loss and testing error diminishes if the
training set is sufficiently large. Empirically, experiments on corrupted benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. Code is available
at: https://github.com/EldercatSAM/DRAUC.

1

Introduction

The Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) is an essential metric in machine learning. Owing to its
interpretation equivalent to the probability of correctly ranking a random pair of positive and negative
examples [11], AUC serves as a more suitable metric than accuracy for imbalanced classification
problems. Research on AUC applications has expanded rapidly across various scenarios, including
medical image classification [40, 51], abnormal behavior detection [5] and more.
However, current research on AUC optimization assumes that the training and testing sets share the
same distribution [46], a challenging condition to satisfy when the testing environment presents a
high degree of uncertainty. This situation is common in real-world applications.
Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) as a technique designed to handle distributional uncertainty, has emerged as a popular solution [38] in various applications, including machine learning
[19], energy systems [1] and transportation [25]. This technique aims to develop a model that
performs well, even under the most adversarial distribution within a specified distance from the
original training distribution. However, existing DRO methods primarily focus on accuracy as a
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

