GIMLET : A Unified Graph-Text Model for

Instruction-Based Molecule Zero-Shot Learning

Haiteng Zhao1 , Shengchao Liu2 , Chang Ma3 , Hannan Xu4 ,
Jie Fu5 , Zhi-Hong Deng1 , Lingpeng Kong3 , Qi Liu3
1
Peking University 2 Mila 3 The University of Hong Kong
4
University of Oxford 5 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Molecule property prediction has gained significant attention in recent years. The
main bottleneck is the label insufficiency caused by expensive lab experiments.
In order to alleviate this issue and to better leverage textual knowledge for tasks,
this study investigates the feasibility of employing natural language instructions
to accomplish molecule-related tasks in a zero-shot setting. We discover that
existing molecule-text models perform poorly in this setting due to inadequate
treatment of instructions and limited capacity for graphs. To overcome these
issues, we propose GIMLET, which unifies language models for both graph and
text data. By adopting generalized position embedding, our model is extended to
encode both graph structures and instruction text without additional graph encoding
modules. GIMLET also decouples encoding of the graph from tasks instructions
in the attention mechanism, enhancing the generalization of graph features across
novel tasks. We construct a dataset consisting of more than two thousand molecule
tasks with corresponding instructions derived from task descriptions. We pretrain
GIMLET on the molecule tasks along with instructions, enabling the model to
transfer effectively to a broad range of tasks. Experimental results demonstrate
that GIMLET significantly outperforms molecule-text baselines in instruction-based
zero-shot learning, even achieving closed results to supervised GNN models on
tasks such as toxcast and muv. 1

1

Introduction

Molecule machine learning has gained significant attention in recent years [10, 52, 85, 77], including
tasks like property prediction [14, 21], molecule design [81, 35, 28, 27], and others, which have broad
applications in biomedical research. The primary method of molecule tasks is graph machine learning
[21], where graphs are employed to represent molecule topology. Presently, graph machine learning
approaches for molecules mainly follow the pretraining and finetuning paradigm [26, 60, 40, 84].
After the pretraining on large molecule corpus, models are able to encode informative molecule
representations and generalize to downstream tasks by supervised finetuning.
One limitation of the supervised finetuning approach is the requirement on labeled data to acquire
task-specific features for prediction on downstream tasks. This requirement poses a challenge in
scenarios where obtaining labeled data is arduous or costly, especially in the field of molecules,
and the training cost also restricts the efficiency of downstream tasks. Additionally, the supervised
method exclusively relies on labeled data for acquiring task information, and is therefore unable
to incorporate other additional information about the task. For instance, there exists a wealth of
information regarding molecule assay tasks often provided in textual descriptions. Unfortunately, the
supervised method fails to leverage such information, thereby restricting its flexibility.
1

The code, model, and data are available at https://github.com/zhao-ht/GIMLET.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

