Action Inference by Maximising Evidence: Zero-Shot
Imitation from Observation with World Models
Xingyuan Zhang1, 2∗, Philip Becker-Ehmck1 , Patrick van der Smagt1,3 , Maximilian Karl1
1
Machine Learning Research Lab, Volkswagen Group, 2 Technical University of Munich,
3
Eötvös Loránd University Budapest
{xingyuan.zhang,philip.becker-ehmck,maximilian.karl}@volkswagen.de

Abstract
Unlike most reinforcement learning agents which require an unrealistic amount
of environment interactions to learn a new behaviour, humans excel at learning
quickly by merely observing and imitating others. This ability highly depends
on the fact that humans have a model of their own embodiment that allows them
to infer the most likely actions that led to the observed behaviour. In this paper,
we propose Action Inference by Maximising Evidence (AIME) to replicate this
behaviour using world models. AIME consists of two distinct phases. In the
first phase, the agent learns a world model from its past experience to understand
its own body by maximising the evidence lower bound (ELBO). While in the
second phase, the agent is given some observation-only demonstrations of an
expert performing a novel task and tries to imitate the expert’s behaviour. AIME
achieves this by defining a policy as an inference model and maximising the
evidence of the demonstration under the policy and world model. Our method
is "zero-shot" in the sense that it does not require further training for the world
model or online interactions with the environment after given the demonstration.
We empirically validate the zero-shot imitation performance of our method on
the Walker and Cheetah embodiment of the DeepMind Control Suite and find it
outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines. Code is available at: https://github.
com/argmax-ai/aime.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has enabled intelligent decision-making agents
to thrive in multiple fields [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. However, one of the biggest issues of DRL is sample
inefficiency. The dominant framework in DRL is learning from scratch [7]. Thus, most algorithms
require an incredible amount of interactions with the environment [1, 2, 3].
In contrast, cortical animals such as humans are able to quickly learn new tasks through just a few
trial-and-error attempts, and can further accelerate their learning process by observing others. An
important difference between biological learning and the DRL framework is that the former uses
past experience for new tasks. When we try a novel task, we use previously learnt components and
generalise to solve the new problem efficiently. This process is augmented by imitation learning [8],
which allows us to replicate similar behaviours without direct observation of the underlying muscle
movements. If the DRL agents could similarly harness observational data, such as the abundant
online video data, the sample efficiency may be dramatically improved [9]. The goal of the problem is
related to the traditional well-established Learning from Demonstration (LfD) field from the robotics
community [10, 11], but instead of relying on knowledge from the engineers and researchers, e.g.
mathematical model of robot’s dynamic or primitives, we aim to let the robots learn by itself.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

