PGDiff: Guiding Diffusion Models for Versatile
Face Restoration via Partial Guidance
Peiqing Yang1
1

Shangchen Zhou1 Qingyi Tao2 Chen Change Loy1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
SenseTime Research, Singapore
https://github.com/pq-yang/PGDiff

Abstract
Exploiting pre-trained diffusion models for restoration has recently become a
favored alternative to the traditional task-specific training approach. Previous
works have achieved noteworthy success by limiting the solution space using
explicit degradation models. However, these methods often fall short when faced
with complex degradations as they generally cannot be precisely modeled. In this
paper, we propose PGDiff by introducing partial guidance, a fresh perspective that
is more adaptable to real-world degradations compared to existing works. Rather
than specifically defining the degradation process, our approach models the desired
properties, such as image structure and color statistics of high-quality images, and
applies this guidance during the reverse diffusion process. These properties are
readily available and make no assumptions about the degradation process. When
combined with a diffusion prior, this partial guidance can deliver appealing results
across a range of restoration tasks. Additionally, PGDiff can be extended to handle
composite tasks by consolidating multiple high-quality image properties, achieved
by integrating the guidance from respective tasks. Experimental results demonstrate
that our method not only outperforms existing diffusion-prior-based approaches
but also competes favorably with task-specific models.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen diffusion models achieve outstanding results in synthesizing realistic details
across various content [33, 29, 7, 15, 34]. The rich generative prior inherent in these models opens up
a vast array of possibilities for tasks like super-resolution, inpainting, and colorization. Consequently,
there has been a growing interest in formulating efficient guidance strategies for pre-trained diffusion
models, enabling their successful adaptation to various restoration tasks [9, 42, 20, 37].
A common approach [9, 42, 20] is to constrain the solution space of intermediate outputs during
the denoising process1 . At each iteration, the intermediate output is modified such that its degraded
counterpart is guided towards the input low-quality (LQ) image. Existing works achieve this goal
either by using a closed-form solution [42, 20] or back-propagating simple losses [9]. These methods
are versatile in the sense that the pre-trained diffusion model can be adapted to various tasks without
fine-tuning, as long as the degradation process is known in advance.
While possessing great versatility, the aforementioned methods are inevitably limited in generalizability due to the need for prior knowledge of the degradation process. In particular, a closed-form
solution generally does not exist except for special cases such as linear operators. In addition,
back-propagating losses demand differentiability of the degradation process, which is violated for
many degradations such as JPEG compression. Importantly, degradations in the wild often consist
1

It refers to the reverse diffusion process, not the image denoising task.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

