Pitfall of Optimism: Distributional Reinforcement
Learning by Randomizing Risk Criterion

Taehyun Cho1 , Seungyub Han1,3 , Heesoo Lee1 , Kyungjae Lee2 , Jungwoo Lee1∗
1
Seoul National University, 2 Chung-Ang University, 3 Hodoo AI Labs
{talium, seungyubhan, algol7240, junglee}@snu.ac.kr
{kyungjae.lee}@ai.cau.ac.kr

Abstract
Distributional reinforcement learning algorithms have attempted to utilize estimated
uncertainty for exploration, such as optimism in the face of uncertainty. However,
using the estimated variance for optimistic exploration may cause biased data
collection and hinder convergence or performance. In this paper, we present
a novel distributional reinforcement learning algorithm that selects actions by
randomizing risk criterion to avoid one-sided tendency on risk. We provide a
perturbed distributional Bellman optimality operator by distorting the risk measure
and prove the convergence and optimality of the proposed method with the weaker
contraction property. Our theoretical results support that the proposed method
does not fall into biased exploration and is guaranteed to converge to an optimal
return. Finally, we empirically show that our method outperforms other existing
distribution-based algorithms in various environments including Atari 55 games.

1

Introduction

Distributional reinforcement learning (DistRL)
learns the stochasticity of returns in the reinforcement learning environments and has shown
remarkable performance in numerous benchmark tasks. DistRL agents model the approximated distribution of returns, where the
mean value implies the conventional Q-value
[2, 6, 13, 25] and provides more statistical information (e.g., mode, median, variance) for
control. Precisely, DistRL aims to capture intrinsic (aleatoric) uncertainty which is an inherent
and irreducible randomness in the environment.
Such learned uncertainty gives rise to the notion of risk-sensitivity, and several distributional
reinforcement learning algorithms distort the
learned distribution to create a risk-averse or
risk-seeking decision making [8, 12].

Figure 1: Illustrative example of why a biased
risk criterion (naïve optimism) can degrade performance. Suppose two actions have similar expected returns, but different variances (intrinsic
uncertainty). (Left) If an agent does not specify
the risk criterion at the moment, the probability of
selecting each action should be similar. (Right)
As OFU principle encourages to decide uncertain
behaviors, the empirical variance from quantiles
was used as an estimate of uncertainty. [19, 21, 23].
However, optimistic decision based on empirical
variance inevitably leads a risk-seeking behavior,
Despite the richness of risk-sensitive informa- which causes biased action selection.
tion from return distribution, only a few DistRL
methods [11, 21, 26, 35, 42] have tried to employ its benefits for exploration strategies which is
essential in deep RL to find an optimal behavior within a few trials. The main reason is that the exploration strategies so far is based on parametric (epistemic) uncertainty which arise from insufficient or
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

