BEDD: The MineRL BASALT
Evaluation and Demonstrations Dataset
for Training and Benchmarking Agents
that Solve Fuzzy Tasks
Stephanie Milani
Carnegie Mellon University
smilani@cs.cmu.edu
Karolis Ramanauskas
University of Bath
kr711@bath.ac.uk

Anssi Kanervisto
Microsoft Research
anssi.kanervisto@microsoft.com

Sander Schulhoff
University of Maryland
sschulho@umd.edu

Brandon Houghton
OpenAI
brandon@openai.com

Rohin Shah
rohinmshah@gmail.com

Abstract
The MineRL BASALT competition has served to catalyze advances in learning
from human feedback through four hard-to-specify tasks in Minecraft, such as
create and photograph a waterfall. Given the completion of two years of BASALT
competitions, we offer to the community a formalized benchmark through the
BASALT Evaluation and Demonstrations Dataset (BEDD), which serves as a resource for algorithm development and performance assessment. BEDD consists of
a collection of 26 million image-action pairs from nearly 14,000 videos of human
players completing the BASALT tasks in Minecraft. It also includes over 3,000
dense pairwise human evaluations of human and algorithmic agents. These comparisons serve as a fixed, preliminary leaderboard for evaluating newly-developed
algorithms. To enable this comparison, we present a streamlined codebase for
benchmarking new algorithms against the leaderboard. In addition to presenting
these datasets, we conduct a detailed analysis of the data from both datasets to guide
algorithm development and evaluation. The released code and data are available at
https://github.com/minerllabs/basalt-benchmark.

1

Introduction

In traditional reinforcement learning, an agent learns how to act using reward based on an explicitlydefined reward signal [42]. This reward signal is often carefully designed by domain experts to
communicate the intended goal for the agent to accomplish. Precisely specifying this form of feedback
programmatically requires designers to a priori enumerate all potential outcomes or constraints on
how they would like the task to be completed. This enumeration is difficult to achieve in practice,
and the resulting reward signals often fall short at correctly specifying the designer’s intent [29].
To address this challenge, researchers have explored the idea of incorporating alternative channels
for communicating information about the desired behavior of the agent. This class of techniques is
generally called learning from human feedback (LfHF) [8, 23]. The goal of LfHF is to utilize the
feedback modalities most likely to result in an agent acting according to human-desired specifications.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

