Goal Driven Discovery of Distributional Differences
via Language Descriptions

Ruiqi Zhong∗, Peter Zhang, Steve Li, Jinwoo Ahn, Dan Klein, Jacob Steinhardt

Abstract
Exploring large corpora can generate useful discoveries but is time-consuming for
humans. We formulate a new task, D5, that automatically discovers differences
between two large corpora in a goal-driven way. The task input is a problem
comprising a user-specified exploration goal (“comparing the side effects of drug A
and drug B”) and a corpus pair (collections of patients’ self-reported reactions after
taking each drug). The output is a goal-relevant description (discovery) of how
these corpora differ (patients taking drug A “mention feelings of paranoia” more
often). We build a D5 system, and to quantitatively evaluate its performance, we 1)
build a diagnostic benchmark, S YN D5, to test whether it can recover known differences between two synthetic corpora, and 2) contribute a meta-dataset, O PEN D5,
aggregating 675 open-ended problems ranging across business, social sciences,
humanities, machine learning, and health. With both synthetic and real datasets,
we confirm that language models can leverage user-specified goals to propose more
relevant candidate discoveries, and they sometimes produce discoveries previously
unknown to the authors, including demographic differences in discussion topics,
political stances in speech, insights in commercial reviews, and error patterns in
NLP models. Finally, we discuss the limitations of our D5 system, which discovers
correlation rather than causation and potentially reinforces biases when misused;
therefore, practitioners should treat the outputs of our system with caution.

1

Introduction

Exploring large corpora and generating discoveries from them can be ad hoc and laborious. For
example, to compare the side effects of drug A and drug B, doctors might inspect two large corpora of
patients’ self-reported reactions after taking each drug; based on ad hoc insights, they hypothesize that
patients taking drug A more often “mentions feelings of paranoia”, and then validate this hypothesis
by laboriously inspecting the two corpora. Since machines can automatically process a large amount
of texts, we might hope for ML systems to facilitate exploratory analyses like the one above.
However, an ML task requires a unified input-output space and evaluation metric so that it can be
automated, benchmarked, learned, and analyzed. To this end, we formalize one type of exploratory
analysis problem as a natural language generation task: goal driven discovery of differences between
text distributions via language descriptions (D5). As shown in Figure 1, the input to the D5 task is a
“problem” comprising a description of a user-specified exploration goal (understanding side effects)
and a corpus pair (text samples from the distributions of self-reported reactions after taking each
drug). The output is a “discovery” represented as a natural language predicate (“mentions feelings of
paranoia”). We evaluate a discovery with two criteria (Section 3): (1) validity: it should describe a
true difference (Zhong et al., 2022); and (2) relevance to the goal (McGarry, 2005).
∗

University of California, Berkeley, EECS Department. Email: ruiqi-zhong@berkeley.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

