Global Convergence Analysis of Local SGD for
Two-layer Neural Network without
Overparameterization

1

Yajie Bao1 Amarda Shehu2 Mingrui Liu2∗
School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240
2
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030
baoyajie2019stat@sjtu.edu.cn, {ashehu,mingruil}@gmu.edu

Abstract
Local SGD, a cornerstone algorithm in federated learning, is widely used in training deep neural networks and shown to have strong empirical performance. A
theoretical understanding of such performance on nonconvex loss landscapes is
currently lacking. Analysis of the global convergence of SGD is challenging, as
the noise depends on the model parameters. Indeed, many works narrow their
focus to GD and rely on injecting noise to enable convergence to the local or
global optimum. When expanding the focus to local SGD, existing analyses in
the nonconvex case can only guarantee finding stationary points or assume the
neural network is overparameterized so as to guarantee convergence to the global
minimum through neural tangent kernel analysis. In this work, we provide the first
global convergence analysis of the vanilla local SGD for two-layer neural networks
without overparameterization and without injecting noise, when the input data is
Gaussian. The main technical ingredients of our proof are a self-correction mechanism and a new exact recursive characterization of the direction of global model
parameters. The self-correction mechanism guarantees the algorithm reaches a
good region even if the initialization is in a bad region. A good (bad) region means
updating the model by gradient descent will move closer to (away from) the optimal
solution. The main difficulty in establishing a self-correction mechanism is to cope
with the gradient dependency between two layers. To address this challenge, we
divide the landscape of the objective into several regions to carefully control the
interference of two layers during the correction process. As a result, we show that
local SGD can correct the two layers and enter the good region in polynomial time.
After that, we establish a new exact recursive characterization of the direction of
global parameters, which is the key to showing convergence to the global minimum
with linear speedup in the number of machines and reduced communication rounds.
Experiments on synthetic data confirm theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a prevalent framework in distributed learning to significantly reduce the
communication cost and effectively preserve the privacy of local clients [43, 27]. As the most
popular algorithm in federated learning, local SGD has shown great empirical success in training deep
neural networks (DNNs) [43, 39]. However, existing literature has not been able to fully explain or
characterize the convergence of local SGD in training DNNs. Recently, extensive works are devoted
to analyzing the convergence of local SGD and its variants in nonconvex optimization [39, 56, 20, 28,
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

