PolyDiffuse: Polygonal Shape Reconstruction via
Guided Set Diffusion Models
Jiacheng Chen

Ruizhi Deng
Yasutaka Furukawa
Simon Fraser University

Abstract
This paper presents PolyDiffuse, a novel structured reconstruction algorithm that
transforms visual sensor data into polygonal shapes with Diffusion Models (DM),
an emerging machinery amid exploding generative AI, while formulating reconstruction as a generation process conditioned on sensor data. The task of structured
reconstruction poses two fundamental challenges to DM: 1) A structured geometry
is a “set” (e.g., a set of polygons for a floorplan geometry), where a sample of N
elements has N ! different but equivalent representations, making the denoising
highly ambiguous; and 2) A “reconstruction” task has a single solution, where
an initial noise needs to be chosen carefully, while any initial noise works for a
generation task. Our technical contribution is the introduction of a Guided Set
Diffusion Model where 1) the forward diffusion process learns guidance networks
to control noise injection so that one representation of a sample remains distinct
from its other permutation variants, thus resolving denoising ambiguity; and 2) the
reverse denoising process reconstructs polygonal shapes, initialized and directed
by the guidance networks, as a conditional generation process subject to the sensor
data. We have evaluated our approach for reconstructing two types of polygonal
shapes: floorplan as a set of polygons and HD map for autonomous cars as a set
of polylines. Through extensive experiments on standard benchmarks, we demonstrate that PolyDiffuse significantly advances the current state of the art and enables
broader practical applications. The code and data are available on our project page:
https://poly-diffuse.github.io.

1

Introduction

Reconstruction and generation were once separate research areas with minimal overlaps. While not
acknowledged by the broader research communities, state-of-the-art reconstruction and generation
techniques have now exhibited increasing similarities. Focusing on structured geometry (e.g., CAD
models) in this paper, Auto-regressive Transformer (AR-Transformer) is a family of state-of-the-art
generative models that iteratively applies a Transformer network to generate CAD construction
sequences [18, 29, 35]. On the reconstruction side, a Transformer network iteratively reconstructs
and refines indoor floorplans, outdoor buildings models, and vectorized traffic maps [7, 23, 47], a
process resembling the generative AR-Transformer.
In 2023, Generative AI is experiencing significant growth, primarily driven by the emergence of
Diffusion Models (DM) [14, 38, 40, 41], where structured geometry generation is not an exception.
DM-based approach iteratively denoises coordinates (with associated properties) to generate realistic
design layouts [17] or floorplans [36]. A natural question is then “Is a Diffusion Model also good at
structured reconstruction?” However, the answer is not that simple.
Take the high-definition (HD) map reconstruction problem for example [22], which aims to reconstruct a set of polylines given sensor data in a bird’s-eye view (see Figure 1). A straightforward DM
formulation would assume a maximum number of polylines (with a fixed number of corners per poly37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

