Optimal Preconditioning and Fisher Adaptive
Langevin Sampling

Michalis K. Titsias
Google DeepMind
mtitsias@google.com

Abstract
We define an optimal preconditioning for the Langevin diffusion by analytically
optimizing the expected squared jumped distance. This yields as the optimal preconditioning an inverse Fisher information covariance matrix, where the covariance
matrix is computed as the outer product of log target gradients averaged under the
target. We apply this result to the Metropolis adjusted Langevin algorithm (MALA)
and derive a computationally efficient adaptive MCMC scheme that learns the
preconditioning from the history of gradients produced as the algorithm runs. We
show in several experiments that the proposed algorithm is very robust in high
dimensions and significantly outperforms other methods, including a closely related
adaptive MALA scheme that learns the preconditioning with standard adaptive
MCMC as well as the position-dependent Riemannian manifold MALA sampler.

1

Introduction

Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a general framework for simulating from arbitrarily complex
distributions, and it has shown to be useful for statistical inference in a wide range of problems
[18, 11]. The main idea of an MCMC algorithm is quite simple. Given a complex target π(x), a
Markov chain is constructed using a π-invariant transition kernel that allows to simulate dependent
realizations x1 , x2 , . . . that eventually converge to samples from π. These samples can be used for
Monte Carlo integration by forming ergodic averages. A general way to define π-invariant transition
kernels is the Metropolis-Hastings accept-reject mechanism in which the chain moves from state xn
to the next state xn+1 by first generating a candidate state yn from a proposal distribution q(yn |xn )
and then it sets xn+1 = yn with probability α(xn , yn ):
α(xn , yn ) = min(1, an ), an =

π(yn ) q(xn |yn )
,
π(xn ) q(yn |xn )

(1)

or otherwise rejects yn and sets xn+1 = xn . The choice of the proposal distribution q(yn |xn ) is
crucial because it determines the mixing of the chain, i.e. the dependence of samples across time.
For example, a "slowly mixing" chain even after convergence may not be useful for Monte Carlo
integration since it will output a highly dependent set of samples producing ergodic estimates of very
high variance. Different ways of defining q(yn |xn ) lead to common algorithms such as random walk
Metropolis (RWM), Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm (MALA) [40, 35] and Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo (HMC) [15, 28]. Within each class of these algorithms adaptation of parameters of
the proposal distribution, such as a step size, is also important and this has been widely studied in
the literature by producing optimal scaling results [34, 35, 36, 22, 6, 8, 38, 7, 39, 9], and also by
developing adaptive MCMC algorithms [21, 5, 37, 19, 2, 1, 4, 24]. The standard adaptive MCMC
procedure in [21] uses the history of the chain to recursively compute an empirical covariance of the
target π and build a multivariate Gaussian proposal distribution. However, this type of covariance
adaptation can be too slow and not so robust in high dimensional settings [38, 3].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

