Stochastic Distributed Optimization under Average
Second-order Similarity: Algorithms and Analysis

Dachao Lin ∗†

Yuze Han ∗‡

Haishan Ye §

Zhihua Zhang ¶

Abstract
We study finite-sum distributed optimization problems involving a master node and
n − 1 local nodes under the popular δ-similarity and µ-strong convexity conditions.
We propose two new algorithms, SVRS and AccSVRS, motivated by previous
works. The non-accelerated SVRS method combines the techniques of gradient
sliding and variance reduction and achieves a better communication complexity
√
of Õ(n+ nδ/µ) compared to existing non-accelerated algorithms. Applying the
framework proposed in Katyusha X [6], we also
p develop a directly accelerated
version named AccSVRS with the Õ(n+n3/4 δ/µ) communication complexity.
In contrast to existing results, our complexity bounds are entirely smoothness-free
and exhibit superiority in ill-conditioned cases. Furthermore, we establish a nearly
matched lower bound to verify the tightness of our AccSVRS method.

1

Introduction

We have witnessed the development of distributed optimization in recent years. Distributed optimization aims to cooperatively solve a learning task over a predefined social network by exchanging
information exclusively with immediate neighbors. This class of problems has found extensive
applications in various fields, including machine learning, healthcare, network information processing, telecommunications, manufacturing, natural language processing tasks, and multi-agent control
[54, 30, 48, 45, 60, 8]. In this paper, we focus on the following classical finite-sum optimization
problem in a centralized setting:
n

min f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1)

where each fi is differentiable and corresponds to a client or node, and the target objective is their
average function f . Without loss of generality, we assume f1 is the master node and the others
are local nodes. In each round, every local node can communicate with the master node certain
information, such as the local parameter x, local gradient ∇fi (x), and some global information
gathered at the master node. Such a scheme can also be viewed as decentralized optimization over a
star network [55].
Following the wisdom of statistical similarity residing in the data at different nodes, many previous
works study scenarios where the individual functions exhibit relationships or, more specifically, certain
homogeneity shared among the local fi ’s and f . The most common one is under the δ-second-order
∗

Equal Contribution.
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies; Peking University; lindachao@pku.edu.cn;
‡
School of Mathematical Sciences; Peking University; hanyuze97@pku.edu.cn;
§
Corresponding Author; School of Management; Xi’an Jiaotong University; SGIT AI Lab, State Grid
Corporation of China; yehaishan@xjtu.edu.cn;
¶
School of Mathematical Sciences; Peking University; zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

