Sample Complexity Bounds for Score-Matching:
Causal Discovery and Generative Modeling

Zhenyu Zhu† ,
Francesco Locatello‡∗ , Volkan Cevher†∗
† École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne ‡ Institute of Science and Technology Austria
†{zhenyu.zhu, volkan.cevher}@epfl.ch ‡ francesco.locatello@ista.ac.at

Abstract
This paper provides statistical sample complexity bounds for score-matching and
its applications in causal discovery. We demonstrate that accurate estimation of the
score function is achievable by training a standard deep ReLU neural network using
stochastic gradient descent. We establish bounds on the error rate of recovering
causal relationships using the score-matching-based causal discovery method of
Rolland et al. [2022], assuming a sufficiently good estimation of the score function.
Finally, we analyze the upper bound of score-matching estimation within the scorebased generative modeling, which has been applied for causal discovery but is also
of independent interest within the domain of generative models.

1

Introduction

Score matching Hyvärinen [2005], an alternative to the maximum likelihood principle for unnormalized probability density models with intractable partition functions, has recently emerged as a new
state-of-the-art approach that leverages machine learning for scalable and accurate causal discovery
from observational data Rolland et al. [2022]. However, the theoretical analysis and guarantees in the
finite sample regime are underexplored for causal discovery even beyond score-matching approaches.
Contributions: In this work, we give the first sample complexity error bounds for score-matching
using deep ReLU neural networks. With this, we obtain the first upper bound on the error rate of the
method proposed by Rolland et al. [2022] to learn the topological ordering of a causal model from
observational data. Thanks to the wide applicability of score-matching in machine learning, we also
discuss applications to the setting of score-based generative modeling. Our main contributions are:
1. We provide the analysis of sample complexity bound for the problem of score function
estimation in causal discovery for non-linear additive Gaussian noise models which has a
convergence rate of log n/n with respect to the number of data. Importantly, our results
require only mild additional assumptions, namely that the non-linear relationships among
the causal variables are bounded and that the score function is Lipschitz. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work to provide sampling complexity bounds for this problem.
2. We provide the first analysis of the state-of-the-art topological ordering-based causal discovery method SCORE [Rolland et al., 2022] and provide a correctness guarantee for the
obtained topological order. Our results demonstrate that the algorithm’s error rate converges
linearly with respect to the number of training data. Additionally, we establish a connection
between the algorithm’s error rate and the average second derivative (curvature) of the
non-linear relationships among the causal variables, discussing the impact of the causal
model’s inherent characteristics on the algorithm’s error rate in identification.
∗

Share the senior authorship

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

