Pengi: An Audio Language Model for Audio Tasks

Soham Deshmukh1 Benjamin Elizalde1 Rita Singh2 Huaming Wang1
1
Microsoft 2 Carnegie Mellon University
{sdeshmukh, benjaminm, huawang}@microsoft.com, rsingh@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
In the domain of audio processing, Transfer Learning has facilitated the rise of
Self-Supervised Learning and Zero-Shot Learning techniques. These approaches
have led to the development of versatile models capable of tackling a wide array
of tasks, while delivering state-of-the-art performance. However, current models
inherently lack the capacity to produce the requisite language for open-ended tasks,
such as Audio Captioning or Audio Question Answering. We introduce Pengi,
a novel Audio Language Model that leverages Transfer Learning by framing all
audio tasks as text-generation tasks. It takes as input, an audio recording, and
text, and generates free-form text as output. The input audio is represented as a
sequence of continuous embeddings by an audio encoder. A text encoder does
the same for the corresponding text input. Both sequences are combined as a
prefix to prompt a pre-trained frozen language model. The unified architecture
of Pengi enables open-ended tasks and close-ended tasks without any additional
fine-tuning or task-specific extensions. When evaluated on 21 downstream tasks,
our approach yields state-of-the-art performance in several of them. Our results
show that connecting language models with audio models is a major step towards
general-purpose audio understanding 1 .

Figure 1: Examples of audio and text prompt inputs and their corresponding textual responses. Images
are for illustration purposes only. Our proposed model Pengi enables close-ended tasks, such as
classification or retrieval and open-ended tasks, such as captioning or question & answering.

1

Introduction

Machine Listening breaks down audio understanding into separate and independent audio tasks. For
example, Sound Event and Scene Classification, Audio Retrieval, and Audio Captioning. Because
these audio tasks are intrinsically related, we can leverage from Transfer Learning (TL). TL focuses
on applying knowledge gained while solving one task to solve a related task. The learning method
involves pre-training a model with a large compilation of datasets from different tasks followed by
fine-tuning on a target dataset. These models have shown the potential to learn general-purpose audio
1

Code is available here: https://github.com/microsoft/Pengi

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

