Into the LAION’s Den:
Investigating Hate in Multimodal Datasets

Abeba Birhane∗
Mozilla Foundation and
School of Computer Science and Statistics
Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
Sang Han
Independent Researcher

Vinay Prabhu*
Independent Researcher

Vishnu Naresh Boddeti
Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University

Alexandra Sasha Luccioni
Hugging Face
Montreal, Canada

Abstract
‘Scale the model, scale the data, scale the compute’ is the reigning sentiment in
the world of generative AI today. While the impact of model scaling has been
extensively studied, we are only beginning to scratch the surface of data scaling and
its consequences. This is especially of critical importance in the context of visionlanguage datasets such as LAION. These datasets are continually growing in size
and are built based on large-scale internet dumps such as the Common Crawl, which
is known to have numerous drawbacks ranging from quality, legality, and content.
The datasets then serve as the backbone for large generative models, contributing
to the operationalization and perpetuation of harmful societal and historical biases
and stereotypes. In this paper, we investigate the effect of scaling datasets on hateful
content through a comparative audit of two datasets: LAION-400M and LAION-2B.
Our results show that hate content increased by nearly 12% with dataset scale,
measured both qualitatively and quantitatively using a metric that we term as Hate
Content Rate (HCR). We also found that filtering dataset contents based on Not Safe
For Work (NSFW) values calculated based on images alone does not exclude all the
harmful content in alt-text. Instead, we found that trace amounts of hateful, targeted,
and aggressive text remain even when carrying out conservative filtering. We end
with a reflection and a discussion of the significance of our results for dataset curation
and usage in the AI community. Code and the meta-data assets curated in this paper
are publicly available at https://github.com/vinayprabhu/hate_scaling.
Content warning: This paper contains examples of hateful text that might be
disturbing, distressing, and/or offensive.

1

Introduction

Generative AI models have come to captivate diverse stakeholders, spanning from researchers [7, 42]
to media institutions [28, 31] and even large-scale investment firms [18, 34]. The release of numerous
generative models introduced generative AI to the general public. The emergence of the Dall·E 2 [57],
a text-to-image vision-language model released in April 2022, which purportedly attracted over a
million users within the first three months of its launch and was celebrated with claims like: “the first AI
technology that has caught fire with regular people” [28]. Subsequently, models such as Stable Diffusion [58] and Midjourney emerged, followed by proprietary projects from large technology companies
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

