Language Is Not All You Need: Aligning Perception
with Language Models
Shaohan Huang∗, Li Dong∗, Wenhui Wang∗, Yaru Hao∗, Saksham Singhal∗, Shuming Ma∗
Tengchao Lv, Lei Cui, Owais Khan Mohammed, Barun Patra, Qiang Liu, Kriti Aggarwal
Zewen Chi, Johan Bjorck, Vishrav Chaudhary, Subhojit Som, Xia Song, Furu Wei†
Microsoft
https://github.com/microsoft/unilm

Abstract
A big convergence of language, multimodal perception, action, and world modeling is a key step toward artificial general intelligence. In this work, we introduce
KOSMOS -1, a Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM) that can perceive
general modalities, learn in context (i.e., few-shot), and follow instructions (i.e.,
zero-shot). Specifically, we train KOSMOS -1 from scratch on web-scale multimodal corpora, including arbitrarily interleaved text and images, image-caption
pairs, and text data. We evaluate various settings, including zero-shot, few-shot,
and multimodal chain-of-thought prompting, on a wide range of tasks without
any gradient updates or finetuning. Experimental results show that KOSMOS -1
achieves impressive performance on (i) language understanding, generation, and
even OCR-free NLP (directly fed with document images), (ii) perception-language
tasks, including multimodal dialogue, image captioning, visual question answering,
and (iii) vision tasks, such as image recognition with descriptions (specifying
classification via text instructions). We also show that MLLMs can benefit from
cross-modal transfer, i.e., transfer knowledge from language to multimodal, and
from multimodal to language. In addition, we introduce a dataset of Raven IQ test,
which diagnoses the nonverbal reasoning capability of MLLMs.

1

Introduction: From LLMs to MLLMs

Large language models (LLMs) have successfully served as a general-purpose interface across various
natural language tasks [1]. The LLM-based interface can be adapted to a task as long as we are able
to transform the input and output into texts. For example, the input of the summarization task is a
document and the output is its summary. So we can feed the input document into the language model
and then produce the generated summary.
Despite the successful applications in natural language processing, it is still struggling to natively use
LLMs for multimodal data, such as image, and audio. Being a basic part of intelligence, multimodal
perception is a necessity to achieve artificial general intelligence, in terms of knowledge acquisition
and grounding to the real world. More importantly, unlocking multimodal input [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]
greatly widens the applications of language models to more high-value areas, such as multimodal
machine learning, document intelligence, and robotics.
In this work, we introduce KOSMOS -1, a Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM) that can
perceive general modalities, follow instructions (i.e., zero-shot learning), and learn in context (i.e.,
few-shot learning). The goal is to align perception with LLMs, so that the models are able to see and
talk. To be specific, we follow M ETA LM [3] to train the KOSMOS -1 model from scratch. As shown
in Figure 1, a Transformer-based language model is regarded as the general-purpose interface, and
perception modules are docked with the language model. We train the model on web-scale multimodal
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

