Private estimation algorithms for stochastic block
models and mixture models
Hongjie Chen
ETH Zürich

Vincent Cohen-Addad
Google Research

Jacob Imola
UC San Diego

Tommaso d’Orsi
Bocconi∗

David Steurer
ETH Zürich

Alessandro Epasto
Google Research
Stefan Tiegel
ETH Zürich

Abstract
We introduce general tools for designing efficient private estimation algorithms, in
the high-dimensional settings, whose statistical guarantees almost match those of
the best known non-private algorithms. To illustrate our techniques, we consider
two problems: recovery of stochastic block models and learning mixtures of
spherical Gaussians.
For the former, we present the first efficient (ε, δ)-differentially private algorithms
for both weak recovery and exact recovery. Previously known algorithms achieving
comparable guarantees required quasi-polynomial time. We complement these results with an information-theoretic lower bound that highlights how the guarantees
of our algorithms are almost tight.
For the latter, we design an (ε, δ)-differentially private algorithm that recovers
√
the centers of the k-mixture when the minimum separation is at least O(k 1/t t).
For all choices of t, this algorithm requires sample complexity n ⩾ k O(1) dO(t)
and√time complexity (nd)O(t) . Prior work required either an additional additive
Ω( log n) term in the minimum separation or an explicit upper bound on the
Euclidean norm of the centers.

1

Introduction

Computing a model that best matches a dataset is a fundamental question in machine learning and
statistics. Given a set of n samples from a model, how to find the most likely parameters of the
model that could have generated this data? This basic question has been widely studied for several
decades, and recently revisited in the context where the input data has been partially corrupted (i.e.,
where few samples of the data have been adversarially generated—see for instance [37, 18, 22, 20]).
This has led to several recent works shedding new lights on classic model estimation problems, such
as the Stochastic Block Model (SBM) [28, 46, 44, 25, 21, 40] and the Gaussian Mixture Model
(GMM) [30, 36, 9, 10] (see Definitions 1.1 and 1.2).
Privacy in machine learning and statistical tasks has recently become of critical importance. New
regulations, renewed consumer interest as well as privacy leaks, have led the major actors to adopt
privacy-preserving solutions for the machine learning [1, 2, 3]. This new push has resulted in a flurry
of activity in algorithm design for private machine learning, including very recently for SBMs and
GMMs [55, 32, 16, 60]. Despite this activity, it has remain an open challenge to fully understand how
privacy requirements impact model estimation problems and in particular their recovery thresholds
and the computational complexity. This is the problem we tackle in this paper.
∗

Much of this work was done while the author was at ETH Zürich.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

