OBJ ECT 3DIT:
Language-guided 3D-aware Image Editing

Oscar Michel1
Anand Bhattad2
Eli VanderBilt1
1,3
1
Ranjay Krishna
Aniruddha Kembhavi
Tanmay Gupta1
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
3
University of Washington

Performance on OBJect Dataset

Input

3DIT (Ours)

move the headphones

rotate the cube
insert a blue cube
remove the sphere

Generalization to Real World

3DIT (Ours)

insert a soccer ball

rotate the mug

move the cube

Translation

move the bookcase

Rotation

rotate the skull

Insertion

insert a baseball cap

Input

Removal

3DIT (Ours)

remove the scale

Input

Generalization to CLEVR

remove the can

1

Figure 1: We present 3DIT, a model to edit individual objects in the context of a rich scene with
language conditioning. 3DIT is able to effectively edit objects while considering their scale and
viewpoint, is able to add, remove and edit shadows to be consistent with the scene lighting and is
able to account for object occlusions. Training on our new benchmark OBJ ECT, 3DIT remarkably
generalizes to images in the CLEVR dataset as well as the real world.

Abstract
Existing image editing tools, while powerful, typically disregard the underlying 3D
geometry from which the image is projected. As a result, edits made using these
tools may become detached from the geometry and lighting conditions that are at
the foundation of the image formation process. In this work, we formulate the new
task of language-guided 3D-aware editing, where objects in an image should be
edited according to a language instruction in context of the underlying 3D scene.
To promote progress towards this goal, we release OBJ ECT: a dataset consisting
of 400K editing examples created from procedurally generated 3D scenes. Each
example consists of an input image, editing instruction in language, and the edited
image. We also introduce 3DIT: single and multi-task models for four editing
tasks. Our models show impressive abilities to understand the 3D composition
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

