Sequential Subset Matching for Dataset Distillation

Jiawei Du , Qin Shi , Joey Tianyi Zhou
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
{dujw,Joey_Zhou}@cfar.a-star.edu.sg, shiqin924924@gmail.com

Abstract
Dataset distillation is a newly emerging task that synthesizes a small-size dataset
used in training deep neural networks (DNNs) for reducing data storage and
model training costs. The synthetic datasets are expected to capture the essence
of the knowledge contained in real-world datasets such that the former yields a
similar performance as the latter. Recent advancements in distillation methods
have produced notable improvements in generating synthetic datasets. However,
current state-of-the-art methods treat the entire synthetic dataset as a unified entity
and optimize each synthetic instance equally. This static optimization approach
may lead to performance degradation in dataset distillation. Specifically, we argue
that static optimization can give rise to a coupling issue within the synthetic data,
particularly when a larger amount of synthetic data is being optimized. This
coupling issue, in turn, leads to the failure of the distilled dataset to extract the
high-level features learned by the deep neural network (DNN) in the latter epochs.
In this study, we propose a new dataset distillation strategy called Sequential Subset
Matching (SeqMatch), which tackles this problem by adaptively optimizing the
synthetic data to encourage sequential acquisition of knowledge during dataset
distillation. Our analysis indicates that SeqMatch effectively addresses the coupling
issue by sequentially generating the synthetic instances, thereby enhancing its
performance significantly. Our proposed SeqMatch outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in various datasets, including SVNH, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and Tiny
ImageNet. Our code is available at https://github.com/shqii1j/seqmatch.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated their remarkable ability
to extract knowledge from large-scale real-world data, as exemplified by the impressive performance
of the large language model GPT-3, which was trained on a staggering 45 terabytes of text data [4].
However, the use of such massive datasets comes at a significant cost in terms of data storage, model
training, and hyperparameter tuning.
The challenges associated with the use of large-scale datasets have motivated the development of
various techniques aimed at reducing datasets size while preserving their essential characteristics.
One such technique is dataset distillation [5, 6, 13, 22, 29, 35, 42, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53], which
involves synthesizing a smaller dataset that effectively captures the knowledge contained within the
original dataset. Models trained on these synthetic datasets have been shown to achieve comparable
performance to those trained on the full dataset. In recent years, dataset distillation has garnered
increasing attention from the deep learning community and has been leveraged in various practical
applications, including continual learning [41, 52, 53], neural architecture search [21, 39, 40, 51, 53],
and privacy-preserving tasks [12, 15, 31], among others.
Corresponding Author
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

