Iteratively Learn Diverse Strategies with State
Distance Information
Z

Wei Fu1 , Weihua Du∗1 , Jingwei Li∗1 , Sunli Chen1 , Jingzhao Zhang12 , Yi Wu12
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University, 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
fuwth17@gmail.com, jxwuyi@gmail.com

Z

\

\

Abstract
In complex reinforcement learning (RL) problems, policies with similar rewards
may have substantially different behaviors. It remains a fundamental challenge
to optimize rewards while also discovering as many diverse strategies as possible,
which can be crucial in many practical applications. Our study examines two design
choices for tackling this challenge, i.e., diversity measure and computation framework. First, we find that with existing diversity measures, visually indistinguishable
policies can still yield high diversity scores. To accurately capture the behavioral
difference, we propose to incorporate the state-space distance information into
the diversity measure. In addition, we examine two common computation frameworks for this problem, i.e., population-based training (PBT) and iterative learning
(ITR). We show that although PBT is the precise problem formulation, ITR can
achieve comparable diversity scores with higher computation efficiency, leading to
improved solution quality in practice. Based on our analysis, we further combine
ITR with two tractable realizations of the state-distance-based diversity measures
and develop a novel diversity-driven RL algorithm, State-based Intrinsic-reward
Policy Optimization (SIPO), with provable convergence properties. We empirically
examine SIPO across three domains from robot locomotion to multi-agent games.
In all of our testing environments, SIPO consistently produces strategically diverse
and human-interpretable policies that cannot be discovered by existing baselines.

1

Introduction

A consensus in deep learning (DL) is that different local optima have similar mappings in the
functional space, leading to similar losses to the global optimum [62, 56, 40]. Hence, via stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), most DL works only focus on the final performance without considering
which local optimum SGD discovers. However, in complex reinforcement learning (RL) problems, the
policies associated with different local optima can exhibit significantly different behaviors [10, 35, 64].
Thus, it is a fundamental problem for an RL algorithm to not only optimize rewards but also discover
as many diverse strategies as possible. A pool of diversified policies can be further leveraged
towards a wide range of applications, including the discovery of emergent behaviors [34, 3, 61],
generating diverse dialogues [30], designing robust robots [12, 25, 19], and enhancing human-AI
collaboration [38, 9, 11].
Obtaining diverse RL strategies requires a quantitative method for measuring the difference (i.e.,
diversity) between two policies. However, how to define such a measure remains an open challenge.
Previous studies have proposed various diversity measures, such as comparing the difference between
the action distributions generated by policies [60, 38, 74], computing probabilistic distances between
the state occupancy of different policies [43], or measuring the mutual information between states and
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

