Improving Robustness with Adaptive Weight Decay
Amin Ghiasi, Ali Shafahi, Reza Ardekani
Apple
Cupertino, CA, 95014
{mghiasi2, ashafahi, rardekani} @apple.com

Abstract
We propose adaptive weight decay, which automatically tunes the hyper-parameter
for weight decay during each training iteration. For classification problems, we
propose changing the value of the weight decay hyper-parameter on the fly based on
the strength of updates from the classification loss (i.e., gradient of cross-entropy),
and the regularization loss (i.e., `2 -norm of the weights). We show that this simple
modification can result in large improvements in adversarial robustness — an
area which suffers from robust overfitting — without requiring extra data across
various datasets and architecture choices. For example, our reformulation results in
20% relative robustness improvement for CIFAR-100, and 10% relative robustness
improvement on CIFAR-10 comparing to the best tuned hyper-parameters of
traditional weight decay resulting in models that have comparable performance to
SOTA robustness methods. In addition, this method has other desirable properties,
such as less sensitivity to learning rate, and smaller weight norms, which the latter
contributes to robustness to overfitting to label noise, and pruning.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have exceeded human capability on many computer vision tasks. Due
to their high capacity for memorizing training examples (Zhang et al., 2021), DNN generalization
heavily relies on the training algorithm. To reduce memorization and improve generaliazation, several
approaches have been taken including regularization and augmentation. Some of these augmentation
techniques alter the network input (DeVries & Taylor, 2017; Chen et al., 2020; Cubuk et al., 2019,
2020; Müller & Hutter, 2021), some alter hidden states of the network (Srivastava et al., 2014; Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015; Gastaldi, 2017; Yamada et al., 2019), some alter the expected output (Warde-Farley
& Goodfellow, 2016; Kannan et al., 2018), and some affect multiple levels (Zhang et al., 2017; Yun
et al., 2019; Hendrycks et al., 2019b). Typically, augmentation methods aim to enhance generalization
by increasing the diversity of the dataset. The utilization of regularizers, such as weight decay (Plaut
et al., 1986; Krogh & Hertz, 1991), serves to prevent overfitting by eliminating solutions that solely
memorize training examples and by constraining the complexity of the DNN. Regularization methods
are most beneficial in areas such as adversarial robustness, and noisy-data settings – settings which
suffer from catastrophic overfitting. In this paper, we revisit weight decay; a regularizer mainly used
to avoid overfitting.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we revisit tuning the weight decay
hyper-parameter to improve adversarial robustness and introduce Adaptive Weight Decay. Also in
Section 2, through extensive experiments on various image classification datasets, we show that
adversarial training with Adaptive Weight Decay improves both robustness and natural generalization
compared to traditional non-adaptive weight decay. Next, in Section 3, we briefly mention other
potential applications of Adaptive Weight Decay to network pruning, robustness to sub-optimal
learning-rates, and training on noisy labels.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

