STXD: Structural and Temporal Cross-Modal
Distillation for Multi-View 3D Object Detection

Sujin Jang∗1 Dae Ung Jo∗1 Sung Ju Hwang2 Dongwook Lee1 Daehyun Ji1
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT) 1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) 2
{s.steve.jang, daeung.jo, dw12.lee, derek.ji}@samsung.com
sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
3D object detection (3DOD) from multi-view images is an economically appealing
alternative to expensive LiDAR-based detectors, but also an extremely challenging
task due to the absence of precise spatial cues. Recent studies have leveraged
the teacher-student paradigm for cross-modal distillation, where a strong LiDARmodality teacher transfers useful knowledge to a multi-view-based image-modality
student. However, prior approaches have only focused on minimizing global distances between cross-modal features, which may lead to suboptimal knowledge
distillation results. Based on these insights, we propose a novel structural and
temporal cross-modal knowledge distillation (STXD) framework for multi-view
3DOD. First, STXD reduces redundancy of the feature components of the student
by regularizing the cross-correlation of cross-modal features, while maximizing
their similarities. Second, to effectively transfer temporal knowledge, STXD encodes temporal relations of features across a sequence of frames via similarity
maps. Lastly, STXD also adopts a response distillation method to further enhance
the quality of knowledge distillation at the output-level. Our extensive experiments
demonstrate that STXD significantly improves the NDS and mAP of the based
student detectors by 2.8% ∼ 4.5% on the nuScenes testing dataset.

1

Introduction

3D object detection (3DOD) is the task of locating and classifying objects in 3D space using
input data from specific modalities, which typically include LiDAR point clouds [61, 14, 7] and
camera images [54, 34, 24]. 3DOD is central to understanding the surrounding environment and has
been widely applied to various complex vision systems, such as autonomous driving [44], robotic
manipulation [71, 65], and augmented reality [42]. Recently, camera-based multi-view 3DOD has
emerged as an attractive alternative to expensive LiDAR-based methods, thanks to its ubiquity, low
cost, and the semantically rich information from colorized pixels. In general, current works on
multi-view 3DOD aim to extract a unified bird’s-eye view (BEV) feature map from multiple camera
images. However, 3DOD from only camera-specific BEV features is extremely challenging due to
the lack of precise spatial cues [39], which leads to inferior performance of camera-based models
compared to LiDAR-based models. To bridge the gap, some prior works [16, 11, 19, 29, 9] introduced
a teacher-student paradigm for cross-modal knowledge distillation to transfer geometrically-rich 3D
information from LiDAR models (teacher) to camera-based 3DOD models (student). The current
state-of-the-art 3DOD models typically follow a similar detection paradigm, where modality-specific
encoders are used to extract BEV features, followed by a 3D object detection head [29, 34, 55, 7].
*

These authors equally contributed to this work

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

