Mitigating the Effect of Incidental Correlations on
Part-based Learning

Gaurav Bhatt∗13 , Deepayan Das2 , Leonid Sigal13 , Vineeth N Balasubramanian 2
1

The University of British Columbia, 2 Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
3
The Vector Institute, Canada

Abstract
Intelligent systems possess a crucial characteristic of breaking complicated problems into smaller reusable components or parts and adjusting to new tasks using
these part representations. However, current part-learners encounter difficulties
in dealing with incidental correlations resulting from the limited observations of
objects that may appear only in specific arrangements or with specific backgrounds.
These incidental correlations may have a detrimental impact on the generalization
and interpretability of learned part representations. This study asserts that partbased representations could be more interpretable and generalize better with limited
data, employing two innovative regularization methods. The first regularization
separates foreground and background information’s generative process via a unique
mixture-of-parts formulation. Structural constraints are imposed on the parts using
a weakly-supervised loss, guaranteeing that the mixture-of-parts for foreground
and background entails soft, object-agnostic masks. The second regularization
assumes the form of a distillation loss, ensuring the invariance of the learned parts
to the incidental background correlations. Furthermore, we incorporate sparse and
orthogonal constraints to facilitate learning high-quality part representations. By
reducing the impact of incidental background correlations on the learned parts, we
exhibit state-of-the-art (SoTA) performance on few-shot learning tasks on benchmark datasets, including MiniImagenet, TieredImageNet, and FC100. We also
demonstrate that the part-based representations acquired through our approach generalize better than existing techniques, even under domain shifts of the background
and common data corruption on the ImageNet-9 dataset. The implementation is
available on GitHub: https://github.com/GauravBh1010tt/DPViT.git

1

Introduction

Many datasets demonstrate a structural similarity by exhibiting "parts" or factors that reflect the
underlying properties of the data [15, 18, 21, 28, 31, 43, 54]. Humans are efficient learners who
represent objects based on their various traits or parts, such as a bird’s morphology, color, and
habitat characteristics. Part-based methods learn these explicit features from the data in addition to
convolution and attention-based approaches (which only learn the internal representations), making
them more expressive [7, 21, 41, 52, 54]. Most existing part-based methods focus on the unsupervised
discovery of parts by modeling spatial configurations [14, 21, 52, 54, 61], while others use part
localization supervision in terms of attribute vectors [25, 41, 50, 56] or bounding boxes [7]. Partbased methods come with a learnable part dictionary that provides a direct means of data abstraction
and is effective in limited data scenarios, such as few-shot learning. Furthermore, the parts can
be combined into hierarchical representations to form more significant components of the object
∗

First author; Email: gauravbhatt.cs.iitr@gmail.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

