Towards Combinatorial Generalization for Catalysts:
A Kohn-Sham Charge-Density Approach

Phillip Pope
University of Maryland, College Park
pepope@cs.umd.edu

David Jacobs
University of Maryland, College Park
dwj@umd.edu

Abstract
The Kohn-Sham equations underlie many important applications such as the discovery of new catalysts. Recent machine learning work on catalyst modeling has
focused on prediction of the energy, but has so far not yet demonstrated significant
out-of-distribution generalization. Here we investigate another approach based
on the pointwise learning of the Kohn-Sham charge-density. On a new dataset of
bulk catalysts with charge densities, we show density models can generalize to
new structures with combinations of elements not seen at train time, a form of
combinatorial generalization. We show that over 80% of binary and ternary test
cases achieve faster convergence than standard baselines in Density Functional
Theory, amounting to an average reduction of 13% in the number of iterations
required to reach convergence, which may be of independent interest. Our results
suggest that density learning is a viable alternative, trading greater inference costs
for a step towards combinatorial generalization, a key property for applications.

1

Introduction

The Kohn-Sham (KS) equations are a nonlinear eigenvalue problem of the form H[ρ]Ψ = EΨ, where
H is a symmetric diagonally dominant
P matrix called the Hamiltonian, Ψ is an eigenvector, E the
associated eigenvalue, and ρ(r) = i |Ψi (r)|2 is a real-valued scalar field called the charge density,
which is unknown a priori [40, 30]. The KS equations are nonlinear in the sense that the matrix H
depends on the charge density ρ, which in turn depends on the eigenvectors Ψ of H. Typically it is
solved by fixed-point iteration, where an initial guess for ρ is made and then a sequence of linear
eigenvalue problems are solved until convergence. In the computational chemistry literature this is
referred to as the self consistent field (SCF) iteration. The cost of the iteration is dominated by the
eigenvalue problem [41]. Consequently methods of reducing the number of requisite iterations, e.g.
with machine learning, are of great interest.
The KS equations lie at the foundation of Density Functional Theory (DFT), an approach to electronic
structure theory which reformulates the N -particle quantum many-body problem in terms of an effective one-particle density [31]. DFT is widely used in a number of physico-chemical applications. One
such application with important economic and environmental consequences and growing attention
from the machine-learning community in recent years is the discovery of new catalysts [54].
Perhaps the greatest difficulty of catalyst discovery is the combinatorial size of the search space of
structures. Even when reducing the candidate set of elements to 55, as done in the Open
 Catalyst
Project [8], the number of possible element combinations grows very quickly: we have 55
= 26, 235,
3

55
=
341,
055,
and
so
forth.
Additional
factors
like
choice
of
crystal
lattice,
surface
orientations,
4
binding sites, and adsorbates further complicate matters, but nevertheless the number of possible
element combinations is a dominating factor. Given the immensity of this search space, generalization
to new combinations is a key aspect for the success of property-predicting models in applications. Put
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

