L AUGHING H YENA D ISTILLERY
Extracting Compact Recurrences From Convolutions

Stefano Massaroli∗,1 , Michael Poli∗,2 , Daniel Y. Fu∗,2 ,
Hermann Kumbong2 , Rom N. Parnichkun3 , Aman Timalsina4 ,
David W. Romero5 , Quinn McIntyre2 , Beidi Chen6 , Atri Rudra7 , Ce Zhang8 ,
Christopher Re2,† , Stefano Ermon2,† , Yoshua Bengio1,†
∗

3

Equal contribution. † Equal senior authorship. 1 Mila and Université de Montréal. 2 Stanford University.
The University of Tokyo. 4 Purdue University. 5 Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam. 6 Carnegie Mellon University
and Meta AI (FAIR). 7 University of Buffalo, SUNY. 8 University of Chicago and Together Computer.

Abstract
Recent advances in attention-free sequence models rely on convolutions as alternatives
to the attention operator at the core of Transformers. In particular, long convolution
sequence models have achieved state-of-the-art performance in many domains, but incur a significant cost during auto-regressive inference workloads – naively requiring a
full pass (or caching of activations) over the input sequence for each generated token
– similarly to attention-based models. In this paper, we seek to enable O(1) compute
and memory cost per token in any pre-trained long convolution architecture to reduce
memory footprint and increase throughput during generation. Concretely, our methods
consist in extracting low-dimensional linear state-space models from each convolution layer, building upon rational interpolation and model-order reduction techniques.
We further introduce architectural improvements to convolution-based layers such as
Hyena: by weight-tying the filters across channels into heads, we achieve higher pretraining quality and reduce the number of filters to be distilled. The resulting model
achieves 10× higher throughput than Transformers and 1.5× higher than Hyena at
1.3B parameters, without any loss in quality after distillation.

1

Introduction

Attention-free approaches such as long convolution sequence models (LCSMs), e.g., H3 [1], Hyena
[2], have shown promise in matching Transformer [3, 4] performance across a wide range of tasks,
with sub-quadratic complexity with respect to sequence length. Despite the improved efficiency during
training on long sequences, unless the convolution filters are either short or admit a low-dimensional
state-state-space realization, LCSMs still need to process the entire growing sequence at every step of
auto-regressive generation, similarly to Transformers.
In this work, we seek to refine LCSMs in both efficiency and quality. First, we study the inference stage,
and propose methods to enable a recurrent mode for auto-regressive generation. Recurrent modes prescribe the existence of a state encoding the past information of the process in a fixed-dimension memory,
enabling constant per-step time and constant-memory in generation. Then, we draw upon an analysis of pre-trained models to develop architectural enhancements for the Hyena block, simultaneously
improving model quality and efficiency of the distillation procedure.
Distilling fast recurrences We introduce LaughingHyena, the first distillation approach for LCSMs
that enables recurrent inference without impacting downstream quality. LaughingHyena seeks compact
recurrences in the form of state-space models (SSMs) [5, 6] as the solution of a nonlinear interpolation
problem involving the convolution filters of a pre-trained model. Since the total memory cost of SSMs
grows linearly in the state dimension d, our distillation procedure enables high throughput by enabling
processing of large batches during generation. We identify and address three core challenges related to
distillation, including the identification of:
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

