Efficient Neural Music Generation
Max W. Y. Lam, Qiao Tian, Tang Li, Zongyu Yin, Siyuan Feng, Ming Tu, Yuliang Ji,
Rui Xia, Mingbo Ma, Xuchen Song, Jitong Chen, Yuping Wang, Yuxuan Wang
Speech, Audio & Music Intelligence (SAMI), ByteDance

Abstract
Recent progress in music generation has been remarkably advanced by the stateof-the-art MusicLM, which comprises a hierarchy of three LMs, respectively, for
semantic, coarse acoustic, and fine acoustic modelings. Yet, sampling with the MusicLM requires processing through these LMs one by one to obtain the fine-grained
acoustic tokens, making it computationally expensive and prohibitive for a realtime generation. Efficient music generation with a quality on par with MusicLM
remains a significant challenge. In this paper, we present MeLoDy (M for music;
L for LM; D for diffusion), an LM-guided diffusion model that generates music
audios of state-of-the-art quality meanwhile reducing 95.7% to 99.6% forward
passes in MusicLM, respectively, for sampling 10s to 30s music. MeLoDy inherits
the highest-level LM from MusicLM for semantic modeling, and applies a novel
dual-path diffusion (DPD) model and an audio VAE-GAN to efficiently decode the
conditioning semantic tokens into waveform. DPD is proposed to simultaneously
model the coarse and fine acoustics by incorporating the semantic information
into segments of latents effectively via cross-attention at each denoising step. Our
experimental results suggest the superiority of MeLoDy, not only in its practical
advantages on sampling speed and infinitely continuable generation, but also in its
state-of-the-art musicality, audio quality, and text correlation.
Our samples are available at https://Efficient-MeLoDy.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Music is an art composed of harmony, melody, and rhythm that permeates every aspect of human life.
With the blossoming of deep generative models [1–3], music generation has drawn much attention in
recent years [4–6]. As a prominent class of generative models, language models (LMs) [7, 8] showed
extraordinary modeling capability in modeling complex relationships across long-term contexts
[9–11]. In light of this, AudioLM [3] and many follow-up works [5, 12–14] successfully applied
LMs to audio synthesis. Concurrent to the LM-based approaches, diffusion probabilistic models
(DPMs) [1, 15, 16], as another competitive class of generative models [2, 17], have also demonstrated
exceptional abilities in synthesizing speech [18–20], sounds [21, 22] and music [6, 23].
However, generating music from free-form text remains challenging as the permissible music descriptions can be very diverse and relate to any of the genres, instruments, tempo, scenarios, or even some
subjective feelings. Conventional text-to-music generation models are listed in Table 1, where both
MusicLM [5] and Noise2Music [6] were trained on large-scale music datasets and demonstrated the
state-of-the-art (SOTA) generative performances with high fidelity and adherence to various aspects
of text prompts. Yet, the success of these two methods comes with large computational costs, which
would be a serious impediment to their practicalities. In comparison, Moûsai [23] building upon
DPMs made efficient samplings of high-quality music possible. Nevertheless, the number of their
demonstrated cases was comparatively small and showed limited in-sample dynamics. Aiming for a
feasible music creation tool, a high efficiency of the generative model is essential since it facilitates
interactive creation with human feedback being taken into account as in [24].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

