Learning Large-scale Neural Fields via
Context Pruned Meta-Learning

Jihoon Tack1 , Subin Kim1 , Sihyun Yu1 , Jaeho Lee2 , Jinwoo Shin1 , Jonathan Schwarz3
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
2
Pohang University of Science and Technology
3
University College London
{jihoontack,subin-kim,sihyun.yu,jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr
jaeho.lee@postech.ac.kr, schwarzjn@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce an efficient optimization-based meta-learning technique for largescale neural field training by realizing significant memory savings through automated online context point selection. This is achieved by focusing each learning
step on the subset of data with the highest expected immediate improvement in
model quality, resulting in the almost instantaneous modeling of global structure
and subsequent refinement of high-frequency details. We further improve the quality of our meta-learned initialization by introducing a bootstrap correction resulting
in the minimization of any error introduced by reduced context sets while simultaneously mitigating the well-known myopia of optimization-based meta-learning.
Finally, we show how gradient re-scaling at meta-test time allows the learning of
extremely high-quality neural fields in significantly shortened optimization procedures. Our framework is model-agnostic, intuitive, straightforward to implement,
and shows significant reconstruction improvements for a wide range of signals. We
provide an extensive empirical evaluation on nine datasets across multiple multiple
modalities, demonstrating state-of-the-art results while providing additional insight
through careful analysis of the algorithmic components constituting our method.
Code is available at https://github.com/jihoontack/GradNCP

1

Introduction

Neural fields (NFs), also known as implicit neural representations (INRs), have emerged as a new
paradigm for representing complex signals as continuous functions (e.g., the implicit pixel coordinate
to feature mapping (x, y) 7→ (r, g, b) of a 2D-image) parameterized by neural networks [43, 60].
In contrast to multi-dimensional array representations, this approach has the benefits of allowing
querying at arbitrary resolutions or from arbitrary viewpoints [39, 52], removing modality-agnostic
architectural choices for downstream tasks (e.g., compression [10, 48, 49], classification [11, 2]
or generative modeling [55, 68]), representing a more compact parameterization and providing an
elegant framework for dealing with data unsuitable for discretization (e.g., vector fields). Thus, the
approach has shown great promise in modeling diverse forms of data, including images [38], videos
[5], 3D scenes [43], voxels [11], climate data [25], and audio [12].
Unfortunately, fitting even a single NF to a signal is often prohibitively expensive (e.g., more than
a half GPU day for a single HD video [30]), limiting the field’s ability to learn NFs at scale for a
large set of signals. To alleviate this issue, optimization-based meta-learning has recently emerged
[53, 61], demonstrating rapid improvements in learning efficiency and thus quickly becoming a
standard technique in NF research. Meta-learning allows signals to be represented at good quality
within only a handful of optimization steps by replacing tabula rasa optimization from a hand-picked
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

