ViCA-NeRF: View-Consistency-Aware 3D Editing of
Neural Radiance Fields
Jiahua Dong
Yu-Xiong Wang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{jiahuad2, yxw}@illinois.edu

“Turn him into iron man”

Instruct-NeRF2NeRF

ViCA-NeRF (Ours)

“Add some flowers”

Instruct-NeRF2NeRF

ViCA-NeRF (Ours)

Figure 1: Our ViCA-NeRF is the first work that achieves multi-view consistent 3D editing with
text instructions, applicable across a broad range of scenes and instructions. Moreover, ViCA-NeRF
exhibits controllability, allowing for early control of final results by editing key views. Notably,
ViCA-NeRF is also efficient, surpassing state-of-the-art Instruct-NeRF2NeRF by being 3 times faster.

Abstract
We introduce ViCA-NeRF, the first view-consistency-aware method for 3D editing
with text instructions. In addition to the implicit neural radiance field (NeRF)
modeling, our key insight is to exploit two sources of regularization that explicitly
propagate the editing information across different views, thus ensuring multi-view
consistency. For geometric regularization, we leverage the depth information
derived from NeRF to establish image correspondences between different views.
For learned regularization, we align the latent codes in the 2D diffusion model
between edited and unedited images, enabling us to edit key views and propagate
the update throughout the entire scene. Incorporating these two strategies, our
ViCA-NeRF operates in two stages. In the initial stage, we blend edits from
different views to create a preliminary 3D edit. This is followed by a second stage of
NeRF training, dedicated to further refining the scene’s appearance. Experimental
results demonstrate that ViCA-NeRF provides more flexible, efficient (3 times
faster) editing with higher levels of consistency and details, compared with the state
of the art. Our code is available at: https://github.com/Dongjiahua/VICA-NeRF.

1

Introduction

The recent advancements in 3D reconstruction technology, exemplified by the neural radiance field
(NeRF) [1] and its variants, have significantly improved the convenience of collecting real-world
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

