Global-correlated 3D-decoupling Transformer
for Clothed Avatar Reconstruction
Zechuan Zhang1 , Li Sun1 , Zongxin Yang1 , Ling Chen2 , Yi Yang1†
1
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
2
AAII, University of Technology Sydney

Abstract
Reconstructing 3D clothed avatars from single images is a challenging task, especially when encountering complex poses and loose clothing. Current methods
exhibit limitations in performance, largely attributable to their dependence on
insufficient 2D image features and inconsistent query methods. Owing to this, we
present Global-correlated 3D-decoupling Transformer for clothed Avatar reconstruction (GTA), a novel transformer-based architecture that reconstructs clothed
human avatars from monocular images. Our approach leverages transformer architectures by utilizing a Vision Transformer model as an encoder for capturing globalcorrelated image features. Subsequently, our innovative 3D-decoupling decoder
employs cross-attention to decouple tri-plane features, using learnable embeddings
as queries for cross-plane generation. To effectively enhance feature fusion with
the tri-plane 3D feature and human body prior, we propose a hybrid prior fusion
strategy combining spatial and prior-enhanced queries, leveraging the benefits of
spatial localization and human body prior knowledge. Comprehensive experiments
on CAPE and THuman2.0 datasets illustrate that our method outperforms state-ofthe-art approaches in both geometry and texture reconstruction, exhibiting high
robustness to challenging poses and loose clothing, and producing higher-resolution
textures. Codes are available at https://github.com/River-Zhang/GTA.

1

Introduction

As virtual worlds and metaverse technology gain popularity, the demand for advanced techniques to
reconstruct 3D clothed human avatars from single images is rapidly increasing. These techniques [1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] are employed across various areas, such as AR/VR, social telepresence, virtual
try-on, or the movie industry. However, in-the-wild images often present challenges, such as loose
clothing and complex poses, which are not typically found in training data. As a result, there is a
pressing need for models that can effectively generalize to these scenarios and reconstruct accurate,
animatable, and high-resolution 3D human avatars.
In light of the significant progress made in 3D clothed human avatar reconstruction, existing models
still face two main limitations: (i) Overreliance on 2D image features. Sole dependence on 2D
CNN-based features compromises the accuracy of 3D object reconstructions due to the lack of
global correlation. Despite the integration of 3D features from human body priors in methods
like [3, 2, 7, 10], their inconsistent performance with loose clothing and challenging poses (See
Fig. 2) indicates insufficient integration. Additionally, optimization-based methods [4, 11, 12, 13]
can be complex and prone to errors, reducing reliability. (ii) Inconsistent query methods. Current
strategies for querying features differ and have drawbacks. The pixel-aligned method [1, 6] directly
†: the corresponding author.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

