Isometric Quotient Variational Auto-Encoders for
Structure-Preserving Representation Learning

In Huh1,∗ , Changwook Jeong2,† , Jae Myung Choe1 , Young-Gu Kim1 , Dae Sin Kim1
1
CSE Team, Innovation Center, Samsung Electronics
2
Graduate School of Semiconductor Materials and Devices Engineering, UNIST
∗
in.huh@samsung.com † changwook.jeong@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
We study structure-preserving low-dimensional representation of a data manifold
embedded in a high-dimensional observation space based on variational autoencoders (VAEs). We approach this by decomposing the data manifold M as
M = M/G × G, where G and M/G are a group of symmetry transformations
and a quotient space of M up to G, respectively. From this perspective, we define
the structure-preserving representation of such a manifold as a latent space Z
which is isometrically isomorphic (i.e., distance-preserving) to the quotient space
M/G rather M (i.e., symmetry-preserving). To this end, we propose a novel
auto-encoding framework, named isometric quotient VAEs (IQVAEs), that can
extract the quotient space from observations and learn the Riemannian isometry
of the extracted quotient in an unsupervised manner. Empirical proof-of-concept
experiments reveal that the proposed method can find a meaningful representation
of the learned data and outperform other competitors for downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

There has been a common consensus that natural image datasets form a low-dimensional manifold M
embedded in a high-dimensional observation space Rd , i.e., dim(M) ≪ d [6]. From this perspective,
a good neural network is a mapping function that can recognize the underlying structure of the data
manifold well [25]. A question that arises is what structures should be represented from the data.
For unsupervised learning task, especially in generative modeling, if we suppose the data manifold
to be a Riemannian one, then preserving geometric structures in the representation space is a key
consideration [1, 8, 25]. To make things more explicit, if Z is a latent representation of M, then Z
should be isometrically isomorphic to M in the sense of the Riemannian isometry. This means that an
infinitesimal distance on the data manifold should be preserved in the latent space as well, promoting
geodesic distances in the latent space that accurately reflect those in the data space. Recently, several
papers [8, 40, 25] have suggested using the concept of Riemannian isometry for deep generative
models, such as variational auto-encoders (VAEs) [22] and generative adversarial networks (GANs)
[14], to obtain more meaningful and relevant representations. These concepts have been applied to
improve latent space interpolations [30] or clustering [45] of data manifolds.
However, the Riemannian isometry does not tell the whole story of the data structure, particularly
in the case of vision datasets. One common property of natural images is that there are symmetry
transformations that preserve the semantic meaning of the given image. For example, if one applies a
rotational transformation to a certain image, then its semantic meaning, e.g., its label, does not change.
In this situation, what one really wants to do is represent the inherent geometry of the manifold, i.e.,
the geometry up to such symmetry transformations [29].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

