Deep Multi-Marginal Momentum Schrödinger Bridge

Tianrong Chen, Guan-horng Liu, Molei Tao, Evangelos A. Theodorou
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
{tianrong.chen,ghliu, mtao, evangelos.theodorou}@gatech.edu

Abstract
It is a crucial challenge to reconstruct population dynamics using unlabeled samples from distributions at coarse time intervals. Recent approaches such as flowbased models or Schrödinger Bridge (SB) models have demonstrated appealing
performance, yet the inferred sample trajectories either fail to account for the
underlying stochasticity or are unnecessarily rigid. In this article, We extend the
approach in [1] to operate in continuous space and propose Deep Momentum
Multi-Marginal Schrödinger Bridge (DMSB), a novel computational framework
that learns the smooth measure-valued spline for stochastic systems that satisfy
position marginal constraints across time. By tailoring the celebrated Bregman
Iteration and extending the Iteration Proportional Fitting to phase space, we manage
to handle high-dimensional multi-marginal trajectory inference tasks efficiently.
Our algorithm outperforms baselines significantly, as evidenced by experiments
for synthetic datasets and a real-world single-cell RNA sequence dataset. Additionally, the proposed approach can reasonably reconstruct the evolution of velocity
distribution, from position snapshots only, when there is a ground truth velocity
that is nevertheless inaccessible.

1

Introduction

We consider the multi-marginal trajectory inference problem, which pertains to elucidating the
dynamics and reactions of indiscernible individuals, given static snapshots of them taken at sporadic
time points. Due to the inability of tracking each individual, one considers the evolution of the
statistical distribution of the population instead. This problem received considerable attention,
and associated applications appear in various scientific areas such as estimating cell dynamics
[2, 3], predicting meteorological evolution [4], and medical healthcare statistics tracking [5]. [6,
7] constructed an energy landscape that best aligned with empirical observations using neural
network. [8, 9] learn regularized Neural ODE [10] to encode such potential landscape. Notably,
in the aforementioned work, the trajectory of samples is represented in a deterministic way. In
contrast, [11, 12] employ Schrödinger Bridge (SB) to determine the most likely evolution of samples
between marginal distributions when individual sample trajectories are also affected by environmental
stochasticity. Yet, these approaches scale poorly w.r.t. the state dimension due to specialized neural
network architectures and computational frameworks.
SB can be viewed as a solution to the entropy-regularized optimal transport problem. SB seeks a
nonlinear SDE that yields a straight path measure between two arbitary distributions. The straightness
is implied by achieving optimality of minimizing transportation costs (i.e. 2-Wasserstein distance
(W2 )). We note SB is often related to Score-based Generated Model (SGM), both of which can be
used for generative modeling by constructing certain Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) that
links data distribution and a tractable prior distribution (i.e. 2 marginals). SGM accomplishes the
generative task by first diffusing data to prior through a pre-specified linear SDE, during which a
neural network is also learned to approximate the score function. Then this score approximator is
used to reverse this diffusion process, and consequently establish the generation. Critically-damped
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

