Seeing is not Believing: Robust Reinforcement
Learning against Spurious Correlation

Wenhao Ding1∗
Laixi Shi2∗
Yuejie Chi1
Ding Zhao1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
California Institute of Technology
{wenhaod,laixis,yuejiec}@andrew.cmu.edu, dingzhao@cmu.edu
1

Abstract
Robustness has been extensively studied in reinforcement learning (RL) to handle
various forms of uncertainty such as random perturbations, rare events, and malicious attacks. In this work, we consider one critical type of robustness against
spurious correlation, where different portions of the state do not have correlations
induced by unobserved confounders. These spurious correlations are ubiquitous
in real-world tasks, for instance, a self-driving car usually observes heavy traffic
in the daytime and light traffic at night due to unobservable human activity. A
model that learns such useless or even harmful correlation could catastrophically
fail when the confounder in the test case deviates from the training one. Although
motivated, enabling robustness against spurious correlation poses significant challenges since the uncertainty set, shaped by the unobserved confounder and causal
structure, is difficult to characterize and identify. Existing robust algorithms that
assume simple and unstructured uncertainty sets are therefore inadequate to address
this challenge. To solve this issue, we propose Robust State-Confounded Markov
Decision Processes (RSC-MDPs) and theoretically demonstrate its superiority in
avoiding learning spurious correlations compared with other robust RL counterparts. We also design an empirical algorithm to learn the robust optimal policy
for RSC-MDPs, which outperforms all baselines in eight realistic self-driving and
manipulation tasks. Please refer to the website for more details.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL), aiming to learn a policy to maximize cumulative reward through
interactions, has been successfully applied to a wide range of tasks such as language generation [1],
game playing [2], autonomous driving [3], etc. While standard RL has achieved remarkable success
in simulated environments, a growing trend in RL is to address another critical concern – robustness –
with the hope that the learned policy still performs well when the deployed (test) environment deviates
from the nominal one used for training [4]. Robustness is highly desirable since the performance
of the learned policy could significantly deteriorate due to the uncertainty and variations of the test
environment induced by random perturbation, rare events, or even malicious attacks [5, 6].
Despite various types of uncertainty that have been investigated in RL, this work focuses on the
uncertainty of the environment with semantic meanings resulting from some unobserved underlying
variables. Such environment uncertainty, denoted as structured uncertainty, is motivated by
innumerable real-world applications but still receives little attention in sequential decision-making
tasks [7]. To specify the phenomenon of structured uncertainty, let us consider a concrete example
(illustrated in Figure 1) in a driving scenario, where a shift between training and test environments
caused by an unobserved confounder can potentially lead to a severe safety issue. Specifically,
the observations brightness and traffic density do not have cause and effect on each other but are
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

