Explaining Predictive Uncertainty with
Information Theoretic Shapley Values

David S. Watson
King’s College London
david.watson@kcl.ac.uk

Joshua O’Hara
King’s College London

Niek Tax
Meta, Central Applied Science

Richard Mudd
Meta, Central Applied Science

Ido Guy
Meta, Central Applied Science

Abstract
Researchers in explainable artificial intelligence have developed numerous methods for helping users understand the predictions of complex supervised learning
models. By contrast, explaining the uncertainty of model outputs has received
relatively little attention. We adapt the popular Shapley value framework to explain
various types of predictive uncertainty, quantifying each feature’s contribution
to the conditional entropy of individual model outputs. We consider games with
modified characteristic functions and find deep connections between the resulting
Shapley values and fundamental quantities from information theory and conditional independence testing. We outline inference procedures for finite sample
error rate control with provable guarantees, and implement efficient algorithms that
perform well in a range of experiments on real and simulated data. Our method
has applications to covariate shift detection, active learning, feature selection, and
active feature-value acquisition.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) algorithms can solve many prediction tasks with greater accuracy than
classical methods. However, some of the most popular and successful algorithms, such as deep
neural networks, often produce models with millions of parameters and complex nonlinearities. The
resulting “black box” is essentially unintelligible to humans. Researchers in explainable artificial
intelligence (XAI) have developed numerous methods to help users better understand the inner
workings of such models (see Sect. 2).
Despite the rapid proliferation of XAI tools, the goals of the field have thus far been somewhat narrow.
The vast majority of methods in use today aim to explain model predictions, i.e. point estimates.
But these are not necessarily the only model output of interest. Predictive uncertainty can also vary
widely across the feature space, in ways that may have a major impact on model performance and
human decision making. Such variation makes it risky to rely on the advice of a black box, especially
when generalizing to new environments. Discovering the source of uncertainty can be an important
first step toward reducing it.
Quantifying predictive uncertainty has many applications in ML. For instance, it is an essential
subroutine in any task that involves exploration, e.g. active learning [18, 36], multi-armed bandits
[73, 40], and reinforcement learning more generally [55, 76]. Other applications of predictive
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

