Maximization of Average Precision for
Deep Learning with Adversarial Ranking Robustness

Gang Li
Texas A&M University
College Station, USA
gang-li@tamu.edu

Wei Tong
General Motors
Warren, USA
wei.tong@gm.com

Tianbao Yang
Texas A&M University
College Station, USA
tianbao-yang@tamu.edu

Abstract
This paper seeks to address a gap in optimizing Average Precision (AP) while
ensuring adversarial robustness, an area that has not been extensively explored to
the best of our knowledge. AP maximization for deep learning has widespread
applications, particularly when there is a significant imbalance between positive and
negative examples. Although numerous studies have been conducted on adversarial
training, they primarily focus on robustness concerning accuracy, ensuring that the
average accuracy on adversarially perturbed examples is well maintained. However,
this type of adversarial robustness is insufficient for many applications, as minor
perturbations on a single example can significantly impact AP while not greatly
influencing the accuracy of the prediction system. To tackle this issue, we introduce
a novel formulation that combines an AP surrogate loss with a regularization
term representing adversarial ranking robustness, which maintains the consistency
between ranking of clean data and that of perturbed data. We then devise an efficient
stochastic optimization algorithm to optimize the resulting objective. Our empirical
studies, which compare our method to current leading adversarial training baselines
and other robust AP maximization strategies, demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed approach. Notably, our methods outperform a state-of-the-art method
(TRADES) by more than 4% in terms of robust AP against PGD attacks while
achieving 7% higher AP on clean data simultaneously on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100.
The code is available at: https://github.com/GangLii/Adversarial-AP

1

Introduction

AP measures the precision of a model at different recall levels, offering a more nuanced understanding
of the trade-offs between precision and recall. Optimizing AP for deep learning is of vital importance,
especially in cases with highly imbalanced datasets. In such situations, accuracy alone can be
misleading, as a model may perform well on the majority class but struggle with the minority class,
thereby offering a superficially high accuracy score. In contrast, AP serves as a ranking metric that is
particularly attuned to errors at the top of the ranking list, which makes it a more appropriate metric
for applications dealing with highly imbalanced datasets. For example, deep AP maximization has
been crucial in enhancing molecular property prediction performance, contributing to a winning
solution in the MIT AICures challenge [54].
However, existing approaches of AP maximization are not robust against adversarial examples. It
is notoriously known that deep neural networks (DNN) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, where
small, carefully-crafted perturbations to the input data can cause the model to produce incorrect
predictions [46, 16]. These perturbations are often imperceptible to humans but can significantly
impact the model’s performance. Tremendous studies have been conducted to improve the adversarial
robustness of DNN. A popular strategy to achieve adversarial robustness is through adversarial
training [27, 59, 53, 45, 21, 2, 35, 44, 47, 15], which injects adversarial examples into the training
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

