STARSS23: An Audio-Visual Dataset of
Spatial Recordings of Real Scenes with
Spatiotemporal Annotations of Sound Events

Kazuki Shimada
Sony AI
kazuki.shimada@sony.com

Archontis Politis
Tampere University
archontis.politis@tuni.fi

Parthasaarathy Sudarsanam
Tampere University
Sharath Adavanne
Tampere University

Daniel Krause
Tampere University

Aapo Hakala
Tampere University

Shusuke Takahashi
Sony Group Corporation

Yuichiro Koyama
Sony Group Corporation

Tuomas Virtanen
Tampere University

Kengo Uchida
Sony AI
Naoya Takahashi
Sony AI

Yuki Mitsufuji
Sony AI, Sony Group Corporation

Abstract
While direction of arrival (DOA) of sound events is generally estimated from
multichannel audio data recorded in a microphone array, sound events usually
derive from visually perceptible source objects, e.g., sounds of footsteps come from
the feet of a walker. This paper proposes an audio-visual sound event localization
and detection (SELD) task, which uses multichannel audio and video information
to estimate the temporal activation and DOA of target sound events. Audiovisual SELD systems can detect and localize sound events using signals from a
microphone array and audio-visual correspondence. We also introduce an audiovisual dataset, Sony-TAu Realistic Spatial Soundscapes 2023 (STARSS23), which
consists of multichannel audio data recorded with a microphone array, video data,
and spatiotemporal annotation of sound events. Sound scenes in STARSS23 are
recorded with instructions, which guide recording participants to ensure adequate
activity and occurrences of sound events. STARSS23 also serves human-annotated
temporal activation labels and human-confirmed DOA labels, which are based on
tracking results of a motion capture system. Our benchmark results demonstrate
the benefits of using visual object positions in audio-visual SELD tasks. The data
is available at https://zenodo.org/record/7880637.

1

Introduction

Given multichannel audio input from a microphone array, a sound event localization and detection (SELD) system [1, 45, 8, 46] outputs a temporal activation track for each of the target sound
classes along with one or more corresponding spatial trajectories, e.g., the direction of arrival (DOA)
around the microphone array, when the track indicates activity. Such a spatiotemporal characterization of sound scenes can be used in a wide range of machine cognition tasks, such as inference
on the type of environment, tracking of specific types of sound sources, acoustic monitoring, scene
visualization systems, and smart-home applications. Recently neural network (NN)-based SELD
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

