Transformers learn to implement preconditioned
gradient descent for in-context learning

Kwangjun Ahn∗
MIT EECS/LIDS
kjahn@mit.edu

Xiang Cheng∗
MIT LIDS
chengx@mit.edu

Hadi Daneshmand∗
MIT LIDS/FODSI
hdanesh@mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
TU Munich / MIT
suvrit@mit.edu

Abstract
Several recent works demonstrate that transformers can implement algorithms
like gradient descent. By a careful construction of weights, these works show
that multiple layers of transformers are expressive enough to simulate iterations
of gradient descent. Going beyond the question of expressivity, we ask: Can
transformers learn to implement such algorithms by training over random problem
instances? To our knowledge, we make the first theoretical progress on this question
via an analysis of the loss landscape for linear transformers trained over random
instances of linear regression. For a single attention layer, we prove the global
minimum of the training objective implements a single iteration of preconditioned
gradient descent. Notably, the preconditioning matrix not only adapts to the input
distribution but also to the variance induced by data inadequacy. For a transformer
with L attention layers, we prove certain critical points of the training objective
implement L iterations of preconditioned gradient descent. Our results call for
future theoretical studies on learning algorithms by training transformers.

1

Introduction

In-context learning (ICL) is the striking capability of large language models: Given a prompt
containing examples and a query, the transformer produces the correct output based on the context
provided by the examples, without adapting its parameters (Brown et al., 2020; Lieber et al., 2021;
Rae et al., 2021; Black et al., 2022). This property has become the focus of body of recent research
that aims to shed light on the underlying mechanism of large language models (Garg et al., 2022;
Akyürek et al., 2022; von Oswald et al., 2023; Li and Malik, 2017; Min et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021;
Elhage et al., 2021; Olsson et al., 2022).
A line of research studies ICL via the expressive power of transformers. Transformer architectures
are powerful Turing machines, capable of implementing various algorithms (Pérez et al., 2021; Wei
et al., 2022). Given an in-context prompt, Edelman et al. (2022); Olsson et al. (2022) argue that
transformers are able to implement algorithms through the recurrence of multi-head attentions to
extract coarse information from raw input prompts. Akyürek et al. (2022); von Oswald et al. (2023)
assert that transformers can implement gradient descent on linear regression encoded in a given input
prompt. It is thought provoking that transformers can implement such algorithms.
Although transformers are universal machines to implement algorithms, they need specific parameter
configurations for achieving these implementations. In practice, their parameters are adjusted via
training using non-convex optimization over random problem instances. Hence, it remains unclear
whether this non-convex optimization can be used to learn algorithms. The present paper investigates
the possibility of learning algorithms via training over random problem instances.
∗

Equal contribution, alphabetical order.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

