Direction-oriented Multi-objective Learning: Simple
and Provable Stochastic Algorithms

Peiyao Xiao1 , Hao Ban2 , Kaiyi Ji1∗
1

Department of CSE, University at Buffalo

2
Zuoyi Technology
{peiyaoxi,kaiyiji}@buffalo.edu, bhsimon0810@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-objective optimization (MOO) has become an influential framework in
many machine learning problems with multiple objectives such as learning with
multiple criteria and multi-task learning (MTL). In this paper, we propose a
new direction-oriented multi-objective formulation by regularizing the common
descent direction within a neighborhood of a direction that optimizes a linear combination of objectives such as the average loss in MTL or a weighted
loss that places higher emphasis on some tasks than the others. This formulation includes GD and MGDA as special cases, enjoys the direction-oriented
benefit as in CAGrad, and facilitates the design of stochastic algorithms. To
solve this problem, we propose Stochastic Direction-oriented Multi-objective
Gradient descent (SDMGrad) with simple SGD type of updates, and its variant SDMGrad-OS with an efficient objective sampling. We develop a comprehensive convergence analysis for the proposed methods with different loop sizes
and regularization coefficients. We show that both SDMGrad and SDMGradOS achieve improved sample complexities to find an ϵ-accurate Pareto stationary
point while achieving a small ϵ-level distance toward a conflict-avoidant (CA) direction. For a constant-level CA distance, their sample complexities match the
best known O(ϵ−2 ) without bounded function value assumption. Extensive experiments show that our methods achieve competitive or improved performance
compared to existing gradient manipulation approaches in a series of tasks on
multi-task supervised learning and reinforcement learning. Code is available at
https://github.com/ml-opt-lab/sdmgrad.

1

Introduction

In recent years, multi-objective optimization (MOO) has drawn intensive attention in a wide range
of applications such as online advertising [1], hydrocarbon production [2], autonomous driving [3],
safe reinforcement learning [4], etc. In this paper, we focus on the stochastic MOO problem, which
takes the formulation of
min L(θ) := (Eξ [L1 (θ; ξ)], Eξ [L2 (θ; ξ)], ..., Eξ [LK (θ; ξ)]),

θ∈Rm

(1)

where m is the parameter dimension, K ≥ 2 is the number of objectives and Li (θ) := Eξ Li (θ; ξ).
One important example of MOO in eq. (1) is the multi-task learning (MTL) [5, 6], whose objective
∗

First two authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

