Anonymous and Copy-Robust Delegations
for Liquid Democracy∗

Markus Utke
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
TU Eindhoven
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
m.utke@tue.nl

Ulrike Schmidt-Kraepelin
Simons Laufer Mathematical Sciences
Institute (SLMath)
Berkeley, CA, United States
uschmidt@slmath.org

Abstract
Liquid democracy with ranked delegations is a novel voting scheme that unites
the practicability of representative democracy with the idealistic appeal of direct
democracy: Every voter decides between casting their vote on a question at hand
or delegating their voting weight to some other, trusted agent. Delegations are
transitive, and since voters may end up in a delegation cycle, they are encouraged
to indicate not only a single delegate, but a set of potential delegates and a ranking
among them. Based on the delegation preferences of all voters, a delegation rule
selects one representative per voter. Previous work has revealed a trade-off between
two properties of delegation rules called anonymity and copy-robustness.
To overcome this issue we study two fractional delegation rules: M IXED B ORDA
B RANCHING, which generalizes a rule satisfying copy-robustness, and the R AN DOM WALK RULE , which satisfies anonymity. Using the Markov chain tree
theorem, we show that the two rules are in fact equivalent, and simultaneously satisfy generalized versions of the two properties. Combining the same theorem with
Fulkerson’s algorithm, we develop a polynomial-time algorithm for computing the
outcome of the studied delegation rule. This algorithm is of independent interest,
having applications in semi-supervised learning and graph theory.

1

Introduction

Today, democratic decision-making in legislative bodies, parties, and non-profit organizations is often
done via one of two extremes: In representative democracy, the constituents elect representatives
who are responsible for deciding upon all upcoming issues for a period of several years. In direct
democracy, the voters may vote upon every issue themselves. While the latter is distinguished by its
idealistic character, it may suffer from low voter turnout as voters do not feel sufficiently informed.
Liquid democracy aims to provide the best of both worlds by letting voters decide whether they
want to cast their opinion on an issue at hand, or prefer to delegate their voting weight to some
other, trusted voter. Delegations are transitive, i.e., if voter v1 delegates to voter v2 , and v2 in turn
delegates to voter v3 , who casts its vote, then v3 receives the voting weight of both v1 and v2 . Liquid
democracy has been implemented, for example, by political parties [Kling et al., 2015] and Google
[Hardt and Lopes, 2015]. From a theoretic viewpoint, liquid democracy has been studied intensively
by the social choice community in the last decade [Paulin, 2020].
Earlier works on liquid democracy [Christoff and Grossi, 2017, Brill, 2018] have pointed towards the
issue of delegation cycles, e.g., the situation that occurs when voter v3 in the above example decides
to delegate to voter v1 instead of casting its vote. If this happens, none of the three voters reaches a
∗

Part of this research was carried out while both authors were affiliated with TU Berlin and Universidad de
Chile, and Markus Utke was affiliated with University of Amsterdam.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

