StableFDG: Style and Attention Based Learning for
Federated Domain Generalization
Jungwuk Park∗
KAIST
savertm@kaist.ac.kr

Dong-Jun Han∗
Purdue University
han762@purdue.edu

Jinho Kim
SK Hynix
jinho123.kim@sk.com

Shiqiang Wang
IBM Research
wangshiq@us.ibm.com

Christopher G. Brinton
Purdue University
cgb@purdue.edu

Jaekyun Moon
KAIST
jmoon@kaist.edu

Abstract
Traditional federated learning (FL) algorithms operate under the assumption that
the data distributions at training (source domains) and testing (target domain) are
the same. The fact that domain shifts often occur in practice necessitates equipping
FL methods with a domain generalization (DG) capability. However, existing
DG algorithms face fundamental challenges in FL setups due to the lack of samples/domains in each client’s local dataset. In this paper, we propose StableFDG, a
style and attention based learning strategy for accomplishing federated domain
generalization, introducing two key contributions. The first is style-based learning, which enables each client to explore novel styles beyond the original source
domains in its local dataset, improving domain diversity based on the proposed
style sharing, shifting, and exploration strategies. Our second contribution is an
attention-based feature highlighter, which captures the similarities between the
features of data samples in the same class, and emphasizes the important/common
characteristics to better learn the domain-invariant characteristics of each class in
data-poor FL scenarios. Experimental results show that StableFDG outperforms
existing baselines on various DG benchmark datasets, demonstrating its efficacy.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) has now become a key paradigm for training a machine learning model
using local data of distributed clients [26, 19, 11]. Without directly sharing each client’s data to the
third party, FL enables the clients to construct a global model via collaboration. However, although
FL has achieved remarkable success, the underlying assumption of previous works is that the data
distributions during training and testing are the same. This assumption is not valid in various scenarios
with domain shifts; for example, although the FL clients only have data samples that belong to the
source domains (e.g., images on sunny days and rainy days), the trained global model should be
also able to make reliable predictions for the unseen target domain (e.g., images on snowy days).
Therefore, in practice, FL methods have to be equipped with a domain generalization (DG) capability.
Given the source domains in the training phase, DG aims to construct a model that has a generalization
capability to predict well on an unseen target domain. Various DG methods have been proposed in a
centralized setup [39, 21, 36, 38, 16, 15, 24, 23]. However, directly applying centralized DG schemes
to FL can potentially restrict the model performance since each client has limited numbers of data
samples and styles in its local dataset. The local models are unable to capture the domain-invariant
characteristics due to lack of data/styles in individual clients.
∗

Authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

