Incentives in Private Collaborative Machine Learning

Rachael Hwee Ling Sim1 , Yehong Zhang2 , Trong Nghia Hoang3
Xinyi Xu1 , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1 , and Patrick Jaillet4
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, People’s Republic of China
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Washington State University, USA
4
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, USA
1
{rachaels,xuxinyi,lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg, 2 zhangyh02@pcl.ac.cn
3
trongnghia.hoang@wsu.edu, 4 jaillet@mit.edu

Abstract
Collaborative machine learning involves training models on data from multiple
parties but must incentivize their participation. Existing data valuation methods
fairly value and reward each party based on shared data or model parameters but
neglect the privacy risks involved. To address this, we introduce differential privacy
(DP) as an incentive. Each party can select its required DP guarantee and perturb
its sufficient statistic (SS) accordingly. The mediator values the perturbed SS
by the Bayesian surprise it elicits about the model parameters. As our valuation
function enforces a privacy-valuation trade-off, parties are deterred from selecting
excessive DP guarantees that reduce the utility of the grand coalition’s model.
Finally, the mediator rewards each party with different posterior samples of the
model parameters. Such rewards still satisfy existing incentives like fairness but
additionally preserve DP and a high similarity to the grand coalition’s posterior.
We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness and practicality of our approach on
synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Collaborative machine learning (ML) seeks to build ML models of higher quality by training on
more data owned by multiple parties [47, 62]. For example, a hospital can improve its prediction
of disease progression by training on data collected from more and diversified patients from other
hospitals [6]. Likewise, a real-estate firm can improve its prediction of demand and price by training
on data from others [9]. However, parties have two main concerns that discourage data sharing and
participation in collaborative ML: (a) whether they benefit from the collaboration and (b) privacy.
Concern (a) arises as each party would expect the significant cost that it incurs to collect and share
data (e.g., the risk of losing its competitive edge) to be covered. Some existing works [47, 51], among
other data valuation methods,1 have recognized that parties require incentives to collaborate, such as
a guaranteed fair higher reward from contributing more valuable data than the others, an individually
rational higher reward from collaboration than in solitude, and a higher total reward (i.e., group
welfare) whenever possible. Often, parties share and are rewarded with information (e.g., gradients
[58] or parameters [47] of parametric ML models) computed from the shared data. However, these
incentive-aware reward schemes expose parties to privacy risks.
1
Data valuation methods study how much data is worth. As explained in [46], a party’s data is first valued
independently using a performance metric (e.g., see Def. 3.1 later) and then relative to the data contributed by
others (e.g., Shapley value (Sec. 4)). The latter value is helpful to (i) model interpretability and (ii) deciding how
much to compensate the data owners fairly.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

