Advancing Bayesian Optimization via
Learning Correlated Latent Space

Seunghun Lee∗, Jaewon Chu∗, Sihyeon Kim∗, Juyeon Ko, Hyunwoo J. Kim †
Computer Science & Engineering
Korea University
{llsshh319, allonsy07, sh_bs15, juyon98, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Bayesian optimization is a powerful method for optimizing black-box functions
with limited function evaluations. Recent works have shown that optimization in
a latent space through deep generative models such as variational autoencoders
leads to effective and efficient Bayesian optimization for structured or discrete
data. However, as the optimization does not take place in the input space, it leads
to an inherent gap that results in potentially suboptimal solutions. To alleviate the
discrepancy, we propose Correlated latent space Bayesian Optimization (CoBO),
which focuses on learning correlated latent spaces characterized by a strong correlation between the distances in the latent space and the distances within the objective function. Specifically, our method introduces Lipschitz regularization, loss
weighting, and trust region recoordination to minimize the inherent gap around
the promising areas. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on several optimization tasks in discrete data, such as molecule design and arithmetic
expression fitting, and achieve high performance within a small budget.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) is a standard method for a wide range of science and engineering problems such as chemical design [1–4], reinforcement learning [5], and hyperparameter tuning [6]. Relying on a surrogate model typically modeled with a Gaussian process (GP), BO estimates the computationally expensive black-box objective function to solve the problem with a minimum number
of function evaluations [7]. While it is known as a powerful method on continuous domains [8, 9],
applying BO is often obstructed by structured or discrete data, as the objective values are in a complex combinatorial space [10]. This challenge has motivated recent interest in latent space Bayesian
optimization (LBO) methods [11–14], which aim to find solutions in low-dimensional, continuous
embeddings of the input data. By adopting deep generative models such as variational autoencoders (VAEs) [15] to map the input space to the latent space, LBO has successfully addressed the
difficulties of such optimization problems.
However, the fact that optimization is not directly conducted in the input space gives rise to inherent
gaps, which may lead to failures in the optimization process. First, we can think of the gap between the input space and the latent space. Seminal works have been developed to address this gap,
with generative models such as β-VAE [16] emphasizing the importance of controlling loss weights,
while WGAN [17] introduces improved regularization. Both aim to learn the improved latent space
that better aligns with the input data distribution. Second, considering the BO problems, an additional gap emerges between the proximity of solutions in the latent space and the similarity of their
∗
†

equal contributions
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

