MM-Fi: Multi-Modal Non-Intrusive 4D Human
Dataset for Versatile Wireless Sensing

Jianfei Yang1∗, He Huang1 , Yunjiao Zhou1 , Xinyan Chen1 , Yuecong Xu1 ,
Shenghai Yuan1 , Han Zou1 , Chris Xiaoxuan Lu2 , Lihua Xie1
1
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
2
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
Project Page: https://ntu-aiot-lab.github.io/mm-fi
Dataset Toolbox: https://github.com/ybhbingo/MMFi_dataset

Abstract
4D human perception plays an essential role in a myriad of applications, such as
home automation and metaverse avatar simulation. However, existing solutions
which mainly rely on cameras and wearable devices are either privacy intrusive
or inconvenient to use. To address these issues, wireless sensing has emerged as
a promising alternative, leveraging LiDAR, mmWave radar, and WiFi signals for
device-free human sensing. In this paper, we propose MM-Fi, the first multi-modal
non-intrusive 4D human dataset with 27 daily or rehabilitation action categories, to
bridge the gap between wireless sensing and high-level human perception tasks.
MM-Fi consists of over 320k synchronized frames of five modalities from 40 human
subjects. Various annotations are provided to support potential sensing tasks, e.g.,
human pose estimation and action recognition. Extensive experiments have been
conducted to compare the sensing capacity of each or several modalities in terms of
multiple tasks. We envision that MM-Fi can contribute to wireless sensing research
with respect to action recognition, human pose estimation, multi-modal learning,
cross-modal supervision, and interdisciplinary healthcare research.

1

Introduction

Human sensing and modeling serve as the fundamental technology in computer vision, humancomputer interaction, ubiquitous computing, and computer graphics [16]. Accurately recognizing
human activities and reconstructing human pose empower a broad spectrum of applications, e.g.,
gaming, home automation, autonomous driving, augmented and virtual reality, animation, and rehabilitation. However, existing methods mainly rely on cameras [25] and wearable inertial sensors [50],
where significant limitations exist when applied in real-world scenarios. For instance, cameras result
in privacy concerns in domestic settings and are susceptible to lighting conditions. Wearable inertial
sensors are low-cost solutions but require strong user compliance for wearing them at all time.
Recently, wireless human sensing has emerged as a promising solution that leverages non-intrusive
sensors such as LiDAR, mmWave radar, and WiFi to address the limitations of illumination, privacy,
and inconvenience [27]. These device-free sensors spread laser or radio frequency (RF) signals
whose responses reflect human motions in different levels of granularity: high-resolution point cloud
data from LiDAR [21], medium-resolution point cloud from mmWave radar [2], and low-resolution
channel state information (CSI) from WiFi [47, 56]. These data modalities are complementary to
existing camera-based or device-based solutions and enable more privacy-preserving human sensing
applications such as homes and hospitals.
In this work, we present MM-Fi, a multi-modal non-intrusive 4D (spatial-temporal) human dataset
for high-fidelity human sensing to facilitate the algorithm development of wireless human sensing.
∗

Corresponding authors (yang0478@e.ntu.edu.sg)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

