Fitting trees to ℓ1-hyperbolic distances

Joon-Hyeok Yim

Anna C. Gilbert

Abstract
Building trees to represent or to fit distances is a critical component of phylogenetic
analysis, metric embeddings, approximation algorithms, geometric graph neural
nets, and the analysis of hierarchical data. Much of the previous algorithmic work,
however, has focused on generic metric spaces (i.e., those with no a priori constraints). Leveraging several ideas from the mathematical analysis of hyperbolic
geometry and geometric group theory, we study the tree fitting problem as finding
the relation between the hyperbolicity (ultrametricity) vector and the error of tree
(ultrametric) embedding. That is, we define a vector of hyperbolicity (ultrametric)
values over all triples of points and compare the ℓp norms of this vector with the ℓq
norm of the distortion of the best tree fit to the distances. This formulation allows
us to define the average hyperbolicity (ultrametricity) in terms of a normalized
ℓ1 norm of the hyperbolicity vector. Furthermore, we can interpret the classical
tree fitting result of Gromov as a p = q = ∞ result. We present an algorithm
HCCROOTED T REE F IT such that the ℓ1 error of the output embedding is analytically bounded in terms of the ℓ1 norm of the hyperbolicity vector (i.e., p = q = 1)
and that this result is tight. Furthermore, this algorithm has significantly different
theoretical and empirical performance as compared to Gromov’s result and related
algorithms. Finally, we show using HCCROOTED T REE F IT and related tree fitting
algorithms, that supposedly standard data sets for hierarchical data analysis and
geometric graph neural networks have radically different tree fits than those of
synthetic, truly tree-like data sets, suggesting that a much more refined analysis of
these standard data sets is called for.

1

Introduction

Constructing trees or ultrametrics to fit given data are both problems of great interest in scientific
applications (e.g., phylogeny), algorithmic applications (optimal transport and Wasserstein distances
are easier, for example, to compute quickly on trees), data visualization and analysis, and geometric
machine learning. An ultrametric space is one in which the usual triangle inequality has been
strengthened to d(x, y) ≤ max{d(x, z), d(y, z)}. A hyperbolic metric space is one in which the
metric relations amongst any four points are the same as they would be in a tree, up to the additive
constant δ. More generally, any finite subset of a hyperbolic space “looks like” a finite tree.
There has been a concerted effort to solve both of these problems in the algorithmic and machine
learning communities, including [1]–[5] among many others. Indeed, the motivation for embedding
into hyperbolic space or into trees was at the heart of the recent explosion in geometric graph neural
networks [6].
As an optimization problem, finding the tree metric that minimizes the ℓp norm of the difference
between the original distances and those on the tree (i.e., the distortion) is known to be NP-hard for
most formulations. [7] showed that it is APX-hard under the ℓ∞ norm. The first positive result also
came from [7], which provided a 3-approximation algorithm and introduced a reduction technique
from a tree metric to an ultrametric (a now widely used technique). The current best known result is
an O((log n log log n)1/p ) approximation for 1 < p < ∞ [2], and O(1) approximation for p = 1,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

