AiluRus: A Scalable ViT Framework for Dense
Prediction
Jin Li1,† Yaoming Wang1,† Xiaopeng Zhang2 Bowen Shi1
Dongsheng Jiang2 Chenglin Li1 Wenrui Dai1 Hongkai Xiong1 Qi Tian2∗
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Huawei Cloud
{deserve_lj, wang_yaoming, sjtu_shibowen, lcl1985,
daiwenrui, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn;
{zhangxiaopeng12, jiangdongsheng1, tian.qi1}@huawei.com

Abstract
Vision transformers (ViTs) have emerged as a prevalent architecture for vision tasks
owing to their impressive performance. However, when it comes to handling long
token sequences, especially in dense prediction tasks that require high-resolution input, the complexity of ViTs increases significantly. Notably, dense prediction tasks,
such as semantic segmentation or object detection, emphasize more on the contours
or shapes of objects, while the texture inside objects is less informative. Motivated
by this observation, we propose to apply adaptive resolution for different regions
in the image according to their importance. Specifically, at the intermediate layer
of the ViT, we utilize a spatial-aware density-based clustering algorithm to select
representative tokens from the token sequence. Once the representative tokens are
determined, we proceed to merge other tokens into their closest representative token.
Consequently, semantic similar tokens are merged together to form low-resolution
regions, while semantic irrelevant tokens are preserved independently as highresolution regions. This strategy effectively reduces the number of tokens, allowing
subsequent layers to handle a reduced token sequence and achieve acceleration.
At the output layers, the resolution of the feature map is restored by unfolding the
merged tokens for task prediction. As a result, our method significantly accelerates
ViTs for dense prediction tasks. We evaluate our proposed method on three different
datasets and observe promising performance. For example, the "Segmenter ViT-L"
model can be accelerated by 48% FPS without fine-tuning, while maintaining the
performance. Additionally, our method can be applied to accelerate fine-tuning as
well. Experimental results demonstrate that we can save 52% training time while
accelerating 2.46× FPS with only a 0.09% performance drop. The code is available
at https://github.com/caddyless/ailurus/tree/main.

1

Introduction

Transformers have shown significant advancements in various vision tasks such as image classification
[9, 27, 33, 18], object detection [38, 34], and semantic segmentation[26, 4]. Despite their impressive
performance across various visual tasks, the complexity of these models poses challenges for finetuning and deployment, particularly as their capacity continues to grow [11, 13, 39]. This complexity
issue is particularly relevant for dense prediction tasks that require high-resolution input. Efforts have
been made to address this challenge by designing efficient ViT models [36, 6, 20, 24, 19, 16, 23, 31,
14, 1, 17]. However, most of these works are primarily focused on classification tasks and are not
applicable to dense prediction tasks. Recently, [15] proposed to expedite well-trained ViTs for dense
∗

: Corresponding author. †: Equal contribution. This work was done when Jin Li interned at Huawei Cloud.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

