On Dynamic Programming Decompositions
of Static Risk Measures in Markov Decision Processes
Jia Lin Hau
University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH
jialin.hau@unh.edu

Erick Delage
HEC Montréal
Montréal (Québec)
erick.delage@hec.ca

Mohammad Ghavamzadeh∗
Amazon
Palo Alto, CA
ghavamza@amazon.com

Marek Petrik
University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH
mpetrik@cs.unh.edu

Abstract
Optimizing static risk-averse objectives in Markov decision processes is difficult
because they do not admit standard dynamic programming equations common in
Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms. Dynamic programming decompositions
that augment the state space with discrete risk levels have recently gained popularity in the RL community. Prior work has shown that these decompositions
are optimal when the risk level is discretized sufficiently. However, we show that
these popular decompositions for Conditional-Value-at-Risk (CVaR) and EntropicValue-at-Risk (EVaR) are inherently suboptimal regardless of the discretization
level. In particular, we show that a saddle point property assumed to hold in prior
literature may be violated. However, a decomposition does hold for Value-at-Risk
and our proof demonstrates how this risk measure differs from CVaR and EVaR.
Our findings are significant because risk-averse algorithms are used in high-stakes
environments, making their correctness much more critical.

1

Introduction

Risk-averse reinforcement learning (RL) seeks to provide a risk-averse policy for high-stakes realworld decision problems. These high-stake domains include autonomous driving (Jin et al., 2019;
Sharma et al., 2020), robot collision avoidance (Ahmadi et al., 2021; Hakobyan and Yang, 2021),
liver transplant timing (Köse, 2016), HIV treatment (Keramati et al., 2020; Zhong, 2020), unmanned
aerial vehicle (UAV) (Choudhry et al., 2021), and investment liquidation (Min et al., 2022), to name a
few. Because these domains call for reliable solutions, risk-averse algorithms must be based on solid
theoretical foundations. This is one reason why monetary risk measures, such as Value-at-Risk (VaR)
and Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR), have become pervasive in risk-averse RL (Prashanth and
Fu, 2022). Indeed, risk measures such as CVaR are known to be coherent (Artzner et al., 1999)
with respect to a set of fundamental axioms that define how risk should be quantified and have been
adopted as gold standards in banking regulations (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2019).
Introducing risk-averse objectives in Markov decision processes (MDPs)—the primary model used
in RL—is challenging. Dynamic programming, the linchpin of most RL algorithms, cannot be
used directly to optimize a risk measure like VaR or CVaR in MDPs. One line of work tackles this
challenge by exploiting the primal representation of risk measures and augmenting the state space
∗

The work was done prior to joining Amazon, while the author was at Google Research.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

