Fair Allocation of Indivisible Chores:
Beyond Additive Costs

Bo Li1
1

Fangxiao Wang1

Yu Zhou1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
comp-bo.li@polyu.edu.hk,
fangxiao.wang@connect.polyu.hk, csyzhou@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
We study the maximin share (MMS) fair allocation of m indivisible chores to n
agents who have costs for completing the assigned chores. It is known that exact
MMS fairness cannot be guaranteed, and so far the best-known approximation
for additive cost functions is 13
11 by Huang and Segal-Halevi [EC, 2023]; however,
beyond additivity, very little is known. In this work, we first prove that no algorithm
can ensure better than min{n, logloglogmm }-approximation if the cost functions are
submodular. This result also shows a sharp contrast with the allocation of goods
where constant approximations exist as shown by Barman and Krishnamurthy
[TEAC, 2020] and Ghodsi et al. [AIJ, 2022]. We then prove that for subadditive
costs, there always exists an allocation that is min{n, ⌈log m⌉}-approximation,
and thus the approximation ratio is asymptotically tight. Besides multiplicative
approximation, we also consider the ordinal relaxation, 1-out-of-d MMS, which
was recently proposed by Hosseini et al. [JAIR and AAMAS, 2022]. Our impossibility result implies that for any d ≥ 2, a 1-out-of-d MMS allocation may
not exist. Due to these hardness results for general subadditive costs, we turn to
studying two specific subadditive costs, namely, bin packing and job scheduling.
For both settings, we show that constant approximate allocations exist for both
multiplicative and ordinal relaxations of MMS.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background and related research

Although fair resource allocation has been widely studied in the past decade, the research is centered
around additive functions [3]. However, in many real-world scenarios, the functions are more
complicated. Particularly, the functions appear in machine learning and artificial intelligence (e.g,
clustering [37], Sketches [18], Coresets [36], data distillation [41]) are often submodular, and we refer
the readers to a recent survey that reviews some major problems within machine learning that have
been touched by submodularity [12]. Therefore, in this work, we study the fair allocation problem
when the agents have beyond additive cost functions. The mainly studied solution concept is maximin
share (MMS) fairness [14], which is traditionally defined for the allocation of goods as a relaxation
of proportionality (PROP). A PROP allocation requires that the utility of each agent is no smaller
than the average utility when all items are allocated to her. PROP is too demanding in the sense that
such an allocation does not exist even when there is a single item and two agents. Due to this strong
impossibility result, the maximin share (MMS) of an agent is proposed to relax the average utility by
the maximum utility the agent can guarantee herself if she is to partition the items into n bundles but
is to receive the least favorite bundle.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

