Faster Query Times for Fully Dynamic k-Center
Clustering with Outliers

Leyla Biabani
Eindhoven University of Technology
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
l.biabani@tue.nl

Annika Hennes
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf
Düsseldorf, Germany
annika.hennes@hhu.de

Morteza Monemizadeh
Eindhoven University of Technology
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
m.monemizadeh@tue.nl

Melanie Schmidt
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf
Düsseldorf, Germany
mschmidt@hhu.de

Abstract
Given a point set P ⊆ M from a metric space (M, d) and numbers k, z ∈ N, the
metric k-center problem with z outliers is to find a set C ∗ ⊆ P of k points such
that the maximum distance of all but at most z outlier points of P to their nearest
center in C ∗ is minimized. We consider this problem in the fully dynamic model,
i.e., under insertions and deletions of points, for the case that the metric space has
a bounded doubling dimension dim. We utilize a hierarchical data structure to
maintain the points and their neighborhoods, which enables us to efficiently find
the clusters. In particular, our data structure can be queried at any time to generate
a (3 + ε)-approximate solution for input values of k and z in worst-case query
time ε−O(dim) k log n log log ∆, where ∆ is the ratio between the maximum and
minimum distance between two points in P . Moreover, it allows insertion/deletion
of a point in worst-case update time ε−O(dim) log n log ∆. Our result achieves a
significantly faster query time with respect to k and z than the current state-of-theart by Pellizzoni, Pietracaprina, and Pucci [18], which uses ε−O(dim) (k + z)2 log ∆
query time to obtain a (3 + ε)-approximate solution.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental problem in machine learning and it has applications in many areas
ranging from natural to social sciences. As a basic unsupervised learning method, it allows us to find
structure in data. Classical center-based clustering methods for objectives like k-means, k-median
and k-center have been around for many decades [9, 13, 16]. Since the beginning of clustering, the
data to be analyzed has changed dramatically, raising new challenges for clustering methods. Data
nowadays comes in large to huge batches and is often prone to inherent change: Content on social
media platforms is constantly added, re-organized or deleted, streaming services handle an always
ongoing flow of people starting and stopping to watch, tweets are the fastest method to distribute
news – and delete them later if desired. Data analysis methods thus face the challenge of analyzing
huge amounts of data, ideally permanently updating their solution.
In this paper, we consider the problem of dynamic k-center clustering with outliers. The (metric)
k-center problem is to find a set C ∗ ⊆ P of k points such that the maximum distance of all points of
P to their nearest center in C ∗ is minimized. This objective is well understood, 2-approximations for
the problem are known [9, 13] and better approximations are not possible unless P equals N P [14].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

