Cal-QL: Calibrated Offline RL Pre-Training for
Efficient Online Fine-Tuning

Mitsuhiko Nakamoto1∗ Yuexiang Zhai1∗ Anikait Singh1 Max Sobol Mark2
Yi Ma1 Chelsea Finn2 Aviral Kumar1 Sergey Levine1
1

UC Berkeley

2

Stanford University

Abstract
A compelling use case of offline reinforcement learning (RL) is to obtain a policy
initialization from existing datasets followed by fast online fine-tuning with limited
interaction. However, existing offline RL methods tend to behave poorly during finetuning. In this paper, we study the fine-tuning problem in the context of conservative
offline RL methods and we devise an approach for learning an effective initialization
from offline data that also enables fast online fine-tuning capabilities. Our approach,
calibrated Q-learning (Cal-QL), accomplishes this by learning a conservative value
function initialization that underestimates the value of the learned policy from
offline data, while also ensuring that the learned Q-values are at a reasonable scale.
We refer to this property as calibration, and define it formally as providing a lower
bound on the true value function of the learned policy and an upper bound on
the value of some other (suboptimal) reference policy, which may simply be the
behavior policy. We show that a conservative offline RL algorithm that also learns
a calibrated value function leads to effective online fine-tuning, enabling us to take
the benefits of offline initializations in online fine-tuning. In practice, Cal-QL can
be implemented on top of the conservative Q learning (CQL) [32] for offline RL
within a one-line code change. Empirically, Cal-QL outperforms state-of-the-art
methods on 9/11 fine-tuning benchmark tasks that we study in this paper. Code
and video are available at https://nakamotoo.github.io/Cal-QL

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning successes follow a common recipe: pre-training models on general-purpose,
Internet-scale data, followed by fine-tuning the pre-trained initialization on a limited amount of data
for the task of interest [22, 7]. How can we translate such a recipe to sequential decision-making
problems? A natural way to instantiate this paradigm is to utilize offline reinforcement learning
(RL) [37] for initializing value functions and policies from static datasets, followed by online finetuning to improve this initialization with limited active interaction. If successful, such a recipe might
enable efficient online RL with much fewer samples than current methods that learn from scratch.
Many algorithms for offline RL have been applied to online fine-tuning. Empirical results across
such works suggest a counter-intuitive trend: policy initializations obtained from more effective
offline RL methods tend to exhibit worse online fine-tuning performance, even within the same
task (see Table 2 of Kostrikov et al. [31] & Figure 4 of Xiao et al. [57]). On the other end, online RL methods training from scratch (or RL from demonstrations [53], where the replay buffer
is seeded with the offline data) seem to improve online at a significantly faster rate. However,
∗
Equal contributions. Corresponding authors: Mitsuhiko Nakamoto, Yuexiang Zhai, and Aviral Kumar
({nakamoto, simonzhai}@berkeley.edu, aviralku@andrew.cmu.edu)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

