Causal discovery from observational and
interventional data across multiple environments
Adam Li
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University
adam.li@columbia.edu
Amin Jaber
Synlico Inc.
amin.jaber@synlico.com
Elias Bareinboim
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
A fundamental problem in many sciences is the learning of causal structure underlying a system, typically through observation and experimentation. Commonly,
one even collects data across multiple domains, such as gene sequencing from
different labs, or neural recordings from different species. Although there exist
methods for learning the equivalence class of causal diagrams from observational
and experimental data, they are meant to operate in a single domain. In this paper,
we develop a fundamental approach to structure learning in non-Markovian systems
(i.e. when there exist latent confounders) leveraging observational and interventional data collected from multiple domains. Specifically, we start by showing that
learning from observational data in multiple domains is equivalent to learning from
interventional data with unknown targets in a single domain. But there are also
subtleties when considering observational and experimental data. Using causal
invariances derived from do-calculus, we define a property called S-Markov that
connects interventional distributions from multiple-domains to graphical criteria
on a selection diagram. Leveraging the S-Markov property, we introduce a new
constraint-based causal discovery algorithm, S-FCI, that can learn from observational and interventional data from different domains. We prove that the algorithm
is sound and subsumes existing constraint-based causal discovery algorithms.

1

Introduction

Causal discovery is the process of learning cause-and-effect relationships between variables in a
given system, which is many times the final goal of the data scientist or a necessary step towards a
more refined causal analysis [1, 2]. The learning process typically leverages constraints from data
to infer the corresponding causal diagram. However, it is common that the data constraints do not
uniquely identify the full diagram. Therefore, the target of analysis is often an equivalence class (EC)
of causal diagrams that encodes constraints found in the data (implied by the underlying unknown
causal system).
An EC encodes invariances in the form of graphical constraints, and thus is used to represent all
causal diagrams that encode those constraints and invariances. Formal characterizations of ECs are
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

