Alternating Gradient Descent and Mixture-of-Experts
for Integrated Multimodal Perception

Hassan Akbari∗ Dan Kondratyuk∗ Yin Cui
Rachel Hornung Huisheng Wang Hartwig Adam
Google Research
{hassanak, dankondratyuk, yincui, rachelhornung, huishengw, hadam}@google.com

Abstract
We present Integrated Multimodal Perception (IMP), a simple and scalable multimodal multi-task training and modeling approach. IMP integrates multimodal
inputs including image, video, text, and audio into a single Transformer encoder
with minimal modality-specific components. IMP makes use of a novel design that
combines Alternating Gradient Descent (AGD) and Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) for
efficient model & task scaling. We conduct extensive empirical studies and reveal
the following key insights: 1) performing gradient descent updates by alternating
on diverse modalities, loss functions, and tasks, with varying input resolutions,
efficiently improves the model. 2) sparsification with MoE on a single modalityagnostic encoder substantially improves the performance, outperforming dense
models that use modality-specific encoders or additional fusion layers and greatly
mitigates the conflicts between modalities. IMP achieves competitive performance
on a wide range of downstream tasks including video classification, image classification, image-text, and video-text retrieval. Most notably, we train a sparse
IMP-MoE-L focusing on video tasks that achieves new state-of-the-art in zero-shot
video classification: 77.0% on Kinetics-400, 76.8% on Kinetics-600, and 68.3% on
Kinetics-700, improving the previous state-of-the-art by +5%, +6.7%, and +5.8%,
respectively, while using only 15% of their total training computational cost.

1

Introduction

The human perception system is profoundly multimodal. We perceive the world through the integration of a vast array of sensory systems across domains — visual, auditory, olfactory, somatic, etc.
Neurons for multimodal integration have been found in both multisensory convergence zones Calvert
[2001] and unimodal regions Driver and Noesselt [2008] in the human brain. Studies in developmental
psychology also suggest that interrelating simultaneous multimodal sensations is key for perceptutal
learning Smith and Gasser [2005]. Inspired by these findings, we see an opportunity for combined
multisensory learning in machine learning systems as well.
The rapid rise of large-scale multitask frameworks and models [Raffel et al., 2020, Roberts et al.,
2022, Radford et al., 2021, Yu et al., 2022, Wang et al., 2022] provides foundations for integrating
capabilities that unify many disparate tasks under one model. However, given the vast quantity
of independent variables involved in designing such a system, achieving an integrated multimodal
machine learning model still remains an open research direction. More specifically, designing a
multi-task model that integrates many multimodal signals is challenging due to various reasons: i.
Different modalities require structurally different I/O signatures to properly train. ii. When training
across multiple datasets, some modalities or objectives may not exist or cannot be applied, depending
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

