Deep Optimal Transport: A Practical Algorithm for
Photo-realistic Image Restoration

Theo J. Adrai
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
Computer Science
theoad@cs.technion.ac.il

Guy Ohayon
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
Computer Science
ohayonguy@cs.technion.ac.il

Michael Elad
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
Computer Science
elad@cs.technion.ac.il

Tomer Michaeli
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
Electrical Engineering
tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We propose an image restoration algorithm that can control the perceptual quality
and/or the mean square error (MSE) of any pre-trained model, trading one over
the other at test time. Our algorithm is few-shot: Given about a dozen images
restored by the model, it can significantly improve the perceptual quality and/or
the MSE of the model for newly restored images without further training. Our
approach is motivated by a recent theoretical result that links between the minimum
MSE (MMSE) predictor and the predictor that minimizes the MSE under a perfect
perceptual quality constraint. Specifically, it has been shown that the latter can be
obtained by optimally transporting the output of the former, such that its distribution
matches the source data. Thus, to improve the perceptual quality of a predictor that
was originally trained to minimize MSE, we approximate the optimal transport by
a linear transformation in the latent space of a variational auto-encoder, which we
compute in closed-form using empirical means and covariances. Going beyond
the theory, we find that applying the same procedure on models that were initially
trained to achieve high perceptual quality, typically improves their perceptual
quality even further. And by interpolating the results with the original output of
the model, we can improve their MSE on the expense of perceptual quality. We
illustrate our method on a variety of degradations applied to general content images
of arbitrary dimensions.

1

Introduction

PD

Many image restoration algorithms aim to recover a clean
source image from its degraded version. The performance
of such algorithms is often evaluated in terms of their average
distortion, which measures the discrepancy between restored
images and their corresponding clean sources, as well as perceptual quality, which refers to the extent to which restored
images resemble natural images. The work in [2] exposed a
fundamental trade-off between distortion and perceptual quality, where the latter is measured using a perceptual index that
quantifies the statistical divergence between the distribution of
restored images and the distribution of natural images. The Figure 1: The W2 -MSE trade-off [1].
n
tio
nc

-fu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

