Open Compound Domain Adaptation with Object
Style Compensation for Semantic Segmentation
Tingliang Feng1,2∗
Hao Shi1,3∗
Xueyang Liu1
Wei Feng1,2
Liang Wan1
Yanlin Zhou4
Di Lin1†
2

1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
Laboratory of Computation and Analytics of Complex Management Systems (CACMS), Tianjin University
3
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
Dunhuang Academy
{fengtl, xyliu850569498, lwan}@tju.edu.cn
shi-h23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
wfeng@ieee.org
zhouyanlin@dha.ac.cn
Ande.lin1988@gmain.com

Abstract
Many methods of semantic image segmentation have borrowed the success of open
compound domain adaptation. They minimize the style gap between the images of
source and target domains, more easily predicting the accurate pseudo annotations
for target domain’s images that train segmentation network. The existing methods
globally adapt the scene style of the images, whereas the object styles of different
categories or instances are adapted improperly. This paper proposes the Object
Style Compensation, where we construct the Object-Level Discrepancy Memory
with multiple sets of discrepancy features. The discrepancy features in a set capture
the style changes of the same category’s object instances adapted from target to
source domains. We learn the discrepancy features from the images of source and
target domains, storing the discrepancy features in memory. With this memory, we
select appropriate discrepancy features for compensating the style information of
the object instances of various categories, adapting the object styles to a unified
style of source domain. Our method enables a more accurate computation of the
pseudo annotations for target domain’s images, thus yielding state-of-the-art results
on different datasets.

1

Introduction

The task of open compound domain adaptation (OCDA) for semantic segmentation aims to train
the segmentation models [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] using a source domain with pixel-level annotations and
target domains of mixed styles with no annotations. The model is trained to perform well on images
from the target domains that share the same style as seen during training, as well as on open domain
images that are not encountered during training. The recent methods [7, 8, 9, 10, 11] of semantic
segmentation utilize the open compound domain adaptation (OCDA), which harnesses the annotated
images and the annotation-free images captured in the open environments to train the segmentation
network. In this manner, the segmentation network learns from richer data with diverse object
appearances while requiring reasonable effort for image labeling. Here, the annotated images belong
to the source domain, while the annotation-free images are in the compound target domain for
capturing the complexity of open environments.
There is a gap between the image styles of the source and target domains, where the image styles
usually are regarded as an array of scene-level properties (e.g., weather and lighting conditions). The
∗
†

Co-first authors. Equal contribution.
Di Lin is the corresponding author of this paper.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

