ExPT: Synthetic Pretraining for Few-Shot
Experimental Design
Tung Nguyen, Sudhanshu Agrawal, Aditya Grover
University of California, Los Angeles
{tungnd,adityag}@cs.ucla.edu, sudhanshuagr27@g.ucla.edu

Abstract
Experimental design for optimizing black-box functions is a fundamental problem
in many science and engineering fields. In this problem, sample efficiency is
crucial due to the time, money, and safety costs of real-world design evaluations.
Existing approaches either rely on active data collection or access to large, labeled
datasets of past experiments, making them impractical in many real-world scenarios.
In this work, we address the more challenging yet realistic setting of few-shot
experimental design, where only a few labeled data points of input designs and
their corresponding values are available. We introduce Experiment Pretrained
Transformers (ExPT), a foundation model for few-shot experimental design that
combines unsupervised learning and in-context pretraining. In ExPT, we only
assume knowledge of a finite collection of unlabelled data points from the input
domain and pretrain a transformer neural network to optimize diverse synthetic
functions defined over this domain. Unsupervised pretraining allows ExPT to
adapt to any design task at test time in an in-context fashion by conditioning on a
few labeled data points from the target task and generating the candidate optima.
We evaluate ExPT on few-shot experimental design in challenging domains and
demonstrate its superior generality and performance compared to existing methods.
The source code is available at https://github.com/tung-nd/ExPT.git.

1

Introduction

The design of experiments to optimize downstream target objectives is a ubiquitous challenge across
many science and engineering domains, including materials discovery [27], protein engineering [7,
49, 2], molecular [22] design, mechanical design [4, 38], and neural architecture optimization [66].
The key criterion of interest in experimental design (ED) is sample-efficiency, as the target objectives
are often black-box functions and evaluating these objectives for any candidate design often involves
expensive real-world experiments. A standard class of approaches learn a surrogate to approximate
the target objective and actively improve the approximation quality through online experiments [53].
However, online data acquisition may be infeasible in the real world due to high costs, time constraints,
or safety concerns. As an alternate, recent works have proposed offline ED [7, 58, 36, 57, 12, 34],
wherein a model learns to perform optimization from a fixed dataset of past experiments. While this
is more practical than the online setting, current offline methods and benchmarks assume access to
large experimental datasets containing thousands of data points, which are hard or even impossible
to obtain in high-stake and emerging science problems. Even when these datasets exist, the past
experiments might be of very poor quality resulting in poor surrogate learning and optimization.
In this paper, we aim to overcome these limitations for hyper-efficient experimental design that does
not require large experimental datasets. To this end, we introduce few-shot experimental design, a
more challenging setting that better resembles real-world scenarios. We describe few-shot ED as
a two-phased pretraining-adaptation paradigm. In the pretraining phase, we only assume access to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

