Bandit Task Assignment
with Unknown Processing Time

Shinji Ito
NEC Corporation, RIKEN AIP
i-shinji@nec.com

Daisuke Hatano
RIKEN AIP
daisuke.hatano@riken.jp

Hanna Sumita
Tokyo Institute of Technology
sumita@c.titech.ac.jp

Kei Takemura
NEC Corporation
kei_takemura@nec.com

Takuro Fukunaga
Chuo University
fukunaga.07s@g.chuo-u.ac.jp

Naonori Kakimura
Keio University
kakimura@math.keio.ac.jp

Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
National Institute of Informatics, The University of Tokyo
k_keniti@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
This study considers a novel problem setting, referred to as bandit task assignment,
that incorporates the processing time of each task in the bandit setting. In this
problem setting, a player sequentially chooses a set of tasks to start so that the
set of processing tasks satisfies a given combinatorial constraint. The reward and
processing time for each task follow unknown distributions, values of which are
revealed only after the task has been completed. The problem generalizes the
stochastic combinatorial semi-bandit problem and the budget-constrained bandit
problem. For this problem setting, we propose an algorithm based on upper
confidence bounds (UCB) combined with a phased-update approach. The proposed
algorithm admits a gap-dependent regret
√ upper bound of O(M N (1/∆)log T ) and
a gap-free regret upper bound of Õ( M N T ), where N is the number of the tasks,
M is the maximum number of tasks run at the same time, T is the time horizon,
and ∆ is the gap between expected per-round rewards of the optimal and best
suboptimal sets of tasks. These regret bounds nearly match lower bounds.

1

Introduction

This paper introduces a new model of sequential decision-making that we refer to as the bandit task
assignment problem. The goal of this model is to determine which tasks to perform sequentially so
that the total reward will be maximized, while estimating the distribution of rewards and processing
time for each task. For each round t = 1, 2, . . . , T , we choose a set At of tasks to start. Each task i in
At will be completed in the (t + cti )-th round, and we then obtain the reward rti . The processing time
cti and the reward rti follow unknown distributions independently for all t, and they are observed
only when the task has been completed, i.e., only bandit feedback is available. In all rounds, the set
of processing tasks is required to satisfy a given combinatorial constraint. That is, in each round, the
player can start a set of new tasks that, together with the tasks still in progress, satisfies the given
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

