Learning Rule-Induced Subgraph Representations for
Inductive Relation Prediction
Tianyu Liu1

Qitan Lv1 Jie Wang1,2∗ Shuling Yang1 Hanzhu Chen1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{tianyu_liu, qitanlv, slyang0916, chenhz}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{jiewangx}@ustc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Inductive relation prediction (IRP)—where entities can be different during training
and inference—has shown great power for completing evolving knowledge graphs.
Existing works mainly focus on using graph neural networks (GNNs) to learn the
representation of the subgraph induced from the target link, which can be seen
as an implicit rule-mining process to measure the plausibility of the target link.
However, these methods cannot differentiate the target link and other links during
message passing, hence the final subgraph representation will contain irrelevant
rule information to the target link, which reduces the reasoning performance and
severely hinders the applications for real-world scenarios. To tackle this problem,
we propose a novel single-source edge-wise GNN model to learn the Rule-inducEd
Subgraph represenTations (REST), which encodes relevant rules and eliminates
irrelevant rules within the subgraph. Specifically, we propose a single-source
initialization approach to initialize edge features only for the target link, which
guarantees the relevance of mined rules and target link. Then we propose several
RNN-based functions for edge-wise message passing to model the sequential
property of mined rules. REST is a simple and effective approach with theoretical
support to learn the rule-induced subgraph representation. Moreover, REST does
not need node labeling, which significantly accelerates the subgraph preprocessing
time by up to 11.66×. Experiments on inductive relation prediction benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of our REST2 .

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs are a collection of factual triples about human knowledge. In recent years, knowledge graphs have been successfully applied in various fileds, such as natural language processing [1],
question answering [2] and recommendation systems [3].
However, due to issues such as privacy concerns or data collection costs, many real-world knowledge
graphs are far from completion. Moreover, knowledge graphs are continuously evolving with new
entities or triples emerging. This dynamic change causes even the large-scale knowledge graphs,
e.g., Freebase [4], Wikidata [5] and YAGO3 [6], to still suffer from incompleteness. Most existing
knowledge graph completion models, e.g., RotatE [7], R-GCN [8], suffer from handling emerging
new entities as they require test entities to be observed in training time. Therefore, inductive relation
prediction, which aims at predicting missing links in evolving knowledge graphs, has attracted
extensive attention[9, 10].
∗
2

The Corresponding Author.
Our code is available at https://github.com/smart-lty/REST

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

