Synthetic Combinations:
A Causal Framework for Combinatorial Interventions
Abhineet Agarwal
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
aa3797@berkeley.edu

Anish Agarwal∗
Department of IEOR
Columbia University
aa5194@columbia.edu

Suhas Vijaykumar†
Amazon, Core AI
suhasv@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider a setting where there are N heterogeneous units and p interventions.
Our goal is to learn unit-specific potential outcomes for any combination of
these p interventions, i.e., N ×2p causal parameters. Choosing a combination of
interventions is a problem that naturally arises in a variety of applications such as
factorial design experiments and recommendation engines (e.g., showing a set of
movies that maximizes engagement). Running N ×2p experiments to estimate the
various parameters is likely expensive and/or infeasible as N and p grow. Further,
with observational data there is likely confounding, i.e., whether or not a unit is
seen under a combination is correlated with its potential outcome. We study this
problem under a novel model that imposes latent structure across both units and
combinations of interventions. Specifically, we assume latent similarity in potential
outcomes across units (i.e., the matrix of potential outcomes is rank r) and
regularity in how combinations of interventions interact (i.e., the coefficients in the
Fourier expansion of the potential outcomes is s sparse). We establish identification
for all N × 2p parameters despite unobserved confounding. We propose an
estimation procedure, Synthetic Combinations, and establish finite-sample
consistency under precise conditions on the observation pattern. We show that
Synthetic Combinations is able to consistentlyestimate unit-specific potential
outcomes given a total of poly(r) × N +s2 p observations. In comparison,
previous methods that do not exploit structure across both units and combinations
have poorer sample complexity that scales as min(N ×s2 p, poly(r)×(N +2p )).

1

Introduction

Modern-day decision makers—in settings from e-commerce to public policy to medicine—often
must select a combination of actions, and would like to do so in a highly personalized manner.
Examples include recommending a curated basket of items to customers on a commerce platform,
deciding on a combination of therapies for a medical patient, enacting a collection of socio-economic
policies for a specific geographic location, conjoint analysis in surveys, selecting important feature
sets for machine learning models, etc. Despite the ubiquity of this setting, it comes with significant
empirical challenges: with p interventions and N units, a decision maker must evaluate N × 2p
potential combinations in order to confirm the optimal personalized policy. With large N and
even with relatively small p (due to exponential dependence), it becomes infeasible to run that
many experiments; in observational data there is the additional challenge of potential unobserved
confounding. Current methods tackle this problem by following one of two approaches: (i) they
impose structure on how combinations of interventions interact, or (ii) they assume latent similarity
∗
†

Work done while post-doc at Amazon, Core AI .
Work done while at MIT.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

