Beyond Probability Partitions: Calibrating Neural
Networks with Semantic Aware Grouping

Jia-Qi Yang De-Chuan Zhan∗ Le Gan
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
yangjq@lamda.nju.edu.cn, zhandc@nju.edu.cn, ganle@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Research has shown that deep networks tend to be overly optimistic about their
predictions, leading to an underestimation of prediction errors. Due to the limited
nature of data, existing studies have proposed various methods based on model
prediction probabilities to bin the data and evaluate calibration error. We propose
a more generalized definition of calibration error called Partitioned Calibration
Error (PCE), revealing that the key difference among these calibration error metrics
lies in how the data space is partitioned. We put forth an intuitive proposition
that an accurate model should be calibrated across any partition, suggesting that
the input space partitioning can extend beyond just the partitioning of prediction
probabilities, and include partitions directly related to the input. Through semanticrelated partitioning functions, we demonstrate that the relationship between model
accuracy and calibration lies in the granularity of the partitioning function. This
highlights the importance of partitioning criteria for training a calibrated and
accurate model. To validate the aforementioned analysis, we propose a method
that involves jointly learning a semantic aware grouping function based on deep
model features and logits to partition the data space into subsets. Subsequently,
a separate calibration function is learned for each subset. Experimental results
demonstrate that our approach achieves significant performance improvements
across multiple datasets and network architectures, thus highlighting the importance
of the partitioning function for calibration.

1

Introduction

With the advancements in deep learning technology, deep learning models have achieved, and
in some cases even surpassed, human-level accuracy in various domains[1, 2]. In safety-critical
applications[3, 4] such as self-driving[5] and disease diagnosis[6], it is not only desirable to have
high accuracy from models but also to have their predicted probabilities reflect the true likelihood of
correctness. For instance, if a model predicts a probability of 0.9 for a particular class, we expect the
actual probability of being correct to be close to 0.9. This is known as probability calibration. However,
recent research has indicated that while deep models have improved in accuracy, their probability
calibration has declined[7–9]. Typically, deep models tend to overestimate the probabilities of correct
predictions, leading to overconfidence. This discrepancy between accuracy and calibration has made
model calibration a crucial research direction.[7, 10–19]
Defining an evaluation method for assessing the degree of calibration is crucial to calibrating a model.
Currently, most evaluation methods are based on binning model prediction probabilities, followed
by analyzing the distribution of true labels within each bin[7, 12, 20, 21]. The calibration error is
then estimated by measuring the difference between the predicted probabilities and the empirical
∗

De-Chuan Zhan is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

