One-step differentiation of iterative algorithms

Jérôme Bolte
Toulouse School
of Economics,
Université Toulouse
Capitole,
Toulouse, France.

Edouard Pauwels
Toulouse School
of Economics (IUF),
Toulouse, France.

Samuel Vaiter
CNRS &
Université Côte d’Azur,
Laboratoire J. A. Dieudonné.
Nice, France.

Abstract
In appropriate frameworks, automatic differentiation is transparent to the
user at the cost of being a significant computational burden when the number
of operations is large. For iterative algorithms, implicit differentiation alleviates this issue but requires custom implementation of Jacobian evaluation.
In this paper, we study one-step differentiation, also known as Jacobianfree backpropagation, a method as easy as automatic differentiation and
as efficient as implicit differentiation for fast algorithms (e.g., superlinear
optimization methods). We provide a complete theoretical approximation
analysis with specific examples (Newton’s method, gradient descent) along
with its consequences in bilevel optimization. Several numerical examples
illustrate the well-foundedness of the one-step estimator.

1

Introduction

Differentiating the solution of a machine learning problem is an important task, e.g., in
hyperparameters optimization [9], in neural architecture search [31] and when using convex
layers [3]. There are two main ways to achieve this goal: automatic differentiation (AD) and
implicit differentiation (ID). Automatic differentiation implements the idea of evaluating
derivatives through the compositional rules of differential calculus in a user-transparent way.
It is a mature concept [27] implemented in several machine learning frameworks [36, 16, 1].
However, the time and memory complexity incurred may become prohibitive as soon as the
computational graph becomes bigger, a typical example being unrolling iterative optimization
algorithms such as gradient descent [5]. The alternative, implicit differentiation, is not always
accessible: it does not solely rely on the compositional rules of differential calculus (Jacobian
multiplication) and usually requires solving a linear system. The user needs to implement
custom rules in an automatic differentiation framework (as done, for example, in [4]) or use
dedicated libraries such as [11, 3, 10] implementing these rules for given models. Provided
that the implementation is carefully done, this is most of the time the gold standard for the
task of differentiating problem solutions.
Contributions. We study a one-step Jacobian approximator based on a simple principle:
differentiate only the last iteration of an iterative process and drop previous derivatives.
The idea of dropping derivatives or single-step differentiation was explored, for example, in
[24, 23, 39, 22, 40, 29] and our main contribution is a general account and approximation
analysis for Jacobians of iterative algorithms. One-step estimation constitutes a rough
approximation at first sight and our motivation to study is its ease-of-use within automatic
differentiation frameworks: no custom Jacobian-vector products or vector-Jacobian products
needed as long as a stop_gradient primitive is available (see Table 1).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

