Revisiting Implicit Differentiation for Learning
Problems in Optimal Control

Ming Xu
School of Computing
Australian National University
mingda.xu@anu.edu.au

Timothy Molloy
School of Engineering
Australian National University
timothy.molloy@anu.edu.au

Stephen Gould
School of Computing
Australian National University
stephen.gould@anu.edu.au

Abstract
This paper proposes a new method for differentiating through optimal trajectories
arising from non-convex, constrained discrete-time optimal control (COC) problems using the implicit function theorem (IFT). Previous works solve a differential
Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) system for the trajectory derivative, and achieve this
efficiently by solving an auxiliary Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) problem.
In contrast, we directly evaluate the matrix equations which arise from applying
variable elimination on the Lagrange multiplier terms in the (differential) KKT
system. By appropriately accounting for the structure of the terms within the
resulting equations, we show that the trajectory derivatives scale linearly with the
number of timesteps. Furthermore, our approach allows for easy parallelization,
significantly improved scalability with model size, direct computation of vectorJacobian products and improved numerical stability compared to prior works. As
an additional contribution, we unify prior works, addressing claims that computing
trajectory derivatives using IFT scales quadratically with the number of timesteps.
We evaluate our method on a both synthetic benchmark and four challenging, learning from demonstration benchmarks including a 6-DoF maneuvering quadrotor
and 6-DoF rocket powered landing.

1

Introduction

This paper addresses end-to-end learning problems that arise in the context of constrained optimal
control, including trajectory optimization, inverse optimal control, and system identification. We
propose a novel, computationally efficient approach to computing analytical derivatives of state and
control trajectories that solve constrained optimal control (COC) problems with respect to underlying
parameters in cost functions, system dynamics, and constraints (e.g., state and control limits).
The efficient computation of these trajectory derivatives is important in the (open-loop) solution
of optimal control problems for both trajectory optimization and model predictive control (MPC).
Such derivatives are also crucial in inverse optimal control (also called inverse reinforcement learning
or learning from demonstration), where given expert demonstration trajectories, the objective is to
compute parameters of the cost function that best explain these trajectories. Extensions of inverse
optimal control that involve inferring parameters of system dynamics in addition to cost functions
also subsume system identification, and provide further motivation for the efficient computation
of trajectory derivatives. Our proposed method of computing trajectory derivatives enables direct
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

