RAPHAEL: Text-to-Image Generation via
Large Mixture of Diffusion Paths

Zeyue Xue∗
The University of Hong Kong
xuezeyue@connect.hku.hk
Qiushan Guo
The University of Hong Kong
qsguo@cs.hku.hk

Guanglu Song∗
SenseTime Research
songguanglu@sensetime.com

Boxiao Liu
SenseTime Research
liuboxiao@sensetime.com

Yu Liu† ‡
SenseTime Research
liuyuisanai@gmail.com

Zhuofan Zong
SenseTime Research
zongzhuofan@gmail.com

Ping Luo‡
The University of Hong Kong
Shanghai AI Laboratory
pluo@cs.hku.hk

“When one is painting one does not think.”
— Raffaello Sanzio da Urbino

Abstract
Text-to-image generation has recently witnessed remarkable achievements. We
introduce a text-conditional image diffusion model, termed RAPHAEL, to generate
highly artistic images, which accurately portray the text prompts, encompassing
multiple nouns, adjectives, and verbs. This is achieved by stacking tens of mixtureof-experts (MoEs) layers, i.e., space-MoE and time-MoE layers, enabling billions of
diffusion paths (routes) from the network input to the output. Each path intuitively
functions as a “painter” for depicting a particular textual concept onto a specified
image region at a diffusion timestep. Comprehensive experiments reveal that
RAPHAEL outperforms recent cutting-edge models, such as Stable Diffusion,
ERNIE-ViLG 2.0, DeepFloyd, and DALL-E 2, in terms of both image quality and
aesthetic appeal. Firstly, RAPHAEL exhibits superior performance in switching
images across diverse styles, such as Japanese comics, realism, cyberpunk, and
ink illustration. Secondly, a single model with three billion parameters, trained on
1, 000 A100 GPUs for two months, achieves a state-of-the-art zero-shot FID score
of 6.61 on the COCO dataset. Furthermore, RAPHAEL significantly surpasses
its counterparts in human evaluation on the ViLG-300 benchmark. We believe
that RAPHAEL holds the potential to propel the frontiers of image generation
research in both academia and industry, paving the way for future breakthroughs
in this rapidly evolving field. More details can be found on a webpage: https:
//raphael-painter.github.io/§ .
* Equal contribution. Work done during Zeyue’s internship at SenseTime Research.
†

Project lead.
Corresponding authors.
§
More creations can be found in https://miaohua.sensetime.com/zh-CN/picture-selection.
Please select the Artist v0.3.5 model to generate. This is our latest version based on RAPHAEL. This information was last updated on Oct. 16th, 2023.
‡

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

