Train Hard, Fight Easy:
Robust Meta Reinforcement Learning

Ido Greenberg
Technion, Nvidia Research
gido@campus.technion.ac.il
Gal Chechik
Bar Ilan University, Nvidia Research
gchechik@nvidia.com

Shie Mannor
Technion, Nvidia Research
shie@ee.technion.ac.il
Eli Meirom
Nvidia Research
emeirom@nvidia.com

Abstract
A major challenge of reinforcement learning (RL) in real-world applications is the
variation between environments, tasks or clients. Meta-RL (MRL) addresses this
issue by learning a meta-policy that adapts to new tasks. Standard MRL methods
optimize the average return over tasks, but often suffer from poor results in tasks of
high risk or difficulty. This limits system reliability since test tasks are not known
in advance. In this work, we define a robust MRL objective with a controlled
robustness level. Optimization of analogous robust objectives in RL is known to
lead to both biased gradients and data inefficiency. We prove that the gradient
bias disappears in our proposed MRL framework. The data inefficiency is addressed
via the novel Robust Meta RL algorithm (RoML). RoML is a meta-algorithm that
generates a robust version of any given MRL algorithm, by identifying and oversampling harder tasks throughout training. We demonstrate that RoML achieves
robust returns on multiple navigation and continuous control benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved
impressive results in a variety of applications in recent years, including cooling systems control [Luo et al., 2022] and conversational chatbots [Cohen et al., 2022].
A significant challenge in extending this
success to mass production is the variation between instances of the problem, e.g.,
different cooling systems or different chatbot end-users. Meta-RL (MRL) addresses
this challenge by learning a “meta-policy”
that quickly adapts to new tasks [Thrun and
Pratt, 1998, Finn et al., 2017]. In the examples above, MRL would maximize the
average return of the adapted policy for a
new cooling system or a new end-user.

Figure 1: (a) An illustration of driving tasks, characterized by
various weather conditions and traffic density. (b) The returns
of two meta-policies π1 , π2 on these tasks. π1 has a higher
average return, but π2 is more robust to high-risk tasks. The
task space is discretized only for illustration purposes.

However, optimizing the return of the average client might not suffice, as certain clients may still
experience low or even negative returns. If 10% of the clients report poor performance, it may deter
potential clients from adopting the new technology – even if its average return is high. This highlights
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

