MultiFusion: Fusing Pre-Trained Models for
Multi-Lingual, Multi-Modal Image Generation

Marco Bellagente4∗ † Manuel Brack2,3† Hannah Teufel1† Felix Friedrich3,6
Björn Deiseroth1,3,6 Constantin Eichenberg1 Andrew Dai1 Robert J.N. Baldock1
Souradeep Nanda5∗ Koen Oostermeijer1 Andres Felipe Cruz-Salinas1
Patrick Schramowski2,3,6,8 Kristian Kersting2,3,6,7‡ Samuel Weinbach1‡
1
Aleph Alpha, 2 German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI),
3
Computer Science Department, TU Darmstadt, 4 Stability AI, 5 University of Texas,
6
Hessian.AI, 7 Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt, 8 LAION
marco.bellagente@gmail.com
brack@cs.tu-darmstadt.de
hannah.teufel@aleph-alpha.de

Abstract
The recent popularity of text-to-image diffusion models (DM) can largely be attributed to the intuitive interface they provide to users. The intended generation can
be expressed in natural language, with the model producing faithful interpretations
of text prompts. However, expressing complex or nuanced ideas in text alone can
be difficult. To ease image generation, we propose M ULTI F USION that allows one
to express complex and nuanced concepts with arbitrarily interleaved inputs of
multiple modalities and languages. M ULTI F USION leverages pre-trained models
and aligns them for integration into a cohesive system, thereby avoiding the need
for extensive training from scratch. Our experimental results demonstrate the
efficient transfer of capabilities from individual modules to the downstream model.
Specifically, the fusion of all independent components allows the image generation
module to utilize multilingual, interleaved multimodal inputs despite being trained
solely on monomodal data in a single language.

1 Introduction
The recent popularity of text-to-image diffusion models (DM) [39, 35, 37] can largely be attributed
to the intuitive interface they provide to users. The intended generation can easily be expressed
in natural language, with the model producing faithful interpretations of a text prompt. Recent
works have demonstrated the output quality to be largely dependent on the input encoders with
more powerful variants yielding more expressive DMs [39, 2, 12]. We take these insights one step
further, vastly enhancing the capabilities of a pre-trained DM through the sophisticated integration of
dedicated modules. We propose M ULTI F USION which effectively supports arbitrarily interleaved
inputs of multiple modalities and languages. Further, we transfer these capabilities from an underlying
language model (LM), eliminating the need for multilingual or multimodal interleaved training data
for the generative model. Our approach can utilize readily available datasets and requires less than
5% of the training compute needed to build a comparable DM from scratch.
∗

Work performed while at Aleph Alpha
Equal contribution
‡
Equal supervision
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

