MG-ViT: A Multi-Granularity Method for Compact
and Efficient Vision Transformers
Yu Zhang1 Yepeng Liu2 Duoqian Miao1∗ Qi Zhang1 Yiwei Shi3 Liang Hu1
1
Tongji University 2 University of Florida 3 University of Bristol

Abstract
Vision Transformer (ViT) faces obstacles in wide application due to its huge
computational cost. Almost all existing studies on compressing ViT adopt the
manner of splitting an image with a single granularity, with very few exploration of
splitting an image with multi-granularity. As we know, important information often
randomly concentrate in few regions of an image, necessitating multi-granularity
attention allocation to an image. Enlightened by this, we introduce the multigranularity strategy to compress ViT, which is simple but effective. We propose a
two-stage multi-granularity framework, MG-ViT, to balance ViT’s performance
and computational cost. In single-granularity inference stage, an input image is
split into a small number of patches for simple inference. If necessary, multigranularity inference stage will be instigated, where the important patches are
further subsplit into multi-finer-grained patches for subsequent inference. Moreover,
prior studies on compression only for classification, while we extend the multigranularity strategy to hierarchical ViT for downstream tasks such as detection
and segmentation. Extensive experiments Prove the effectiveness of the multigranularity strategy. For instance, on ImageNet, without any loss of performance,
MG-ViT reduces 47% FLOPs of LV-ViT-S and 56% FLOPs of DeiT-S.

1

Introduction

Transformer [1] has gained tremendous achievements in computer vision. Despite the excellent
performance of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) in computer vision tasks [2; 3; 4; 5], due to
ViT’s superior ability to capture global information and long-range interactions, ViT [6] outperforms
CNN in various tasks [7; 8; 9; 10; 11]. However, the impressive performance of ViT comes at the
cost of its huge computational overhead. Therefore, more researches focus on ViT compression for
greater efficiency. Since the computational cost of ViT increases quadratically with the number of
tokens, minimizing the number of tokens is crucial in compressing ViT.
Notable investigations have adopted various methods to compress ViT. DynamicViT [12] reduces
token number by pruning redundant tokens, EViT [13] merges redundant tokens into one token.
DVT [14] utilizes the particular and dynamic patch splitting manner (e.g., 4×4, 7×7, etc.) for each
image, based on its complexity, rather than following the official manner of 14×14. Although DVT
innovatively considers the differences in complexity between images, it still uses single granularity to
split one image. As we all know, images often contain a lot of redundancy, with important semantic
information randomly concentrated in a few regions. Therefore, it is imperative to consider the
complexity and semantic density diversities across various regions of the image: different regions
of an image should be assigned attention with multiple granularities. We initiate our exploration by
observing the foundational task, classification, and we have 3 intriguing observations:
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

