Efficient Hyper-parameter Optimization
with Cubic Regularization
Zhenqian Shen1⇤ Hansi Yang2⇤ Yong Li1 James Kwok2 Quanming Yao1†
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
{szg22@mails, liyong07@mail, qyaoaa@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn
{hyangbw, jamesk}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
As hyper-parameters are ubiquitous and can significantly affect the model performance, hyper-parameter optimization is extremely important in machine learning.
In this paper, we consider a sub-class of hyper-parameter optimization problems,
where the hyper-gradients are not available. Such problems frequently appear when
the performance metric is non-differentiable or the hyper-parameter is not continuous. However, existing algorithms, like Bayesian optimization and reinforcement
learning, often get trapped in local optimals with poor performance. To address the
above limitations, we propose to use cubic regularization to accelerate convergence
and avoid saddle points. First, we adopt stochastic relaxation, which allows obtaining gradient and Hessian information without hyper-gradients. Then, we exploit
the rich curvature information by cubic regularization. Theoretically, we prove that
the proposed method can converge to approximate second-order stationary points,
and the convergence is also guaranteed when the lower-level problem is inexactly
solved. Experiments on synthetic and real-world data demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed method.

1

Introduction

In a machine learning system, hyper-parameters are parameters that control the learning process. Wellknown examples include learning rate, and choice of loss functions or regularizers. Hyper-parameters
play a crucial role in determining the ultimate performance of machine learning models [1; 2; 3],
affecting both the convergence of training algorithms and the generalization capabilities of the final
models. Therefore, hyper-parameter optimization, as a problem of finding the optimal values for the
hyper-parameters in a machine learning system, is fundamental and important.
Since manual hyper-parameter tuning can be time-consuming and often inefficient to find better hyperparameters, there have been many works on hyper-parameter optimization to automatically search for
optimal hyper-parameters. Numerous existing hyper-parameter optimization algorithms compute the
hyper-gradient with respect to hyper-parameter and utilize it to update current hyper-parameter [4; 5;
6; 7]. However, computing the hyper-gradient requires the objectives to be differentiable, and the
hyper-parameters to be optimized must be continuous. As such, hyper-gradients cannot be obtained
in many important hyper-parameter optimization problems. For instance, in recommendation system
and knowledge graph completion, non-differentiable evaluation metrics such as MRR and NDCG are
commonly used [8; 9; 10], which makes it impossible to compute hyper-gradients. Moreover, many
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

