Optimal cross-learning for contextual bandits with
unknown context distributions
Jon Schneider
Google Research
jschnei@google.com

Julian Zimmert
Google Research
zimmert@google.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of designing contextual bandit algorithms in the “crosslearning” setting of Balseiro et al., where the learner observes the loss for the action
they play in all possible contexts, not just the context of the current round. We
specifically consider the setting where losses are chosen adversarially and contexts
are sampled i.i.d. from an unknown distribution. In this setting, we resolve an
open problem of Balseiro et al. by providing an efficient
√ algorithm with a nearly
e
tight (up to logarithmic factors) regret bound of O( T K), independent of the
number of contexts. As a consequence, we obtain the first nearly tight regret bounds
for the problems of learning to bid in first-price auctions (under unknown value
distributions) and sleeping bandits with a stochastic action set.
At the core of our algorithm is a novel technique for coordinating the execution
of a learning algorithm over multiple epochs in such a way to remove correlations
between estimation of the unknown distribution and the actions played by the
algorithm. This technique may be of independent interest for other learning
problems involving estimation of an unknown context distribution.

1

Introduction

In the contextual bandits problem, a learner repeatedly observes a context, chooses an action, and
observes a reward for the chosen action only. The goal is to learn a policy that maximizes the expected
reward over time, while taking into account the fact that the context can change from one round to
the next. Algorithms for the contextual bandits problem are extensively used across various domains,
such as personalized recommendations in e-commerce, dynamic pricing, clinical trials, and adaptive
routing in networks, among others.
Traditionally, in contextual bandits problems, the learner only observes the reward for the current
action and the current context. However, in some applications, the learner may be able to deduce the
reward they would have received from taking this action in other contexts and attempt to make use of
this additional information. For example, if a learner is repeatedly bidding into an auction (where
their context is their private value for the item, and their action is the bid), they can deduce their net
utility under different counterfactual values for the item.
This form of “cross-learning” between contexts was first introduced by Balseiro et al. [2019], who
showed that with this extra information it is possible to construct algorithms for this problem with
regret guarantees (compared to the best fixed mapping from contexts to actions) that are independent
of the total number √
of contexts C – in contrast, without this cross-learning information it is necessary
to suffer at least Ω( CKT ) regret against such a benchmark. In particular, when contexts are drawn
i.i.d. from a known distribution ν and
√losses are chosen adversarially, Balseiro et al. [2019] present an
efficient algorithm that achieves e
O( KT ) expected regret compared to the best fixed mapping from
contexts to actions. However, this learning algorithm crucially requires knowledge of the distribution
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

