OpenDataVal: a Unified Benchmark for Data
Valuation
Kevin Fu Jiang∗
Columbia University

Weixin Liang∗
Stanford University

James Zou
Stanford University

Yongchan Kwon†
Columbia University

Abstract
Assessing the quality and impact of individual data points is critical for improving
model performance and mitigating undesirable biases within the training dataset.
Several data valuation algorithms have been proposed to quantify data quality,
however, there lacks a systemic and standardized benchmarking system for data
valuation. In this paper, we introduce OpenDataVal, an easy-to-use and unified
benchmark framework that empowers researchers and practitioners to apply and
compare various data valuation algorithms. OpenDataVal provides an integrated
environment that includes (i) a diverse collection of image, natural language, and
tabular datasets, (ii) implementations of eleven different state-of-the-art data valuation algorithms, and (iii) a prediction model API that can import any models in
scikit-learn. Furthermore, we propose four downstream machine learning tasks for
evaluating the quality of data values. We perform benchmarking analysis using
OpenDataVal, quantifying and comparing the efficacy of state-of-the-art data valuation approaches. We find that no single algorithm performs uniformly best across
all tasks, and an appropriate algorithm should be employed for a user’s downstream
task. OpenDataVal is publicly available at https://opendataval.github.io
with comprehensive documentation. Furthermore, we provide a leaderboard where
researchers can evaluate the effectiveness of their own data valuation algorithms.

1

Introduction

Real-world data often exhibit heterogeneity and noise as they are collected from a wide range of
sources and are susceptible to measurement and annotation errors [25, 19, 21]. When such data are
incorporated into model development, they can introduce undesirable biases and potentially hinder
model performance. Managing and addressing these challenges is crucial to ensure the reliability and
accuracy of the insights derived from real-world data. As such, it is becoming increasingly important
to understand and evaluate the intrinsic properties of data, such as data quality, data bias, and their
influences on the model training process [14, 20]. From all these motivations, data valuation has
emerged as a principled evaluation framework that aims to quantify the impact of individual data
points on model predictions or model performance.
There have been substantial recent efforts in developing different data valuation methods, and they
have demonstrated promising outcomes in various real-world applications. One widely used data
valuation method is DataShapley [7], which is based on the Shapley value from game theory [31].
This method has been applied to detect low-quality chest X-ray image data [35] and design a data
∗
†

Co-first author
Corresponding author (e-mail: yk3012@columbia.edu)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

