Getting ViT in Shape:
Scaling Laws for Compute-Optimal Model Design

Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin? , Xiaohua Zhai? , Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer?
Google DeepMind
Zürich, Switzerland
{ibomohsin,xzhai,akolesnikov,lbeyer}@google.com

Abstract
Scaling laws have been recently employed to derive compute-optimal model size
(number of parameters) for a given compute duration. We advance and refine such
methods to infer compute-optimal model shapes, such as width and depth, and
successfully implement this in vision transformers. Our shape-optimized vision
transformer, SoViT, achieves results competitive with models that exceed twice its
size, despite being pre-trained with an equivalent amount of compute. For example,
SoViT-400m/14 achieves 90.3% fine-tuning accuracy on ILSRCV2012, surpassing
the much larger ViT-g/14 and approaching ViT-G/14 under identical settings, with
also less than half the inference cost. We conduct a thorough evaluation across
multiple tasks, such as image classification, captioning, VQA and zero-shot transfer,
demonstrating the effectiveness of our model across a broad range of domains and
identifying limitations. Overall, our findings challenge the prevailing approach of
blindly scaling up vision models and pave a path for a more informed scaling.

1

Introduction

The de-facto approach for improving performance of vision and language models today is scale:
large models are trained on more data for longer [64, 43, 24, 19, 80, 23, 13, 16]. Empirically, it
has been observed that the benefit of scale often follows a predictable power law in which the
performance f (x) (e.g. error rate or log-perplexity) satisfies f (x) ∼ βx−c + ε∞ for some β, c > 0
as one varies the scaling dimension x (e.g. data or model size), if the remaining dimensions are not
bottlenecks [34, 39, 27, 26, 3, 1]. Here, ε∞ is the irreducible loss.
However, the simple power-law relation becomes more complicated when compute is considered. In
this case, power laws are observed only along the compute-optimal frontier. Otherwise, scaling up
the model size for a fixed compute budget can deteriorate performance (see [39, 35] and Figure 4).
Since one often has a fixed compute budget in mind (e.g. available hardware and time), one should
pick the model size that maximizes performance subject to the compute budget constraint, which
may imply not training until convergence. Indeed, this approach was used successfully in the recent
Chinchilla [35] that outperformed its predecessor Gopher [55] despite being 4× smaller in size.
Unfortunately, in both [39] and [35] among others, the “size” of a model is equated with its parameter
count, with no special consideration for model “shape dimensions”, such as “depth” or “width”.
The rationale behind this choice follows from the surprising observation that the transformer shape
had little impact on its scaling behavior in language modeling (LM) when performance is measured
upstream (e.g. using log-perplexity) [39, 32, 33]. Nevertheless, follow-up analysis suggests that
shape plays a pivotal role in other domains, such as in machine translation [47] and also in language
modeling for downstream performance [66], with recent works even advocating for extreme aspect
ratios, such as a single wide attention layer [12].
?

Significant technical contributions.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

