Bypass Exponential Time Preprocessing: Fast Neural
Network Training via Weight-Data Correlation
Preprocessing

Josh Alman∗

Jiehao Liang†

Zhao Song‡

Ruizhe Zhang§

Danyang Zhuo¶

Abstract
Over the last decade, deep neural networks have transformed our society, and
they are already widely applied in various machine learning applications. Stateof-the-art deep neural networks are becoming larger in size every year to deliver
increasing model accuracy, and as a result, model training consumes substantial
computing resources and will only consume more in the future. Using current
training methods, in each iteration, to process a data point x ∈ Rd in a layer, we
need to spend Θ(md) time to evaluate all the m neurons in the layer. This means
processing the entire layer takes Θ(nmd) time for n data points. Recent work
[Song, Yang and Zhang, NeurIPS 2021] reduces this time per iteration to o(nmd)
but requires exponential time to preprocess either the data or the neural network
weights, making it unlikely to have practical usage.
In this work, we present a new preprocessing method that simply stores the weightdata correlation in a tree data structure in order to quickly, and dynamically detect
which neurons fire at each iteration. Our method requires only O(nmd) time in
preprocessing and still achieves o(nmd) time per iteration. We complement our
new algorithm with a lower bound, proving that assuming a popular conjecture
from complexity theory, one could not substantially speed up our algorithm for
dynamic detection of firing neurons.

1

Introduction

Machine learning applications are requiring larger and larger neural network size, and the computing
resources required to train these large models is growing correspondingly. Determining how to train
these models quickly has become an important research challenge.
Training a neural network is an iterative algorithm, and in each iteration, we need to process each
of the m neurons on each of the n data points. Assuming each data point has a length of d (e.g., d
could be the size of an input image), this means the per-iteration training time of the straightforward
algorithm is at least Ω(nmd) just to compute the activations. As we train larger neural networks on
more training data, this running time can become a significant obstacle.
Recent work by Song, Yang, and Zhang [SYZ21] gave the first training algorithm that reduces this
per iteration training time to o(nmd). The high-level idea of their algorithm is to use a nearest
neighbor search data structure that stores the neural network weights and training data. This allows
the training method to have fast access to the inner products of the training data with the current
∗

josh@cs.columbia.edu. Columbia University.
jiehao.liang@berkeley.edu. University of California, Berkeley.
‡
zsong@adobe.com. Adobe Research.
§
ruizhe@utexas.edu. Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.
¶
danyang@cs.duke.edu. Duke University.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

