G ALOPA: Graph Transport Learning
with Optimal Plan Alignment

Yejiang Wang1,2 Yuhai Zhao1,2,† Zhengkui Wang3 Ling Li1,2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing in Medical Image
of Ministry of Education, Northeastern University, China
3
InfoComm Technology Cluster, Singapore Institute of Technology, Singapore
wangyejiang@stumail.neu.edu.cn, zhaoyuhai@mail.neu.edu.cn,
zhengkui.wang@singaporetech.edu.sg, lilingneu@gmail.com

1

Abstract
Self-supervised learning on graphs aims to learn graph representations in an unsupervised manner. While graph contrastive learning (GCL - relying on graph
augmentation for creating perturbation views of anchor graphs and maximizing/minimizing similarity for positive/negative pairs) is a popular self-supervised
method, it faces challenges in finding label-invariant augmented graphs and determining the exact extent of similarity between sample pairs to be achieved. In this
work, we propose an alternative self-supervised solution that (i) goes beyond the
label invariance assumption without distinguishing between positive/negative samples, (ii) can calibrate the encoder for preserving not only the structural information
inside the graph, but the matching information between different graphs, (iii) learns
isometric embeddings that preserve the distance between graphs, a by-product
of our objective. Motivated by optimal transport theory, this scheme relies on an
observation that the optimal transport plans between node representations at the
output space, which measure the matching probability between two distributions,
should be consistent with the plans between the corresponding graphs at the input
space. The experimental findings include: (i) The plan alignment strategy significantly outperforms the counterpart using the transport distance; (ii) The proposed
model shows superior performance using only node attributes as calibration signals,
without relying on edge information; (iii) Our model maintains robust results even
under high perturbation rates; (iv) Extensive experiments on various benchmarks
validate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised graph learning involves learning representations of real-world graph data without
the need for human supervision. Graph contrastive learning (GCL) [6, 16, 71] has been identified
as one of the most successful graph self-supervised learning approaches, with its key components
consisting of graph augmentation and contrastive learning. The former creates perturbation views
of anchor graphs via various augmenting techniques, while the latter maximizes the similarity for
two augmentations (positive pairs) of the same anchor and minimizes the similarity for those of
two different anchors (negative pairs). The effectiveness of contrastive learning is dependent on
the assumption that the augmented operations preserve the nature of data points and ensure that the
augmented samples have consistent labels with the original ones.
† Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

