Bounce: Reliable High-Dimensional Bayesian
Optimization for Combinatorial and Mixed Spaces

Leonard Papenmeier
Lund University
leonard.papenmeier@cs.lth.se

Luigi Nardi
Lund University, Stanford University, DBtune
luigi.nardi@cs.lth.se

Matthias Poloczek
Amazon
San Francisco, CA 94105, USA
matpol@amazon.com

Abstract
Impactful applications such as materials discovery, hardware design, neural architecture search, or portfolio optimization require optimizing high-dimensional
black-box functions with mixed and combinatorial input spaces. While Bayesian
optimization has recently made signiﬁcant progress in solving such problems, an
in-depth analysis reveals that the current state-of-the-art methods are not reliable.
Their performances degrade substantially when the unknown optima of the function do not have a certain structure. To ﬁll the need for a reliable algorithm for
combinatorial and mixed spaces, this paper proposes Bounce that relies on a novel
map of various variable types into nested embeddings of increasing dimensionality. Comprehensive experiments show that Bounce reliably achieves and often
even improves upon state-of-the-art performance on a variety of high-dimensional
problems.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) has become a ‘go-to’ method for optimizing expensive-to-evaluate
black-box functions [27, 83] that have numerous important applications, including hyperparameter optimization for machine learning models [9, 27], portfolio optimization in ﬁnance [7], chemical engineering and materials discovery [13, 15, 26, 33, 37, 38, 40, 57, 68, 71, 81], hardware design [22, 36, 51], or scheduling problems [42]. These problems are challenging for a variety of
reasons. Most importantly, they may expose hundreds of tunable parameters that allow for granular
optimization of the underlying design but also lead to high-dimensional optimization tasks and the
‘curses of dimensionality’ [10, 63]. Typical examples are drug design [53, 76] and combinatorial
testing [55]. Moreover, real-world applications often have categorical or ordinal tunable parameters,
in addition to the real-valued parameters that BO has traditionally focused on [10, 27, 70]. Recent
efforts have thus extended BO to combinatorial and mixed spaces. Casmopolitan of Wan et al. [79]
uses trust regions (TRs) to accommodate high dimensionality, building upon prior work of Eriksson
et al. [25] for continuous spaces. COMBO of Oh et al. [56] constructs a surrogate model based on a
combinatorial graph representation of the function. Recently, Deshwal et al. [21] presented BODi
that employs a novel type of dictionary-based embedding and showed that it outperforms the prior
work. However, the causes for BODi’s excellent performance are not yet well-understood and require
a closer examination. Moreover, the ability of methods for mixed spaces to scale to higher dimensionalities trails behind BO for continuous domains. In particular, Papenmeier et al. [60] showed
that nested embeddings allow BO to handle a thousand input dimensions, thus outperforming vanilla
TR-based approaches and raising the question of whether similar performance gains are feasible for
combinatorial domains.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

