OneNet: Enhancing Time Series Forecasting Models
under Concept Drift by Online Ensembling

Yi-Fan Zhang1,2 , Qingsong Wen3∗, Xue Wang3 , Weiqi Chen3 , Liang Sun3 ,
Zhang Zhang1,2 , Liang Wang1,2 , Rong Jin3†, Tieniu Tan1,2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), Institute of Automation
3
Alibaba Group

Abstract
Online updating of time series forecasting models aims to address the concept
drifting problem by efficiently updating forecasting models based on streaming
data. Many algorithms are designed for online time series forecasting, with some
exploiting cross-variable dependency while others assume independence among
variables. Given every data assumption has its own pros and cons in online time
series modeling, we propose Online ensembling Network (OneNet). It dynamically
updates and combines two models, with one focusing on modeling the dependency
across the time dimension and the other on cross-variate dependency. Our method
incorporates a reinforcement learning-based approach into the traditional online
convex programming framework, allowing for the linear combination of the two
models with dynamically adjusted weights. OneNet addresses the main shortcoming of classical online learning methods that tend to be slow in adapting to the
concept drift. Empirical results show that OneNet reduces online forecasting error
by more than 50% compared to the State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) method. The code is
available at https://github.com/yfzhang114/OneNet.

1

Introduction

In recent years, we have witnessed a significant increase in research efforts that apply deep learning
to time series forecasting [Lim and Zohren, 2021, Wen et al., 2022]. Deep models have proven to
perform exceptionally well not only in forecasting tasks, but also in representation learning, enabling
the extraction of abstract representations that can be effectively transferred to downstream tasks such
as classification and anomaly detection. However, existing studies have focused mainly on the batch
learning setting, assuming that the entire training dataset is available beforehand, and the relationship
between the input and output variables remains constant throughout the learning process. These
approaches fall short in real-world applications where concepts are often not stable but change over
time, known as concept drift [Tsymbal, 2004], where future data exhibit patterns different from those
observed in the past. In such cases, re-training the model from scratch could be time-consuming.
Therefore, it is desirable to train the deep forecaster online, incrementally updating the forecasting
model with new samples to capture the changing dynamics in the environment.
The real world setting, termed online forecasting, poses challenges such as high noisy gradients
compared to offline mini-batch training [Aljundi et al., 2019a], and continuous distribution shifts
which can make the model learned from historical data less effective for the current prediction. While
some studies have attempted to address the issues by designing advanced updating structures or
learning objectives [Pham et al., 2023, You et al., 2021], they all rely on TCN backbones [Bai et al.,
∗
†

Corresponding author
Work done at Alibaba Group, and now affiliated with Meta.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

