A Cross-Moment Approach for Causal Effect
Estimation
Yaroslav Kivva
School of Computer and Communication Sciences
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
yaroslav.kivva@epfl.ch
Saber Salehkaleybar
School of Computer and Communication Sciences
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
saber.salehkaleybar@epfl.ch
Negar Kiyavash
College of Management of Technology
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
negar.kiyavash@epfl.ch

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating the causal effect of a treatment on an
outcome in linear structural causal models (SCM) with latent confounders when
we have access to a single proxy variable. Several methods (such as difference-indifference (DiD) estimator or negative outcome control) have been proposed in
this setting in the literature. However, these approaches require either restrictive
assumptions on the data generating model or having access to at least two proxy
variables. We propose a method to estimate the causal effect using cross moments
between the treatment, the outcome, and the proxy variable. In particular, we
show that the causal effect can be identified with simple arithmetic operations on
the cross moments if the latent confounder in linear SCM is non-Gaussian.In this
setting, DiD estimator provides an unbiased estimate only in the special case where
the latent confounder has exactly the same direct causal effects on the outcomes
in the pre-treatment and post-treatment phases. This translates to the common
trend assumption in DiD, which we effectively relax. Additionally, we provide
an impossibility result that shows the causal effect cannot be identified if the
observational distribution over the treatment, the outcome, and the proxy is jointly
Gaussian. Our experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets showcase the
effectiveness of the proposed approach in estimating the causal effect.

1

Introduction

Estimating the effect of a treatment (or an action) on an outcome is an important problem in many
fields such as healthcare [SJS17], social sciences [Gan10], and economics [IR]. Randomized control
trials are the gold standard to estimate causal effects. However, in many applications, performing
randomized experiments are too costly or even infeasible, say due to ethical or legal concerns. Thus,
estimating the causal effect from merely observational studies is one of the main topics of interest
in causal inference. This problem has been studied extensively in two main frameworks, potential
outcome (PO) framework [Rub74] and structural causal model (SCM) framework [Pea09]. The main
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

