MetaBox: A Benchmark Platform for Meta-Black-Box
Optimization with Reinforcement Learning

Zeyuan Ma1 , Hongshu Guo1 , Jiacheng Chen1 , Zhenrui Li1 , Guojun Peng1 ,
Yue-Jiao Gong1,∗, Yining Ma2 , Zhiguang Cao3
1
South China University of Technology
2
National University of Singapore
3
Singapore Management University
{scut.crazynicolas, guohongshu369, jackchan9345}@gmail.com,
zhenrui.li@outlook.com, {pgj20010419, gongyuejiao}@gmail.com,
yiningma@u.nus.edu, zhiguangcao@outlook.com

Abstract
Recently, Meta-Black-Box Optimization with Reinforcement Learning (MetaBBORL) has showcased the power of leveraging RL at the meta-level to mitigate manual
fine-tuning of low-level black-box optimizers. However, this field is hindered by
the lack of a unified benchmark. To fill this gap, we introduce MetaBox, the first
benchmark platform expressly tailored for developing and evaluating MetaBBORL methods. MetaBox offers a flexible algorithmic template that allows users
to effortlessly implement their unique designs within the platform. Moreover, it
provides a broad spectrum of over 300 problem instances, collected from synthetic
to realistic scenarios, and an extensive library of 19 baseline methods, including
both traditional black-box optimizers and recent MetaBBO-RL methods. Besides,
MetaBox introduces three standardized performance metrics, enabling a more
thorough assessment of the methods. In a bid to illustrate the utility of MetaBox
for facilitating rigorous evaluation and in-depth analysis, we carry out a wideranging benchmarking study on existing MetaBBO-RL methods. Our MetaBox is
open-source and accessible at: https://github.com/GMC-DRL/MetaBox.

1

Introduction

Black Box Optimization (BBO) is a class of optimization problems featured by its objective function
that is either unknown or too intricate to be mathematically formulated. It has a broad range of
applications such as hyper-parameter tuning [1], neural architecture searching [2], and proteindocking [3]. Due to the black-box nature, the optimizer has no access to the mathematical expression,
gradients, or any other structural information related to the problem. Instead, the interaction with
the black-box problem is primarily realized through querying inputs (i.e., a solution) and observing
outputs (i.e., its objective value).
Traditional solvers for BBO problems include population-based optimizers such as genetic algorithms [4], evolutionary strategies [5–7], particle swarm optimization [8, 9], and differential evolution [10–13]. The Bayesian Optimization (BO) [14, 15] is also commonly used. However, with
limited knowledge of the problem, these optimizers lean on carefully hand-crafted designs to strike a
balance between exploration and exploitation when seeking the optimal solution.
To eliminate the burdensome task of manual fine-tuning, recent research has proposed the concept
of Meta-Black-Box Optimization (MetaBBO), which aims to refine the black-box optimizers by
∗

Yue-Jiao Gong is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

