SegRefiner: Towards Model-Agnostic Segmentation
Refinement with Discrete Diffusion Process
Mengyu Wang1,3∗, Henghui Ding4 , Jun Hao Liew5 ,
Yao Zhao1,2,3†, Yunchao Wei1,2,3†

Jiajun Liu5

1

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network
4
Nanyang Technological University 5 ByteDance
wmengyu0826@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we explore a principal way to enhance the quality of object masks
produced by different segmentation models. We propose a model-agnostic solution
called SegRefiner, which offers a novel perspective on this problem by interpreting
segmentation refinement as a data generation process. As a result, the refinement
process can be smoothly implemented through a series of denoising diffusion
steps. Specifically, SegRefiner takes coarse masks as inputs and refines them
using a discrete diffusion process. By predicting the label and corresponding
states-transition probabilities for each pixel, SegRefiner progressively refines the
noisy masks in a conditional denoising manner. To assess the effectiveness of
SegRefiner, we conduct comprehensive experiments on various segmentation tasks,
including semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, and dichotomous image
segmentation. The results demonstrate the superiority of our SegRefiner from
multiple aspects. Firstly, it consistently improves both the segmentation metrics and
boundary metrics across different types of coarse masks. Secondly, it outperforms
previous model-agnostic refinement methods by a significant margin. Lastly,
it exhibits a strong capability to capture extremely fine details when refining
high-resolution images. The source code and trained models are available at
github.com/MengyuWang826/SegRefiner.

1

Introduction

Although segmentation in image [35, 23, 24, 14, 11] and video [54, 37, 38, 16, 15] has been
extensively studied in the past decades, obtaining accurate and detailed segmentation masks is always
challenging since high-quality segmentation requires the model to capture both high-level semantic
information and fine-grained texture information to make accurate predictions. This challenge is
particularly pronounced for images with resolutions of 2K or higher, which requires considerable
computational complexity and memory usage. As a result, existing segmentation algorithms often
predict masks at a smaller size, inevitably leading to lower accuracy due to the loss of fine-grained
information during downsampling.
Since directly predicting high-quality masks is challenging, some previous works have shifted their
attention to the refinement of coarse masks obtained from a preceding segmentation model. A popular
line of direction [29, 57, 27, 28] is to augment the segmentation models (and features) with a new
∗
†

Work done during an internship at ByteDance.
Co-corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

