An Adaptive Algorithm for Learning with Unknown
Distribution Drift
Alessio Mazzetto
Brown University

Eli Upfal
Brown University

Abstract
We develop and analyze a general technique for learning with an unknown distribution drift. Given a sequence of independent observations from the last T steps
of a drifting distribution, our algorithm agnostically learns a family of functions
with respect to the current distribution at time T . Unlike previous work, our technique does not require prior knowledge about the magnitude of the drift. Instead,
the algorithm adapts to the sample data. Without explicitly estimating the drift,
the algorithm learns a family of functions with almost the same error as a learning
algorithm that knows the magnitude of the drift in advance. Furthermore, since
our algorithm adapts to the data, it can guarantee a better learning error than an
algorithm that relies on loose bounds on the drift. We demonstrate the application
of our technique in two fundamental learning scenarios: binary classification and
linear regression.

1

Introduction

Standard statistical learning models (such as PAC learning) assume independent and identically
distributed training set, and evaluate the performance of their algorithms with respect to the same
distribution as the training set [Vapnik, 1998, van de Geer, 2000, Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David,
2014, Wainwright, 2019]. However, in many practical applications, such as weather forecast, finance prediction or consumer preference analysis, the training data is drawn from a non-stationary
distribution that drifts in time. In this work, we consider a more general setting where the samples
are still independent, but their distribution can change over time. To obtain accurate results, the
learning algorithm needs to adjust to the distribution drift occurring in the input.
This framework has been extensively studied in the literature [Helmbold and Long, 1991, Bartlett,
1992, Helmbold and Long, 1994, Barve and Long, 1996, 1997]. This line of research culminated in
showing that as long as the total variation distance of two consecutive distributions is bounded by ∆,
there exists an algorithm that agnostically learns a family of binary classifiers with VC dimension ν
with expected error O((ν∆)1/3 ) [Long, 1998], which can be shown to be tight. These results were
generalized in the work of Mohri and Muñoz Medina [2012] to address any family of functions with
bounded Rademacher complexity and to use a finer problem-dependent distance between distributions called discrepancy, originally introduced in the context of domain adaptation [Mansour et al.,
2009].
The core idea of the aforementioned work is to learn by using a number of previous samples that
minimizes the trade-off between the error due to the variance of the estimation (statistical error),
and the error due to the drifting of the samples with respect to the current distribution (drift error).
If the algorithm trains using only a few recent observations, the statistical error will be large. If
the algorithm uses a larger training set, including not very recent observations, the drift error will
be large. For example, if the algorithm uses the most recent r training point, the hypothesis class
has VC-dimension
ν, and the distribution drift in each step is bounded by ∆, then the statistical
p
error is O( ν/r) and the drift error is O(r∆). The trade-off with respect to r is optimized for r =
Θ((∆2 /ν)−1/3 ) giving O((ν∆)1/3 ) error, as mentioned before. This, as well as similar approaches
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

