American Stories: A Large-Scale Structured Text
Dataset of Historical U.S. Newspapers
∗

Melissa Dell1,2 , Jacob Carlson1 , Tom Bryan1 , Emily Silcock1 , Abhishek Arora1 , Zejiang Shen3 ,
Luca D’Amico-Wong1 , Quan Le4 , Pablo Querubin2,5 , Leander Heldring6
1

Harvard University; Cambridge, MA, USA.
National Bureau of Economic Research; Cambridge, MA, USA.
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Cambridge, MA, USA.
4
Princeton University; Princeton, NJ, USA.
5
New York University; New York, NY, USA.
6
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.
∗
Corresponding author: melissadell@fas.harvard.edu.
2

Abstract
Existing full text datasets of U.S. public domain newspapers do not recognize the
often complex layouts of newspaper scans, and as a result the digitized content
scrambles texts from articles, headlines, captions, advertisements, and other layout regions. OCR quality can also be low. This study develops a novel, deep learning pipeline for extracting full article texts from newspaper images and applies it
to the nearly 20 million scans in Library of Congress’s public domain Chronicling
America collection. The pipeline includes layout detection, legibility classification, custom OCR, and association of article texts spanning multiple bounding
boxes. To achieve high scalability, it is built with efficient architectures designed
for mobile phones. The resulting American Stories dataset provides high quality
data that could be used for pre-training a large language model to achieve better
understanding of historical English and historical world knowledge. The dataset
could also be added to the external database of a retrieval-augmented language
model to make historical information - ranging from interpretations of political
events to minutiae about the lives of people’s ancestors - more widely accessible.
Furthermore, structured article texts facilitate using transformer-based methods
for popular social science applications like topic classification, detection of reproduced content, and news story clustering. Finally, American Stories provides a
massive silver quality dataset for innovating multimodal layout analysis models
and other multimodal applications.

1

Introduction

Historical local newspapers provide a massive repository of texts about American communities and
their inhabitants that can elucidate topics ranging from semantic change to political polarization
to the construction of national and cultural identities to the minutiae of the daily lives of people’s
ancestors. Given the enormous breadth and depth of content, historical newspapers have been widely
studied, yet existing open source U.S. newspaper datasets have significant limitations that complicate
the extent to which modern deep learning methods can leverage and liberate their content.
Library of Congress’s Chronicling America project [19] is the primary public domain historical U.S.
newspaper dataset. It consists of around 20 million historical newspaper scans and their corresponding digitized texts. Its content is concentrated before 1925, as this content has entered the public
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

