Efficient Potential-based Exploration in Reinforcement
Learning using Inverse Dynamic Bisimulation Metric
Yiming Wang1

1

Ming Yang1

Renzhi Dong1

Binbin Sun1

Furui Liu2

Leong Hou U1⇤
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, University of Macau, Macao SAR, China
2
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
{wang.yiming,ming.ink,renzhi.dong,sun.binbin}@connect.um.edu.mo
liufurui@zhejianglab.com,ryanlhu@um.edu.mo

Abstract
Reward shaping is an effective technique for integrating domain knowledge into
reinforcement learning (RL). However, traditional approaches like potential-based
reward shaping totally rely on manually designing shaping reward functions, which
significantly restricts exploration efficiency and introduces human cognitive biases.
While a number of RL methods have been proposed to boost exploration by designing an intrinsic reward signal as exploration bonus. Nevertheless, these methods
heavily rely on the count-based episodic term in their exploration bonus which falls
short in scalability. To address these limitations, we propose a general end-to-end
potential-based exploration bonus for deep RL via potentials of state discrepancy,
which motivates the agent to discover novel states and provides them with denser
rewards without manual intervention. Specifically, we measure the novelty of
adjacent states by calculating their distance using the bisimulation metric-based
potential function, which enhances agent exploration and ensures policy invariance.
In addition, we offer a theoretical guarantee on our inverse dynamic bisimulation
metric, bounding the value difference and ensuring that the agent explores states
with higher TD error, thus significantly improving training efficiency. The proposed
approach is named LIBERTY (expLoration vIa Bisimulation mEtRic-based sTate
discrepancY) which is comprehensively evaluated on the MuJoCo and the Arcade
Learning Environments. Extensive experiments have verified the superiority and
scalability of our algorithm compared with other competitive methods.

1

Introduction

Reward shaping is a common method of transforming possible domain knowledge to redesign the
reward function so that it guides the agent to explore state-action space more effectively. The potentialbased reward shaping (PBRS) method Ng et al. [1999] is the first to demonstrate that policy invariance
can be ensured if the shaping reward function takes the form of the difference between potential
values. Existing reward shaping approaches, such as PBRS and its variants Devlin and Kudenko
[2012], Harutyunyan et al. [2015], Li et al. [2023], mainly concentrate on generating additional
rewards using potential values. However, they often assume that the shaping rewards derived from
prior knowledge are entirely beneficial without considering their potential limitations. Moreover, the
conversion of human prior knowledge into numerical values unavoidably requires human intervention,
leading to subjective judgments and potential cognitive biases. The heavy reliance on human prior
⇤

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

