One-Pass Distribution Sketch for Measuring Data
Heterogeneity in Federated Learning

Zichang Liu∗
Rice University
zichangliu@rice.edu

Zhaozhuo Xu∗
Stevens Institute of Technology
zxu79@stevens.edu

Benjamin Coleman
Rice University†
benjamin.ray.coleman@gmail.com

Anshumali Shrivastava
Rice University & ThirdAI Corp.
anshumali@rice.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a machine learning paradigm where multiple client
devices train models collaboratively without data exchange. Data heterogeneity
problem is naturally inherited in FL since data in different clients follow diverse
distributions. To mitigate the negative influence of data heterogeneity, we need to
start by measuring it across clients. However, the efficient measurement between
distributions is a challenging problem, especially in high dimensionality. In this
paper, we propose a one-pass distribution sketch to represent the client data distribution. Our sketching algorithm only requires a single pass of the client data,
which is efficient in terms of time and memory. Moreover, we show in both theory
and practice that the distance between two distribution sketches represents the divergence between their corresponding distributions. Furthermore, we demonstrate
with extensive experiments that our distribution sketch improves the client selection
in the FL training. We also showcase that our distribution sketch is an efficient
solution to the cold start problem in FL for new clients with unlabeled data.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) has recently become the go-to solution for challenging on-device applications
such as typing prediction [1], machine translation [2, 3] and fraud detection [4, 5]. Initially proposed
by McMahan et. al. [6], the FL setting defines a learning problem where multiple clients collaborate
to construct a global model from local client data. Unlike in centralized learning, where clients can
freely exchange data, FL requires that private data never leave the client device. The FL framework is
uniquely positioned to comply with recent data privacy legislation [7, 8, 9], and it has correspondingly
seen a surge of interest in machine learning (ML) research and deployment [10, 11, 12].
Data Heterogeneity in FL. Clients’ local datasets may be drawn from significantly different statistical
distributions [6, 13, 14, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22]. For instance, in the typing prediction task,
each client is a cellphone user. Differences in user interest, language, and geography will produce
extremely diverse word distributions. Data heterogeneity is a severe problem for FL because the
models trained on each client may have many different behaviors. It is challenging to aggregate such
different client models into a coherent and performant global model.
∗
†

Equal contribution. The order of authors is determined by flipping a coin.
Now with Google DeepMind.
Code is available at https://github.com/lzcemma/RACE_Distance

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

