Theoretical Analysis of Inductive Biases in
Deep Convolutional Networks

Zihao Wang
Peking University
zihaowang@stu.pku.edu.cn

Lei Wu
Peking University
leiwu@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we provide a theoretical analysis of the inductive biases in convolutional neural networks (CNNs). We start by examining the universality of CNNs,
i.e., the ability to approximate any continuous functions. We prove that a depth
of O(log d) suffices for deep CNNs to achieve this universality, where d in the
input dimension. Additionally, we establish that learning sparse functions with
2
e
d) samples, indicating that deep CNNs can efficiently
CNNs requires only O(log
capture long-range sparse correlations. These results are made possible through a
novel combination of the multichanneling and downsampling when increasing the
network depth. We also delve into the distinct roles of weight sharing and locality
in CNNs. To this end, we compare the performance of CNNs, locally-connected
networks (LCNs), and fully-connected networks (FCNs) on a simple regression
task, where LCNs can be viewed as CNNs without weight sharing. On the one
hand, we prove that LCNs require Ω(d) samples while CNNs need only e
O(log2 d)
samples, highlighting the critical role of weight sharing. On the other hand, we
e
prove that FCNs require Ω(d2 ) samples, whereas LCNs need only O(d)
samples,
underscoring the importance of locality. These provable separations quantify the
difference between the two biases, and the major observation behind our proof is
that weight sharing and locality break different symmetries in the learning process.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Fukushima, 1988; LeCun et al., 1998) are a fundamental
model in deep learning, known for their exceptional performance in many tasks. In particular, CNNs
consistently outperform the fully-connected neural network (FCN) counterparts in vision-related
tasks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017). Uncovering the underlying
mechanism behind the success of CNNs is thus of paramount importance in deep learning.
Zhou (2020a;b); Feng et al. (2022); He et al. (2022) studied the approximation capabilities of CNNs
for target functions in spaces such as continuous functions and Sobolev spaces. Although these results
are important, they cannot explain why CNNs perform better than FCNs. The primary reason for this
limitation is that these works did not take into account the specific structures of CNNs, including
multichanneling, downsampling, weight sharing, and locality. The locality refers to the use of small
filters, e.g., filter sizes can be as small as 3 in popular VGG nets (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014)
and ResNets (He et al., 2016). Comprehending the inductive biases of these architecture choices is
critical to understand the exceptional performance of CNNs.
Li et al. (2020) designed a simple classification task to demonstrate the superiority of CNNs over
FCNs. The authors prove that for this task, FCNs need Ω(d2 ) samples while CNNs need only O(1)
samples, thereby providing theoretical support for the superiority of using convolutions. However,
this study neither examined the individual impact of weight sharing and locality nor considered the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

