Stability Guarantees for Feature Attributions with
Multiplicative Smoothing

Anton Xue Rajeev Alur Eric Wong
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
{antonxue,alur,exwong}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Explanation methods for machine learning models tend not to provide any formal
guarantees and may not reflect the underlying decision-making process. In this
work, we analyze stability as a property for reliable feature attribution methods.
We prove that relaxed variants of stability are guaranteed if the model is sufficiently
Lipschitz with respect to the masking of features. We develop a smoothing method
called Multiplicative Smoothing (MuS) to achieve such a model. We show that
MuS overcomes the theoretical limitations of standard smoothing techniques and
can be integrated with any classifier and feature attribution method. We evaluate
MuS on vision and language models with various feature attribution methods, such
as LIME and SHAP, and demonstrate that MuS endows feature attributions with
non-trivial stability guarantees.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning models are incredibly powerful at challenging prediction tasks but notoriously black-box in their decision-making. One can therefore achieve impressive performance without
fully understanding why. In settings like medical diagnosis [1, 2] and legal analysis [3, 4], where
accurate and well-justified decisions are important, such power without proof is insufficient. In order
to fully wield the power of such models while ensuring reliability and trust, a user needs accurate and
insightful explanations of model behavior.
One popular family of explanation methods is feature attributions [5, 6, 7, 8]. Given a model and
input, a feature attribution method generates a score for each input feature that denotes its importance
to the overall prediction. For instance, consider Figure 1, in which the Vision Transformer [9]
classifier predicts the full image (left) as “Goldfish”. We then use a feature attribution method like
SHAP [7] to score each feature and select the top-25%, for which the masked image (middle) is
consistently predicted as “Goldfish”. However, adding a single patch of features (right) alters the
prediction confidence so much that it now yields “Axolotl”. This suggests that the explanation is
brittle [10], as small changes easily cause it to induce some other class. In this paper, we study how
to overcome such behavior by analyzing the stability of an explanation: we consider an explanation
to be stable if, once the explanatory features are included, the addition of more features does not
change the prediction.
Stability implies that the selected features are enough to explain the prediction [12, 13, 14] and that this
selection maintains strong explanatory power even in the presence of additional information [10, 15].
Similar properties are studied in literature and identified as useful for interpretability [16], and
we emphasize that our main focus is on analyzing and achieving provable guarantees. Stability
guarantees, in particular, are useful as they allow one to predict how model behavior varies with the
explanation. Given a stable explanation, one can include more features, e.g., adding context, while
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

