QATCH: Benchmarking SQL-centric tasks with Table
Representation Learning Models on Your Data

Simone Papicchio
Politecnico di Torino
Turin, Italy

Paolo Papotti
EURECOM
Sophia Antipolis, France

Luca Cagliero
Politecnico di Torino
Turin, Italy

Abstract
Table Representation Learning (TRL) models are commonly pre-trained on large
open-domain datasets comprising millions of tables and then used to address
downstream tasks. Choosing the right TRL model to use on proprietary data can
be challenging, as the best results depend on the content domain, schema, and data
quality. Our purpose is to support end-users in testing TRL models on proprietary
data in two established SQL-centric tasks, i.e., Question Answering (QA) and
Semantic Parsing (SP). We present QATCH (Query-Aided TRL Checklist), a
toolbox to highlight TRL models’ strengths and weaknesses on relational tables
unseen at training time. For an input table, QATCH automatically generates a
testing checklist tailored to QA and SP. Checklist generation is driven by a SQL
query engine that crafts tests of different complexity. This design facilitates inherent
portability, allowing the checks to be used by alternative models. We also introduce
a set of cross-task performance metrics evaluating the TRL model’s performance
over its output. Finally, we show how QATCH automatically generates tests for
proprietary datasets to evaluate various state-of-the-art models including TAPAS,
TAPEX, and C HAT GPT.

1

Introduction

Table Representation Learning (TRL) models are getting increasing attention for their ability to
support various NLP downstream tasks involving tabular data (Badaro et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2022).
Such models are built using large open-domain datasets during pre-training and can then be fine-tuned
with labelled examples for the target task.
Motivation. In most settings, companies aim at adopting a pre-trained model to reduce costs.
However, despite the abundance of such methods, it is still challenging to select and manage a TRL
model for proprietary data. Models use different pre-training tasks and datasets, work under different
assumptions, and the top performing model for an existing benchmark is not necessarily the best one
when tested on proprietary data. Indeed, the performance of models fine-tuned on benchmark data is
not necessarily replicable on proprietary data.
In a corporate setting, there are at least three scenarios where a given TRL model needs to be evaluated
against proprietary datasets:
• Comparison: Compare TRL models fine-tuned on private examples to see which one performs best.
• Validation: As crafting examples is expensive, verify when the quality meets the requirements.
• Maintenance: Fine-tuned models need to be re-calibrated to avoid data and conceptual shifting,
continuous evaluation helps the identification of this issue.
Challenges. Supporting these scenarios with accurate evaluation is a not obvious task. For the first
scenario, consider an engineer who is selecting the TRL model for a Question Answering (QA) task
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

