PAC-Bayesian Spectrally-Normalized Bounds for
Adversarially Robust Generalization

Jiancong Xiao1,∗, Ruoyu Sun2,3,4,†, Zhi-Quan Luo2,4,†
1
University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA
2
Scool of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
Shenzhen International Center for Industrial and Applied Mathematcs
4
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
jcxiao@upenn.edu, {sunruoyu,luozq}@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. It is found
empirically that adversarially robust generalization is crucial in establishing defense algorithms against adversarial attacks. Therefore, it is interesting to study the
theoretical guarantee of robust generalization. This paper focuses on norm-based
complexity, based on a PAC-Bayes approach (Neyshabur et al., 2017b). The main
challenge lies in extending the key ingredient, which is a weight perturbation bound
in standard settings, to the robust settings. Existing attempts heavily rely on additional strong assumptions, leading to loose bounds. In this paper, we address this
issue and provide a spectrally-normalized robust generalization bound for DNNs.
Compared to existing bounds, our bound offers two significant advantages: Firstly,
it does not depend on additional assumptions. Secondly, it is considerably tighter,
aligning with the bounds of standard generalization. Therefore, our result provides
a different perspective on understanding robust generalization: The mismatch terms
between standard and robust generalization bounds shown in previous studies do
not contribute to the poor robust generalization. Instead, these disparities solely due
to mathematical issues. Finally, we extend the main result to adversarial robustness
against general non-ℓp attacks and other neural network architectures.

1

Introduction

Even though deep neural networks (DNNs) have impressive performance on many machine learning
tasks, they are often highly susceptible to adversarial perturbations imperceptible to the human eye
(Goodfellow et al., 2015; Madry et al., 2018). They have received enormous attention in the machine
learning literature over recent years and a large number of defense algorithms (Gowal et al., 2020;
Rebuffi et al., 2021) are proposed to improve the robustness in practice. Nonetheless, it still fails to
deliver satisfactory performance. One major challenge stems from adversarially robust generalization.
For example, Madry et al. (2018) demonstrated that the robust generalization gap can extend up to
50% on CIFAR-10. In contrast, the standard generalization gap is notably small in practical settings.
Hence, a theoretical question arises: Why is there a huge difference between standard generalization
and robust generalization? This paper focuses on norm-based generalization analysis.
In classical learning theory, one of the most well-known findings is that the generalization bound
for neural networks depends on the norms of their layers (Bartlett, 1998). To further explore the
generalization of deep learning, a series of work aimed at improving the norm-based bound (Bartlett &
∗
†

Work done while at CUHK(SZ).
Corresponding Authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

