Training neural operators to preserve invariant
measures of chaotic attractors
Ruoxi Jiang∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
roxie62@uchicago.edu

Peter Y. Lu∗
Department of Physics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
lup@uchicago.edu

Elena Orlova
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
eorlova@uchicago.edu

Rebecca Willett
Department of Statistics and Computer Science
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
willett@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Chaotic systems make long-horizon forecasts difficult because small perturbations
in initial conditions cause trajectories to diverge at an exponential rate. In this
setting, neural operators trained to minimize squared error losses, while capable
of accurate short-term forecasts, often fail to reproduce statistical or structural
properties of the dynamics over longer time horizons and can yield degenerate
results. In this paper, we propose an alternative framework designed to preserve
invariant measures of chaotic attractors that characterize the time-invariant statistical properties of the dynamics. Specifically, in the multi-environment setting
(where each sample trajectory is governed by slightly different dynamics), we
consider two novel approaches to training with noisy data. First, we propose a loss
based on the optimal transport distance between the observed dynamics and the
neural operator outputs. This approach requires expert knowledge of the underlying
physics to determine what statistical features should be included in the optimal
transport loss. Second, we show that a contrastive learning framework, which does
not require any specialized prior knowledge, can preserve statistical properties of
the dynamics nearly as well as the optimal transport approach. On a variety of
chaotic systems, our method is shown empirically to preserve invariant measures
of chaotic attractors.

1

Introduction

Training fast and accurate surrogate models to emulate complex dynamical systems is key to many
scientific applications of machine learning, including climate modeling [1], fluid dynamics [2, 3],
plasma physics [4], and molecular dynamics [5, 6]. Fast emulators are powerful tools that can be
used for forecasting and data assimilation [1, 4, 7], sampling to quantify uncertainty and compute
statistical properties [1, 5, 6], identifying latent dynamical parameters [8, 9], and solving a wide range
of inverse problems [10]. Specifically, neural operator architectures [2, 11, 12] have been shown to
be promising physics-informed surrogate models for emulating spatiotemporal dynamics, such as
dynamics governed by partial differential equations (PDEs).
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

