Guarantees for Self-Play in Multiplayer Games via
Polymatrix Decomposability

Revan MacQueen
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta / Amii

James R. Wright
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta / Amii

revan@ualberta.ca

james.wright@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Self-play is a technique for machine learning in multi-agent systems where a
learning algorithm learns by interacting with copies of itself. Self-play is useful
for generating large quantities of data for learning, but has the drawback that
the agents the learner will face post-training may have dramatically different
behavior than the learner came to expect by interacting with itself. For the special
case of two-player constant-sum games, self-play that reaches Nash equilibrium
is guaranteed to produce strategies that perform well against any post-training
opponent; however, no such guarantee exists for multiplayer games. We show
that in games that approximately decompose into a set of two-player constant-sum
games (called constant-sum polymatrix games) where global ϵ-Nash equilibria are
boundedly far from Nash equilibria in each subgame (called subgame stability), any
no-external-regret algorithm that learns by self-play will produce a strategy with
bounded vulnerability. For the first time, our results identify a structural property of
multiplayer games that enable performance guarantees for the strategies produced
by a broad class of self-play algorithms. We demonstrate our findings through
experiments on Leduc poker.

1

Introduction

Self-play is one of the most commonly used approaches for machine learning in multi-agent systems.
In self-play, a learner interacts with copies of itself to produce data that will be used for training.
Some of the most noteworthy successes of AI in the past decade have been based on self-play; by
employing the procedure, algorithms have been able to achieve super-human abilities in various
games, including Poker (Moravcik et al., 2017; Brown & Sandholm, 2018, 2019), Go and Chess
(Silver et al., 2016, 2018), Starcraft (Vinyals et al., 2019), Diplomacy (Paquette et al., 2019), and
Stratego (Perolat et al., 2022).
Self-play has the desirable property that unbounded quantities of training data can be generated
(assuming access to a simulator). But using self-play necessarily involves a choice of agents for the
learner to train with: copies of itself. Strategies that perform well during training may perform poorly
against new agents, whose behavior may differ dramatically from that of the agents that the learner
trained against.
The problem of learning strategies during training that perform well against new agents is a central
challenge in algorithmic game theory and multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) (Matignon
et al., 2012; Lanctot et al., 2017). In particular, a self-play trained agent interacting with agents
from an independent self-play instance—differing only by random seed—can lead to dramatically
worse performance (Lanctot et al., 2017). The self-play-based DORA (Bakhtin et al., 2021) performs
well aginst copies of itself in the game of no-press Diplomacy, but poorly against human-like agents
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

