Policy Space Diversity for Non-Transitive Games

Jian Yao1∗ , Weiming Liu 1∗ , Haobo Fu1∗ , Yaodong Yang2 ,
Stephen McAleer3 , Qiang Fu1 , Wei Yang1
1
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
2
Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Policy-Space Response Oracles (PSRO) is an influential algorithm framework
for approximating a Nash Equilibrium (NE) in multi-agent non-transitive games.
Many previous studies have been trying to promote policy diversity in PSRO. A
major weakness in existing diversity metrics is that a more diverse (according to
their diversity metrics) population does not necessarily mean (as we proved in the
paper) a better approximation to a NE. To alleviate this problem, we propose a new
diversity metric, the improvement of which guarantees a better approximation to
a NE. Meanwhile, we develop a practical and well-justified method to optimize
our diversity metric using only state-action samples. By incorporating our diversity
regularization into the best response solving in PSRO, we obtain a new PSRO
variant, Policy Space Diversity PSRO (PSD-PSRO). We present the convergence
property of PSD-PSRO. Empirically, extensive experiments on various games
demonstrate that PSD-PSRO is more effective in producing significantly less
exploitable policies than state-of-the-art PSRO variants. The experiment code is
available at https://github.com/nigelyaoj/policy-space-diversity-psro.

1

Introduction

Most real-world games demonstrate strong non-transitivity [9], where the winning rule follows a
cyclic pattern (e.g., the strategy cycle in Rock-Paper-Scissors) [6, 3]. A common objective in solving
non-transitive games is to find a Nash Equilibrium (NE), which has the best worst-case performance
in the whole policy space. Traditional algorithms, like simple self-play, fail to converge to a NE in
games with strong non-transitivity [26]. Recently, many game-theoretic methods have been proposed
to approximate a NE in such games. For example, Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) [54]
minimizes the so-called counterfactual regret. Neural fictitious self play [18, 19] extends the classical
game-theoretic approach, Fictitious Play (FP) [4], to larger games using Reinforcement Learning
(RL) to approximate a Best Response (BR). Another well-known algorithm is Policy-Space Response
Oracles (PSRO) [26], which generalizes the double oracle approach [38] by adopting a RL subroutine
to approximate a BR.
Improving the performance of PSRO on approximating a NE is an active research topic, and many
PSRO variants have been proposed so far, which generally fall into three categories. The first
category [36, 45, 12, 29] aims to improve the training efficiency at each iteration. For instance,
pipeline-PSRO [36] trains multiple BRs in parallel at each iteration. Neural population learning
[29] enables fast transfer learning across policies via representing a population of policies within a
single conditional model. The second category [37, 53] incorporates no-regret learning into PSRO,
which solves an unrestricted-restricted game with a no-regret learning method to guarantee the
decrease of exploitability of the meta-strategy across each iteration. The third category [2, 41, 32, 33]
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Haobo Fu (haobofu@tencent.com).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

