Learning better with Dale’s Law: A Spectral
Perspective
Pingsheng Li*
McGill University
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
pingsheng.li@mail.mcgill.ca
Arna Ghosh
McGill University
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
ghosharn@mila.quebec

Jonathan Cornford*
McGill University
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
cornforj@mila.quebec
Blake Richards
McGill University
Montreal Neurological Institute
Mila - Quebec AI Institute & CIFAR
blake.richards@mila.quebec

Abstract
Most recurrent neural networks (RNNs) do not include a fundamental constraint
of real neural circuits: Dale’s Law, which implies that neurons must be excitatory
(E) or inhibitory (I). Dale’s Law is generally absent from RNNs because simply
partitioning a standard network’s units into E and I populations impairs learning.
However, here we extend a recent feedforward bio-inspired EI network architecture,
named Dale’s ANNs, to recurrent networks, and demonstrate that good performance
is possible while respecting Dale’s Law. This begs the question: What makes some
forms of EI network learn poorly and others learn well? And, why does the
simple approach of incorporating Dale’s Law impair learning? Historically the
answer was thought to be the sign constraints on EI network parameters, and
this was a motivation behind Dale’s ANNs. However, here we show the spectral
properties of the recurrent weight matrix at initialisation are more impactful on
network performance than sign constraints. We find that simple EI partitioning
results in a singular value distribution that is multimodal and dispersed, whereas
standard RNNs have an unimodal, more clustered singular value distribution, as do
recurrent Dale’s ANNs. We also show that the spectral properties and performance
of partitioned EI networks are worse for small networks with fewer I units, and
we present normalised SVD entropy as a measure of spectrum pathology that
correlates with performance. Overall, this work sheds light on a long-standing
mystery in neuroscience-inspired AI and computational neuroscience, paving the
way for greater alignment between neural networks and biology.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are a major tool in computational neuroscience research, with
numerous papers that use RNNs to model the brain published every year [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However,
when using RNNs to model real neural networks there is always the question of which biological
constraints to incorporate into the model. Some biological constraints are considered law-like [6], and
are thus thought to be particularly important. One example is Dale’s Law, which says that neurons
*Equal contribution.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

