Payoff-based Learning with
Matrix Multiplicative Weights in Quantum Games

Kyriakos Lotidis
Stanford University
klotidis@stanford.edu

Nicholas Bambos
Stanford University
bambos@stanford.edu

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG
38000 Grenoble, France & Archimedes RU, NKUA
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr
Jose Blanchet
Stanford University
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of learning in quantum games – and other
classes of semidefinite games – with scalar, payoff-based feedback. For concreteness, we focus on the widely used matrix multiplicative weights (MMW) algorithm
and, instead of requiring players to have full knowledge of the game (and/or each
other’s chosen states), we introduce a suite of minimal-information matrix multiplicative weights (3MW) methods tailored to different information frameworks.
The main difficulty to attaining convergence in this setting is that, in contrast to
classical finite games, quantum games have an infinite continuum of pure states
(the quantum equivalent of pure strategies), so standard importance-weighting
techniques for estimating payoff vectors cannot be employed. Instead, we borrow ideas from bandit convex optimization and we design a zeroth-order gradient
sampler adapted to the semidefinite geometry of the problem at hand. As a first
result, we√show that the 3MW method with deterministic payoff feedback retains
the O(1/ 𝑇) convergence rate of the vanilla, full information MMW algorithm
in quantum min-max games, even though the players only observe a single scalar.
Subsequently, we relax the algorithm’s information requirements even further and
we provide a 3MW method that only requires players to observe a random realization of their payoff observable, and converges to equilibrium at an O(𝑇 −1/4 ) rate.
Finally, going beyond zero-sum games, we show that a regularized variant of the
proposed 3MW method guarantees local convergence with high probability to all
equilibria that satisfy a certain first-order stability condition.

1

Introduction

The integration of quantum information theory into computer science and machine learning [4, 51, 64]
has the potential ofy providing faster and more efficient computing resources, new encryption and
security protocols, and improved machine learning algorithms, enabling advancements in areas
such as quantum cryptography, shadow tomography, quantum GANs, and adversarial learning
[1, 15, 18, 37]. As a well-known example, Google’s “Sycamore” 54-qubit processor recently
showcased this “quantum advantage” by training an autonomous vehicle model in less than 200
seconds [4], a fact made possible by the ability of quantum computers to prepare superpositions of
qubits that exceed the operational capabilities of standard Boolean gates.
Deploying such models within a multi-agent context, such as the utilization of QGANs or autonomous
vehicles, leads to a significant transformation compared to classical non-cooperative environments.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

