Grassmann Manifold Flows for
Stable Shape Generation

Ryoma Yataka1,2 , Kazuki Hirashima1 , Masashi Shiraishi1
Information Technology R&D Center (ITC), Mitsubishi Electric Corporation,
Kamakura, Kanagawa, 247-8501, Japan
2
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
{Yataka.Ryoma@dw.MitsubishiElectric.co.jp, yataka@merl.com}
1

Abstract
Recently, studies on machine learning have focused on methods that use symmetry
implicit in a specific manifold as an inductive bias. Grassmann manifolds provide
the ability to handle fundamental shapes represented as shape spaces, enabling
stable shape analysis. In this paper, we present a novel approach in which we
establish the theoretical foundations for learning distributions on the Grassmann
manifold via continuous normalization flows, with the explicit goal of generating
stable shapes. Our approach facilitates more robust generation by effectively
eliminating the influence of extraneous transformations, such as rotations and
inversions, through learning and generating within a Grassmann manifold designed
to accommodate the essential shape information of the object. The experimental
results indicated that the proposed method could generate high-quality samples
by capturing the data structure. Furthermore, the proposed method significantly
outperformed state-of-the-art methods in terms of the log-likelihood or evidence
lower bound. The results obtained are expected to stimulate further research in this
field, leading to advances for stable shape generation and analysis.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning algorithms are designed to automatically learn and extract latent factors
that explain a specific dataset. Symmetry is known to be an inductive bias (that is, prior knowledge
other than training data that can contribute significantly to learning results) for learning latent factors
(Cohen & Welling (2016, 2017); Weiler & Cesa (2019); Satorras et al. (2021); Bronstein et al. (2021);
Puny et al. (2022)). Moreover, they exist in many phenomena in the natural sciences. If a target M is
invariant1 when the operation g ∈ S designated by S applied to M , M has symmetry S. For example,
a sphere remains a sphere even if a rotation R is applied; a symmetric shape remains symmetric even
if a left–right reversal is applied.
Recent studies have focused on methods incorporating symmetry into models based on equivariance
and invariance, when the data space forms a non-Euclidean space (a sphere S n or a special unitary
group SU (n)) (Cohen et al. (2018, 2019b); Graham et al. (2020); Haan et al. (2021); Boyda et al.
(2021a)). Among them, discriminative and generative models for subspace data (e.g., shape matrices
of point cloud data such as three-dimensional molecules and general object shapes) have been
proposed as viable approaches using Grassmann manifolds, which are quotient manifolds obtained
by introducing a function that induces invariance with respect to orthogonal transformations into
Invariance implies the transformation π satisfies π (x) = π (x′ ) = π (g(x)) for x′ = g (x) obtained by
applying the operation g to the input x. Transformation π is considered invariant with respect to operation g.
A transformation π is considered equivariant with respect to an operation p if π satisfies g (π (x)) = π (g(x)).
Invariance is a special case of equivariance where π (g) is an identity transformation.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

