Visual Instruction Tuning

1

Haotian Liu1∗ , Chunyuan Li2∗ , Qingyang Wu3 , Yong Jae Lee1
3
University of Wisconsin–Madison 2 Microsoft Research
Columbia University
https://llava-vl.github.io

Abstract
Instruction tuning large language models (LLMs) using machine-generated
instruction-following data has been shown to improve zero-shot capabilities on
new tasks, but the idea is less explored in the multimodal field. We present the
first attempt to use language-only GPT-4 to generate multimodal language-image
instruction-following data. By instruction tuning on such generated data, we introduce LLaVA: Large Language and Vision Assistant, an end-to-end trained
large multimodal model that connects a vision encoder and an LLM for generalpurpose visual and language understanding. To facilitate future research on visual
instruction following, we construct two evaluation benchmarks with diverse and
challenging application-oriented tasks. Our experiments show that LLaVA demonstrates impressive multimodal chat abilities, sometimes exhibiting the behaviors
of multimodal GPT-4 on unseen images/instructions, and yields a 85.1% relative score compared with GPT-4 on a synthetic multimodal instruction-following
dataset. When fine-tuned on Science QA, the synergy of LLaVA and GPT-4
achieves a new state-of-the-art accuracy of 92.53%. We make GPT-4 generated
visual instruction tuning data, our model, and code publicly available.

1

Introduction

Humans interact with the world through many channels such as vision and language, as each
individual channel has a unique advantage in representing and communicating certain concepts, and
thus facilitates a better understanding of the world. One of the core aspirations in artificial intelligence
is to develop a general-purpose assistant that can effectively follow multi-modal vision-and-language
instructions, aligned with human intent to complete various real-world tasks in the wild [4, 26].
To this end, the community has witnessed an emergent interest in developing language-augmented
foundation vision models [26, 16], with strong capabilities in open-world visual understanding
such as classification [39, 21, 56, 53, 38], detection [28, 61, 32], segmentation [25, 62, 57] and
captioning [49, 27], as well as visual generation and editing [41, 42, 55, 15, 43, 29]. We refer readers
to the Computer Vision in the Wild reading list for a more up-to-date literature compilation [12]. In
this line of work, each task is solved independently by one single large vision model, with the task
instruction implicitly considered in the model design. Further, language is only utilized to describe
the image content. While this allows language to play an important role in mapping visual signals to
language semantics—a common channel for human communication, it leads to models that usually
have a fixed interface with limited interactivity and adaptability to the user’s instructions.
Large language models (LLM), on the other hand, have shown that language can play a wider
role: a universal interface for a general-purpose assistant, where various task instructions can be
explicitly represented in language and guide the end-to-end trained neural assistant to switch to the
task of interest to solve it. For example, the recent success of ChatGPT [34] and GPT-4 [35] have
demonstrated the power of aligned LLMs in following human instructions, and have stimulated
tremendous interest in developing open-source LLMs. Among them, LLaMA [48] is an opensource LLM that matches the performance of GPT-3. Alpaca [47], Vicuna [9], GPT-4-LLM [37]
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

