FELM: Benchmarking Factuality Evaluation of
Large Language Models

Shiqi Chen1∗ Yiran Zhao3 Jinghan Zhang2 I-Chun Chern4
Siyang Gao1 Pengfei Liu5 Junxian He2
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
National University of Singapore 4 Carnegie Mellon University 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
schen438-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, junxianh@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Assessing factuality of text generated by large language models (LLMs) is an
emerging yet crucial research area, aimed at alerting users to potential errors and
guiding the development of more reliable LLMs. Nonetheless, the evaluators
assessing factuality necessitate suitable evaluation themselves to gauge progress
and foster advancements. This direction remains under-explored, resulting in substantial impediments to the progress of factuality evaluators. To mitigate this issue,
we introduce a benchmark for Factuality Evaluation of large Language Models,
referred to as FELM. In this benchmark, we collect responses generated from
LLMs and annotate factuality labels in a fine-grained manner. Contrary to previous
studies that primarily concentrate on the factuality of world knowledge (e.g. information from Wikipedia), FELM focuses on factuality across diverse domains,
spanning from world knowledge to math and reasoning. Our annotation is based
on text segments, which can help pinpoint specific factual errors. The factuality
annotations are further supplemented by predefined error types and reference links
that either support or contradict the statement. In our experiments, we investigate
the performance of several LLM-based factuality evaluators on FELM, including
both vanilla LLMs and those augmented with retrieval mechanisms and chain-ofthought processes. Our findings reveal that while retrieval aids factuality evaluation,
current LLMs are far from satisfactory to faithfully detect factual errors.1

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved stunning success, resulting in a paradigm shift towards
generative AI based on prompting (OpenAI, 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023;
OpenAI, 2023). However, a known issue of LLMs is their tendency to generate falsehoods or
hallucinate contents, posing a significant hurdle to broader applications. Even state-of-the-art LLMs
such as ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022) are susceptible to this issue as shown in Borji (2023); Zhuo
et al. (2023); Min et al. (2023), which raises concerns about the practical utility of these models.
Consequently, factuality evaluators that could detect factual errors in LLM’s responses are urgently
needed to alert users to potential risks and drive the development of more reliable LLMs. For example,
an ideal factuality evaluation system, as demonstrated in Figure 1 , should be able to segment the
LLM responses into fine-grained textual spans, assess the factual correctness of each segment, and
highlight any errors for the users. To facilitate interpretability, the factuality evaluator may also
categorize the error type, provide an explanation, and offer reference links to justify its assessment.
* Work done during visiting HKUST.
1

The FELM dataset is available at https://github.com/hkust-nlp/felm.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

