Robust Bayesian Satisficing

Artun Saday
Bilkent University
artun.saday@bilkent.edu.tr

Yaşar Cahit Yıldırım
Bilkent University
cahit.yildirim@bilkent.edu.tr

Cem Tekin
Bilkent University
cemtekin@ee.bilkent.edu.tr

Abstract
Distributional shifts pose a significant challenge to achieving robustness in contemporary machine learning. To overcome this challenge, robust satisficing (RS) seeks
a robust solution to an unspecified distributional shift while achieving a utility
above a desired threshold. This paper focuses on the problem of RS in contextual
Bayesian optimization when there is a discrepancy between the true and reference
distributions of the context. We propose a novel robust Bayesian satisficing algorithm called RoBOS for noisy black-box optimization. Our algorithm guarantees
sublinear lenient regret under certain assumptions on the amount of distribution
shift. In addition, we define a weaker notion of regret called robust satisficing
regret, in which our algorithm achieves a sublinear upper bound independent of the
amount of distribution shift. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, we
apply it to various learning problems and compare it to other approaches, such as
distributionally robust optimization.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) [1, 2] is a powerful technique for optimizing complex black-box functions
that are expensive to evaluate. It is particularly useful in situations where the function is noisy or
has multiple local optima. The approach combines a probabilistic model of the objective function
with a search algorithm to efficiently identify the best input values. In recent years, BO has become
a popular method for various sequential decision-making problems such as parameter tuning in
machine learning [3], vaccine and drug development [4], and dynamic treatment regimes [5].
Contextual BO [6] is an extension of BO that allows for optimization in the presence of contexts,
i.e., exogenous variables associated with the environment that can affect the outcome. A common
approach to BO when the context distribution is known is to maximize the expected utility [7, 8].
Often, however, there exists a distributional mismatch between the reference distribution that the
learner assumes and the true covariate distribution the environment decides. When there is uncertainty
surrounding the reference distribution, choosing the solution that maximizes the expected utility may
result in a suboptimal or even disastrous outcome. A plethora of methods have been developed to
tackle distribution shifts in BO; the ones that are most closely related to our work are adversarially
robust BO (STABLEOPT) [9] and distributionally robust BO (DRBO) [10]. STABLEOPT aims
to maximize the utility under an adversarial perturbation to the input. DRBO aims to maximize
the utility under the worst-case context distribution in a known uncertainty set. We focus on the
contextual framework of DRBO. However, unlike DRBO, our algorithm does not require as input an
uncertainty set. This provides an additional level of robustness to distribution shifts, even when the
true distribution lies outside of a known uncertainty set.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

