Don’t blame Dataset Shift! Shortcut Learning
due to Gradients and Cross Entropy
Aahlad Puli1∗

Lily Zhang 2

Yoav Wald 2

Rajesh Ranganath1,2,3

1

Department of Computer Science, New York University
2
Center for Data Science, New York University
3
Department of Population Health, Langone Health, New York University

Abstract
Common explanations for shortcut learning assume that the shortcut improves prediction under the training distribution but not in the test distribution. Thus, models
trained via the typical gradient-based optimization of cross-entropy, which we call
default-ERM, utilize the shortcut. However, even when the stable feature determines the label in the training distribution and the shortcut does not provide any
additional information, like in perception tasks, default-ERM still exhibits shortcut learning. Why are such solutions preferred when the loss for default-ERM
can be driven to zero using the stable feature alone? By studying a linear perception task, we show that default-ERM’s preference for maximizing the margin
leads to models that depend more on the shortcut than the stable feature, even
without overparameterization. This insight suggests that default-ERM’s implicit
inductive bias towards max-margin is unsuitable for perception tasks. Instead, we
develop an inductive bias toward uniform margins and show that this bias guarantees dependence only on the perfect stable feature in the linear perception task.
We develop loss functions that encourage uniform-margin solutions, called margin control (MARG - CTRL). M ARG - CTRL mitigates shortcut learning on a variety
of vision and language tasks, showing that better inductive biases can remove the
need for expensive two-stage shortcut-mitigating methods in perception tasks.

1

Introduction

Shortcut learning is a phenomenon where a model learns to base its predictions on an unstable
correlation, or shortcut, that does not hold across data distributions collected at different times and/or
places [Geirhos et al., 2020]. A model that learns shortcuts can perform worse than random guessing
in settings where the label’s relationship with the shortcut feature changes [Koh et al., 2021, Puli
et al., 2022]. Such drops in performance do not occur if the model depends on features whose
relationship with the label does not change across settings; these are stable features.
Shortcut learning is well studied in cases where models that use both shortcut and stable features
achieve lower loss than models that only use the stable feature [Arjovsky et al., 2019, Puli et al.,
2022, Geirhos et al., 2020]. These works consider cases where the Bayes-optimal classifier — the
training conditional distribution of the label given the covariates — depends on both stable and
shortcut features. In such cases, shortcut learning occurs as the Bayes-optimal predictor is the target
of standard supervised learning algorithms such as the one that minimizes the log-loss via gradient
descent (GD), which we call default-ERM.
However, in many machine learning tasks, the stable feature perfectly predicts the label, i.e. a perfect
stable feature. For example, in task of predicting hair color from images of celebrity faces in the
∗1

Corresponding email: aahlad@nyu.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

