Maximum Average Randomly Sampled: A Scale Free
and Non-parametric Algorithm for Stochastic Bandits

Masoud Moravej Khorasani∗
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
The University of Melbourne
Parkville, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
m.moravej.kh@gmail.com
Erik Weyer
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
The University of Melbourne
Parkville, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
ewey@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) methods are one of the most effective methods
in dealing with the exploration-exploitation trade-off in online decision-making
problems. The confidence bounds utilized in UCB methods tend to be constructed
based on concentration equalities which are usually dependent on a parameter of
scale (e.g. a bound on the payoffs, a variance, or a subgaussian parameter) that
must be known in advance. The necessity of knowing a scale parameter a priori
and the fact that the confidence bounds only use the tail information can deteriorate
the performance of the UCB methods. Here we propose a data-dependent UCB
algorithm called MARS (Maximum Average of Randomly Sampled Rewards)
in a non-parametric setup for multi-armed bandits with symmetric rewards. The
algorithm does not depend on any scaling, and the data-dependent upper confidence
bound is constructed based on the maximum average of randomly sampled rewards
inspired by the work of Hartigan in the 1960s and 70s. A regret bound for the multiarmed bandit problem is derived under the same assumptions as for the ψ-UCB
method without incorporating any correction factors. The method is illustrated and
compared with baseline algorithms in numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

The classical stochastic multi-armed bandit problem introduced by [21] has been studied extensively
in statistics, computer science, electrical engineering, and economics. New applications in machine
learning and data science such as personalized new recommendation and Monte-Carlo tree search
have generated renewed interest in the problem.
The problem is described as follows: The classical stochastic multi-armed bandit problem is an online
decision-making problem where each arm represents an action. At each round t ∈ {1, · · · , n} the
agent chooses an action (arm) At ∈ A and observe a reward Xt ∈ R where A is the set of available
actions and its finite cardinality is K ≥ 2. The reward Xt is a sample from an underlying distribution
∗

The code to reproduce the results of the paper can be found at https://github.com/Masoud-Moravej/
MARS-NeurIPS2023.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

