Solving Linear Inverse Problems Provably via
Posterior Sampling with Latent Diffusion Models

Litu Rout
Constantine Caramanis

Negin Raoof

Giannis Daras

Alexandros G. Dimakis

Sanjay Shakkottai

The University of Texas at Austin∗

Abstract
We present the first framework to solve linear inverse problems leveraging pretrained latent diffusion models. Previously proposed algorithms (such as DPS and
DDRM) only apply to pixel-space diffusion models. We theoretically analyze our
algorithm showing provable sample recovery in a linear model setting. The algorithmic insight obtained from our analysis extends to more general settings often
considered in practice. Experimentally, we outperform previously proposed posterior sampling algorithms in a wide variety of problems including random inpainting,
block inpainting, denoising, deblurring, destriping, and super-resolution.

1

Introduction

We study the use of pre-trained latent diffusion models to solve linear inverse problems such as
denoising, inpainting, compressed sensing and super-resolution. There are two classes of approaches
for inverse problems: supervised methods where a restoration model is trained to solve the task at
hand [37, 39, 56, 31], and unsupervised methods that use the prior learned by a generative model
to guide the restoration process [52, 40, 5, 33, 11, 26]; see also the survey of Ongie et al. [36] and
references therein.
The second family of unsupervised methods has gained popularity because: (i) general-domain
foundation generative models have become widely available, (ii) unsupervised methods do not require
any training to solve inverse problems and leverage the massive data and compute investment of
pre-trained models and (iii) generative models sample from the posterior-distribution, mitigating
certain pitfalls of likelihood-maximization methods such as bias in the reconstructions [35, 24] and
regression to the mean [23, 22].
Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful new approach to generative modeling [47, 48, 49, 20,
29, 18, 54]. This family of generative models works by first corrupting the data distribution p0 (x0 )
using an Itô Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE), dx = f (x, t)dt + g(t)dw, and then by learning
the score-function, ∇xt log pt (xt ), at all levels t, using Denoising Score Matching (DSM) [21, 53].
The seminal result of Anderson [1] shows that we can reverse the corruption process, i.e., start with
noise and then sample from the data distribution, by running another Itô SDE. The SDE that corrupts
the data is often termed as Forward SDE and its reverse as Reverse SDE [49]. The latter depends
on the score-function ∇xt log pt (xt ) that we learn through DSM. In [8, 9], the authors provided a
non-asymptotic analysis for the sampling of diffusion models when the score-function is only learned
approximately.
The success of diffusion models sparked the interest to investigate how we can use them to solve
inverse problems. Song et al. [49] showed that given measurements y = Ax0 + σy n, we can
∗

Email:{litu.rout,neginmr,giannisdaras,constantine,sanjay.shakkottai}utexas.edu, dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

