“Why Not Looking backward?” A Robust Two-Step
Method to Automatically Terminate Bayesian
Optimization

Shuang Li
Control and Simulation Center, Harbin Institute of Technology, China.
National Key Laboratory of Modeling and Simulation for Complex Systems, China.
ShuangLi.hit@outlook.com
Ke Li
Department of Computer Science
University of Exeter, EX4 4RN, Exeter, UK.
k.li@exeter.ac.uk
Wei Li∗
Control and Simulation Center, Harbin Institute of Technology, China.
National Key Laboratory of Modeling and Simulation for Complex Systems, China.
frank@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a powerful method for tackling expensive blackbox optimization problems. As a sequential model-based optimization strategy,
BO iteratively explores promising solutions until a predetermined budget, either
iterations or time, is exhausted. The decision on when to terminate BO significantly
influences both the quality of solutions and its computational efficiency. In this
paper, we propose a simple, yet theoretically grounded, two-step method for
automatically terminating BO. Our core concept is to proactively identify if the
search is within a convex region by examining previously observed samples. BO is
halted once the local regret within this convex region falls below a predetermined
threshold. To enhance numerical stability, we propose an approximation method
for calculating the termination indicator by solving a bilevel optimization problem.
We conduct extensive empirical studies on diverse benchmark problems, including
synthetic functions, reinforcement learning, and hyperparameter optimization.
Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method saves up to ≈ 80%
computational budget yet is with an order of magnitude smaller performance
degradation, comparing against the other peer methods. In addition, our proposed
termination method is robust in terms of the setting of its termination criterion.

1

Introduction
“Nature does not hurry, yet everything is accomplished.” — Lao Tzu

In this paper, we consider the black-box optimization problem (BBOP) defined as follows:
maximize f (x),
x∈Ω

∗

Wei Li is the corresponding author of this paper.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

(1)

