Towards Personalized Federated Learning via
Heterogeneous Model Reassembly

Jiaqi Wang1 Xingyi Yang2 Suhan Cui1 Liwei Che1
Lingjuan Lyu3 Dongkuan Xu4 Fenglong Ma1∗
1
The Pennsylvania State University 2 National University of Singapore
3
Sony AI 4 North Carolina State University
{jqwang,sxc6192,lfc5481,fenglong}@psu.edu,
xyang@u.nus.edu, lingjuan.lv@sony.com, dxu27@ncsu.edu

Abstract
This paper focuses on addressing the practical yet challenging problem of model
heterogeneity in federated learning, where clients possess models with different
network structures. To track this problem, we propose a novel framework called
pFedHR, which leverages heterogeneous model reassembly to achieve personalized federated learning. In particular, we approach the problem of heterogeneous
model personalization as a model-matching optimization task on the server side.
Moreover, pFedHR automatically and dynamically generates informative and diverse personalized candidates with minimal human intervention. Furthermore, our
proposed heterogeneous model reassembly technique mitigates the adverse impact
introduced by using public data with different distributions from the client data
to a certain extent. Experimental results demonstrate that pFedHR outperforms
baselines on three datasets under both IID and Non-IID settings. Additionally,
pFedHR effectively reduces the adverse impact of using different public data and
dynamically generates diverse personalized models in an automated manner2 .

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) aims to enable collaborative machine learning without the need to share
clients’ data with others, thereby upholding data privacy [1, 2, 3]. However, traditional federated
learning approaches [2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15] typically enforce the use of an
identical model structure for all clients during training. This constraint poses challenges in achieving
personalized learning within the FL framework. In real-world scenarios, clients such as data centers,
institutes, or companies often possess their own distinct models, which may have varying structures.
Training on top of their original models should be a better solution than deploying new ones for
collaborative purposes. Therefore, a practical solution lies in fostering heterogeneous model
cooperation within FL, while preserving individual model structures. Only a few studies have
attempted to address the challenging problem of heterogeneous model cooperation in FL [16, 17, 18,
19, 20], and most of them incorporate the use of a public dataset to facilitate both cooperation and
personalization [17, 18, 19, 20]. However, these approaches still face several key issues:
• Undermining personalization through consensus: Existing methods often generate consensual
side information, such as class information [17], logits [18, 21], and label-wise representations [22],
using public data. This information is then exchanged and used to conduct average operations
on the server, resulting in a consensus representation. However, this approach poses privacy and
∗
2

Corresponding author.
Source code can be found in the link https://github.com/JackqqWang/pfedHR

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

