Towards Hybrid-grained Feature Interaction Selection
for Deep Sparse Network

Fuyuan Lyu1 , Xing Tang2† , Dugang Liu4 , Chen Ma3 ,
Weihong Luo2 , Liang Chen2 , Xiuqiang He2 , Xue Liu1
1
McGill University, 2 FiT, Tencent, 3 City University of Hong Kong,
4
Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ)
†
corresponding author
fuyuan.lyu@mail.mcgill.ca, xing.tang@hotmail.com,
dugang.ldg@gmail.com, chenma@cityu.edu.hk,
{lobbyluo,leocchen,xiuqianghe}@tencent.com,
xue.liu@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Deep sparse networks are widely investigated as a neural network architecture for
prediction tasks with high-dimensional sparse features, with which feature interaction selection is a critical component. While previous methods primarily focus on
how to search feature interaction in a coarse-grained space, less attention has been
given to a finer granularity. In this work, we introduce a hybrid-grained feature
interaction selection approach that targets both feature field and feature value for
deep sparse networks. To explore such expansive space, we propose a decomposed
space which is calculated on the fly. We then develop a selection algorithm called
OptFeature, which efficiently selects the feature interaction from both the feature
field and the feature value simultaneously. Results from experiments on three large
real-world benchmark datasets demonstrate that OptFeature performs well in terms
of accuracy and efficiency. Additional studies support the feasibility of our method.
All source code are publicly available1 .

1

Introduction

Deep Sparse Networks (DSNs) are commonly utilized neural network architectures for prediction
tasks, designed to handle sparse and high-dimensional categorical features as inputs. These networks
find widespread application in real-world scenarios such as advertisement recommendation, fraud
detection, and more. For instance, in the context of advertisement recommendation, the input often
comprises high-dimensional features like user id and City, which significantly contribute to the final
prediction.
As depicted in Figure 1(a), the general DSN architecture consists of three components. Firstly,
the embedding layer transforms different feature values into dense embeddings. Following this,
feature interaction layers create feature interactions [4] based on the embeddings of raw features, as
illustrated in Figure 1(b). Finally, the predictor makes the final prediction based on the features and
their interactions. A core challenge in making accurate DSNs predictions is effectively capturing
suitable feature interactions among input features [8, 11, 16, 15].
Various methods have been proposed to address the issue of modelling feature interactions.
Wide&Deep first models human-crafted feature interactions using linear regression [22]. To eliminate
the need for human expertise, DeepFM [8] models all second-order feature interactions by utilizing
1

https://github.com/fuyuanlyu/OptFeature

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

