Harnessing the Power of Choices in Decision Tree
Learning

Guy Blanc∗
Stanford
gblanc@stanford.edu

Jane Lange∗
MIT
jlange@mit.edu

Colin Sullivan∗
Stanford
colins26@stanford.edu

Li-Yang Tan∗
Stanford
lytan@stanford.edu

Chirag Pabbaraju∗
Stanford
cpabbara@stanford.edu
Mo Tiwari∗
Stanford
motiwari@stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose a simple generalization of standard and empirically successful decision
tree learning algorithms such as ID3, C4.5, and CART. These algorithms, which
have been central to machine learning for decades, are greedy in nature: they grow
a decision tree by iteratively splitting on the best attribute. Our algorithm, Top-k,
considers the k best attributes as possible splits instead of just the single best
attribute.We demonstrate, theoretically and empirically, the power of this simple
generalization. We first prove a greediness hierarchy theorem showing that for every
k ∈ N, Top-(k + 1) can be dramatically more powerful than Top-k: there are data
distributions for which the former achieves accuracy 1 − ε, whereas the latter only
achieves accuracy 12 + ε. We then show, through extensive experiments, that Top-k
outperforms the two main approaches to decision tree learning: classic greedy
algorithms and more recent “optimal decision tree” algorithms. On one hand, Top-k
consistently enjoys significant accuracy gains over greedy algorithms across a wide
range of benchmarks. On the other hand, Top-k is markedly more scalable than
optimal decision tree algorithms and is able to handle dataset and feature set sizes
that remain far beyond the reach of these algorithms. The code to reproduce our
results is available at: https://github.com/SullivanC19/pydl8.5-topk.

1

Introduction

Decision trees are a fundamental workhorse in machine learning. Their logical and hierarchical
structure makes them easy to understand and their predictions easy to explain. Decision trees are
therefore the most canonical example of an interpretable model: in his influential survey [Bre01b],
Breiman writes “On interpretability, trees rate an A+”; much more recently, the survey [RCC+ 22]
lists decision tree optimization as the very first of 10 grand challenges for the field of interpretable
machine learning. Decision trees are also central to modern ensemble methods such as random
forests [Bre01a] and XGBoost [CG16], which achieve state-of-the-art accuracy for a wide range of
tasks.
Greedy algorithms such as ID3 [Qui86], C4.5 [Qui93], and CART [BFSO84] have long been the
standard approach to decision tree learning. These algorithms build a decision tree from labeled data
in a top-down manner, growing the tree by iteratively splitting on the “best” attribute as measured
with respect to a certain heuristic function (e.g., information gain). Owing to their simplicity, these
∗

Authors ordered alphabetically.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

