Random Cuts are Optimal for Explainable k-Medians

Konstantin Makarychev∗
Northwestern University

Liren Shan∗
TTIC

Abstract
We show that the R ANDOM C OORDINATE C UT algorithm gives the optimal competitive ratio for explainable k-medians in ℓ1 . The problem of explainable k-medians
was introduced by Dasgupta, Frost, Moshkovitz, and Rashtchian in 2020. Several
groups of authors independently proposed a simple polynomial-time randomized
algorithm for the problem and showed that this algorithm is O(log k log log k)
competitive. We provide a tight analysis of the algorithm and prove that its competitive ratio is upper bounded by 2 ln k + 2. This bound matches the Ω(log k) lower
bound by Dasgupta et al (2020).

1

Introduction

Machine learning is being increasingly used to make decisions for critical applications, such as
healthcare, finance, and public policy. Considering the profound impact of algorithmic decisions on
individuals and society, it is essential to understand the underlying logic behind these decisions. In
this paper, we explore an explainable k-medians clustering algorithm (called R ANDOM C OORDINATE C UT). The algorithm’s aim is to cluster data sets and present results in a manner easily understood
and visualized by humans.
Clustering is a fundamental task in unsupervised learning. Among many clustering methods, k-means,
k-medians, and k-medoids are particularly popular. These are centroid-based methods that choose k
centers and assign each data point to the center nearest to it. As a result, each cluster is a Voronoi
cell in the Voronoi partition of the space. Since these cells may have a complicated boundary (see
Figure 1 for an example of k-medians), it is not always easy for humans to comprehend and visualize
such clustering.
To address this problem, Dasgupta, Frost, Moshkovitz, and Rashtchian [2020] introduced explainable
k-means and k-medians clustering. They argued that decision trees are easy to understand and
interpret. Therefore, in order to make clustering more explainable, we need to use threshold decision
trees to define clusters. A threshold decision tree is a binary space partitioning tree with k leaves.
Each internal node of the threshold decision tree splits the data into two groups using a threshold cut
(j, θ): on the one side of the cut, we have points x with xj ≤ θ and, on the other side, points x with
xj > θ. Thus, every node of the tree corresponds to a rectangular region of the space. A decision tree
with k leaves partitions data set X into k clusters, P1 , . . . , Pk . See Figure 1 for an example. Dasgupta
et al. [2020] suggested that we use the standard k-medians and k-means objectives to measure the
cost of the threshold decision tree. For k-medians, the cost of a threshold decision tree T equals
cost(X, T ) =

k X
X

∥x − ĉi ∥1 ,

i=1 x∈Pi

where P1 , . . . , Pk is the partitioning of X produced by T ; and ĉ1 , . . . , ĉk are the medians of clusters
P1 , . . . , Pk . We denote the ℓ1 -norm by ∥ · ∥1 . Note that each Pi is a rectangular region of the space.
Thus, generally speaking, every x is not assigned to the closest center ĉ1 , . . . , ĉk like in unconstrained
k-medians or k-means.
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

