Streaming PCA for Markovian Data
Syamantak Kumar1

Purnamrita Sarkar2

1
Department of Computer Science, UT Austin
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, UT Austin
syamantak@utexas.edu, purna.sarkar@austin.utexas.edu
2

Abstract
Since its inception in 1982, Oja’s algorithm has become an established method
for streaming principle component analysis (PCA). We study the problem of
streaming PCA, where the data-points are sampled from an irreducible, aperiodic,
and reversible Markov chain starting in stationarity. Our goal is to estimate the
top eigenvector of the unknown covariance matrix of the stationary distribution.
This setting has implications in scenarios where data can solely be sampled from
a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) type algorithm, and the objective is to
perform inference on parameters of the stationary distribution. Most convergence
guarantees for Oja’s algorithm in the literature assume that the data-points
are sampled IID. For data streams with Markovian dependence, one typically
downsamples the data to get a "nearly" independent data stream. In this paper, we
obtain the first near-optimal rate for Oja’s algorithm on the entire data, where we
remove the logarithmic dependence on the sample size, n, resulting from throwing
data away in downsampling strategies.

1

Introduction

Streaming Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is an important and well studied problem where the
principal eigenvector of the sample covariance matrix of a dataset is computed one data-point at a
time. One of the most popular algorithms for streaming PCA was introduced by Erkki Oja in 1982
[29, 30]. Most existing analyses of Oja’s algorithm are done when the data is sampled IID.
However, in many practical applications, the data-points are dependent and are sampled from an
MCMC process converging to a target stationary distribution. This naturally arises in the context of
token algorithms for Federated PCA settings [10, 12, 13] with multiple machines communicating via
a fixed and connected graph topology. Each machine contains an arbitrary fraction of data-points
and the goal is to design a streaming algorithm that respects this topology and returns the principal
component of the whole dataset. This is typically achieved using a Metropolis-Hastings scheme that
uses local information to design the transition matrix of a Markov chain with any desired stationary
distribution. The stationary distribution, π, of the random walk is chosen so that the distribution of the
samples under π matches the uniform distribution over data-points. Governed by this Markov chain,
a random walker then travels the network of machines and samples one data-point at a time from
the current machine and computes the update. However, even under the stationary distribution, the
data-points are dependent, which deviates from the IID setup. Our goal is to obtain a near-optimal
analysis of the sin2 error of the estimated vector with respect to the true top eigenvector of the
unknown covariance matrix in the Markovian setting.
Estimating the first principal component with streaming PCA: Let Xt be a mean zero d
dimensional vector with covariance matrix Σ, and let ηt be a decaying learning rate. The update rule
of Oja’s algorithm is given as wt
(1)
wt ← (I + ηt Xt XtT )wt−1 , wt ←
∥wt ∥2
where wt is the estimate of v1 , the top eigenvector of Σ, and ηt is the step-size at timestep t. We aim
2
to analyse the sin2 error of Oja’s iterate at timestep t, defined as 1 − ⟨wt , v1 ⟩ .
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

