What Makes Good Examples for
Visual In-Context Learning?
B

Yuanhan Zhang1 Kaiyang Zhou2 Ziwei Liu1,
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
{yuanhan002, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
kyzhou@hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Large vision models with billions of parameters and trained on broad data have
great potential in numerous downstream applications. However, these models are
typically difficult to adapt due to their large parameter size and sometimes lack
of accesss to their weights—entities able to develop large vision models often
provide APIs only. In this paper, we study how to better utilize large vision models through the lens of in-context learning, a concept that has been well-known
in natural language processing but has only been studied very recently in computer vision. In-context learning refers to the ability to perform inference on
tasks never seen during training by simply conditioning on in-context examples
(i.e., input-output pairs) without updating any internal model parameters. To demystify in-context learning in computer vision, we conduct an extensive research
and identify a critical problem: downstream performance is highly sensitivie to
the choice of visual in-context examples. To address this problem, we propose a
prompt retrieval framework specifically for large vision models, allowing the selection of in-context examples to be fully automated. Concretely, we provide two
implementations: (i) an unsupervised prompt retrieval method based on nearest
example search using an off-the-shelf model, and (ii) a supervised prompt retrieval
method, which trains a neural network to choose examples that directly maximize
in-context learning performance. Both methods do not require access to the internal weights of large vision models. Our results demonstrate that our methods can
bring non-trivial improvements to visual in-context learning in comparison to the
commonly-used random selection.

1

Introduction

In recent years, large-scale models have emerged in computer vision: they have enormous parameter
sizes and are pre-trained on broad data to gain wide-ranging knowledge. These models have demonstrated remarkable generalization performance and have great potential for numerous downstream
applications [4]. However, due to the large model size and the potentially proprietary data used for
training, entities able to develop large-scale models typically only provide users with APIs, known
as Model-as-a-Service (Maas). Representative examples include the prominent text-to-image generation models, DALL·E [17] and Imagen [20], and OpenAI’s powerful language models like GPT3/ChatGPT [16]. As a result, users are unable to apply full fine-tuning or some parameter-efficient
tuning techniques, such as prompt learning [11, 10, 26, 25, 23, 15], for model adaptation, largely
limiting downstream performance. To circumvent the problem, “black-box” adaptation methods
need to be developed.
B

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

