Blurred-Dilated Method for Adversarial Attacks
Weibin Wu∗
School of Software Engineering
Sun Yat-sen University
wuwb36@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Yang Deng
School of Software Engineering
Sun Yat-sen University
dengy73@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Jianping Zhang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
jpzhang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Zibin Zheng
School of Software Engineering
Sun Yat-sen University
zhzibin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which lead to
incorrect predictions. In black-box settings, transfer attacks can be conveniently
used to generate adversarial examples. However, such examples tend to overfit the
specific architecture and feature representations of the source model, resulting in
poor attack performance against other target models. To overcome this drawback,
we propose a novel model modification-based transfer attack: Blurred-Dilated
method (BD) in this paper. In summary, BD works by reducing downsampling
while introducing BlurPool and dilated convolutions in the source model. Then
BD employs the modified source model to generate adversarial samples. We
think that BD can more comprehensively preserve the feature information than
the original source model. It thus enables more thorough destruction of the image
features, which can improve the transferability of the generated adversarial samples.
Extensive experiments on the ImageNet dataset show that adversarial examples
generated by BD achieve significantly higher transferability than the state-of-the-art
baselines. Besides, BD can be conveniently combined with existing black-box
attack techniques to further improve their performance.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning has achieved great success in the field of computer vision. Despite the
shining achievement, deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [1, 2]. It is
easy to deceive deep neural networks into making incorrect predictions by adding small adversarial
perturbations to natural images, which are almost imperceptible to the human visual system [3]. This
has brought significant security implications with the wide application of deep neural networks [4, 5].
Therefore, to enhance the robustness of deep neural networks, more and more researchers have begun
to focus on adversarial attacks and defenses.
Adversarial attacks can be mainly divided into two types: white-box attacks and black-box attacks. In
white-box attacks [2, 4, 6], attackers have access to all the information about the target model, such
as the model architecture and parameters, so adversarial samples can be directly produced through
gradients with a high success rate. However, white-box attacks are often difficult to implement in
reality because attackers cannot obtain all the information of the target model. Black-box attacks
can overcome this problem. Prevalent black-box attacks can be generally categorized as query-based
and transfer-based. This paper mainly focuses on transfer-based black-box attacks, where attackers
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

