Synthcity: a benchmark framework for diverse use
cases of tabular synthetic data

Zhaozhi Qian
University of Cambridge
zq224@cam.ac.uk

Rob Davis
University of Cambridge
rd473@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Accessible high-quality data is the bread and butter of machine learning research,
and the demand for data has exploded as larger and more advanced ML models are
built across different domains. Yet, real data often contain sensitive information,
subject to various biases, and are costly to acquire, which compromise their quality
and accessibility. Synthetic data have thus emerged as a complement, sometimes
even a replacement, to real data for ML training. However, the landscape of
synthetic data research has been fragmented due to the large number of data
modalities (e.g., tabular data, time series data, images, etc.) and various use cases
(e.g., privacy, fairness, data augmentation, etc.). This poses practical challenges
in comparing and selecting synthetic data generators in different problem settings.
To this end, we develop Synthcity, an open-source Python library that allows
researchers and practitioners to perform one-click benchmarking of synthetic data
generators across data modalities and use cases. In addition, Synthcity’s plug-in
style API makes it easy to incorporate additional data generators into the framework.
Beyond benchmarking, it also offers a single access point to a diverse range of
cutting-edge data generators. Through examples on tabular data generation and
data augmentation, we illustrate the general applicability of Synthcity, and the
insight one can obtain.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

19

20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

1

Introduction

Access to high quality data is the lifeblood of AI. Although AI holds strong promise in numerous highstakes domains, the lack of high-quality datasets creates a significant hurdle for the development of
AI, leading to missed opportunities. Specifically, three prominent issues contribute to this challenge:
data scarcity, privacy, and bias [Mehrabi et al., 2021, Gianfrancesco et al., 2018, Tashea, 2017,
Dastin, 2018]. As a result, the dataset may not be available, accessible, or suitable for building
performant and socially responsible AI systems [Sambasivan et al., 2021].
This challenge is especially prominent for tabular datasets, which are often curated in highly regulated
industries including healthcare, finance, manufacturing etc. Synthetic tabular data has the potential
to fuel the development of AI by unleashing the information in datasets that are small, sensitive or
biased. To achieve this, we need high-performance generative models that both faithfully capture the
data distribution and satisfy additional constraints for the desired use cases.
To date, the landscape of synthetic data research has been fragmented because the combination of
use cases (i.e. fairness, privacy, and augmentation) and data modalities (e.g. static tabular data, time
series data, etc.) creates a plethora of problem settings. In response to the large problem space, the
Submitted to the 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets
and Benchmarks. Do not distribute.

