PackQViT: Faster Sub-8-bit Vision Transformers via
Full and Packed Quantization on the Mobile
Peiyan Dong1⇤, Lei Lu1⇤ , Chao Wu1⇤ , Cheng Lyu1 , Geng Yuan2 , Hao Tang3†, Yanzhi Wang1
1 Northeastern University, 2 University of Georgia, 3 Carnegie Mellon University
{dong.pe, lu.lei1, cha.wu, yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu

Abstract
While Vision Transformers (ViTs) have undoubtedly made impressive strides in
computer vision (CV), their intricate network structures necessitate substantial
computation and memory resources. A decision-making process for CV tasks typically entails performing computations with low latency, which is a tricky problem
for ViT models. Model quantization is a widely-used technique to optimize the
hardware efficiency of deep neural networks. Full quantization under Sub-8-bit
precision, in particular, is a promising solution to reduce inference latency significantly. Unfortunately, current commodity hardware, such as CPUs and GPUs,
still struggles to efficiently execute these sub-8-bit quantized networks, as their
SIMD instructions only support a granularity of 8 bits or wider. Also, there is a
scarcity of literature that presents a full quantization paradigm for ViTs. In this
paper, we propose an activation-aware fully sub-8-bit quantization-aware training
(QAT) framework called PackQViT for efficient yet accurate ViT acceleration on
mobile devices to facilitate real-time AI-powered decision-making. Specifically, in
revisiting data activation within the ViT dataflow, two characteristics are relevant
to quantization strategy and precision: the long-tailed distribution and systematic
channel-wise outliers. In response, we employ either log2 quantization or clipping
to address the long-tailed distribution and incorporate outlier-aware training for
residual link quantization to regulate the various channel-wise outliers more consistently. Notably, due to the systematic fixed pattern, outlier-aware training approach
can predict the channel indices and regularized scales of outliers in advance, thus
avoiding the runtime data-adaptive selection during inference. Furthermore, we
employ Int-2n -Softmax, Int-LayerNorm, and Integer GELU to enable integer-only
computation flow. Finally, we develop a SIMD-based 4-bit packed multiplier to
achieve end-to-end ViT acceleration on mobile phones. Compared to prior studies
on ViT quantization using 8-bit precision, PackQViT surpasses other works by
an improved accuracy ranging from 0.4% to 17.9% for various widely used ViTs
on ImageNet dataset; under 4-bit precision, PackQViT demonstrates 0.4%⇠2.8%
higher accuracy. Compared to the baseline multiplier, our implementations on
the Realme GT Android smartphone with Snapdragon 870 SoC CPU achieve
2.6 ⇥ ⇠3.7⇥ speedup under 8-bit scenario and 3.8 ⇥ ⇠5.9⇥ speedup under 4-bit
which ensures practical real-time performance. Codes available at PackQViT.

1

Introduction

Transformers [3, 35] have experienced a resurgence in recent times, with ViTs [16] demonstrating
remarkable versatility across a broad range of domains, including computer vision (CV), e.g., image
⇤ Equal Contribution

† Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

