Towards a Unified Framework of Contrastive
Learning for Disentangled Representations

Stefan Matthes, Zhiwei Han, Hao Shen
fortiss GmbH, Munich, Germany
{matthes,han,shen}@fortiss.org

Abstract
Contrastive learning has recently emerged as a promising approach for learning
data representations that discover and disentangle the explanatory factors of the
data. Previous analyses of such approaches have largely focused on individual
contrastive losses, such as noise-contrastive estimation (NCE) and InfoNCE, and
rely on specific assumptions about the data generating process. This paper extends
the theoretical guarantees for disentanglement to a broader family of contrastive
methods, while also relaxing the assumptions about the data distribution. Specifically, we prove identifiability of the true latents for four contrastive losses studied in
this paper, without imposing common independence assumptions. The theoretical
findings are validated on several benchmark datasets. Finally, practical limitations
of these methods are also investigated.

1

Introduction

Learning to disentangle the explanatory factors of the observed data is valuable for a variety of machine learning (ML) applications, as it allows for a more compact, interpretable, and manipulable data
representation. Consequently, this can improve sampling efficiency [46] and predictive performance
[35, 11, 13] for downstream tasks, and promote fairness [33, 8]. Among the many efforts to develop
a theoretically grounded approach to learning such representations, contrastive learning (CL) has
emerged as a particularly promising technique.
Intuitively, contrastive methods learn a function that maps observations into a representation space,
such that related examples (e.g., augmentations of the same sample) are mapped close to each other
and negative pairs are mapped far apart [6, 48]. In recent years, this intuition has been refined and
extended by different theories. One of these theories is that contrastive methods (approximately)
invert the data generating process [49, 24] and thus recover the generative factors. We build upon this
line of work and extend their theoretical findings to a wider range of contrastive objectives.
In this study, we aim to develop a unified framework of statistical priors on the data generating
process to improve our understanding of CL for disentangled representations. Two important issues
we will discuss are how to deal with nonuniform marginal distributions of the latent factors and
situations when these factors are conditionally dependent to some degree. We demonstrate how this
could be accomplished with a simple modification of common contrastive objectives. We also show
that without these modifications, contrastive objectives make implicit assumptions about the data
generating process and investigate when these assumptions are justified. We empirically verify our
theoretical claims and show practical limitations of the proposed framework.
In short, the contributions of our study can be summarized as follows:
• We extend and unify theoretical guarantees of disentanglement for a family of contrastive
losses under relaxed assumptions about the data generating process.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

