Image Captioners Are Scalable Vision Learners Too

Michael Tschannen◦,† Manoj Kumar◦ Andreas Steiner◦
Xiaohua Zhai Neil Houlsby Lucas Beyer◦
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Contrastive pretraining on image-text pairs from the web is one of the most popular
large-scale pretraining strategies for vision backbones, especially in the context of
large multimodal models. At the same time, image captioning on this type of data
is commonly considered an inferior pretraining strategy. In this paper, we perform
a fair comparison of these two pretraining strategies, carefully matching training
data, compute, and model capacity. Using a standard encoder-decoder transformer,
we find that captioning alone is surprisingly effective: on classification tasks,
captioning produces vision encoders competitive with contrastively pretrained
encoders, while surpassing them on vision & language tasks. We further analyze
the effect of the model architecture and scale, as well as the pretraining data on the
representation quality, and find that captioning exhibits the same or better scaling
behavior along these axes. Overall our results show that plain image captioning is
a more powerful pretraining strategy than was previously believed.

1

Introduction

Contrastive language image pretraining (CLIP) [50] has recently become a very popular pretraining
strategy, enabling scalable vision-language pretraining on billions of image-text pairs collected from
the web. CLIP not only enables zero-shot transfer to arbitrary image classification and retrieval
tasks, but also produces high-quality vision backbones rivaling the best label-supervised ones [14].
The corresponding checkpoints [50, 9, 58] are among the most powerful publicly available vision
backbones, enjoying wide adoption in the context of multi-modal vision-language models, where
often a pretrained vision backbone is combined with a pretrained language model [1, 6, 62, 23, 17, 5].
Before contrastive image-text pretraining was popularized by CLIP [50] and ALIGN [26], a number
of works explored generative image captioning [13, 54] and n-gram prediction [27, 37] approaches
for representation learning at small scale. However, [50] showed that the zero-shot classification
performance of contrastive pretraining scales much better than captioning as a function of the number
of training examples seen (see [50, Fig. 2]). Since then, follow-up works of [50] which focus on
pretraining from scratch do usually not rely on captioning alone, but augment it with a contrastive
loss [66, 34, 40]. Those follow-up works based on generative captioning alone typically rely on
cross-modal encoders with early fusion of image and text, targeting visual question answering (VQA)
and/or captioning tasks with the full encoder-decoder system [63, 22, 10], and do not study the
properties of the vision backbone alone.
We revisit image captioning as a pretraining task for learning general vision encoders from web
image-text pairs. We compare CLIP-style models with image captioning ones consisting of a Vision
Transformer (ViT) [15] encoder and a standard Transformer decoder, henceforth simply referred to
as Captioner (Cap). In our experiments, we carefully match pretraining compute and model capacity,
and train both models for the same number of examples.
◦

Significant technical contributions. † MT led the project.
Code is available at https://github.com/google-research/big_vision.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

