A Dual-Stream Neural Network Explains the
Functional Segregation of Dorsal and Ventral Visual
Pathways in Human Brains
Minkyu Choi1 , Kuan Han1 ,
Xiaokai Wang2 , Yizhen Zhang1,3 , and Zhongming Liu1,2
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
2
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109
3
Department of Neurological Surgery , University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143
{cminkyu, kuanhan, xiaokaiw, zhyz, zmliu}@umich.edu

Abstract
The human visual system uses two parallel pathways for spatial processing and
object recognition. In contrast, computer vision systems tend to use a single feedforward pathway, rendering them less robust, adaptive, or efficient than human
vision. To bridge this gap, we developed a dual-stream vision model inspired by the
human eyes and brain. At the input level, the model samples two complementary
visual patterns to mimic how the human eyes use magnocellular and parvocellular
retinal ganglion cells to separate retinal inputs to the brain. At the backend, the
model processes the separate input patterns through two branches of convolutional
neural networks (CNN) to mimic how the human brain uses the dorsal and ventral
cortical pathways for parallel visual processing. The first branch (WhereCNN)
samples a global view to learn spatial attention and control eye movements. The
second branch (WhatCNN) samples a local view to represent the object around the
fixation. Over time, the two branches interact recurrently to build a scene representation from moving fixations. We compared this model with the human brains
processing the same movie and evaluated their functional alignment by linear transformation. The WhereCNN and WhatCNN branches were found to differentially
match the dorsal and ventral pathways of the visual cortex, respectively, primarily
due to their different learning objectives, rather than their distinctions in retinal
sampling or sensitivity to attention-driven eye movements. These model-based
results lead us to speculate that the distinct responses and representations of the
ventral and dorsal streams are more influenced by their distinct goals in visual
attention and object recognition than by their specific bias or selectivity in retinal
inputs. This dual-stream model takes a further step in brain-inspired computer
vision, enabling parallel neural networks to actively explore and understand the
visual surroundings.

1

Introduction

The human visual system comprises two parallel and segregated streams of neural networks: the
"where" stream and the "what" stream [1]. The "where" stream originates from magnocellular
retinal ganglion cells and extends along the dorsal visual cortex. The "what" stream originates from
parvocellular retinal ganglion cells and extends along the ventral visual cortex [2]. The two streams
exhibit selective responses to different aspects of visual stimuli [3]. The "where" stream is tuned to
coarse but fast information from a wide view, while the "what" stream is selective to fine but slow
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

