Reducing Blackwell and Average Optimality to
Discounted MDPs via the Blackwell Discount Factor
Julien Grand-Clément
ISOM Department
HEC Paris
grand-clement@hec.fr

Marek Petrik
Department of Computer Science
University of New Hampshire
mpetrik@cs.unh.edu

Abstract
We introduce the Blackwell discount factor for Markov Decision Processes (MDPs).
Classical objectives for MDPs include discounted, average, and Blackwell optimality. Many existing approaches to computing average-optimal policies solve
for discount-optimal policies with a discount factor close to 1, but they only work
under strong or hard-to-verify assumptions such as unichain or ergodicity. We highlight the shortcomings of the classical definition of Blackwell optimality, which
does not lead to simple algorithms for computing Blackwell-optimal policies and
overlooks the pathological behaviors of optimal value functions with respect to the
discount factors. To resolve this issue, we show that when the discount factor is
larger than the Blackwell discount factor γbw , all discount-optimal policies become
Blackwell- and average-optimal, and we derive a general upper bound on γbw . Our
upper bound on γbw , parametrized by the bit-size of the rewards and transition
probabilities of the MDP instance, provides the first reduction from average and
Blackwell optimality to discounted optimality, without any assumptions, along with
new polynomial-time algorithms. Our work brings new ideas from polynomials
and algebraic numbers to the analysis of MDPs. Our results also apply to robust
MDPs, enabling the first algorithms to compute robust Blackwell-optimal policies.

1

Introduction

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) provide a widely-used framework for modeling sequential
decision-making problems (Puterman, 2014). In a (finite) MDP, the decision maker repeatedly
interacts with an environment characterized by a finite set of states and a finite set of available
actions. The decision maker follows a policy that prescribes an action at a state at every period. An
instantaneous reward is obtained at every period, depending on the current state-action pair, and the
system transitions to the next state at the next period. MDPs provide the underlying model for the
applications of reinforcement learning (RL), ranging from healthcare (Gottesman et al., 2019) to
game solving (Mnih et al., 2013) and finance (Deng et al., 2016).
There are several optimality criteria that measure a decision maker’s performance in an MDP. In
discounted optimality, the decision maker optimizes the discounted return, defined as the sum of the
instantaneous rewards over the infinite horizon, where future rewards are discounted with a discount
factor γ ∈ [0, 1). In average optimality, the decision maker optimizes the average return, defined
as the average of the instantaneous rewards obtained over the infinite horizon. The average return
ignores any return gathered in finite time, i.e., it does not reflect the transient performance of a policy
and it only focuses on the steady-state behavior. The most selective optimality criterion in MDPs is
Blackwell optimality (Puterman, 2014). A policy is Blackwell-optimal if it optimizes the discounted
return simultaneously for all discount factors sufficiently close to 1. Since a discount factor close
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

