Implicit Convolutional Kernels for Steerable CNNs
Maksim Zhdanov⇤
AMLab, University of Amsterdam
m.zhdanov@uva.nl

Nico Hoffmann
Helmholtz-Zentrum
Dresden-Rossendorf

Gabriele Cesa
Qualcomm AI Research†
AMLab, University of Amsterdam

Abstract
Steerable convolutional neural networks (CNNs) provide a general framework
for building neural networks equivariant to translations and transformations of an
origin-preserving group G, such as reflections and rotations. They rely on standard
convolutions with G-steerable kernels obtained by analytically solving the groupspecific equivariance constraint imposed onto the kernel space. As the solution is
tailored to a particular group G, implementing a kernel basis does not generalize to
other symmetry transformations, complicating the development of general group
equivariant models. We propose using implicit neural representation via multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) to parameterize G-steerable kernels. The resulting
framework offers a simple and flexible way to implement Steerable CNNs and
generalizes to any group G for which a G-equivariant MLP can be built. We prove
the effectiveness of our method on multiple tasks, including N-body simulations,
point cloud classification and molecular property prediction.

1

Introduction

Equivariant deep learning is a powerful tool for high-dimensional problems with known data domain
symmetry. By incorporating this knowledge as inductive biases into neural networks, the hypothesis
class of functions can be significantly restricted, leading to improved data efficiency and generalization
performance [6]. Convolutional neural networks [28] (CNNs) are a prominent example as they are
equivariant to translations. Group-equivariant CNNs [9] (G-CNNs) generalize CNNs to exploit
a larger number of symmetries via group convolutions, making them equivariant to the desired
symmetry group, such as the Euclidean group E(n) that encompasses translations, rotations, and
reflections in n-dimensional Euclidean space. In physics and chemistry, many important problems,
such as molecular modelling or point clouds, rely on the Euclidean group. Objects defined in physical
space have properties that are invariant or equivariant to Euclidean transformations, and respecting
this underlying symmetry is often desired for the model to perform as expected.
Neural networks can be parameterized in various ways to incorporate equivariance to the Euclidean
group. One option is to use a message-passing neural network as a backbone and compute/update
messages equivariantly via convolutions. This approach generalizes well to point clouds and graphs
and offers the high expressivity of graph neural networks. Equivariant convolutional operators can be
further categorized as regular [3, 9, 14, 26] or steerable group convolutions [10, 11, 52]. The latter
recently proved to be especially suitable for incorporating physical and geometric quantities into a
model [5]. The key idea behind Steerable CNNs is using standard convolution - which guarantees
translation equivariance - with G-steerable kernels that ensure commutativity with the transformations
of another group G, such as rotations. The commutation requirement imposes a constraint onto
the kernel space that must be solved analytically for each group G. This, in turn, does not allow
generalizing a convolution operator tailored to a specific group to other symmetry transformations. In
⇤
†

Work done while at Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf.
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

