LVM-Med: Learning Large-Scale Self-Supervised
Vision Models for Medical Imaging via Second-order
Graph Matching

Duy M. H. Nguyen∗ 1,2,3 , Hoang Nguyen3 , Nghiem T. Diep3 , Tan N. Pham3,4 , Tri Cao3 ,
Binh T. Nguyen4 , Paul Swoboda5 , Nhat Ho6 , Shadi Albarqouni7,8 , Pengtao Xie9,10 ,
Daniel Sonntag† 3,11 , Mathias Niepert∗ † 1,2
1

University of Stuttgart, 2 IMPRS for Intelligent Systems
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, 4 University of Science - VNUHCM,
5
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 6 University of Texas at Austin 7 Helmholtz Munich,
8
University Hospital Bonn, 9 UC San Diego, 10 MBZUAI, 11 Oldenburg University.
3

Abstract
Obtaining large pre-trained models that can be fine-tuned to new tasks with limited
annotated samples has remained an open challenge for medical imaging data. While
pre-trained deep networks on ImageNet and vision-language foundation models
trained on web-scale data are prevailing approaches, their effectiveness on medical
tasks is limited due to the significant domain shift between natural and medical images. To bridge this gap, we introduce LVM-Med, the first family of deep networks
trained on large-scale medical datasets. We have collected approximately 1.3 million in medical images from 55 publicly available datasets, covering a large number
of organs and modalities such as CT, MRI, X-ray, and Ultrasound. We benchmark
several state-of-the-art self-supervised algorithms on this dataset and propose a
novel self-supervised contrastive learning algorithm using a graph matching formulation. The proposed approach makes three contributions: (i) it integrates prior
pair-wise image similarity metrics based on local and global information; (ii) it
captures the structural constraints of feature embeddings through a loss function
constructed via a combinatorial graph-matching objective; and (iii) it can be trained
efficiently end-to-end using modern gradient-estimation techniques for black-box
solvers. We thoroughly evaluate the proposed LVM-Med on 15 downstream medical tasks ranging from segmentation and classification to object detection, and
both for the in and out-of-distribution settings. LVM-Med empirically outperforms
a number of state-of-the-art supervised, self-supervised, and foundation models.
For challenging tasks such as Brain Tumor Classification or Diabetic Retinopathy
Grading, LVM-Med improves previous vision-language models trained on 1 billion
masks by 6-7% while using only a ResNet-50. We release pre-trained models at
this link https://github.com/duyhominhnguyen/LVM-Med.

1

Introduction

Constructing large-scale annotated medical image datasets for training deep networks is challenging
due to data acquisition complexities, high annotation costs, and privacy concerns [1, 2]. Visionlanguage pretraining has emerged as a promising approach for developing foundational models that
support various AI tasks. Methods such as CLIP [3], Align [4], and Flava [5] propose a unified model
trained on large-scale image-text data, showing exceptional capabilities and performance across
∗

Corresponding authors, † Co-Senior authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023), New Orleans.

