Block-Coordinate Methods and Restarting for Solving
Extensive-Form Games∗
Jelena Diakonikolas
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
jelena@cs.wisc.edu

Darshan Chakrabarti
IEOR Department
Columbia University
New York, NY 10025
dc3595@columbia.edu

Christian Kroer
IEOR Department
Columbia University
New York, NY 10025
ck2945@columbia.edu

Abstract
Coordinate descent methods are popular in machine learning and optimization for
their simple sparse updates and excellent practical performance. In the context
of large-scale sequential game solving, these same properties would be attractive,
but until now no such methods were known, because the strategy spaces do not
satisfy the typical separable block structure exploited by such methods. We present
the first cyclic coordinate-descent-like method for the polytope of sequence-form
strategies, which form the strategy spaces for the players in an extensive-form
game (EFG). Our method exploits the recursive structure of the proximal update
induced by what are known as dilated regularizers, in order to allow for a pseudo
block-wise update. We show that our method enjoys a O(1/T ) convergence rate to
a two-player zero-sum Nash equilibrium, while avoiding the worst-case polynomial
scaling with the number of blocks common to cyclic methods. We empirically show
that our algorithm usually performs better than other state-of-the-art first-order
methods (i.e., mirror prox), and occasionally can even beat CFR+ , a state-ofthe-art algorithm for numerical equilibrium computation in zero-sum EFGs. We
then introduce a restarting heuristic for EFG solving. We show empirically that
restarting can lead to speedups, sometimes huge, both for our cyclic method, as
well as for existing methods such as mirror prox and predictive CFR+ .

1

Introduction

Extensive-form games (EFGs) are a broad class of game-theoretic models which are played on a
tree. They can compactly model both simultaneous and sequential moves, private and/or imperfect
information, and stochasticity. Equilibrium computation for a two-player zero-sum EFG can be
formulated as the following bilinear saddle-point problem (BSPP)
min max ⟨Mx, y⟩ .

x∈X y∈Y

(PD)

Here, the set of strategies X , Y for the x and y players are convex polytopes known as sequence-form
polytopes [44]. The (PD) formulation lends itself to first-order methods (FOMs) [14, 25], linear
∗

Authors are ordered alphabetically.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

