Encoding Human Behavior in
Information Design through Deep Learning

Guanghui Yu
Washington University in St. Louis
guanghuiyu@wustl.edu

Wei Tang
Columbia University
wt2359@columbia.edu

Saumik Narayanan
Washington University in St. Louis
saumik@wustl.edu

Chien-Ju Ho
Washington University in St. Louis
chienju.ho@wustl.edu

Abstract
We initiate the study of behavioral information design through deep learning. In
information design, a sender aims to persuade a receiver to take certain actions
by strategically revealing information. We address scenarios in which the receiver
might exhibit different behavior patterns other than the standard Bayesian rational
assumption. We propose HAIDNet, a neural-network-based optimization framework for information design that can adapt to multiple representations of human
behavior. Through extensive simulation, we show that HAIDNet can not only
recover information policies that are near-optimal compared with known analytical
solutions, but also can extend to designing information policies for settings that
are computationally challenging (e.g., when there are multiple receivers) or for
settings where there are no known solutions in general (e.g., when the receiver
behavior does not follow the Bayesian rational assumption). We also conduct
real-world human-subject experiments and demonstrate that our framework can
capture human behavior from data and lead to more effective information policy
for real-world human receivers.

1

Introduction

The problem of information design, where a player with an information advantage (the sender) can
strategically reveal information to influence another player (the receiver) to take certain actions, is
ubiquitous in everyday applications. For example, online retailers can highlight a subset of product
features to influence buyers to make purchases [32, 46]. Recommendation systems might selectively
display other users’ ratings to persuade users to follow recommendations [75]. Politicians can
influence voters’ decisions by designing different policy experiments [1]. There have been various
research efforts from economics [51, 62, 29, 30, 44], machine learning and artificial intelligence [79,
12, 2, 33, 6, 25], and general computer science [23, 18] devoted to the study of information design.
Among the growing literature on information design, the model of Bayesian persuasion proposed by
Kamenica and Gentzkow [39] is one of the most prominent, and has inspired a rich body of studies.
While Bayesian persuasion offers an elegant framework for formulating the information design
problem, it has two limitations. First, the receiver is assumed to be Bayesian rational. This means
that the receiver can form a posterior in a Bayesian manner and chooses the action that maximizes
his expected utility. 1 However, as consistently observed in empirical studies [53, 37], humans often
1

We use she/he to denote the sender/receiver, respectively.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

