SiT Dataset: Socially Interactive Pedestrian Trajectory
Dataset for Social Navigation Robots

Jongwook Bae∗ Jungho Kim∗ Junyong Yun∗ Changwon Kang∗ Jeongseon Choi
Chanhyeok Kim Junho Lee Jungwook Choi Jun Won Choi†
Hanyang University
{jwbae, junghokim, jyyun, changwonkang, jschoi, chkim, jhlee}@spa.hanyang.ac.kr
{choij, junwchoi}@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
To ensure secure and dependable mobility in environments shared by humans
and robots, social navigation robots should possess the capability to accurately
perceive and predict the trajectories of nearby pedestrians. In this paper, we
present a novel dataset of pedestrian trajectories, referred to as Social Interactive
Pedestrian Trajectory (SiT) dataset, which can be used to train pedestrian detection,
tracking, and trajectory prediction models needed to design social navigation robots.
Our dataset includes sequential raw data captured by two 3D LiDARs and five
cameras covering a 360-degree view, two inertial measurement units (IMUs), and
real-time kinematic positioning (RTK), as well as annotations including 2D &
3D boxes, object classes, and object IDs. Thus far, various human trajectory
datasets have been introduced to support the development of pedestrian motion
forecasting models. Our SiT dataset differs from these datasets in the following
three respects. First, whereas the pedestrian trajectory data in other datasets were
obtained from static scenes, our data was collected while the robot navigated in
a crowded environment, capturing human-robot interactive scenarios in motion.
Second, unlike many autonomous driving datasets where pedestrians are usually
at a distance from vehicles and found on pedestrian paths, our dataset offers a
distinctive view of navigation robots interacting closely with humans in crowded
settings. Third, our dataset has been carefully organized to facilitate the training
and evaluation of end-to-end prediction models encompassing 3D detection, 3D
multi-object tracking, and trajectory prediction. This design allows for an end-toend unified modular approach across different tasks. We introduce a comprehensive
benchmark for assessing models across all aforementioned tasks and present the
performance of multiple baseline models as part of our evaluation. Our dataset
provides a strong foundation for future research in pedestrian trajectory prediction,
which could expedite the development of safe and agile social navigation robots.
The SiT dataset, development kit, and trained models are publicly available at:
https://spalaboratory.github.io/SiT/

1

Introduction

With advances in technology in a variety of fields, social navigation robots are emerging as versatile
vehicles that can provide a variety of services, including last-mile delivery, street cleaning, manufacturing, and security patrols. These mobile robots need to move safely and smoothly while interacting
with humans in shared ways without collisions. A popular method of collision avoidance is to create
an occupancy grid map and represent the location of obstacles on the map. In complex and crowded
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

