Analyzing Vision Transformers for Image
Classification in Class Embedding Space

Martina G. Vilas
Goethe University Frankfurt
Ernst Strüngmann Institute

Timothy Schaumlöffel
Goethe University Frankfurt
The Hessian Center for AI

Gemma Roig
Goethe University Frankfurt
The Hessian Center for AI

Abstract
Despite the growing use of transformer models in computer vision, a mechanistic
understanding of these networks is still needed. This work introduces a method to
reverse-engineer Vision Transformers trained to solve image classification tasks.
Inspired by previous research in NLP, we demonstrate how the inner representations
at any level of the hierarchy can be projected onto the learned class embedding
space to uncover how these networks build categorical representations for their predictions. We use our framework to show how image tokens develop class-specific
representations that depend on attention mechanisms and contextual information,
and give insights on how self-attention and MLP layers differentially contribute to
this categorical composition. We additionally demonstrate that this method (1) can
be used to determine the parts of an image that would be important for detecting
the class of interest, and (2) exhibits significant advantages over traditional linear
probing approaches. Taken together, our results position our proposed framework
as a powerful tool for mechanistic interpretability and explainability research.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based deep neural networks have become one of the most popular architectures in
machine learning due to their remarkable performance and adaptability to multiple domains. Consequently, recent work has focused on reverse-engineering the inner mechanisms of these networks for
better understanding and control of their predictions (e.g. [2, 7, 11, 12, 18]). Of these, a series of
studies in the field of NLP [2, 7, 8, 11, 12] have shed light on the predictive mechanisms of large
language transformers by projecting the hidden states and parameters of intermediate processing
layers onto a vocabulary space using the pre-trained output embedding matrix. This approach has
enabled the analysis in human-understandable terms of how next-word predictions are built internally,
introducing a simple and efficient method for the mechanistic interpretability of NLP transformers.
So far, to the best of our knowledge, no work has shown that a similar approach can be applied to
reverse engineer Vision Transformers (ViTs) for image classification. We thus introduce a method to
characterize the categorical building processes of these networks by projecting their intermediate
representations and parameter matrices onto the class embedding space. Our framework quantifies
how the inner representations increasingly align with the class prototype learned by the model
(encoded by the class projection matrix), and uncovers the factors and mechanisms behind this
alignment.
In this work, we use our method to show that (1) image tokens increasingly align to class prototype
representations, from early stages of the model; (2) factors such as attention mechanisms and
contextual information have a role in this alignment; and (3) the categorical building process partly
relies on key-value memory pair mechanisms differentially imparted by the self-attention and MLP
layers. In addition, we discuss how to use this framework to identify the parts of an image that would
be the most informative for building a class representation. Finally, we show that our method can
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

