Unified lower bounds for interactive high-dimensional
estimation under information constraints
Jayadev Acharya
Cornell University
acharya@cornell.edu

Clément L. Canonne
University of Sydney
clement.canonne@sydney.edu.au

Ziteng Sun
Google Research, New York
zitengsun@google.com

Himanshu Tyagi
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
htyagi@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
We consider distributed parameter estimation using interactive protocols subject
to local information constraints such as bandwidth limitations, local differential
privacy, and restricted measurements. We provide a unified framework enabling
us to derive a variety of (tight) minimax lower bounds for different parametric
families of distributions, both continuous and discrete, under any `p loss. Our lower
bound framework is versatile and yields “plug-and-play” bounds that are widely
applicable to a large range of estimation problems. In particular, our approach
recovers bounds obtained using data processing inequalities and Cramér–Rao
bounds, two other alternative approaches for proving lower bounds in our setting
of interest. Further, for the families considered, we complement our lower bounds
with matching upper bounds.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of parameter estimation under local information constraints, where the
estimation algorithm has access to only limited information about each sample. These constraints
can be of various types, including communication constraints, where each sample must be described
using a few (e.g., constant number of) bits; (local) privacy constraints, where each sample is obtained
from a different user and the users seek to reveal as little as possible about their specific data; as
well as many others, e.g., noisy communication channels, or limited types of data access such as
linear measurements. Such problems have received significant attention in recent years, motivated by
applications such as data analytics in distributed systems and federated learning.
Our main focus is on information-theoretic lower bounds for the minimax error rates (or, equivalently,
the sample complexity) of these problems. Several recent works have provided bounds that apply to
specific constraints or work for specific parametric estimation problems, sometimes without allowing
for interactive protocols. Indeed, handling interactive protocols is technically challenging, and several
results in prior work exhibit flaws in their analysis. In particular, even the most basic Gaussian mean
estimation problem using interactive communication remains, surprisingly, open.
We present general, “plug-and-play” lower bounds for parametric estimation under information
constraints that can be used for any local information constraint and allows for interactive protocols.
Our abstract bound requires very simple (and natural) assumptions to hold for the underlying
parametric family; in particular, we do not require technical “regularity” conditions that are common
in asymptotic statistics.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

