Provably Efficient Offline Goal-Conditioned
Reinforcement Learning with General Function
Approximation and Single-Policy Concentrability

Hanlin Zhu
EECS, UC Berkeley; Meta AI
hanlinzhu@berkeley.edu

Amy Zhang
ECE, UT Austin; Meta AI
amy.zhang@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) refers to learning generalpurpose skills that aim to reach diverse goals. In particular, offline GCRL only
requires purely pre-collected datasets to perform training tasks without additional
interactions with the environment. Although offline GCRL has become increasingly prevalent and many previous works have demonstrated its empirical success,
the theoretical understanding of efficient offline GCRL algorithms is not well
established, especially when the state space is huge and the offline dataset only
covers the policy we aim to learn. In this paper, we provide a rigorous theoretical
analysis of an existing empirically successful offline GCRL algorithm. We prove
that under slight modification, this algorithm enjoys an Õ(poly(1/ϵ)) sample complexity (where ϵ is the desired suboptimality of the learned policy) with general
function approximation thanks to the property of (semi-)strong convexity of the
objective functions. We only require nearly minimal assumptions on the dataset
(single-policy concentrability) and the function class (realizability). Moreover, this
algorithm consists of two uninterleaved optimization steps, which we refer to as
V -learning and policy learning, and is computationally stable since it does not
involve minimax optimization. We also empirically validate our theory by showing
that the modified algorithm outperforms the previous algorithm in various realworld environments. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first algorithm that
is both provably efficient with general function approximation and single-policy
concentrability, and empirically successful without requiring solving minimax
optimization problems.

1

Introduction

Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) aims to design agents that are able to learn generalpurpose skills to reach diverse goals [Kaelbling, 1993, Schaul et al., 2015, Plappert et al., 2018].
In particular, offline GCRL learns goal-reaching policies by purely pre-collected data without any
further interactions with the environment [Chebotar et al., 2021, Yang et al., 2022]. Since such
interaction can be expensive or even unsafe in practice, offline GCRL is increasingly popular as a
way to learn generalist agents in real-world environments [Lange et al., 2012, Levine et al., 2020].
Although offline GCRL is promising and achieves great success in various practical scenarios [Lynch
et al., 2020, Chebotar et al., 2021, Yang et al., 2022, Ma et al., 2022b,c], designing practical algorithms
that are provably efficient still remains an open question. On the practical side, an ideal algorithm
should be scalable to huge (or infinite) state spaces and only require minimal dataset coverage
assumptions. Moreover, the algorithm should be computationally efficient and stable (e.g., only
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

