EHRSHOT: An EHR Benchmark for Few-Shot
Evaluation of Foundation Models
Michael Wornow⇤
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
mwornow@stanford.edu

Rahul Thapa⇤
Center for Biomedical Informatics Research
Stanford University
rthapa84@stanford.edu

Ethan Steinberg
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
ethan@stanford.edu

Jason A. Fries†
Center for Biomedical Informatics Research
Stanford University
jfries@stanford.edu

Nigam H. Shah†
Center for Biomedical Informatics Research
Clinical Excellence Research Center
Stanford University
Technology and Digital Solutions
Stanford Healthcare
nigam@stanford.edu

Abstract
While the general machine learning (ML) community has benefited from public
datasets, tasks, and models, the progress of ML in healthcare has been hampered
by a lack of such shared assets. The success of foundation models creates new
challenges for healthcare ML by requiring access to shared pretrained models to
validate performance benefits. We help address these challenges through three
contributions. First, we publish a new dataset, EHRSHOT, which contains deidentified structured data from the electronic health records (EHRs) of 6,739
patients from Stanford Medicine. Unlike MIMIC-III/IV and other popular EHR
datasets, EHRSHOT is longitudinal and not restricted to ICU/ED patients. Second,
we publish the weights of CLMBR-T-base, a 141M parameter clinical foundation
model pretrained on the structured EHR data of 2.57M patients. We are one of
the first to fully release such a model for coded EHR data; in contrast, most prior
models released for clinical data (e.g. GatorTron, ClinicalBERT) only work with
unstructured text and cannot process the rich, structured data within an EHR. We
provide an end-to-end pipeline for the community to validate and build upon its
performance. Third, we define 15 few-shot clinical prediction tasks, enabling
evaluation of foundation models on benefits such as sample efficiency and task
adaptation. Our model and dataset are available via a research data use agreement
from our website. Code to reproduce our results is available here.

⇤
†

Equal contribution
Equal senior authorship

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

