Retaining Beneficial Information from Detrimental
Data for Deep Neural Network Repair

Long-Kai Huang1 , Peilin Zhao1 , Junzhou Huang2 , Sinno Jialin Pan3
1
Tencent AI Lab
2
The University of Texas at Arlington
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
hlongkai@gmail.com, masonzhao@tencent.com, jzhuang@uta.edu, sinnopan@cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
The performance of deep learning models heavily relies on the quality of the training data. Inadequacies in the training data, such as corrupt input or noisy labels,
can lead to the failure of model generalization. Recent studies propose repairing
the model by identifying the training samples that contribute to the failure and
removing their influence from the model. However, it is important to note that the
identified data may contain both beneficial and detrimental information. Simply
erasing the information of the identified data from the model can have a negative
impact on its performance, especially when accurate data is mistakenly identified
as detrimental and removed. To overcome this challenge, we propose a novel approach that leverages the knowledge obtained from a retained clean set. Concretely,
Our method first identifies harmful data by utilizing the clean set, then separates the
beneficial and detrimental information within the identified data. Finally, we utilize
the extracted beneficial information to enhance the model’s performance. Through
empirical evaluations, we demonstrate that our method outperforms baseline approaches in both identifying harmful data and rectifying model failures. Particularly
in scenarios where identification is challenging and a significant amount of benign
data is involved, our method improves performance while the baselines deteriorate
due to the erroneous removal of beneficial information.

1

Introduction

The effectiveness of deep neural networks (DNNs) is greatly influenced by the quantity and quality
of the training data from which they are trained. However, obtaining a large amount of high-quality
data can be costly. An alternative approach is to acquire training data from sources such as the
Web [2], external data suppliers, or crowdsourcing [14]. Although this allows for the collection
of a substantial volume of data, the quality of the acquired data cannot be guaranteed. Various
issues can arise, including annotation errors [3], data corruption [13], or even deliberate adversarial
manipulation [39] by malicious providers. Consequently, a portion of the collected data may have a
different distribution than the majority of the data [21]. In this work, we refer to these two categories
of data as "detrimental" and "target" data, respectively. The presence of detrimental data in the
training set can significantly hinder the performance of a DNN [1]. While recent research has
proposed methods to mitigate specific issues like label noise [31, 5, 11], adversarial attacks [28, 39],
or data shifts during model training [21, 32], it remains challenging to train a model that generalizes
well to target data when the specific cause of the detrimental data is unknown.
It is important to note that in practical scenarios, a DNN model must undergo a quality assurance test
before it can be deployed. During this evaluation process, the performance of the trained DNN model
is usually assessed using a small reserved set of data known as clean data. This clean data is expected
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

