Generalized Information-theoretic Multi-view
Clustering

Weitian Huang
School of Computer Science and Engineering
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, 510006, China

Sirui Yang
School of Computer Science and Engineering
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, 510006, China

Hongmin Cai∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, 510006, China

Abstract
In an era of more diverse data modalities, multi-view clustering has become a
fundamental tool for comprehensive data analysis and exploration. However, existing multi-view unsupervised learning methods often rely on strict assumptions on
semantic consistency among samples. In this paper, we reformulate the multi-view
clustering problem from an information-theoretic perspective and propose a general theoretical model. In particular, we define three desiderata under multi-view
unsupervised learning in terms of mutual information, namely, comprehensiveness
, concentration, and cross-diversity. The multi-view variational lower bound is
then obtained by approximating the samples’ high-dimensional mutual information. The Kullback–Leibler divergence is utilized to deduce sample assignments.
Ultimately the information-based multi-view clustering model leverages deep neural networks and Stochastic Gradient Variational Bayes to achieve representation
learning and clustering simultaneously. Extensive experiments on both synthetic
and real datasets with wide types demonstrate that the proposed method exhibits
more stable and superior clustering performance than state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

Multiple views of data are often collected by different measurement methods to represent various
properties of objects in many practical applications. For example, for images or videos, various visual
features such as HOG [1], SIFT [2], and LBP [3] can be acquired by traditional filters and form a
kind of multi-view data. These features can be collected from different domains or generated from
various sensors. In general, different views can complement each other due to limitations or biases in
measurement methods that would result in insufficient information contained in individual views [4].
The ever-increasing network activity brings massive unlabeled data, which makes clustering, the
traditional task of machine learning, one of the hot topics in unsupervised learning. Importantly,
in clustering task, learning the comprehensive and discriminative representations is crucial for
partitioning the samples. Compared to single-view clustering, multi-view clustering (MVC) is widely
studied as it exploits complementary information between different views to improve the ultimate
performance. Most multi-view clustering algorithms learn the consistent representation among
multiple views to realize clustering. The benchmark techniques include view co-regularization [5],
∗

Hongmin Cai is the Corresponding Author, whose E-mail is: hmcai@scut.edu.cn.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

