Bayesian Metric Learning for Uncertainty
Quantification in Image Retrieval

Frederik Warburg∗
Technical University of Denmark
frwa@dtu.dk

Marco Miani∗
Technical University of Denmark
mmia@dtu.dk

Silas Brack
Technical University of Denmark
silasbrack@gmail.com

Søren Hauberg
Technical University of Denmark
sohau@dtu.dk

Abstract
We propose a Bayesian encoder for metric learning. Rather than relying on neural
amortization as done in prior works, we learn a distribution over the network
weights with the Laplace Approximation. We first prove that the contrastive loss is
a negative log-likelihood on the spherical space. We propose three methods that ensure a positive definite covariance matrix. Lastly, we present a novel decomposition
of the Generalized Gauss-Newton approximation. Empirically, we show that our
Laplacian Metric Learner (LAM) yields well-calibrated uncertainties, reliably detects out-of-distribution examples, and has state-of-the-art predictive performance.

We present the Laplacian Metric Learner
(LAM) to estimate reliable uncertainties
of image embeddings as demonstrated in
Fig. 1. We learn a distribution over the
network weights (weight posterior) from
∗

Uncertainty

Metric learning seeks data representations
where similar observations are near and dissimilar ones are far. This elegantly allows
for building retrieval systems with simple
nearest-neighbor search. Such systems easily cope with a large number of classes, and
new classes can organically be added without retraining. While these retrieval systems show impressive performance, they
quickly, and with no raised alarms, deteriorate with out-of-distribution data [38].
In particular, in safety-critical applications,
the lack of uncertainty estimation is a concern as retrieval errors may propagate unnoticed through the system, resulting in erroneous and possibly dangerous decisions.

Uncertainty

Introduction

Uncertainty

1

1.0
0.5

PFE
LAM

0.0

1.0
0.5
0.0

1.0
0.5
0.0

Figure 1: Reliable stochastic embeddings. LAM
(ours) estimates reliable uncertainties of latent image
embeddings that reflect the amount of blur, noise, or
occlusion in the input image.

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

