Offline Imitation Learning with Variational
Counterfactual Reasoning

Zexu Sun§ , Bowei He† , Jinxin Liu‡ , Xu Chen§∗, Chen Ma† , Shuai Zhang¶
§
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
†
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
‡
School of Engineering, Westlake University ¶ DiDi Chuxing
{sunzexu21, xu.chen}@ruc.edu.cn, boweihe2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
liujinxin@westlake.edu.cn, chenma@cityu.edu.hk, shuai.zhang@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
In offline imitation learning (IL), an agent aims to learn an optimal expert behavior
policy without additional online environment interactions. However, in many
real-world scenarios, such as robotics manipulation, the offline dataset is collected
from suboptimal behaviors without rewards. Due to the scarce expert data, the
agents usually suffer from simply memorizing poor trajectories and are vulnerable
to the variations in the environments, lacking the capability of generalizing to new
environments. To automatically generate high-quality expert data and improve the
generalization ability of the agent, we propose a framework named Offline Imitation
Learning with Counterfactual data Augmentation (OILCA) by doing counterfactual
inference. In particular, we leverage identifiable variational autoencoder to generate
counterfactual samples for expert data augmentation. We theoretically analyze
the influence of the generated expert data and the improvement of generalization.
Moreover, we conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate that our approach
significantly outperforms various baselines on both D EEP M IND C ONTROL S UITE
benchmark for in-distribution performance and C AUSALW ORLD benchmark for
out-of-distribution generalization.

1

Introduction

By utilizing the pre-collected expert data, imitation learning (IL) allows us to circumvent the difficulty
in designing proper rewards for decision-making tasks and learning an expert policy. Theoretically,
as long as adequate expert data are accessible, we can easily learn an imitator policy that maintains
a sufficient capacity to approximate the expert behaviors [25, 30, 29, 31]. However, in practice,
several challenging issues hinder its applicability to practical tasks. In particular, expert data are
often limited, and due to the typical requisite for online interaction with the environment, performing
such online IL may be costly or unsafe in real-world scenarios such as self-driving or industrial
robotics [11, 34, 37]. Alternatively, in such settings, we might instead have access to large amounts of
pre-collected unlabeled data, which are of unknown quality and may consist of both good-performing
and poor-performing trajectories. For example, in self-driving tasks, a number of human driving
behaviors may be available; in industrial robotics domains, one may have access to large amounts of
robot data. The question then arises: can we perform offline IL with only limited expert data and the
previously collected unlabeled data, thus relaxing the costly online IL requirements?
Traditional behavior cloning (BC) [5] directly mimics historical behaviors logged in offline data
(both expert data and unlabeled data) via supervised learning. However, in our above setting, BC
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

