CAP: Correlation-Aware Pruning
for Highly-Accurate Sparse Vision Models

Denis Kuznedelev
Skoltech & Yandex
Denis.Kuznedelev@skoltech.ru
Elias Frantar
IST Austria
elias.frantar@ist.ac.at

Eldar Kurtic
IST Austria
eldar.kurtic@ist.ac.at
Dan Alistarh
IST Austria & Neural Magic
dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at

Abstract
Driven by significant improvements in architectural design and training pipelines,
computer vision has recently experienced dramatic progress in terms of accuracy
on classic benchmarks such as ImageNet. These highly-accurate models are
challenging to deploy, as they appear harder to compress using standard techniques
such as pruning. We address this issue by introducing the Correlation Aware
Pruner (CAP), a new unstructured pruning framework which significantly pushes
the compressibility limits for state-of-the-art architectures. Our method is based on
two technical advancements: a new theoretically-justified pruner, which can handle
complex weight correlations accurately and efficiently during the pruning process
itself, and an efficient finetuning procedure for post-compression recovery. We
validate our approach via extensive experiments on several modern vision models
such as Vision Transformers (ViT), modern CNNs, and ViT-CNN hybrids, showing
for the first time that these can be pruned to high sparsity levels (e.g. ≥ 75%) with
low impact on accuracy (≤ 1% relative drop). Our approach is also compatible
with structured pruning and quantization, and can lead to practical speedups of 1.5
to 2.4x without accuracy loss. To further showcase CAP’s accuracy and scalability,
we use it to show for the first time that extremely-accurate large vision models,
trained via self-supervised techniques, can also be pruned to moderate sparsities,
with negligible accuracy loss1 .

1

Introduction

Computer vision has seen impressive progress recently via a new generation of architectures motivated
by the Vision Transformer (ViT) approach [9, 43] and its extensions, e.g. [1, 28, 46], accompanied by
more advanced data augmentation and training approaches [43, 48]. Next-generation vision models
such as ViT [9, 43] and ConvNext [49, 29] achieve breakthrough performance across vision tasks,
despite encoding fewer inductive biases. This comes at the cost of very large computational and
parameter budgets, both for training and deployment. Thus, there is a clear need to reduce these costs
via compression, enabling deployment in resource-constrained settings.
Yet, the general consensus from the literature is that next-generation models are harder to compress
while preserving accuracy, relative to their classic convolutional counterparts [6, 40, 35, 20]. For
example, if current techniques can compress the classic ResNet50 model [18] to 80-90% unstructured
sparsity with negligible loss of accuracy [33, 44], the best currently-known results for similarlyaccurate ViT models only reach at most 50% sparsity while maintaining dense accuracy [6]. Our
investigation of this phenomenon, detailed in the paper, shows that this occurs for two reasons:
1

The code is available at https://github.com/IST-DASLab/CAP

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

