Is RLHF More Difficult than Standard RL?
A Theoretical Perspective

Yuanhao Wang, Qinghua Liu, Chi Jin
Princeton University
{yuanhao,qinghual,chij}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) learns from preference
signals, while standard Reinforcement Learning (RL) directly learns from reward
signals. Preferences arguably contain less information than rewards, which makes
preference-based RL seemingly more difficult. This paper theoretically proves that,
for a wide range of preference models, we can solve preference-based RL directly
using existing algorithms and techniques for reward-based RL, with small or no
extra costs. Specifically, (1) for preferences that are drawn from reward-based
probabilistic models, we reduce the problem to robust reward-based RL that can
tolerate small errors in rewards; (2) for general arbitrary preferences where the
objective is to find the von Neumann winner, we reduce the problem to multiagent
reward-based RL which finds Nash equilibria for factored Markov games under a
restricted set of policies. The latter case can be further reduced to adversarial MDP
when preferences only depend on the final state. We instantiate all reward-based RL
subroutines by concrete provable algorithms, and apply our theory to a large class
of models including tabular MDPs and MDPs with generic function approximation.
We further provide guarantees when K-wise comparisons are available.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a control-theoretic problem in which agents take a sequence of
actions, receive reward feedback from the environment, and aim to find good policies that maximize
the cumulative rewards. The reward labels can be objective measures of success (winning in a game
of Go [Silver et al., 2017]) or more often hand-designed measures of progress (gaining gold in
DOTA2 [Berner et al., 2019]). The empirical success of RL in various domains [Mnih et al., 2013,
Vinyals et al., 2019, Todorov et al., 2012] crucially relies on the availability and quality of reward
signals. However, this also presents a limitation for applying standard reinforcement learning when
designing a good reward function is difficult.
An important approach that addresses this challenge is reinforcement learning from Human feedback
(RLHF), where RL agents learn from preference feedback provided by humans. Preference feedback
is arguably more intuitive to human users, more aligned with human values and easier to solicit
in applications such as recommendation systems and image generation [Pereira et al., 2019, Lee
et al., 2023]. Empirically, RLHF is a key ingredient empowering the successes in tasks ranging from
robotics [Jain et al., 2013] to large language models [Ouyang et al., 2022].
A simple observation about preference feedback is that preferences can always be reconstructed from
reward signals. In other words, preference feedback contains arguably less information than scalar
rewards, which may render the RLHF problem more challenging. A natural question to ask is:
Is preference-based RL more difficult than reward-based RL?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

