Deciphering Spatio-Temporal Graph Forecasting:
A Causal Lens and Treatment
Yutong Xia1 , Yuxuan Liang2∗, Haomin Wen3 , Xu Liu1 , Kun Wang4 ,
Zhengyang Zhou4 , Roger Zimmermann1
1
National University of Singapore
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
Beijing Jiaotong University 4 University of Science and Technology of China
{yutong.x,yuxliang}@outlook.com;{liuxu,rogerz}@comp.nus.edu.sg
wenhaomin@bjtu.edu.cn;wk520529@mail.ustc.edu.cn;zzy0929@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Spatio-Temporal Graph (STG) forecasting is a fundamental task in many real-world
applications. Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Networks have emerged as the most
popular method for STG forecasting, but they often struggle with temporal out-ofdistribution (OoD) issues and dynamic spatial causation. In this paper, we propose
a novel framework called CaST to tackle these two challenges via causal treatments.
Concretely, leveraging a causal lens, we first build a structural causal model to
decipher the data generation process of STGs. To handle the temporal OoD issue,
we employ the back-door adjustment by a novel disentanglement block to separate
the temporal environments from input data. Moreover, we utilize the front-door
adjustment and adopt edge-level convolution to model the ripple effect of causation.
Experiments results on three real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
CaST, which consistently outperforms existing methods with good interpretability.
Our source code is available at https://github.com/yutong-xia/CaST.

1

Introduction

Individuals enter a world with intrinsic structure, where components interact with one another across
space and time, leading to a spatio-temporal composition. Spatio-Temporal Graph (STG) has been
pivotal for incorporating this structural information into the formulation of real-world issues. Within
the realm of smart cities [60], STG forecasting (e.g., traffic prediction [58, 49, 17, 52] and air quality
forecasting [28, 48, 27]) has become instrumental in informed decision-making and sustainability.
With recent advances in deep learning, Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Networks (STGNNs) [50, 20]
have become the leading approach for STG forecasting. They primarily use Graph Neural Networks
(GNN) [23] to capture spatial correlations among nodes, and adopt Temporal Convolutional Networks
(TCN) [2] or Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) [13] to learn temporal dependencies.
However, STG data is subject to temporal dynamics and may exhibit various data generation distributions over time, also known as temporal out-of-distribution (OoD) issues or temporal distribution
shift [6, 67]. As depicted in Figure 1a, the training data (periods A and B) and test data derive from
different distributions, namely PA (x) ̸= PB (x) ̸= Ptest (x). Most prior studies [26, 61, 56, 15, 30]
have overlooked this essential issue, which potentially results in suboptimal performance of STGNNs
that are trained on a specific time period to accurately predict future unseen data.
Meanwhile, dynamic spatial causation is another essential nature of STG data that must be addressed
for effective and unbiased representation learning in STG forecasting. While the majority of STGNNs
∗

Yuxuan Liang is the corresponding author of this paper. Email: yuxliang@outlook.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

