BayesDAG: Gradient-Based Posterior Inference for
Causal Discovery
† ∗1,3,4

Yashas Annadani

Nick Pawlowski2 Joel Jennings2 Stefan Bauer3,4
*
Cheng Zhang2 Wenbo Gong 2
1
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm 2 Microsoft Research
3
Helmholtz AI, Munich 4 TU Munich

Abstract
Bayesian causal discovery aims to infer the posterior distribution over causal
models from observed data, quantifying epistemic uncertainty and benefiting
downstream tasks. However, computational challenges arise due to joint inference
over combinatorial space of Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) and nonlinear
functions. Despite recent progress towards efficient posterior inference over DAGs,
existing methods are either limited to variational inference on node permutation
matrices for linear causal models, leading to compromised inference accuracy, or
continuous relaxation of adjacency matrices constrained by a DAG regularizer,
which cannot ensure resulting graphs are DAGs. In this work, we introduce
a scalable Bayesian causal discovery framework based on a combination of
stochastic gradient Markov Chain Monte Carlo (SG-MCMC) and Variational
Inference (VI) that overcomes these limitations. Our approach directly samples
DAGs from the posterior without requiring any DAG regularization, simultaneously
draws function parameter samples and is applicable to both linear and nonlinear
causal models. To enable our approach, we derive a novel equivalence to the
permutation-based DAG learning, which opens up possibilities of using any
relaxed gradient estimator defined over permutations. To our knowledge, this
is the first framework applying gradient-based MCMC sampling for causal
discovery. Empirical evaluation on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate
our approach’s effectiveness compared to state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

The quest for discovering causal relationships in data-generating processes lies at the heart of
empirical sciences and decision-making [56, 59, 68]. Structural Causal Models (SCMs) [52] and
their associated Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) provide a robust mathematical framework for
modeling such relationships. Knowledge of the underlying SCM and its corresponding DAG permits
predictions of unseen interventions and causal reasoning, thus making causal discovery – learning an
unknown SCM and its associated DAG from observed data – a subject of extensive research [54, 60].
In contrast to traditional methods that infer a single graph or its Markov equivalence class (MEC)
[14, 60], Bayesian causal discovery [21, 33, 65] aims to infer a posterior distribution over SCMs and
their DAGs from observed data. This approach encapsulates the epistemic uncertainty, degree of
confidence in every causal hypothesis, which is particularly valuable for real-world applications when
data is scarce. It is also beneficial for downstream tasks such as experimental design [2, 4, 49, 64].
Equal contribution. † Work done during internship at Microsoft Research.
wenbogong@microsoft.com
∗

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

Correspondence to

