Learning to Tokenize for Generative Retrieval

Weiwei Sun1 , Lingyong Yan2 , Zheng Chen1 , Shuaiqiang Wang2 , Haichao Zhu2
Pengjie Ren1 , Zhumin Chen1 , Dawei Yin2 , Maarten de Rijke3 , Zhaochun Ren4∗
1
Shandong University, China 2 Baidu Inc., China
3
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands 4 Leiden University, The Netherlands
{sunnweiwei,lingyongy}@gmail.com yindawei@acm.org
m.derijke@uva.nl z.ren@liacs.leidenuniv.nl

Abstract
As a new paradigm in information retrieval, generative retrieval directly generates
a ranked list of document identifiers (docids) for a given query using generative
language models (LMs). How to assign each document a unique docid (denoted
as document tokenization) is a critical problem, because it determines whether the
generative retrieval model can precisely retrieve any document by simply decoding
its docid. Most existing methods adopt rule-based tokenization, which is ad-hoc and
does not generalize well. In contrast, in this paper we propose a novel document
tokenization learning method, G EN R ET, which learns to encode the complete
document semantics into docids. G EN R ET learns to tokenize documents into
short discrete representations (i.e., docids) via a discrete auto-encoding approach.
We develop a progressive training scheme to capture the autoregressive nature of
docids and diverse clustering techniques to stabilize the training process. Based on
the semantic-embedded docids of any set of documents, the generative retrieval
model can learn to generate the most relevant docid only according to the docids’
semantic relevance to the queries. We conduct experiments on the NQ320K, MS
MARCO, and BEIR datasets. G EN R ET establishes the new state-of-the-art on
the NQ320K dataset. Compared to generative retrieval baselines, G EN R ET can
achieve significant improvements on unseen documents. Moreover, G EN R ET can
also outperform comparable baselines on MS MARCO and BEIR, demonstrating
the method’s generalizability.

1

Introduction

Document retrieval plays an essential role in web search applications and various downstream
knowledge-intensive tasks by identifying relevant documents to satisfy users’ queries. Recently,
generative retrieval has emerged as a new paradigm for document retrieval [1, 5, 37, 41, 46, 47] that
directly generates a ranked list of document identifiers (docids) for a given query using generative
language models (LMs). Unlike dense retrieval [9, 13, 23, 42], generative retrieval presents an
end-to-end solution for document retrieval tasks [37]. It also offers a promising approach to better
exploit the capabilities of recent large LMs [1, 41].
As shown in Figure 1, document tokenization aims to tokenize each document in the corpus as a
sequence of discrete characters, i.e., docids. Document tokenization plays a crucial role in generative
retrieval, as it defines how the document is distributed in the semantic space [37]. And it is still an
open problem how to define docids. Most previous generative methods tend to employ rule-based
document tokenizers, such as generating titles or URLs [5, 46], or clustering results from off-the-shelf
document embeddings [37, 41]. Such rule-based methods are usually ad-hoc and do not generalize
well. In particular, the tokenization results potentially perform well on retrieving documents that have
been seen during training, but generalize poorly to unlabeled documents [17, 20].
∗
Corresponding author.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

