Bucks for Buckets (B4B): Active Defenses Against
Stealing Encoders

Jan Dubiński 1,2∗ † Stanisław Pawlak 1† Franziska Boenisch 4†
Tomasz Trzciński 1,2,3 Adam Dziedzic 4∗‡
1

Warsaw University of Technology 2 IDEAS NCBR 3 Tooploox
4
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

Abstract
Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) APIs provide ready-to-use and highutility encoders that generate vector representations for given inputs. Since these
encoders are very costly to train, they become lucrative targets for model stealing
attacks during which an adversary leverages query access to the API to replicate
the encoder locally at a fraction of the original training costs. We propose Bucks
for Buckets (B4B), the first active defense that prevents stealing while the attack is
happening without degrading representation quality for legitimate API users. Our
defense relies on the observation that the representations returned to adversaries
who try to steal the encoder’s functionality cover a significantly larger fraction
of the embedding space than representations of legitimate users who utilize the
encoder to solve a particular downstream task. B4B leverages this to adaptively
adjust the utility of the returned representations according to a user’s coverage of
the embedding space. To prevent adaptive adversaries from eluding our defense by
simply creating multiple user accounts (sybils), B4B also individually transforms
each user’s representations. This prevents the adversary from directly aggregating
representations over multiple accounts to create their stolen encoder copy. Our
active defense opens a new path towards securely sharing and democratizing
encoders over public APIs.5

1

Introduction

In model stealing attacks, adversaries extract a machine learning model exposed via a public API by
repeatedly querying it and updating their own stolen copy based on the obtained responses. Model
stealing was shown to be one of the main threats to the security of machine learning models in practice [38]. Also in research, since the introduction of the first extraction attack against classifiers [40],
a lot of work on improving stealing [27, 33, 40, 41], extending it to different model types [8, 37],
and proposing adequate defenses [18, 25, 26, 31] has been put forward. With the recent shift in
learning paradigms from supervised to self supervised learning (SSL), especially the need for new
defenses becomes increasingly pressing. From an academic viewpoint, the urge arises because it
was shown that SSL models (encoders) are even more vulnerable to model stealing [16, 29, 36] than
their supervised counterparts. This is because whereas supervised models’ output is low dimensional,
e.g., per-class probabilities or pure labels, SSL encoders output high-dimensional representation
vectors that encode a larger amount of information and thereby facilitate stealing. In addition, from
a practical industry’s viewpoint, defenses are required since many popular API providers, such as
Cohere, OpenAI, or Clarify [1–3] already expose their high-value SSL encoders via APIs to a broad
range of users.
∗

Corresponding authors: jan.dubinski.dokt@pw.edu.pl and adam.dziedzic@cispa.de
Equal contribution.
‡
Project Lead.
5
Code available at https://github.com/stapaw/b4b-active-encoder-defense
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

