Use Perturbations when Learning from Explanations

Juyeon Heo∗
University of Cambridge
jh2324@cam.ac.uk

Vihari Piratla∗
University of Cambridge
vp421@cam.ac.uk

Matthew Wicker
Alan Turing Institute

Adrian Weller
Alan Turing Institute and
University of Cambridge

Abstract
Machine learning from explanations (MLX) is an approach to learning that uses
human-provided explanations of relevant or irrelevant features for each input to
ensure that model predictions are right for the right reasons. Existing MLX approaches rely on local model interpretation methods and require strong model
smoothing to align model and human explanations, leading to sub-optimal performance. We recast MLX as a robustness problem, where human explanations
specify a lower dimensional manifold from which perturbations can be drawn, and
show both theoretically and empirically how this approach alleviates the need for
strong model smoothing. We consider various approaches to achieving robustness,
leading to improved performance over prior MLX methods. Finally, we show how
to combine robustness with an earlier MLX method, yielding state-of-the-art results
on both synthetic and real-world benchmarks. Our implementation can be found at:
https://github.com/vihari/robust_mlx.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) display impressive capabilities, making them strong candidates for
real-wold deployment. However, numerous challenges hinder their adoption in practice. Several
major deployment challenges have been linked to the fact that labelled data often under-specifies
the task (D’Amour et al., 2020). For example, systems trained on chest x-rays were shown to
generalise poorly because they exploited dataset-specific incidental correlations such as hospital tags
for diagnosing pneumonia (Zech et al., 2018; DeGrave et al., 2021). This phenomenon of learning
unintended feature-label relationships is referred to as shortcut learning (Geirhos et al., 2020) and is
a critical challenge to solve for trustworthy deployment of machine learning algorithms. A common
remedy to avoid shortcut learning is to train on diverse data (Shah et al., 2022) from multiple domains,
demographics, etc, thus minimizing the underspecification problem, but this may be impractical for
many applications such as in healthcare.
Enriching supervision through human-provided explanations of relevant and irrelevant regions/features per example is an appealing direction toward reducing under-specification. For
instance, a (human-provided) explanation for chest x-ray classification may highlight scanning artifacts such as hospital tag as irrelevant features. Learning from such human-provided explanations
(MLX) has been shown to avoid known shortcuts (Schramowski et al., 2020). Ross et al. (2017)
pioneered an MLX approach based on regularizing DNNs, which was followed by several others
(Schramowski et al., 2020; Rieger et al., 2020; Stammer et al., 2021; Shao et al., 2021). Broadly,
existing approaches employ a model interpretation method to obtain per-example feature saliency, and
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

