Scalable Transformer for PDE Surrogate Modeling

Zijie Li, Dule Shu, Amir Barati Farimani
Carnegie Mellon University
Mechanical Engineering Department
{zijieli, dules}@andrew.cmu.edu & barati@cmu.edu

Abstract
Transformer has shown state-of-the-art performance on various applications and has
recently emerged as a promising tool for surrogate modeling of partial differential
equations (PDEs). Despite the introduction of linear-complexity attention, applying
Transformer to problems with a large number of grid points can be numerically
unstable and computationally expensive. In this work, we propose Factorized
Transformer (FactFormer), which is based on an axial factorized kernel integral.
Concretely, we introduce a learnable projection operator that decomposes the
input function into multiple sub-functions with one-dimensional domain. These
sub-functions are then evaluated and used to compute the instance-based kernel
with an axial factorized scheme. We showcase that the proposed model is able to
simulate 2D Kolmogorov flow on a 256 × 256 grid and 3D smoke buoyancy on
a 64 × 64 × 64 grid with good accuracy and efficiency. The proposed factorized
scheme can serve as a computationally efficient low-rank surrogate for the full
attention scheme when dealing with multi-dimensional problems.

1

Introduction

Various physics processes are modeled by partial differential equations (PDEs), from the interaction
between atoms in molecular systems to large-scale cosmological phenomena. Solving PDEs advances
the understanding of complex physical phenomena, enabling people to make accurate predictions,
and make informed decisions across a wide range of scientific and engineering disciplines. Numerical
solvers provide a practical way to simulate and predict PDEs since many PDEs are often difficult
to solve analytically. Most numerical solvers divide the continuous domain into a discretized grid
and reduce the continuous differential equations to algebraic equations via methods like finite
difference/element/volume methods or spectral method. Despite the theoretical guarantees behind
them, their practical realization of specific problems can pose challenges that require careful expertise
to overcome, such as a sufficient understanding of the underlying physics, or a fine-tailored mesh that
resolves the necessary spatio-temporal scales. The interest in developing user-friendly and efficient
PDE solvers, along with the success of deep learning models in many other areas [13, 44, 51, 103],
has facilitated the emergence of neural-network-based PDE solvers, where the neural network can
be used to parameterize the solution function of the target equation [96], or to approximate the
solution operator[69, 76]. Compared to many numerical solvers, neural PDE solvers appear to be
more tolerant with coarse discretization [104], and can be applied without explicit meshing [96]. In
addition, knowing the underlying equations are not strictly necessary for neural PDE solvers, which
gives them the potential to simplify and accelerate the process of physics simulation based on PDEs.
Among various neural network designs, attention-based models (Transformer) [115] have become
state-of-the-art for a wide array of applications [13, 18, 27, 51], which gives rise to a recent surge
of interest in applying the Transformer to PDE modeling [16, 29, 35, 41, 43, 54, 67, 73, 82, 86].
By viewing the input sequence as a function sampled on a discretization grid, attention can be
interpreted as a learnable kernel integral [17, 35, 54, 60] or a learnable Galerkin projection [16], and
the sequence-to-sequence Transformer [115] can be modified correspondingly to be better suited for
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

