Interpretability at Scale:
Identifying Causal Mechanisms in Alpaca
∗

∗

Zhengxuan Wu , Atticus Geiger ,
Thomas Icard, Christopher Potts, and Noah D. Goodman
Stanford University
{wuzhengx, atticusg, icard, cgpotts, ngoodman}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Obtaining human-interpretable explanations of large, general-purpose language
models is an urgent goal for AI safety. However, it is just as important that our
interpretability methods are faithful to the causal dynamics underlying model
behavior and able to robustly generalize to unseen inputs. Distributed Alignment
Search (DAS) [23] is a powerful gradient descent method grounded in a theory
of causal abstraction that has uncovered perfect alignments between interpretable
symbolic algorithms and small deep learning models fine-tuned for specific tasks. In
the present paper, we scale DAS significantly by replacing the remaining brute-force
search steps with learned parameters – an approach we call Boundless DAS. This
enables us to efficiently search for interpretable causal structure in large language
models while they follow instructions. We apply Boundless DAS to the Alpaca
model (7B parameters), which, off the shelf, solves a simple numerical reasoning
problem. With Boundless DAS, we discover that Alpaca does this by implementing
a causal model with two interpretable boolean variables. Furthermore, we find that
the alignment of neural representations with these variables is robust to changes
in inputs and instructions. These findings mark a first step toward faithfully
understanding the inner-workings of our ever-growing and most widely deployed
language models. Our tool is extensible to larger LLMs and is released publicly
at https://github.com/frankaging/align-transformers.

1

Introduction

Present-day large language models (LLMs) display remarkable behaviors: they appear to solve
coding tasks, translate between languages, engage in open-ended dialogue, and much more. As a
result, their societal impact is rapidly growing, as they make their way into products, services, and
people’s own daily tasks. In this context, it is vital that we move beyond behavioral evaluation to
deeply explain, in human-interpretable terms, the internal processes of these models, as an initial step
in auditing them for safety, trustworthiness, and pernicious social biases.
The theory of causal abstraction [5,22] provides a generic framework for representing interpretability
methods that faithfully assess the degree to which a complex causal system (e.g., a neural network)
implements an interpretable causal system (e.g., a symbolic algorithm). Where the answer is
positive, we move closer to having guarantees about how the model will behave. However, thus far,
such interpretability methods have been applied only to small models fine-tuned for specific tasks
[19,20,28,7] and this is arguably not an accident: the space of alignments between the variables in
the hypothesized causal model and the representations in the neural network becomes exponentially
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

