Efficient Test-Time Adaptation for Super-Resolution
with Second-Order Degradation and Reconstruction

Zeshuai Deng1∗ Zhuokun Chen1 2∗ Shuaicheng Niu1∗ Thomas H. Li5
Bohan Zhuang3† Mingkui Tan1 2 4†
1

South China University of Technology, 2 Pazhou Lab, 3 ZIP Lab, Monash University,
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education,
5
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School

Abstract
Image super-resolution (SR) aims to learn a mapping from low-resolution (LR)
to high-resolution (HR) using paired HR-LR training images. Conventional SR
methods typically gather the paired training data by synthesizing LR images from
HR images using a predetermined degradation model, e.g., Bicubic down-sampling.
However, the realistic degradation type of test images may mismatch with the
training-time degradation type due to the dynamic changes of the real-world scenarios, resulting in inferior-quality SR images. To address this, existing methods
attempt to estimate the degradation model and train an image-specific model, which,
however, is quite time-consuming and impracticable to handle rapidly changing domain shifts. Moreover, these methods largely concentrate on the estimation of one
degradation type (e.g., blur degradation), overlooking other degradation types like
noise and JPEG in real-world test-time scenarios, thus limiting their practicality.
To tackle these problems, we present an efficient test-time adaptation framework
for SR, named SRTTA, which is able to quickly adapt SR models to test domains
with different/unknown degradation types. Specifically, we design a second-order
degradation scheme to construct paired data based on the degradation type of the
test image, which is predicted by a pre-trained degradation classifier. Then, we
adapt the SR model by implementing feature-level reconstruction learning from
the initial test image to its second-order degraded counterparts, which helps the
SR model generate plausible HR images. Extensive experiments are conducted
on newly synthesized corrupted DIV2K datasets with 8 different degradations and
several real-world datasets, demonstrating that our SRTTA framework achieves an
impressive improvement over existing methods with satisfying speed. The source
code is available at https://github.com/DengZeshuai/SRTTA.

1

Introduction

Image super-resolution (SR) aims to reconstruct plausible high-resolution (HR) images from the given
low-resolution (LR) images, which is widely applied in microscopy [42, 44], remote sensing [17, 35]
and surveillance [40, 56]. Most previous SR methods [11, 31, 60, 8] hypothesize that the LR
images are downsampled from HR images using a predefined degradation model, e.g., Bicubic
down-sampling. However, due to the diverse imaging sensors and multiple propagations on the
Internet, real-world images may contain different degradation types (e.g., Gaussian blur, Poisson
noise, and JPEG artifact) [32, 52, 53, 25]. Besides, the realistic degradations of real-world images
∗
†

Equal contribution. Email: sedengzeshuai@mail.scut.edu.cn, {caesard216, niushuaicheng}@gmail.com
Corresponding author. Email: mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn, bohan.zhuang@gmail.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

