Fine-Grained Theoretical Analysis of Federated
Zeroth-Order Optimization

Jun Chen1 , Hong Chen1,2,5,6∗, Bin Gu3,4 , Hao Deng1∗
College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, China
2
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
5
Shenzhen Institute of Nutrition and Health, Huazhong Agricultural University, China
6
Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture,
Genome Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Agricultural Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, China
cj850487243@163.com, chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn,
jsgubin@gmail.com, dengh@mail.hzau.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Federated zeroth-order optimization (FedZO) algorithm enjoys the advantages of
both zeroth-order optimization and federated learning, and has shown exceptional
performance on black-box attack and softmax regression tasks. However, there is
little generalization analysis for FedZO, and its analysis on computing convergence
rate is slower than the corresponding first-order optimization setting. This paper
aims to establish systematic theoretical assessments of FedZO by developing the
analysis technique of on-average model stability. We establish the first generalization error bound of FedZO under the Lipschitz continuity and smoothness
conditions. Then, refined generalization and optimization bounds are provided
by replacing bounded gradient with heavy-tailed gradient noise and utilizing the
second-order Taylor expansion for gradient approximation. With the help of a
new error decomposition strategy, our theoretical analysis is also extended to the
asynchronous case. For FedZO, our fine-grained analysis fills the theoretical gap
on the generalization guarantees and polishes the convergence characterization of
the computing algorithm.

1

Introduction

Federated learning collaborates multiple local clients to train a global model without sharing local
raw data, which often enjoys great ability in protecting data privacy [1]. The core training steps
of federated learning include local clients receiving the global model from the central server, the
local models being updated by the global information and local data, and the updated local models
being uploaded to renew the global model. Based on this building-block process, rich federated
learning algorithms have been formulated to match different motivations, where their properties on
privacy protection [2, 3, 4, 5] and convergence rate [6, 7, 8] are investigated. In general, the existing
algorithms of federated learning depend heavily on the gradient information of loss function, see
e.g., [1, 6, 7, 8]. Indeed, there are some learning scenarios where the gradient or Hessian information
* Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

