Provably Efficient Offline Reinforcement Learning
in Regular Decision Processes

Roberto Cipollone
Sapienza University of Rome
cipollone@diag.uniroma1.it

Anders Jonsson
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
anders.jonsson@upf.edu

Alessandro Ronca
University of Oxford
alessandro.ronca@cs.ox.ac.uk

Mohammad Sadegh Talebi
University of Copenhagen
m.shahi@di.ku.dk

Abstract
This paper deals with offline (or batch) Reinforcement Learning (RL) in episodic
Regular Decision Processes (RDPs). RDPs are the subclass of Non-Markov Decision Processes where the dependency on the history of past events can be captured
by a finite-state automaton. We consider a setting where the automaton that underlies the RDP is unknown, and a learner strives to learn a near-optimal policy using
pre-collected data, in the form of non-Markov sequences of observations, without
further exploration. We present RegORL, an algorithm that suitably combines automata learning techniques and state-of-the-art algorithms for offline RL in MDPs.
RegORL has a modular design allowing one to use any off-the-shelf offline RL algorithm in MDPs. We report a non-asymptotic high-probability sample complexity
bound for RegORL to yield an ε-optimal policy, which makes appear a notion of
concentrability relevant for RDPs. Furthermore, we present a sample complexity
lower bound for offline RL in RDPs. To our best knowledge, this is the first work
presenting a provably efficient algorithm for offline learning in RDPs.

1

Introduction

Most reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms hinge on the Markovian assumption, i.e. that the
underlying system transitions and rewards are Markovian in some natural notion of (observable)
state, and hence, the distribution of future observations depends only on the current state-action of
the system. This fundamental assumption allows one to model decision making using the powerful
framework of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) [1]. However, there are many application scenarios
where rewards are issued according to temporal conditions over histories (or trajectories), and
others where the environment itself evolves in a history-dependent manner. As a result, Markovian
approaches may prove unsuitable for modeling such situations. These scenarios can be appropriately
modeled as Non-Markovian Decision Processes (NMDPs) [2, 3].
NMDPs describe environments where the distribution on the next observation and reward is a function
of the history. In these environments, behaving optimally may also require to take histories into
account. For example, a robot may receive a reward for delivering an item only if the item was
previously requested, and a self-driving car is more likely to skid and lose control if it previously
rained. Also, consider a mobile robot that has to track an object which may disappear from its field
of view. The object is likely to be found again in the same place where it was seen last time. This
requires the agent to remember, hence to act according to information in its interaction history. In
general, an NMDP can show an arbitrary dependency on the history or trace, preventing efficient
learning. Consequently, recent research has focused on tractable sub-classes of NMDPs. In Regular
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

