Augmented Memory Replay-based Continual
Learning Approaches for Network Intrusion Detection

Suresh Kumar Amalapuram∗ , Sumohana S Channappayya# , and Bheemarjuna Reddy Tamma∗
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering∗ , Dept. of Electrical Engineering#
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India
{cs19resch11001,sumohana,tbr}@iith.ac.in

Abstract
Intrusion detection is a form of anomalous activity detection in communication
network traffic. Continual learning (CL) approaches to the intrusion detection task
accumulate old knowledge while adapting to the latest threat knowledge. Previous
works have shown the effectiveness of memory replay-based CL approaches for this
task. In this work, we present two novel contributions to improve the performance
of CL-based network intrusion detection in the context of class imbalance and
scalability. First, we extend class balancing reservoir sampling (CBRS), a memorybased CL method, to address the problems of severe class imbalance for large
datasets. Second, we propose a novel approach titled perturbation assistance for
parameter approximation (PAPA) based on the Gaussian mixture model to reduce
the number of virtual stochastic gradient descent (SGD) parameter computations
needed to discover maximally interfering samples for CL. We demonstrate that
the proposed approaches perform remarkably better than the baselines on standard
intrusion detection benchmarks created over shorter periods (KDDCUP’99, NSLKDD, CICIDS-2017/2018, UNSW-NB15, and CTU-13) and a longer period with
distribution shift (AnoShift). We also validated proposed approaches on standard
continual learning benchmarks (SVHN, CIFAR-10/100, and CLEAR-10/100) and
anomaly detection benchmarks (SMAP, SMD, and MSL). Further, the proposed
PAPA approach significantly lowers the number of virtual SGD update operations,
thus resulting in training time savings in the range of 12 to 40% compared to the
maximally interfered samples retrieval algorithm.

1

Introduction

Learning from a continuum of data with distribution shift over time is known as continual/lifelong
learning (CL) [1, 2]. CL algorithms aim to preserve learned knowledge (stability) while embracing the
knowledge of new tasks (plasticity). The conflict in balancing stability and plasticity often leads to the
problem of catastrophic forgetting (CF) [3, 4]. In other words, past tasks’ knowledge degrades over
time due to interference from the newer task. Unlike computer vision [5, 6, 7, 8], natural language
processing [9, 10], and speech processing [11, 12], CL applications to many real-world problems
are under-explored, and one such exemplar is network intrusion detection (NID) in communication
networks. Intrusion detection is a form of distribution shift detection that aims to detect anomalous
activity patterns in the network traffic [13, 14]. To ensure protection against novel cyber-attacks,
network intrusion detection systems (NIDS) must evolve continuously and effortlessly learn from the
newer attack data.
The concept drift/distribution shift is prevalent in cybersecurity, as malicious behavior can shift
either suddenly or gradually over time [15, 13]. While NID formulated as anomaly detection (AD) is
typically trained on normal data (zero positive learning [16]) and is immune to the drift of malicious
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

