Jailbroken: How Does LLM Safety Training Fail?
Content Warning: This paper contains examples of harmful language.
Alexander Wei
UC Berkeley
awei@berkeley.edu

Nika Haghtalab∗
UC Berkeley
nika@berkeley.edu

Jacob Steinhardt∗
UC Berkeley
jsteinhardt@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Large language models trained for safety and harmlessness remain susceptible to
adversarial misuse, as evidenced by the prevalence of “jailbreak” attacks on early
releases of ChatGPT that elicit undesired behavior. Going beyond recognition of
the issue, we investigate why such attacks succeed and how they can be created.
We hypothesize two failure modes of safety training: competing objectives and
mismatched generalization. Competing objectives arise when a model’s capabilities
and safety goals conflict, while mismatched generalization occurs when safety
training fails to generalize to a domain for which capabilities exist. We use these
failure modes to guide jailbreak design and then evaluate state-of-the-art models,
including OpenAI’s GPT-4 and Anthropic’s Claude v1.3, against both existing and
newly designed attacks. We find that vulnerabilities persist despite the extensive
red-teaming and safety-training efforts behind these models. Notably, new attacks
utilizing our failure modes succeed on every prompt in a collection of unsafe
requests from the models’ red-teaming evaluation sets and outperform existing ad
hoc jailbreaks. Our analysis emphasizes the need for safety-capability parity—that
safety mechanisms should be as sophisticated as the underlying model—and argues
against the idea that scaling alone can resolve these safety failure modes.

1

Introduction

In recent months, large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT, Claude, and Bard have seen
widespread deployment. These models exhibit advanced general capabilities [38], but also pose risks
around misuse by bad actors (e.g., for misinformation or for crime [9, 32, 25, 30, 28]).
To mitigate these risks of misuse, model creators have implemented safety mechanisms to restrict
model behavior to a “safe” subset of capabilities. These include both training-time interventions to
align models with predefined values [41, 7] and post hoc flagging and filtering of inputs and outputs
[56, 24, 52, 45]. These efforts are often complemented by red teaming, which proactively identifies
and trains against weaknesses [42, 23, 38].
While hardening LLMs for safety can help [38], models remain vulnerable to adversarial inputs,
as demonstrated by the spread of “jailbreaks” for ChatGPT on social media since its initial release
[13, 17, 2]. These attacks are engineered to elicit behavior, such as producing harmful content or
leaking personally identifiable information, that the model was trained to avoid. Attacks can range
from elaborate role play (e.g., DAN [48]) to subtle subversion of the safety objective (see Figure 1(a)).
Model creators have acknowledged and updated their models against jailbreak attacks [7, 38, 10, 5],
but a systematic analysis and a conceptual understanding of this phenomenon remains lacking.
In this work, we analyze the vulnerability of safety-trained LLMs to jailbreak attacks by examining
the model’s pretraining and safety training processes. Based on known safety training methods, we
hypothesize two failure modes—competing objectives and mismatched generalization—that shed
∗

Equal advising.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

