Detecting Hidden Confounding In Observational Data
Using Multiple Environments

Rickard K.A. Karlsson
Department of Intelligent Systems
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
r.k.a.karlsson@tudelft.nl

Jesse H. Krijthe
Department of Intelligent Systems
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
j.h.krijthe@tudelft.nl

Abstract
A common assumption in causal inference from observational data is that there is
no hidden confounding. Yet it is, in general, impossible to verify this assumption
from a single dataset. Under the assumption of independent causal mechanisms
underlying the data-generating process, we demonstrate a way to detect unobserved
confounders when having multiple observational datasets coming from different
environments. We present a theory for testable conditional independencies that are
only absent when there is hidden confounding and examine cases where we violate
its assumptions: degenerate & dependent mechanisms, and faithfulness violations.
Additionally, we propose a procedure to test these independencies and study its
empirical finite-sample behavior using simulation studies and semi-synthetic data
based on a real-world dataset. In most cases, the proposed procedure correctly
predicts the presence of hidden confounding, particularly when the confounding
bias is large.

1

Introduction

Estimating the causal effect of a treatment on an outcome is a fundamental challenge in many areas of
science and society. While this is straightforwardly done using data from randomized studies, using
observational data for this task is appealing since they are often more feasible to collect while also
being more representative of the population of interest [Pearl, 2009]. To identify causal effects using
such data it is often assumed there is no hidden confounding. When this untestable assumption is
violated we run the risk of confusing causal relationships with spurious correlations. This can have
serious consequences such as unknowingly suggesting a non-effective or, even worse, potentially
harmful treatment. Therefore, detecting the presence of hidden confounding is an important problem.
Data collected from different sources often tend to be heterogeneous due to e.g. changing circumstances or time shifts. In this work, we show how such heterogeneity can be exploited to make hidden
confounding testable solely from observational data. We consider a setting where observational
data has been collected from different environments E. In each environment, we observe the same
treatment T and outcome Y , as well as covariates X that are known confounders between T and
Y . Further, we assume that the data is heterogeneous across these environments under the principle
of Independent Causal Mechanisms [Peters et al., 2017, Schölkopf et al., 2021], which states that
a causal system consists of autonomous modules that do not inform or influence each other. The
question we ask is whether there exists further hidden confounding between T and Y after having
adjusted for X. If that is the case, the causal effect of T on Y is not identifiable in general. Perhaps
surprisingly, we demonstrate a way to decide if the causal effect would be identifiable by deriving
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

