Patch n’ Pack: NaViT, a Vision Transformer
for any Aspect Ratio and Resolution

Mostafa Dehghani∗ , Basil Mustafa∗ , Josip Djolonga† , Jonathan Heek† ,
Matthias Minderer, Mathilde Caron, Andreas Steiner, Joan Puigcerver,
Robert Geirhos, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Avital Oliver, Piotr Padlewski,
Alexey A. Gritsenko, Mario Lucic, Neil Houlsby
Google DeepMind
{dehghani,basilm}@google.com

Abstract
The ubiquitous and demonstrably suboptimal choice of resizing images to a fixed
resolution before processing them with computer vision models has not yet been
successfully challenged. However, models such as the Vision Transformer (ViT)
offer flexible sequence-based modeling, and hence varying input sequence lengths.
We take advantage of this with NaViT (Native Resolution ViT) which uses sequence
packing during training to process inputs of arbitrary resolutions and aspect ratios.
Alongside flexible model usage, we demonstrate improved training efficiency for
large-scale supervised and contrastive image-text pretraining. NaViT can be efficiently transferred to standard tasks such as image and video classification, object
detection, and semantic segmentation and leads to improved results on robustness and
fairness benchmarks. At inference time, the input resolution flexibility can be used to
smoothly navigate the test-time cost-performance trade-off. We believe that NaViT
marks a departure from the standard, CNN-designed, input and modelling pipeline
used by most computer vision models, and represents a promising direction for ViTs.

1

Introduction

The simple, flexible and scalable nature of the Vision Transformer (ViT) [1] has rendered it an almost
ubiquitous replacement to convolution based neural networks. Underpinning this model is a simple
operation: splitting an image into patches, each of which is linearly projected to a token. Typically,
input images are resized to a fixed square aspect ratio and then split into a fixed number of patches.
Recent works have explored alternatives to this paradigm: FlexiViT [2] supports multiple patch sizes
within one architecture, enabling smooth variation of sequence length and thus compute cost. This
is achieved via random sampling of a patch size at each training step and a resizing algorithm to allow
the initial convolutional embedding to support multiple patch sizes. Pix2Struct [3] introduced an
alternative patching approach which preserves the aspect ratio, which is particularly useful for tasks
such as chart and document understanding.
We present an alternative, NaViT. Multiple patches from different images are packed in a single
sequence—termed Patch n’ Pack—which enables variable resolution while preserving the aspect
∗

Project lead. † Core contributor.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023)

