DYffusion: A Dynamics-informed Diffusion Model
for Spatiotemporal Forecasting

Salva Rühling Cachay
Bo Zhao
Hailey Joren
Rose Yu
University of California, San Diego
{sruhlingcachay, bozhao, hjoren, roseyu}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
While diffusion models can successfully generate data and make predictions, they
are predominantly designed for static images. We propose an approach for efficiently training diffusion models for probabilistic spatiotemporal forecasting,
where generating stable and accurate rollout forecasts remains challenging, Our
method, DYffusion, leverages the temporal dynamics in the data, directly coupling
it with the diffusion steps in the model. We train a stochastic, time-conditioned interpolator and a forecaster network that mimic the forward and reverse processes of
standard diffusion models, respectively. DYffusion naturally facilitates multi-step
and long-range forecasting, allowing for highly flexible, continuous-time sampling
trajectories and the ability to trade-off performance with accelerated sampling at
inference time. In addition, the dynamics-informed diffusion process in DYffusion
imposes a strong inductive bias and significantly improves computational efficiency
compared to traditional Gaussian noise-based diffusion models. Our approach
performs competitively on probabilistic forecasting of complex dynamics in sea
surface temperatures, Navier-Stokes flows, and spring mesh systems.1

1

Introduction

Dynamics forecasting refers to the task of predicting the future behavior of a dynamic system, involving learning the underlying dynamics governing the system’s evolution to make accurate predictions
about its future states. Obtaining accurate and reliable probabilistic forecasts is an important component of policy formulation [39, 4], risk management [38, 20], resource optimization [7], and strategic
planning [46, 72]. In many applications, accurate long-range probabilistic forecasts are particularly
challenging to obtain [38, 20, 4]. In operational settings, methods typically hinge on sophisticated
numerical simulations that require supercomputers to perform calculations within manageable time
frames, often compromising the spatial resolution of the grid for efficiency [3].
Generative modeling presents a promising avenue for probabilistic dynamics forecasting. Diffusion
models, in particular, can successfully model natural image and video distributions [47, 54, 59]. The
standard approach, Gaussian diffusion, corrupts the data with Gaussian noise to varying degrees
through the “forward process” and sequentially denoises a random input at inference time to obtain
highly realistic samples through the “reverse process” [60, 25, 32]. However, learning to map from
noise to realistic data is challenging in high dimensions, especially with limited data availability.
Consequently, the computational costs associated with training and inference from diffusion models
are prohibitive, requiring a sequential sampling process over hundreds of diffusion steps. For example,
a denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) takes around 20 hours to sample 50k images of
size 32 × 32 [61]. In addition, few methods apply diffusion models beyond static images. Video
1

Code is available at: https://github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/dyffusion

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

