Reconciling Competing Sampling Strategies of
Network Embedding

Yuchen Yan, Baoyu Jing, Lihui Liu, Ruijie Wang, Jinning Li,
Tarek Abdelzaher, Hanghang Tong
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, IL, USA
{yucheny5, baoyuj2, lihuil2, ruijiew2, jinning4, zaher, htong}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Network embedding plays a significant role in a variety of applications. To capture
the topology of the network, most of the existing network embedding algorithms
follow a sampling training procedure, which maximizes the similarity (e.g., embedding vectors’ dot product) between positively sampled node pairs and minimizes
the similarity between negatively sampled node pairs in the embedding space.
Typically, close node pairs function as positive samples while distant node pairs
are usually considered as negative samples. However, under different or even
competing sampling strategies, some methods champion sampling distant node
pairs as positive samples to encapsulate longer distance information in link prediction, whereas others advocate adding close nodes into the negative sample set
to boost the performance of node recommendation. In this paper, we seek to
understand the intrinsic relationships between these competing strategies. To this
end, we identify two properties (discrimination and monotonicity) that given any
node pair proximity distribution, node embeddings should embrace. Moreover,
we quantify the empirical error of the trained similarity score w.r.t. the sampling
strategy, which leads to an important finding that the discrimination property and
the monotonicity property for all node pairs can not be satisfied simultaneously
in real-world applications. Guided by such analysis, a simple yet novel model
(S ENSEI) is proposed, which seamlessly fulfills the discrimination property and the
partial monotonicity within the top-K ranking list. Extensive experiments show
that S ENSEI outperforms the state-of-the-arts in plain network embedding.

1

Introduction

In the era of big data, network embedding [36, 14, 21, 7, 42] maps nodes in the network to lowdimensional vectors in the embedding space, which plays an important role in many tasks such as
node recommendation [54, 61, 38, 8, 20, 19, 1, 2], networked time series imputation [44, 18, 48, 9],
knowledge graph completion [49, 46, 47, 45, 28], and network alignment [52, 53, 60, 62, 16, 27, 59].
To distill the topology information of the network, most existing network embedding methods
follow a sampling training procedure. Given any central node to be considered, existing network
embedding methods build a positively sampled node pair set and a negatively sampled node pair
set. Then, they optimize the embeddings of nodes by maximizing/minimizing the similarity between
the positively/negatively sampled node pairs in the embedding space. Explicitly or implicitly, these
methods are based on an assumption that nodes close to the central node should be included in
the positively sampled node pair set, whereas distant nodes are likely to be considered as negative
samples. For example, DeepWalk [36] and metapath2vec [7] explicitly construct random walk
containing positively sampled nodes and select negative nodes according to the degree distribution of
the network. The message-passing mechanism in GraphSAGE [15] and graph auto-encoder (GAE)
[22] is built on graph Laplacian regularization [21, 57], which makes connected node pairs to be
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

