Enhancing Knowledge Transfer for Task Incremental
Learning with Data-free Subnetwork

Qiang Gao1,∗ , Xiaojun Shan2,∗ , Yuchen Zhang2 , Fan Zhou2,†
Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
qianggao@swufe.edu.cn, {xiaojunshan@std., yuchenzhang@std., fan.zhou@}uestc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
As there exist competitive subnetworks within a dense network in concert with
Lottery Ticket Hypothesis, we introduce a novel neuron-wise task incremental
learning method, namely Data-free Subnetworks (DSN), which attempts to enhance
the elastic knowledge transfer across the tasks that sequentially arrive. Specifically,
DSN primarily seeks to transfer knowledge to the new coming task from the
learned tasks by selecting the affiliated weights of a small set of neurons to be
activated, including the reused neurons from prior tasks via neuron-wise masks.
And it also transfers possibly valuable knowledge to the earlier tasks via datafree replay. Especially, DSN inherently relieves the catastrophic forgetting and
the unavailability of past data or possible privacy concerns. The comprehensive
experiments conducted on four benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed DSN in the context of task-incremental learning by comparing
it to several state-of-the-art baselines. In particular, DSN enables the knowledge
transfer to the earlier tasks, which is often overlooked by prior efforts.

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL), as one of the human-like lifelong learning or incremental learning paradigms,
has received enormous attention in Artificial Intelligence (AI) community due to its capability
to incrementally learn a sequence of tasks in a (deep) neural network and to keep accumulating
knowledge throughout its lifetime [1]. According to the context of whether the task identity is
provided during model training and inference, the majority of prior works categorize continual
learning into three main practical problems by specific settings, including task-incremental learning,
class-incremental learning, and task-free incremental learning. This study was prepared for Task
Incremental Learning or TIL for short. Not limited to TIL, existing solutions for incremental learning
are put forward to solve the catastrophic forgetting (CF) issue [2] that is a common phenomenon
in CL scenarios. Usually, these approaches can be broadly categorized into three directions, i.e.,
regularization-based [3, 4, 5], rehearsal-based [6, 7, 8], and architecture-based [9, 10, 11, 12].
Motivations: Recently, several studies have demonstrated that deep neural networks are usually
over-parameterized, whereby the redundant or unuseful weights can be pruned, allowing efficient
computation and on-par or even better performance [13, 14, 15]. Likewise, researchers stated this
phenomenon as Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) [16, 17], i.e., a randomly-initialized neural network
contains a subnetwork such that, when trained in isolation, can match the performance of the original
network. With this in mind, more recent efforts turn to randomly initialize a large but sparse neural
network and employ it to sequentially discover compact subnetworks for (task) incremental learning,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author (fan.zhou@uestc.edu.cn).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

