Convolutions Die Hard: Open-Vocabulary
Segmentation with Single Frozen Convolutional CLIP

Qihang Yu1 , Ju He2 , Xueqing Deng1 , Xiaohui Shen1 , Liang-Chieh Chen1
1
2
ByteDance
The Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Open-vocabulary segmentation is a challenging task requiring segmenting and
recognizing objects from an open set of categories in diverse environments. One
way to address this challenge is to leverage multi-modal models, such as CLIP,
to provide image and text features in a shared embedding space, which effectively bridges the gap between closed-vocabulary and open-vocabulary recognition.
Hence, existing methods often adopt a two-stage framework to tackle the problem,
where the inputs first go through a mask generator and then through the CLIP model
along with the predicted masks. This process involves extracting features from raw
images multiple times, which can be ineffective and inefficient. By contrast, we
propose to build everything into a single-stage framework using a shared Frozen
Convolutional CLIP backbone, which not only significantly simplifies the current
two-stage pipeline, but also remarkably yields a better accuracy-cost trade-off.
The resulting single-stage system, called FC-CLIP, benefits from the following
observations: the frozen CLIP backbone maintains the ability of open-vocabulary
classification and can also serve as a strong mask generator, and the convolutional
CLIP generalizes well to a larger input resolution than the one used during contrastive image-text pretraining. Surprisingly, FC-CLIP advances state-of-the-art
results on various benchmarks, while running practically fast. Specifically, when
training on COCO panoptic data only and testing in a zero-shot manner, FC-CLIP
achieve 26.8 PQ, 16.8 AP, and 34.1 mIoU on ADE20K, 18.2 PQ, 27.9 mIoU on
Mapillary Vistas, 44.0 PQ, 26.8 AP, 56.2 mIoU on Cityscapes, outperforming the
prior art under the same setting by +4.2 PQ, +2.4 AP, +4.2 mIoU on ADE20K,
+4.0 PQ on Mapillary Vistas and +20.1 PQ on Cityscapes, respectively. Additionally, the training and testing time of FC-CLIP is 7.5× and 6.6× significantly
faster than the same prior art, while using 5.9× fewer total model parameters.
Meanwhile, FC-CLIP also sets a new state-of-the-art performance across various
open-vocabulary semantic segmentation datasets. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/bytedance/fc-clip.

1

Introduction

Panoptic segmentation [44] is a complex computer vision task that aims to predict a set of nonoverlapping masks, each with its corresponding class label. It combines the tasks of semantic
segmentation [37] and instance segmentation [34], making it a challenging problem to solve. Many
methods [43, 87, 18, 83, 51, 93, 20, 94, 53] have been proposed to tackle this problem, and a
significant progress has been made in terms of panoptic quality (PQ). However, due to the high cost
of annotating such a fine-grained dataset [54, 22], the number of semantic classes is typically limited
to a few dozens or hundreds. This restriction hinders the further application of existing approaches to
real-world settings, where the number of possible semantic classes is unlimited.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

