Variational Imbalanced Regression: Fair Uncertainty
Quantification via Probabilistic Smoothing

Ziyan Wang
Georgia Institute of Technology
wzy@gatech.edu

Hao Wang
Rutgers University
hw488@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Existing regression models tend to fall short in both accuracy and uncertainty
estimation when the label distribution is imbalanced. In this paper, we propose a probabilistic deep learning model, dubbed variational imbalanced regression (VIR), which not only performs well in imbalanced regression but naturally produces reasonable uncertainty estimation as a byproduct. Different from
typical variational autoencoders assuming I.I.D. representations (a data point’s
representation is not directly affected by other data points), our VIR borrows
data with similar regression labels to compute the latent representation’s variational distribution; furthermore, different from deterministic regression models producing point estimates, VIR predicts the entire normal-inverse-gamma
distributions and modulates the associated conjugate distributions to impose
probabilistic reweighting on the imbalanced data, thereby providing better uncertainty estimation. Experiments in several real-world datasets show that our
VIR can outperform state-of-the-art imbalanced regression models in terms of
both accuracy and uncertainty estimation. Code will soon be available at https:
//github.com/Wang-ML-Lab/variational-imbalanced-regression.

1

Introduction

Deep regression models are currently the state of the art in making predictions in a continuous label
space and have a wide range of successful applications in computer vision [50], natural language
processing [22], healthcare [43, 45], recommender systems [16, 42], etc. However, these models
fail however when the label distribution in training data is imbalanced. For example, in visual age
estimation [30], where a model infers the age of a person given her visual appearance, models are
typically trained on imbalanced datasets with overwhelmingly more images of younger adults, leading
to poor regression accuracy for images of children or elderly people [48, 49]. Such unreliability in
imbalanced regression settings motivates the need for both improving performance for the minority in
the presence of imbalanced data and, more importantly, providing reasonable uncertainty estimation
to inform practitioners on how reliable the predictions are (especially for the minority where accuracy
is lower).
Existing methods for deep imbalanced regression (DIR) only focus on improving the accuracy of
deep regression models by smoothing the label distribution and reweighting data with different
labels [48, 49]. On the other hand, methods that provide uncertainty estimation for deep regression
models operates under the balance-data assumption and therefore do not work well in the imbalanced
setting [1, 8, 29].
To simultaneously cover these two desiderata, we propose a probabilistic deep imbalanced regression model, dubbed variational imbalanced regression (VIR). Different from typical variational
autoencoders assuming I.I.D. representations (a data point’s representation is not directly affected by
other data points), our VIR assumes Neighboring and Identically Distributed (N.I.D.) and borrows
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

