Provable benefits of annealing for estimating
normalizing constants: Importance Sampling,
Noise-Contrastive Estimation, and beyond

Omar Chehab
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA
Palaiseau, France
l-emir-omar.chehab@inria.fr

Aapo Hyvärinen
Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
Helsinki, Finland
aapo.hyvarinen@helsinki.fi

Andrej Risteski
Department of Machine Learning
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA
aristesk@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recent research has developed several Monte Carlo methods for estimating the
normalization constant (partition function) based on the idea of annealing. This
means sampling successively from a path of distributions that interpolate between a
tractable "proposal" distribution and the unnormalized "target" distribution. Prominent estimators in this family include annealed importance sampling and annealed
noise-contrastive estimation (NCE). Such methods hinge on a number of design
choices: which estimator to use, which path of distributions to use and whether to
use a path at all; so far, there is no definitive theory on which choices are efficient.
Here, we evaluate each design choice by the asymptotic estimation error it produces.
First, we show that using NCE is more efficient than the importance sampling estimator, but in the limit of infinitesimal path steps, the difference vanishes. Second,
we find that using the geometric path brings down the estimation error from an
exponential to a polynomial function of the parameter distance between the target
and proposal distributions. Third, we find that the arithmetic path, while rarely
used, can offer optimality properties over the universally-used geometric path. In
fact, in a particular limit, the optimal path is arithmetic. Based on this theory, we
finally propose a two-step estimator to approximate the optimal path in an efficient
way.

1

Introduction

Recent progress in generative modeling has sparked renewed interest in models of data that are
defined by an unnormalized distribution. A prominent example is energy-based models, which are
increasingly used in deep learning [1], and for which there are a variety of parameter estimation
procedures [2–5]. Another example comes from Bayesian statistics, where the posterior model of
parameters given data is frequently known only up to a proportionality constant. Such models can
be evaluated and compared by the probability they assign to a dataset, yet this requires computing
their normalization constants (partition functions) which are typically high-dimensional, intractable
integrals.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

