Learning List-Level Domain-Invariant
Representations for Ranking

Ruicheng Xian1† Honglei Zhuang2
Ji Ma2
Kai Hui2
Han Zhao1

Zhen Qin2
Hamed Zamani3† Jing Lu2
Xuanhui Wang2
Michael Bendersky2

1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{rxian2,hanzhao}@illinois.edu
2
Google Research
{hlz,zhenqin,ljwinnie,maji,kaihuibj,xuanhui,bemike}@google.com
3
University of Massachusetts Amherst
zamani@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Domain adaptation aims to transfer the knowledge learned on (data-rich) source
domains to (low-resource) target domains, and a popular method is invariant representation learning, which matches and aligns the data distributions on the feature
space. Although this method is studied extensively and applied on classification
and regression problems, its adoption on ranking problems is sporadic, and the
few existing implementations lack theoretical justifications. This paper revisits
invariant representation learning for ranking. Upon reviewing prior work, we
found that they implement what we call item-level alignment, which aligns the
distributions of the items being ranked from all lists in aggregate but ignores their
list structure. However, the list structure should be leveraged, because it is intrinsic
to ranking problems where the data and the metrics are defined and computed on
lists, not the items by themselves. To close this discrepancy, we propose list-level
alignment—learning domain-invariant representations at the higher level of lists.
The benefits are twofold: it leads to the first domain adaptation generalization
bound for ranking, in turn providing theoretical support for the proposed method,
and it achieves better empirical transfer performance for unsupervised domain
adaptation on ranking tasks, including passage reranking.

1

Introduction

Learning to rank applies machine learning techniques to solve ranking problems that are at the core of
many everyday products and applications, including search engines and recommendation systems [34].
The availability of ever-increasing amounts of training data and advances in modeling are constantly
refreshing the state-of-the-art of many ranking tasks [40]. Yet, the training of practical and effective
ranking models on tasks with little to no annotated data remains a challenge [57]. A popular transfer
learning framework for this problem is domain adaptation [41]: given source domains with labeled
data that are relevant to the target domain of interest, domain adaptation methods optimize the model
on the source domain and make the knowledge transferable by utilizing (unlabeled) target data.
For domain adaptation, there are task-specific and general-purpose (unsupervised) methods. E.g.,
for text ranking in information retrieval where we only have access to target documents without any
training query or relevance annotation, a method is to use generative language models to synthesize
†

Work performed while at Google Research.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

