Connecting Certified and Adversarial Training

Yuhao Mao, Mark Niklas Müller, Marc Fischer, Martin Vechev
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{yuhao.mao, mark.mueller, marc.fischer, martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Training certifiably robust neural networks remains a notoriously hard problem.
While adversarial training optimizes under-approximations of the worst-case loss,
which leads to insufficient regularization for certification, sound certified training
methods, optimize loose over-approximations, leading to over-regularization and
poor (standard) accuracy. In this work, we propose TAPS, an (unsound) certified
training method that combines IBP and PGD training to optimize more precise,
although not necessarily sound, worst-case loss approximations, reducing overregularization and increasing certified and standard accuracies. Empirically, TAPS
achieves a new state-of-the-art in many settings, e.g., reaching a certified accuracy
of 22% on T INY I MAGE N ET for ℓ∞ -perturbations with radius ϵ = 1/255. We
make our implementation and networks public at github.com/eth-sri/taps.

1

Introduction

Adversarial robustness, i.e., a neural network’s resilience to small input perturbations (Biggio et al.,
2013; Szegedy et al., 2014), has established itself as an important research area.
Neural Network Certification can rigorously prove such robustness: While complete verification
methods (Tjeng et al., 2019; Bunel et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022a; Ferrari et al., 2022) can decide
every robustness property given enough (exponential) time, incomplete methods (Wong and Kolter,
2018; Singh et al., 2019a; Zhang et al., 2018) trade precision for scalability.
Adversarial training methods, such as PGD (Madry et al., 2018), aim to improve robustness by
training with samples that are perturbed to approximately maximize the training loss. This can be
seen as optimizing an under-approximation of the worst-case loss. While it empirically improves
robustness significantly, it generally does not induce sufficient regularization for certification and has
been shown to fail in the face of more powerful attacks (Tramèr et al., 2020).
Certified Training methods, in contrast, optimize approximations of the worst-case loss, thus
increasing certified accuracies at the cost of over-regularization that leads to reduced standard
accuracies. In this work, we distinguish two certified training paradigms. Sound methods (Mirman
et al., 2018; Gowal et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2021) compute sound over-approximations of the worst-case
loss via bound propagation. The resulting approximation errors induce a strong (over-)regularization
that makes certification easy but causes severely reduced standard accuracies. Interestingly, reducing
these approximation errors by using more precise bound propagation methods, empirically, results in
strictly worse performance, as they induce harder optimization problems (Jovanović et al., 2022). This
gave rise to unsound methods (Balunovic and Vechev, 2020; Palma et al., 2022; Müller et al., 2022a),
which aim to compute precise but not necessarily sound approximations of the worst-case loss,
reducing (over)-regularization and resulting in networks that achieve higher standard and certified
accuracies, but can be harder to certify. Recent advances in certification techniques, however, have
made their certification practically feasible (Ferrari et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022a).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

