Algorithm Selection for Deep Active Learning with
Imbalanced Datasets
Jifan Zhang
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Madison, WI 53715
jifan@cs.wisc.edu

Shuai Shao
Meta Inc.
Menlo Park, CA 94025
sshao@meta.com

Saurabh Verma
Meta Inc.
Menlo Park, CA 94025
saurabh08@meta.com

Robert Nowak
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Madison, WI 53715
rdnowak@wisc.edu

Abstract
Label efficiency has become an increasingly important objective in deep learning
applications. Active learning aims to reduce the number of labeled examples
needed to train deep networks, but the empirical performance of active learning
algorithms can vary dramatically across datasets and applications. It is difficult
to know in advance which active learning strategy will perform well or best in a
given application. To address this, we propose the first adaptive algorithm selection
strategy for deep active learning. For any unlabeled dataset, our (meta) algorithm
TAILOR (Thompson ActIve Learning algORithm selection) iteratively and adaptively chooses among a set of candidate active learning algorithms. TAILOR uses
novel reward functions aimed at gathering class-balanced examples. Extensive
experiments in multi-class and multi-label applications demonstrate TAILOR ’s
effectiveness in achieving accuracy comparable or better than that of the best of
the candidate algorithms. Our implementation of TAILOR is open-sourced at
https://github.com/jifanz/TAILOR.

1

Introduction

Active learning (AL) aims to reduce data labeling cost by iteratively and adaptively finding informative
unlabeled examples for annotation. Label-efficiency is increasingly crucial as deep learning models
require large amount of labeled training data. In recent years, numerous new algorithms have been
proposed for deep active learning [Sener and Savarese, 2017, Gal et al., 2017, Ash et al., 2019,
Kothawade et al., 2021, Citovsky et al., 2021, Zhang et al., 2022]. Relative label efficiencies among
algorithms, however, vary significantly across datasets and applications [Beck et al., 2021, Zhan
et al., 2022]. When it comes to choosing the best algorithm for a novel dataset or application,
practitioners have mostly been relying on educated guesses and subjective preferences. Prior work
[Baram et al., 2004, Hsu and Lin, 2015, Pang et al., 2018] have studied the online choice of active
learning algorithms for linear models, but these methods become ineffective in deep learning settings
(see Section 2). In this paper, we present the first principled approach for automatically selecting
effective deep AL algorithms for novel, unlabeled datasets.
We reduce the algorithm selection task to a multi-armed bandit problem. As shown in Figure 1, the
idea may be viewed as a meta algorithm adaptively choosing among a set of candidate AL algorithms
(arms). The objective of the meta algorithm is to maximize the cumulative reward incurred from
running the chosen candidate algorithms. In Section 4, we propose reward functions that encourage
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

