Reward Imputation with Sketching for
Contextual Batched Bandits
∗

∗

†

Xiao Zhang1,2 , Ninglu Shao1,2, , Zihua Si1,2, , Jun Xu1,2, ,
Wenhan Wang3 , Hanjing Su3 , Ji-Rong Wen1,2
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
3
Tencent Inc., Shenzhen, China
{zhangx89, ninglu_shao, zihua_si, junxu, jrwen}@ruc.edu.cn
{justinsu, ezewang}@tencent.com

Abstract
Contextual batched bandit (CBB) is a setting where a batch of rewards is observed from the environment at the end of each episode, but the rewards of the
non-executed actions are unobserved, resulting in partial-information feedback.
Existing approaches for CBB often ignore the rewards of the non-executed actions,
leading to underutilization of feedback information. In this paper, we propose an
efficient approach called Sketched Policy Updating with Imputed Rewards (SPUIR)
that completes the unobserved rewards using sketching, which approximates the
full-information feedbacks. We formulate reward imputation as an imputation
regularized ridge regression problem that captures the feedback mechanisms of
both executed and non-executed actions. To reduce time complexity, we solve
the regression problem using randomized sketching. We prove that our approach
achieves an instantaneous regret with controllable bias and smaller variance than
approaches without reward imputation. Furthermore, our approach enjoys a sublinear regret bound against the optimal policy. We also present two extensions, a
rate-scheduled version and a version for nonlinear rewards, making our approach
more practical. Experimental results show that SPUIR outperforms state-of-the-art
baselines on synthetic, public benchmark, and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Contextual bandits have gained significant popularity in solving sequential decision-making problems
(Li et al., 2010; Lan and Baraniuk, 2016; Yom-Tov et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2021), where the agent
continuously updates its decision-making policy fully online (i.e., at each step), considering the
context and the received reward feedback to maximize cumulative rewards. In this paper, we address
a more general setting called contextual batched bandits (CBB). In CBB, the decision process is
divided into N episodes, and within each episode, the agent interacts with the environment for a fixed
number of B steps. At the end of each episode, the agent collects reward feedbacks and contexts.
Subsequently, the policy is updated using the collected data to guide the decision-making process in
the subsequent episode. CBB offers a practical framework for real-world streaming applications (e.g.,
streaming recommendation (Zhang et al., 2021, 2022)). In the context of CBB settings, the batch size
B, can be adjusted by the agent to achieve improved regret guarantees and meet the data throughput
requirements based on the available computing resources (Zhou, 2023).
∗
†

Ninglu Shao and Zihua Si have made equal contributions to this paper.
Corresponding author: Jun Xu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

