SimMTM: A Simple Pre-Training Framework for
Masked Time-Series Modeling
Jiaxiang Dong∗, Haixu Wu∗, Haoran Zhang, Li Zhang, Jianmin Wang, Mingsheng LongB
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
{djx20,z-hr20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wuhaixu98@gmail.com
{lizhang,jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Time series analysis is widely used in extensive areas. Recently, to reduce labeling
expenses and benefit various tasks, self-supervised pre-training has attracted immense interest. One mainstream paradigm is masked modeling, which successfully
pre-trains deep models by learning to reconstruct the masked content based on the
unmasked part. However, since the semantic information of time series is mainly
contained in temporal variations, the standard way of randomly masking a portion
of time points will seriously ruin vital temporal variations of time series, making the
reconstruction task too difficult to guide representation learning. We thus present
SimMTM, a Simple pre-training framework for Masked Time-series Modeling.
By relating masked modeling to manifold learning, SimMTM proposes to recover
masked time points by the weighted aggregation of multiple neighbors outside the
manifold, which eases the reconstruction task by assembling ruined but complementary temporal variations from multiple masked series. SimMTM further learns
to uncover the local structure of the manifold, which is helpful for masked modeling. Experimentally, SimMTM achieves state-of-the-art fine-tuning performance
compared to the most advanced time series pre-training methods in two canonical
time series analysis tasks: forecasting and classification, covering both in- and
cross-domain settings. Code is available at https://github.com/thuml/SimMTM.

1

Introduction

Time series analysis has attached immense importance in extensive real-world applications, such as
financial analysis, energy planning and etc [47, 51]. Vast amounts of time series are incrementally
collected from IoT and wearable devices. However, the semantic information of time series is
mainly buried in human-indiscernible temporal variations, making it difficult to annotate. Recently,
self-supervised pre-training has been widely explored [23, 15], which benefits deep models from
pretext knowledge learned over large-scale unlabeled data and further promotes the performance of
various downstream tasks. Mainly, as a well-recognized pre-training paradigm, masked modeling has
achieved great success in many areas, such as masked language modeling (MLM) [7, 31, 32, 3, 10]
and masked image modeling (MIM) [11, 50, 20]. This paper extends pre-training methods to time
series, especially masked time-series modeling (MTM).
The canonical technique of masked modeling is to optimize the model by learning to reconstruct
the masked content based on the unmasked part [7]. However, unlike images and natural languages
whose patches or words contain much even redundant semantic information, we observe that the
valuable semantic information of time series is mainly included in the temporal variations, such as
the trend, periodicity, and peak valley, which can correspond to unique weather processes, abnormal
faults, etc. in the real world. Therefore, directly masking a portion of time points will seriously ruin
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

