Adversarial Resilience in Sequential Prediction
via Abstention
Surbhi Goel
University of Pennsylvania
surbhig@cis.upenn.edu

Steve Hanneke
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Shay Moran
Technion and Google Research, Israel
smoran@technion.ac.il

Abhishek Shetty
University of California, Berkeley
shetty@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of sequential prediction in the stochastic setting with an
adversary that is allowed to inject clean-label adversarial (or out-of-distribution)
examples. Algorithms designed to handle purely stochastic data tend to fail in the
presence of such adversarial examples, often leading to erroneous predictions. This
is undesirable in many high-stakes applications such as medical recommendations,
where abstaining from predictions on adversarial examples is preferable to misclassification. On the other hand, assuming fully adversarial data leads to very
pessimistic bounds that are often vacuous in practice.
To move away from these pessimistic guarantees, we propose a new model of
sequential prediction that sits between the purely stochastic and fully adversarial
settings by allowing the learner to abstain from making a prediction at no cost on
adversarial examples, thereby asking the learner to make predictions with certainty.
Assuming access to the marginal distribution on the non-adversarial examples, we
design a learner whose error scales with the VC dimension (mirroring the stochastic
setting) of the hypothesis class, as opposed to the Littlestone dimension which
characterizes the fully adversarial setting. Furthermore, we design learners for VC
dimension 1 classes and the class of axis-aligned rectangles, which work even in
the absence of access to the marginal distribution. Our key technical contribution
is a novel measure for quantifying uncertainty for learning VC classes, which may
be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of sequential prediction in the realizable setting, where labels are generated
from an unknown f ∗ belonging to a hypothesis class F. Sequential prediction is typically studied
under two distributional assumptions on the input data: the stochastic setting where the data is
assumed to be identically and independently distributed (i.i.d) according to some fixed (perhaps
unknown) distribution, and the fully-adversarial setting where we make absolutely no assumptions
on the data generation process. A simple empirical risk minimzation (ERM) strategy works for the
stochastic setting where the learner predicts according to the best hypothesis on the data seen so
far. The number of mistakes of this strategy typically scales with the Vapnik-Chervonenkis (VC)
dimension of the underlying hypothesis class F. However, in the fully adversarial setting, this strategy
can lead to infinite mistakes even for classes of VC dimension 1 even if the adversary is required to
be consistent with labels from f ∗ . The Littlestone dimension, which characterizes the complexity of
sequential prediction in fully-adversarial setting, can be very large and often unbounded compared to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

