Meta-AdaM: A Meta-Learned Adaptive Optimizer
with Momentum for Few-Shot Learning

Siyuan Sun
Department of Computer Science
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011
sxs14473@iastate.edu

Hongyang Gao
Department of Computer Science
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011
hygao@iastate.edu

Abstract
We introduce Meta-AdaM, a meta-learned adaptive optimizer with momentum, designed for few-shot learning tasks that pose significant challenges to deep learning
models due to the limited number of labeled examples. Meta-learning has been
successfully employed to address these challenges by transferring meta-learned
prior knowledge to new tasks. Most existing works focus on meta-learning an optimal model initialization or an adaptive learning rate learner for rapid convergence.
However, these approaches either neglect to consider weight-update history for
the adaptive learning rate learner or fail to effectively integrate momentum for fast
convergence, as seen in many-shot learning settings. To tackle these limitations,
we propose a meta-learned learning rate learner that utilizes weight-update history
as input to predict more appropriate learning rates for rapid convergence. Furthermore, for the first time, our approach incorporates momentum into the optimization
process of few-shot learning via a double look-ahead mechanism, enabling rapid
convergence similar to many-shot settings. Extensive experimental results on
benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed Meta-AdaM.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has demonstrated its capability in solving various challenging tasks in many-shotlearning settings, where each classification class contains sufficient training examples [12]. However,
its performance is hindered on small datasets or under few-shot-learning (FSL) settings [37]. In FSL,
unseen tasks with limited training examples pose significant challenges for optimizing deep learning
models [45]. With limited training data, deep learning models may suffer from severe underfitting
or overfitting problems [28]. Numerous meta-learning methods have been proposed to address this
challenge by identifying and encoding shared knowledge among different data distributions within
the model. With prior generalized knowledge, a meta-learning model can be rapidly transferred to a
new task by fine-tuning it with limited unseen data [13].
Existing optimization-based meta-learning methods for FSL facilitate this transfer process by finetuning a meta-learned model on new few-shot tasks. There are two primary directions for using
meta-learning in FSL tasks: learning an optimal initialization and generating high-quality gradient
updates for rapid convergence. In the first direction, most methods [7, 8, 29, 24, 17, 18] employ an
inner loop to fine-tune the meta-model on specific tasks and iteratively optimize the meta-model in
an outer loop based on the adapted model from the inner loop. The resulting initial model weights
enable the adapted model to converge more quickly to an optimal solution for a new task. In the
second direction, some works [38, 2, 46] focus on generating high-quality and task-adaptive gradient
updates, allowing the optimizer to rapidly converge to an appropriate solution.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

