EICIL: Joint Excitatory Inhibitory Cycle Iteration
Learning for Deep Spiking Neural Networks

Zihang Shao1

Xuanye Fang1
Yaxin Li1
Chaoran Feng1
2
1,2*
Jiangrong Shen
Qi Xu
1
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have undergone continuous development and extensive research over the decades to improve biological plausibility while optimizing energy efﬁciency. However, traditional deep SNN training methods have
some limitations, and they rely on strategies such as pre-training and ﬁne-tuning,
indirect encoding and reconstruction, and approximate gradients. These strategies lack complete training models and lack biocompatibility. To overcome these
limitations, we propose a novel learning method named Deep Spiking Neural Networks with Joint Excitatory Inhibition Loop Iterative Learning (EICIL). Inspired
by biological neuron signal transmission, this method integrates excitatory and inhibitory behaviors in neurons, organically combining these two behavioral modes
into one framework. EICIL signiﬁcantly improves the biomimicry and adaptability of spiking neuron models and expands the representation space of spiking
neurons. Extensive experiments based on EICIL and traditional learning methods show that EICIL outperforms traditional methods on various datasets such as
CIFAR10 and CIFAR100, demonstrating the key role of learning methods that
integrate both behaviors during training.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the spiking neural network (SNN) has garnered signiﬁcant attention and research
in the ﬁelds of neuroscience and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) [33, 26, 7]. As a computational
model that simulates the functioning principles of biological neural systems, SNN exhibits high
biological plausibility and energy efﬁciency, making it a crucial approach for neural information
processing[17, 20, 14]. However, traditional deep SNN training methods face certain limitations,
such as reliance on pre-training and ﬁne-tuning strategies, indirect encoding, and approximate gradients. These limitations lead to the training of SNNs leaning more towards deep learning-based
methods [12, 17, 20, 3] and away from the principles of brain heuristics.
In order to enhance the biological plausibility and adaptability of SNN, and overcome these limitations, we propose a novel learning and training method called Excitatory-Inhibitory Cooperative
Iterative Learning (EICIL). The core idea of EICIL is to simulate the excitatory and inhibitory behaviors of biological neurons and seamlessly integrate them into the training process of SNN. In
this way, EICIL can better emulate the characteristics of neural signal transmission and expand the
representation space of SNN.
*

Corresponding author: xuqi@dlut.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

