Are GATs Out of Balance?
Nimrah Mustafa∗
nimrah.mustafa@cispa.de

∗

Aleksandar Bojchevski†
a.bojchevski@uni-koeln.de

Rebekka Burkholz∗
burkholz@cispa.de

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
†
University of Cologne, 50923 Köln, Germany

Abstract
While the expressive power and computational capabilities of graph neural networks (GNNs) have been theoretically studied, their optimization and learning
dynamics, in general, remain largely unexplored. Our study undertakes the Graph
Attention Network (GAT), a popular GNN architecture in which a node’s neighborhood aggregation is weighted by parameterized attention coefficients. We derive
a conservation law of GAT gradient flow dynamics, which explains why a high
portion of parameters in GATs with standard initialization struggle to change during training. This effect is amplified in deeper GATs, which perform significantly
worse than their shallow counterparts. To alleviate this problem, we devise an
initialization scheme that balances the GAT network. Our approach i) allows
more effective propagation of gradients and in turn enables trainability of deeper
networks, and ii) attains a considerable speedup in training and convergence time
in comparison to the standard initialization. Our main theorem serves as a stepping
stone to studying the learning dynamics of positive homogeneous models with
attention mechanisms.

1

Introduction

A rapidly growing class of model architectures for graph representation learning are Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) [20] which have achieved strong empirical performance across various applications
such as social network analysis [8], drug discovery [27], recommendation systems [61], and traffic
forecasting [50]. This has driven research focused on constructing and assessing specific architectural
designs [59] tailored to various tasks.
On the theoretical front, mostly the expressive power [51, 26] and computational capabilities [45]
of GNNs have been studied. However, there is limited understanding of the underlying learning
mechanics. We undertake a classical variant of GNNs, the Graph Attention Network (GAT) [48, 9].
It overcomes the limitation of standard neighborhood representation averaging in GCNs [29, 22] by
employing a self-attention mechanism [47] on nodes. Attention performs a weighted aggregation
over a node’s neighbors to learn their relative importance. This increases the expressiveness of the
neural network. GAT is a popular model that continues to serve as strong baseline.
However, a major limitation of message-passing GNNs in general, and therefore GATs as well, is
severe performance degradation when the depth of the network is even slightly increased. SOTA
results are reportedly achieved by models of 2 or 3 layers. This problem has largely been attributed to
over-smoothing [35], a phenomenon in which node representations become indistinguishable when
multiple layers are stacked. To relieve GNNs of over-smoothing, practical techniques inspired by
classical deep neural networks tweak the training process, e.g. by normalization [11, 64, 65, 66] or
regularization [38, 42, 55, 67], and impose architectural changes such as skip connections (dense
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

