Meta-in-context learning in large language models
Julian Coda-Forno1,2,∗ Marcel Binz1 Zeynep Akata2
Matthew Botvinick3 Jane X. Wang3 Eric Schulz1
1
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, 2 University of Tübingen - Tübingen, Germany;
3
Google DeepMind - London, United-Kingdom
∗
{julian.coda-forno@tuebingen.mpg.de}

Abstract
Large language models have shown tremendous performance in a variety of tasks.
In-context learning – the ability to improve at a task after being provided with a
number of demonstrations – is seen as one of the main contributors to their success.
In the present paper, we demonstrate that the in-context learning abilities of large
language models can be recursively improved via in-context learning itself. We
coin this phenomenon meta-in-context learning. Looking at two idealized domains,
a one-dimensional regression task and a two-armed bandit task, we show that
meta-in-context learning adaptively reshapes a large language model’s priors over
expected tasks. Furthermore, we find that meta-in-context learning modifies the
in-context learning strategies of such models. Finally, we broaden the scope of
our investigation to encompass two diverse benchmarks: one focusing on realworld regression problems and the other encompassing multiple NLP tasks. In
both cases, we observe competitive performance comparable to that of traditional
learning algorithms. Taken together, our work improves our understanding of
in-context learning and paves the way toward adapting large language models to
the environment they are applied purely through meta-in-context learning rather
than traditional finetuning.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are taking not only machine learning research but also society by
storm [1, 2, 3]. Part of what makes these models so persuasive is that their abilities reach far beyond
what we expected pure language models to do. They can, among other things, solve challenging
reasoning problems, including university-level math questions [4] or analogical reasoning tasks [5],
out-of-the-box and without additional training.
Much of this power comes from what is known as in-context learning [6]. In-context learning
(sometimes also called few-shot learning or few-shot prompting) refers to the ability of an LLM to
improve at a given task after being provided with a number of task-relevant demonstrations. This
ability sets LLMs apart from traditional models and led to a totally new paradigm – one which
eschews finetuning of weights on task-specific data altogether and instead relies entirely on contextual
information.
In the present paper, we ask whether the learning algorithm implemented through in-context learning
can be improved through in-context learning itself (without the need for any further finetuning of
parameters). To study this question, we conducted several experiments where we presented an LLM
with multiple learning tasks in a sequence. In three distinct settings, we find evidence for the idea
that the in-context learning abilities of an LLM can be recursively enhanced via in-context learning,
thereby displaying a form of meta-in-context learning. Figure 1 provides a high-level overview of
our approach on an example supervised learning task.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

