Knowledge Diffusion for Distillation

Tao Huang1,2 Yuan Zhang3 Mingkai Zheng1 Shan You2∗
Fei Wang4 Chen Qian2 Chang Xu1
1
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
2
SenseTime Research 3 Peking University
4
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
The representation gap between teacher and student is an emerging topic in knowledge distillation (KD). To reduce the gap and improve the performance, current
methods often resort to complicated training schemes, loss functions, and feature
alignments, which are task-specific and feature-specific. In this paper, we state that
the essence of these methods is to discard the noisy information and distill the valuable information in the feature, and propose a novel KD method dubbed DiffKD,
to explicitly denoise and match features using diffusion models. Our approach is
based on the observation that student features typically contain more noises than
teacher features due to the smaller capacity of student model. To address this, we
propose to denoise student features using a diffusion model trained by teacher features. This allows us to perform better distillation between the refined clean feature
and teacher feature. Additionally, we introduce a light-weight diffusion model with
a linear autoencoder to reduce the computation cost and an adaptive noise matching
module to improve the denoising performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that DiffKD is effective across various types of features and achieves state-of-theart performance consistently on image classification, object detection, and semantic
segmentation tasks. Code is available at https://github.com/hunto/DiffKD.

1

Introduction

The success of deep neural networks is generally accomplished with the requirements of large
computation and memory, which restricts their applications on resource-limited devices. One widelyused solution is knowledge distillation (KD) [14], which aims to boost the performance of efficient
model (student) by transferring the knowledge of a larger model (teacher).
The key to knowledge distillation lies in how to transfer the knowledge from teacher to student by
matching the output features (e.g., representations and logits). Recently, some studies [17, 29] have
shown that the discrepancy between student feature and teacher feature can be significantly large due
to the capacity gap between the two models. Directly aligning those mismatched features would even
disturb the optimization of student and weaken the performance. As a result, the essence of most
state-of-the-art KD methods is to shrink this discrepancy and only select the valuable information
for distillation. For example, TAKD [29] introduces multiple middle-sized teach assistant models
to bridge the gap; SFTN [30] learns a student-friendly teacher by regularizing the teacher training
with student; DIST [17] relaxes the exact matching of teacher and student features of KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence loss by proposing a correlation-based loss; MasKD [18] distills the valuable
information in the features and ignores the noisy regions by learning to identify receptive regions that
contribute to the task precision. However, these methods need to resort to either complicated training
schemes or task-specific priors, making them challenging to apply to various tasks and feature types.
∗

Correspondence to: Shan You <youshan@sensetime.com>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

