Class-Distribution-Aware Pseudo-Labeling for
Semi-Supervised Multi-Label Learning

Ming-Kun Xie1,2 , Jia-Hao Xiao1,2 , Hao-Zhe Liu1,2 , Gang Niu3 , Masashi Sugiyama3,4 ,
Sheng-Jun Huang1,2∗
1
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Nanjing, China
3
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
4
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
{mkxie, jiahaoxiao, haozheliu, huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn
gang.niu.ml@gmail.com sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Pseudo-labeling has emerged as a popular and effective approach for utilizing
unlabeled data. However, in the context of semi-supervised multi-label learning
(SSMLL), conventional pseudo-labeling methods encounter difficulties when dealing with instances associated with multiple labels and an unknown label count.
These limitations often result in the introduction of false positive labels or the
neglect of true positive ones. To overcome these challenges, this paper proposes a
novel solution called Class-Aware Pseudo-Labeling (CAP) that performs pseudolabeling in a class-aware manner. The proposed approach introduces a regularized
learning framework incorporating class-aware thresholds, which effectively control
the assignment of positive and negative pseudo-labels for each class. Notably,
even with a small proportion of labeled examples, our observations demonstrate
that the estimated class distribution serves as a reliable approximation. Motivated by this finding, we develop a class-distribution-aware thresholding strategy
to ensure the alignment of pseudo-label distribution with the true distribution.
The correctness of the estimated class distribution is theoretically verified, and
a generalization error bound is provided for our proposed method. Extensive
experiments on multiple benchmark datasets confirm the efficacy of CAP in addressing the challenges of SSMLL problems. The implementation is available at
https://github.com/milkxie/SSMLL-CAP.

1

Introduction

In single-label supervised learning, each instance is assumed to be associated with only one class
label, while many realistic scenarios may be multi-labeled, where each instance consists of multiple
semantics. For example, an image of a nature landscape often contains the objects of sky, cloud, and
mountain. Multi-label learning (MLL) is a practical and effective paradigm for handling examples
with multiple labels. It trains a classifier that can predict all the relevant labels for unseen instances
based on the given training examples. A large number of recent works have witnessed the great
progress that MLL has made in many practical applications [27], e.g., image annotation [21], protein
subcellular localization [28], and visual attribute recognition [32].
Thanks to its powerful capacity, the deep neural network (DNN) has become a prevalent learning
model for handling MLL examples [34]. Unfortunately, it requires a large number of precisely labeled
∗

Correspondence to: Sheng-Jun Huang (huangsj@nuaa.edu.cn).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

