Fast Exact Leverage Score Sampling from Khatri-Rao
Products with Applications to Tensor Decomposition

Vivek Bharadwaj 1,2 , Osman Asif Malik 2 , Riley Murray 3,2,1 ,
Laura Grigori 4 , Aydın Buluç 2, 1 , James Demmel 1
1
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, UC Berkeley
2
Computational Research Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Lab
3
International Computer Science Institute
4
Institute of Mathematics, EPFL & Lab for Simulation and Modelling, Paul Scherrer Institute

Abstract
We present a data structure to randomly sample rows from the Khatri-Rao product
of several matrices according to the exact distribution of its leverage scores. Our
proposed sampler draws each row in time logarithmic in the height of the KhatriRao product and quadratic in its column count, with persistent space overhead
at most the size of the input matrices. As a result, it tractably draws samples
even when the matrices forming the Khatri-Rao product have tens of millions
of rows each. When used to sketch the linear least squares problems arising in
CANDECOMP / PARAFAC tensor decomposition, our method achieves lower
asymptotic complexity per solve than recent state-of-the-art methods. Experiments
on billion-scale sparse tensors validate our claims, with our algorithm achieving
higher accuracy than competing methods as the decomposition rank grows.

1

Introduction

The Khatri-Rao product (KRP, denoted by ⊙) is the column-wise Kronecker product of two matrices,
and it appears in diverse applications across numerical analysis and machine learning [16]. We
examine overdetermined linear least squares problems of the form minX ∥AX − B∥F , where the
design matrix A = U1 ⊙ ... ⊙ UN is the Khatri-Rao product of matrices Uj ∈ RIj ×R . These problems
appear prominently in signal processing [23], compressed sensing [31], inverse problems related to
partial differential equations [5], and alternating least squares (ALS) CANDECOMP / PARAFAC
(CP) tensor decomposition [13]. In this work, we focus on the case where A has moderate column
count (several hundred at most). Despite this, the problem remains formidable because the height of
QN
A is j=1 Ij . For row counts Ij in the millions, it is intractable to even materialize A explicitly.
Several recently-proposed randomized sketching algorithms can approximately solve least squares
problems with Khatri-Rao product design matrices [4, 12, 15, 18, 29]. These methods apply a
sketching operator S to the design and data matrices to solve the reduced least squares problem
minX̃ SAX̃ − SB , where S has far fewer rows than columns. For appropriately chosen S, the
F
residual of the downsampled system falls within a specified tolerance ε of the optimal residual with
high probability 1 − δ. In this work, we constrain S to be a sampling matrix that selects and reweights
a subset of rows from both A and B. When the rows are selected according to the distribution of
statistical leverage scores on the design matrix A, only Õ (R/(εδ)) samples are required (subject to
the assumptions at the end of section 2.1). The challenge, then, is to efficiently sample according to
the leverage scores when A has Khatri-Rao structure.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

