DDCoT: Duty-Distinct Chain-of-Thought Prompting
for Multimodal Reasoning in Language Models

Ge Zheng1∗ Bin Yang1∗ Jiajin Tang1∗ Hong-Yu Zhou2 Sibei Yang1†
1
2
ShanghaiTech University
The University of Hong Kong
Project Page: https://toneyaya.github.io/ddcot/

Abstract
A long-standing goal of AI systems is to perform complex multimodal reasoning
like humans. Recently, large language models (LLMs) have made remarkable
strides in such multi-step reasoning on the language modality solely by leveraging
the chain of thought (CoT) to mimic human thinking. However, the transfer of these
advancements to multimodal contexts introduces heightened challenges, including
but not limited to the impractical need for labor-intensive annotation and the
limitations in terms of flexibility, generalizability, and explainability. To evoke CoT
reasoning in multimodality, this work first conducts an in-depth analysis of these
challenges posed by multimodality and presents two key insights: “keeping critical
thinking” and “letting everyone do their jobs” in multimodal CoT reasoning.
Furthermore, this study proposes a novel DDCoT prompting that maintains a
critical attitude through negative-space prompting and incorporates multimodality
into reasoning by first dividing the reasoning responsibility of LLMs into reasoning
and recognition and then integrating the visual recognition capability of visual
models into the joint reasoning process. The rationales generated by DDCoT not
only improve the reasoning abilities of both large and small language models in
zero-shot prompting and fine-tuning learning, significantly outperforming state-ofthe-art methods but also exhibit impressive generalizability and explainability.

1

Introduction

One of the fundamental aspirations of AI systems is to address complex tasks with reliability and
efficiency that are aligned with human capabilities [31, 48, 58, 11, 5, 52, 53, 49, 50]. In tackling
such complex tasks, humans rely on multi-step reasoning that integrates information from various
modalities. Recently, language models (LMs) [3, 37, 55, 8, 7] have shown remarkable progress in a
range of multi-step reasoning tasks by prompting [60, 25, 70, 15, 54] or fine-tuning [35, 13, 59, 27]
with the chain of thought (CoT) that mimics the human reasoning process.
However, most studies on CoT reasoning have focused solely on the language modality [44, 10, 32,
72, 22, 5, 68, 66], with minimal attention to multimodal contexts. UnifiedQA [31] and MM-CoT [71]
are the pioneering works of eliciting CoT reasoning in vision-and-language multimodality. They
employ multimodal inputs, as illustrated in Figure 1(a), necessitating training for the generation of
the intermediate reasoning steps (i.e., rationales) either as an explanation accompanied by an answer
or as reasoning prior to inferring the answer. Despite the benefits of these multimodal CoT reasoning
methods in enhancing the ability of LMs to answer multimodal science questions, several significant
challenges have impeded their deployment: (1) Labor-intensive annotation: manual annotation
for rationales is time-consuming, costly, and challenging to ensure consistency and completeness in
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author. yangsb@shanghaitech.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

