Prompt-augmented Temporal Point Process for
Streaming Event Sequence

Siqiao Xue∗ , Yan Wang∗ , Zhixuan Chu♠ , Xiaoming Shi, Caigao Jiang, Hongyan Hao
Gangwei Jiang, Xiaoyun Feng, James Y. Zhang, Jun Zhou
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China
{siqiao.xsq,luli.wy,chuzhixuan.czx}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Neural Temporal Point Processes (TPPs) are the prevalent paradigm for modeling
continuous-time event sequences, such as user activities on the web and financial
transactions. In real-world applications, event data is typically received in a streaming manner, where the distribution of patterns may shift over time. Additionally,
privacy and memory constraints are commonly observed in practical scenarios,
further compounding the challenges. Therefore, the continuous monitoring of
a TPP to learn the streaming event sequence is an important yet under-explored
problem. Our work paper addresses this challenge by adopting Continual Learning
(CL), which makes the model capable of continuously learning a sequence of tasks
without catastrophic forgetting under realistic constraints. Correspondingly, we
propose a simple yet effective framework, PromptTPP1 , by integrating the base
TPP with a continuous-time retrieval prompt pool. The prompts, small learnable
parameters, are stored in a memory space and jointly optimized with the base
TPP, ensuring that the model learns event streams sequentially without buffering
past examples or task-specific attributes. We present a novel and realistic experimental setup for modeling event streams, where PromptTPP consistently achieves
state-of-the-art performance across three real user behavior datasets.

1

Introduction

Event sequences are ubiquitous in a wide range of applications, such as healthcare, finance, social
media, and so on. Neural TPPs (Mei & Eisner, 2017; Shchur et al., 2020; Zuo et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2022) have emerged as the dominant paradigm for modeling such data, thanks
to their ability to leverage the rich representation power of neural networks. However, most existing
works assume a static setting, where the TPP model is trained on the entire data, and parameters
remain fixed after training. In contrast, real-world event data usually arrives in a streaming manner,
rendering it impractical to store all data and retrain the model from scratch at each time step due to
computational and storage costs. Shown in Figure 1, a common approach is to use sliding windows
to frame the data for model training and prediction. Traditional schemes include pretraining a TPP,
which is used for all the following test periods, retraining TPP on the data of each slide of windows
and online TPPs. However, they either may fail to adapt to new data or suffer from catastrophic
forgetting (see Appendix A for an empirical analysis).
In our work, we approach the problem by adopting Continual Learning (CL) (Hadsell et al., 2020;
Hao et al., 2023; Chu & Li, 2023; Chu et al., 2023b), a relevant area studying how systems learn
sequentially from a continuous stream of correlated data. Yet, classical CL models are not fully
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author.
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/yanyanSann/PromptTPP

♠

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

