Classical Simulation of Quantum Circuits Using
Reinforcement Learning:
Parallel Environments and Benchmark

1

Xiao-Yang Liu1,2 and Zeliang Zhang2∗
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 2 Columbia University,

liux33@rpi.edu, XL2427@columbia.edu, hust0426@gmail.com

Abstract
Google’s “quantum supremacy” announcement [3] has received broad questions
from academia and industry due to the debatable estimate of 10, 000 years’ running time for the classical simulation task on the Summit supercomputer. Has
“quantum supremacy” already come? Or will it come in one or two decades
later? To avoid hasty advertisements of “quantum supremacy” by tech giants or
quantum startups and eliminate the cost of dedicating a team to the classical simulation task, we advocate an open-source approach to maintain a trustable benchmark performance. In this paper, we take a reinforcement learning approach for
the classical simulation of quantum circuits and demonstrate its great potential by
reporting an estimated simulation time of less than 4 days, a speedup of 5.40×
over the state-of-the-art method. Specifically, we formulate the classical simulation task as a tensor network contraction ordering problem using the K-spin Ising
model and employ a novel Hamiltonian-based reinforcement learning algorithm.
Then, we evaluate the performance of classical simulation of quantum circuits. We
develop a dozen of massively parallel environments to simulate quantum circuits.
We open-source our parallel gym environments and benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Running time

Google proudly announced “achieving quantum supremacy”
[3] with its 53-qubit Sycamore circuits back in 2019,
Google
which was later challenged by researchers claiming to have
existing
pulled ahead of Google on classical computers. Quantum
supremacy [46] aims to demonstrate that a programmable
goal
10,000
quantum device can solve a problem that no classical comyears
puter can solve in any feasible amount of time, irrespective
21
days
of the usefulness of the problem. As illustrated in Fig. 1, for
the problem of random number generation, Google’s “quantum supremacy” announcement [3] relied on an estimated
Quantum circuit
simulation time of 10, 000 years on the Summit supercom53
100
?
puter, while existing works reduce it to less than 21 days
Number of Qubits
and scale the number of quantum qubits up to around 100.
This raises the debate: Has “quantum supremacy” already
come? Or will it come in one or two decades later? Our Figure 1: Running time of different
goal is to use machine learning methods to derive the best quantum circuit simulation methods.
performance curves for the classical simulation task, to settle down the present debate and suggest
∗

Quantum

Supremacy

Zeliang Zhang completed this work as a research assistant at Columbia University.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

