LD2: Scalable Heterophilous Graph Neural Network
with Decoupled Embeddings
Ningyi Liao
Nanyang Technological University
liao0090@e.ntu.edu.sg

Siqiang Luo⇤
Nanyang Technological University
siqiang.luo@ntu.edu.sg

Xiang Li
East China Normal University
xiangli@dase.ecnu.edu.cn

Jieming Shi
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
jieming.shi@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Heterophilous Graph Neural Network (GNN) is a family of GNNs that specializes in learning graphs under heterophily, where connected nodes tend to have
different labels. Most existing heterophilous models incorporate iterative non-local
computations to capture node relationships. However, these approaches have limited application to large-scale graphs due to their high computational costs and
challenges in adopting minibatch schemes. In this work, we study the scalability
issues of heterophilous GNN and propose a scalable model, LD2 , which simplifies
the learning process by decoupling graph propagation and generating expressive
embeddings prior to training. Theoretical analysis demonstrates that LD2 achieves
optimal time complexity in training, as well as a memory footprint that remains
independent of the graph scale. We conduct extensive experiments to showcase that
our model is capable of lightweight minibatch training on large-scale heterophilous
graphs, with up to 15⇥ speed improvement and efficient memory utilization, while
maintaining comparable or better performance than the baselines. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/gdmnl/LD2.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) combine graph management techniques and neural networks to learn
from graph-structured data, and have shown remarkable performance in diverse graph processing
tasks, including node classification [1, 2], link prediction [3, 4], and community detection [5, 6].
Common GNN models rely on the principle of homophily, which assumes that connected nodes
tend to be similar to each other in terms of classes [7]. This inductive bias introduces additional
information from the graph structure and improves model performance in appropriate tasks [8].
However, this assumption does not always hold in practice. A broad range of real-world graphs
are heterophilous, where class labels of neighboring nodes usually differ from the ego node [9].
In such cases, the aggregation mechanism employed by conventional GNNs, which only passes
messages from a node to its neighbors, may mix the information from non-homophilous nodes and
cause them to be less discriminative. Consequently, the locality-based design is considered less
advantageous or even potentially harmful in these applications [10, 11]. Various solutions have been
proposed to address the heterophily problem, giving rise to a class of specialized GNNs known as
heterophilous GNNs. Common strategies to address heterophily include discovering multi-hop or
global graph relations [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17], and retrieving expressive node information through
enhanced network architectures [18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23].
⇤

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

