Optimization and Bayes: A Trade-off for
Overparameterized Neural Networks

Zhengmian Hu, Heng Huang
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20740
huzhengmian@gmail.com,henghuanghh@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel algorithm, Transformative Bayesian Learning
(TransBL), which bridges the gap between empirical risk minimization (ERM) and
Bayesian learning for neural networks. We compare ERM, which uses gradient
descent to optimize, and Bayesian learning with importance sampling for their generalization and computational complexity. We derive the first algorithm-dependent
PAC-Bayesian generalization bound for infinitely wide networks based on an exact
KL divergence between the trained posterior distribution obtained by infinitesimal step size gradient descent and a Gaussian prior. Moreover, we show how to
transform gradient-based optimization into importance sampling by incorporating
a weight. While Bayesian learning has better generalization, it suffers from low
sampling efficiency. Optimization methods, on the other hand, have good sampling
efficiency but poor generalization. Our proposed algorithm TransBL enables a
trade-off between generalization and sampling efficiency.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success in machine learning and related
applications. It repeatedly outperformed conventional machine learning approaches, resulting in
ground-breaking research such as human-level performance in computer vision [31], substantial
progress in natural language processing [10], and mastering the game of Go [65].
The success of DNNs is the result of a critical combination of the complexity and generalization.
On the one hand, universal approximation theorem [34] guarantees that any continuous function can
be approximated arbitrarily well by using a deep network. On the other hand, deep architectures,
together with large-scale training data and back-propagation algorithm, present a good generalization
ability towards unseen data.
Although expressive power and generalization ability are both desirable on their own, they are
mutually incompatible. Being one of the main contributions of statistical learning theory, the probably
approximately correct (PAC) learning [69] allows us to establish an upper bound of generalization
gap by capacity of a hypothesis space. Generally speaking, if a model is capable of fitting random
labels, then it must generalize poorly.
Recent result [79] shows that overparameterized DNNs do fit random label perfectly. However, it is
observed that more steps of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) are needed to train a neural network to
fit random labels. This phenomenon suggests that the learning capability of DNNs increases with the
number of training steps. In light of this observation, the algorithm-dependent generalization bounds
which control the complexity by maximum training steps are preferred over uniform convergence
bounds.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

