SNAP: Self-Supervised Neural Maps
for Visual Positioning and Semantic Understanding

Paul-Edouard Sarlin 1∗
psarlin.com

Eduard Trulls 2
trulls@google.com

Jan Hosang 2
hosang@google.com
1

sensor data
satellite

Simon Lynen 2
slynen@google.com
2

ETH Zurich

Marc Pollefeys 1
marc.pollefeys@ethz.ch

Google Research

self-supervised learning
aerial

downstream tasks
visual positioning

SNAP
multi-view fusion
semantic mapping
street
view

multi-modal neural map

Figure 1: We learn neural 2D maps from multi-modal imagery using camera poses. SNAP outperforms the state of the art in visual positioning, and by solving localization as a proxy task learns
easily interpretable, high-level semantics through self-supervision alone, without any semantic cues.

Abstract
Semantic 2D maps are commonly used by humans and machines for navigation
purposes, whether it’s walking or driving. However, these maps have limitations:
they lack detail, often contain inaccuracies, and are difficult to create and maintain,
especially in an automated fashion. Can we use raw imagery to automatically
create better maps that can be easily interpreted by both humans and machines? We
introduce SNAP, a deep network that learns rich neural 2D maps from ground-level
and overhead images. We train our model to align neural maps estimated from different inputs, supervised only with camera poses over tens of millions of StreetView
images. SNAP can resolve the location of challenging image queries beyond the
reach of traditional methods, outperforming the state of the art in localization by a
large margin. Moreover, our neural maps encode not only geometry and appearance
but also high-level semantics, discovered without explicit supervision. This enables
effective pre-training for data-efficient semantic scene understanding, with the
potential to unlock cost-efficient creation of more detailed maps.†

1

Introduction

Semantic 2D maps such as Google Maps are ubiquitous in our daily lives, used by billions of people.
They offer compact, yet easily interpretable representations of the world from a bird’s-eye view,
allowing us to effectively navigate large outdoor environments by foot or vehicle. By contrast,
∗

Work done during an internship at Google.

†

Code available at github.com/google-research/snap

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

