R EC KONIN G: Reasoning through Dynamic
Knowledge Encoding

Zeming Chen1

Gail Weiss1 Eric Mitchell2 Asli Celikyilmaz3 Antoine Bosselut1
EPFL1 Stanford University2 Meta AI Research3
{zeming.chen, gail.weiss, antoine.bosselut}@epfl.ch
eric.mitchell@cs.stanford.edu aslic@meta.com

Abstract
Recent studies on transformer-based language models show that they can answer
questions by reasoning over knowledge provided as part of the context (i.e., incontext reasoning). However, since the available knowledge is often not filtered for
a particular question, in-context reasoning can be sensitive to distractor facts, additional content that is irrelevant to a question but that may be relevant for a different
question (i.e., not necessarily random noise). In these situations, the model fails to
distinguish the necessary knowledge to answer the question, leading to spurious
reasoning and degraded performance. This reasoning failure contrasts with the
model’s apparent ability to distinguish its contextual knowledge from all the knowledge it has memorized during pre-training. Following this observation, we propose
teaching the model to reason more robustly by folding the provided contextual
knowledge into the model’s parameters before presenting it with a question. Our
method, R ECKONING, is a bi-level learning algorithm that teaches language models to reason by updating their parametric knowledge through back-propagation,
allowing them to answer questions using the updated parameters. During training,
the inner loop rapidly adapts a copy of the model weights to encode contextual
knowledge into its parameters. In the outer loop, the model learns to use the
updated weights to reproduce and answer reasoning questions about the memorized
knowledge. Our experiments on three diverse multi-hop reasoning datasets show
that R ECKONING’s performance improves over the in-context reasoning baseline
(by up to 4.5%). We also find that compared to in-context reasoning, R ECKONING
generalizes better to longer reasoning chains unseen during training, is more robust
to distractors in the context, and is computationally more efficient when multiple
questions are asked about the same knowledge.

1

Introduction

Consider the sentence: “John is David’s dad, and Tom is John’s dad”. Concluding that Tom is
David’s grandfather involves reasoning about the information in the sentence. Specifically, it requires
understanding the direct information, or contextual knowledge, given in the sentence: the stated
relationships between John, David, and Tom; and combining it with our existing, commonsense
knowledge of the world: someone’s dad’s dad is their grandfather. Achieving such logical reasoning
automatically has long been a goal of AI [17, 53, 74, 82].
The example above demonstrates two necessary abilities required for successful reasoning: first,
holding large amounts of commonsense or general knowledge about the world, and second, processing
and combining new information with existing knowledge. Transformer-based large language models
have shown a remarkable capacity for the first of these abilities, repeatedly being demonstrated to
memorize large amounts of data, or parametric knowledge, in their weights [8, 11, 50, 64].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

