Understanding the Latent Space of Diffusion Models
through the Lens of Riemannian Geometry

Yong-Hyun Park∗1 , Mingi Kwon∗2 , Jaewoong Choi3 , Junghyo Jo†1 , Youngjung Uh†2 ,
1
Seoul National University 2 Yonsei University 3 Korea Institute for Advanced Study

Abstract
Despite the success of diffusion models (DMs), we still lack a thorough understanding of their latent space. To understand the latent space xt ∈ X , we analyze them
from a geometrical perspective. Our approach involves deriving the local latent
basis within X by leveraging the pullback metric associated with their encoding
feature maps. Remarkably, our discovered local latent basis enables image editing
capabilities by moving xt , the latent space of DMs, along the basis vector at specific
timesteps. We further analyze how the geometric structure of DMs evolves over
diffusion timesteps and differs across different text conditions. This confirms the
known phenomenon of coarse-to-fine generation, as well as reveals novel insights
such as the discrepancy between xt across timesteps, the effect of dataset complexity, and the time-varying influence of text prompts. To the best of our knowledge,
this paper is the first to present image editing through x-space traversal, editing only
once at specific timestep t without any additional training, and providing thorough
analyses of the latent structure of DMs. The code to reproduce our experiments can
be found at https://github.com/enkeejunior1/Diffusion-Pullback.

1

Introduction

The diffusion models (DMs) are powerful generative models that have demonstrated impressive
performance [22, 51, 52, 17, 37]. DMs have shown remarkable applications, including text-to-image
synthesis [45, 46, 5, 36], inverse problems [14, 31], and image editing [21, 54, 39, 35].
Despite their achievements, the research community lacks a comprehensive understanding of the
latent space of DMs and its influence on the generated results. So far, the completely diffused images
are considered as latent variables but it does not have useful properties for controlling the results. For
example, traversing along a direction from a latent produces weird changes in the results. Fortunately,
Kwon et al. [26] consider the intermediate feature space of the diffusion kernel, referred to as H,
as a semantic latent space and show its usefulness on controlling generated images. In the similar
sense, some works investigate the feature maps of the self-attention or cross-attention operations
for controlling the results [21, 54, 39], improving sample quality [8], or downstream tasks such as
semantic segmentation [32, 55].
Still, the structure of the space Xt where latent variables {xt } live remains unexplored despite its
crucial role in understanding DMs. It is especially challenging because 1) the model is trained
to estimate the forward noise which does not depend on the input, as opposed to other typical
supervisions such as classification or similarity, and 2) there are lots of latent variables over multiple
recursive timesteps. In this paper, we aim to analyze X in conjunction with its corresponding
∗

Equal Contribution

†

Corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

