Fairly Recommending with Social Attributes:
A Flexible and Controllable Optimization Approach

Jinqiu Jin1,∗ Haoxuan Li2,∗ Fuli Feng1,† Sihao Ding1 Peng Wu3 Xiangnan He1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Peking University 3 Beijing Technology and Business University
jjq20021015@mail.ustc.edu.cn, hxli@stu.pku.edu.cn, fulifeng93@gmail.com,
dsihao@mail.ustc.edu.cn, pengwu@btbu.edu.cn, xiangnanhe@gmail.com

Abstract
Item-side group fairness (IGF) requires a recommendation model to treat different
item groups similarly, and has a crucial impact on information diffusion, consumption activity, and market equilibrium. Previous IGF notions only focus on the direct
utility of the item exposures, i.e., the exposure numbers across different item groups.
Nevertheless, the item exposures also facilitate utility gained from the neighboring
users via social influence, called social utility, such as information sharing on the
social media. To fill this gap, this paper introduces two social attribute-aware IGF
metrics, which require similar user social attributes on the exposed items across
the different item groups. In light of the trade-off between the direct utility and
social utility, we formulate a new multi-objective optimization problem for training
recommender models with flexible trade-off while ensuring controllable accuracy.
To solve this problem, we develop a gradient-based optimization algorithm and
theoretically show that the proposed algorithm can find Pareto optimal solutions
with varying trade-off and guaranteed accuracy. Extensive experiments on two realworld datasets validate the effectiveness of our approach. Our codes are available
at https://github.com/mitao-cat/nips23_social_igf.

1

Introduction

Developing fair recommendation algorithms is crucial to perform reliable information search and
decision making, which prevents users’ as well as platforms’ interests from being sacrificed [1]. One
particular aspect of recommendation fairness is item-side group fairness (IGF), which requires a
recommendation model to treat different item groups similarly, and the items are grouped based on
attributes such as category or brand [2, 3, 4]. Existing IGF frameworks primarily focus on the direct
utility of item exposures, requiring a similar number of exposures for different item groups, and can
be broadly categorized into two forms: Statistical Parity (SP) [5, 6] and Equal Opportunity (EO) [7].
Nevertheless, the existing IGF notions overlook the social utility of item exposures, as users with
different social attributes may produce varying utilities due to the social influence among users.
For example, a user’s friends may view a recommended micro-video due to sharing activities or
public record in the user’s timeline. This can lead to unfairness problem in which some item groups
benefit more than others though the existing IGF notions are satisfied. Figure 1a illustrates a toy
example where item group A receives the same number of exposures as group B, thus satisfying
the requirement of the previous SP, while items in group A are recommended to users with greater
numbers of friends. This motivates us to consider both direct and social utility for IGF notions.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

