What a MESS: Multi-Domain Evaluation of
Zero-Shot Semantic Segmentation

Benedikt Blumenstiel∗
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
IBM Research Europe
benedikt.blumenstiel@kit.edu

Johannes Jakubik*
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
IBM Research Europe
johannes.jakubik@kit.edu

Hilde Kühne
University of Bonn
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
hildegard.kuehne@ibm.com

Michael Vössing
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
IBM Germany
michael.voessing@kit.edu

Abstract
While semantic segmentation has seen tremendous improvements in the past, there
are still significant labeling efforts necessary and the problem of limited generalization to classes that have not been present during training. To address this
problem, zero-shot semantic segmentation makes use of large self-supervised
vision-language models, allowing zero-shot transfer to unseen classes. In this work,
we build a benchmark for Multi-domain Evaluation of Semantic Segmentation
(MESS), which allows a holistic analysis of performance across a wide range of
domain-specific datasets such as medicine, engineering, earth monitoring, biology,
and agriculture. To do this, we reviewed 120 datasets, developed a taxonomy, and
classified the datasets according to the developed taxonomy. We select a representative subset consisting of 22 datasets and propose it as the MESS benchmark.
We evaluate eight recently published models on the proposed MESS benchmark
and analyze characteristics for the performance of zero-shot transfer models. The
toolkit is available at https://github.com/blumenstiel/MESS.

1

Introduction

Zero-shot semantic segmentation utilizes self-supervised models such as CLIP to minimize labeling
requirements during training and to improve model generalization. Recent models are already able
to include classes during inference that were not present during training. For this reason, zero-shot
semantic segmentation is becoming increasingly relevant for real-world scenarios. In particular, the
performance on domain-specific datasets such as earth monitoring datasets, as visualized in Figure 1,
becomes more and more relevant. Current standard benchmarks tend to focus on in-domain tasks
but do not capture performance comparisons across domains. This is problematic because it limits
insight into the applicability of zero-shot semantic segmentation to new domains. It also makes it
difficult to assess whether architectures might be suitable for datasets that pose additional challenges
(e.g., different sensor types or specialized vocabulary). To better understand the behavior of zero-shot
semantic segmentation models on a wider range of more complex, domain-specific datasets, we
propose a holistic Multi-domain Evaluation of Semantic Segmentation (MESS). To this end, we
have examined 120 datasets and classified them within a developed taxonomy. We leverage our
benchmark to evaluate eight recently published models for zero-shot semantic segmentation including
∗

Equal contributions

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

