Decoding the Enigma: Benchmarking Humans and
AIs on the Many Facets of Working Memory

Ankur Sikarwar and Mengmi Zhang
Deep NeuroCognition Lab, Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), A*STAR, Singapore
Center for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Address correspondence to mengmi@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
Working memory (WM), a fundamental cognitive process facilitating the temporary
storage, integration, manipulation, and retrieval of information, plays a vital role in
reasoning and decision-making tasks. Robust benchmark datasets that capture the
multifaceted nature of WM are crucial for the effective development and evaluation
of AI WM models. Here, we introduce a comprehensive Working Memory
(WorM) benchmark dataset for this purpose. WorM comprises 10 tasks and
a total of 1 million trials, assessing 4 functionalities, 3 domains, and 11 behavioral
and neural characteristics of WM. We jointly trained and tested state-of-the-art
recurrent neural networks and transformers on all these tasks. For comparison, we
also include human behavioral benchmarks. Note that all computational models
were never trained with any human data or behavioral biases; yet, these models
remarkably replicate some characteristics of WM in biological brains, such as
primacy and recency effects. Moreover, we performed neural population analysis
on these models and identified neural clusters specialized for different domains and
functionalities of WM. Not all computational models exhibit a strong alignment
with all human behaviors. Our experimental results also reveal several limitations
in existing models to match with working memory capabilities of humans. This
dataset serves as a valuable resource for communities in cognitive psychology,
neuroscience, and AI, offering a standardized framework to compare and enhance
WM models, investigate WM’s neural underpinnings, and develop WM models
with human-like capabilities. Our source code and data are available at: link.

1

Introduction

Working memory (WM) defines a core cognitive process enabling temporary storage, integration,
manipulation, and recall of information. It is vital for many downstream tasks involving reasoning
[57, 46, 34], decision-making [50, 26], and language comprehension [5, 9, 1]. Understanding and
modeling WM has significant implications for both neuroscience and AI research. In neuroscience and
cognitive science, extensive investigations have been conducted to unravel the underlying mechanisms
of WM. The non-exhaustive list of works involves (1) identifying brain regions such as the prefrontal
cortex [15, 51, 37], hippocampus [6, 55], and parietal cortex [28, 32, 47] as key players in WM
processes; (2) exploring the role of WM capacity in cognitive processes such as selective attention
[17, 48], and executive control [19, 7]; and (3) investigating how WM abilities differed in individuals
of different ages [20, 53], intelligence levels [12], and neurological disorders [2, 23].
However, despite significant progress in individual subdomains, there remains a notable gap in
the broader study of WM and its relevance for the AI community. To date, research efforts in
neuroscience, and cognitive science have mostly focused on specific aspects of WM or individual
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

