Hierarchical Multi-Agent Skill Discovery

Mingyu Yang1 , Yaodong Yang2 † , Zhenbo Lu3 † , Wengang Zhou1,3 , Houqiang Li1,3
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Institute for AI, Peking University
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
ymy@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn
luzhenbo@iai.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Skill discovery has shown significant progress in unsupervised reinforcement
learning. This approach enables the discovery of a wide range of skills without
any extrinsic reward, which can be effectively combined to tackle complex tasks.
However, such unsupervised skill learning has not been well applied to multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) due to two primary challenges. One is how to
learn skills not only for the individual agents but also for the entire team, and
the other is how to coordinate the skills of different agents to accomplish multiagent tasks. To address these challenges, we present Hierarchical Multi-Agent
Skill Discovery (HMASD), a two-level hierarchical algorithm for discovering both
team and individual skills in MARL. The high-level policy employs a transformer
structure to realize sequential skill assignment, while the low-level policy learns to
discover valuable team and individual skills. We evaluate HMASD on sparse reward
multi-agent benchmarks, and the results show that HMASD achieves significant
performance improvements compared to strong MARL baselines.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has recently demonstrated remarkable potential in
solving various real-world problems, such as unmanned aerial vehicles [1], autonomous driving [2]
and traffic light control [3]. Despite its broad applications, current MARL algorithms [4, 5] typically
require well-crafted team or individual rewards to guide the agents to learn policies for efficient
coordination. This limitation hinders the generalization of MARL to the sparse reward multi-agent
tasks, where agents receive a non-zero reward only when they coordinate to achieve a challenging goal.
Compared to single-agent tasks, the sparse reward problem in multi-agent tasks poses more challenges.
On the one hand, the joint state and action spaces of multi-agent tasks increase exponentially with the
number of agents, which exacerbates the difficulty for agents to explore those valuable but rare states.
On the other hand, we need to distribute the received sparse reward not only to different timesteps but
also to different agents [6].
To solve sparse reward multi-agent problems, a promising approach is to discover underlying skills
within the multi-agent task and effectively combine these skills to achieve the final goal. For example,
in a football game, there are various skills involved such as dribbling, passing, receiving and shooting.
A common training strategy for a football team is to let each player learn these fundamental skills
first and then train players together to cooperatively use these skills for scoring the goal, which is
more efficient than directly training players without any skills together. Similarly, in a sparse reward
multi-agent task, it’s difficult for agents to cooperatively achieve a challenging goal from scratch.
We can first try to discover the underlying useful skills within the task, which is much easier than
solving the entire task under the sparse reward setting [7, 8]. Although these discovered skills may
†

Corresponding authors: Yaodong Yang and Zhenbo Lu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

