A Metadata-Driven Approach to Understand Graph
Neural Networks
Ting Wei Li
University of Michigan
tingwl@umich.edu

Qiaozhu Mei
University of Michigan
qmei@umich.edu

Jiaqi Ma
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
jiaqima@illinois.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable success in various
applications, but their performance can be sensitive to specific data properties of the
graph datasets they operate on. Current literature on understanding the limitations
of GNNs has primarily employed a model-driven approach that leverages heuristics
and domain knowledge from network science or graph theory to model the GNN
behaviors, which is time-consuming and highly subjective. In this work, we propose
a metadata-driven approach to analyze the sensitivity of GNNs to graph data
properties, motivated by the increasing availability of graph learning benchmarks.
We perform a multivariate sparse regression analysis on the metadata derived from
benchmarking GNN performance across diverse datasets, yielding a set of salient
data properties. To validate the effectiveness of our data-driven approach, we focus
on one identified data property, the degree distribution, and investigate how this
property influences GNN performance through theoretical analysis and controlled
experiments. Our theoretical findings reveal that datasets with a more balanced
degree distribution exhibit better linear separability of node representations, thus
leading to better GNN performance. We also conduct controlled experiments using
synthetic datasets with varying degree distributions, and the results align well with
our theoretical findings. Collectively, both the theoretical analysis and controlled
experiments verify that the proposed metadata-driven approach is effective in
identifying critical data properties for GNNs.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), as a broad family of graph machine learning models, have gained
increasing research interests in recent years. However, unlike the ResNet model [14] in computer
vision or the Transformer model [36] in natural language processing, there has not been a dominant
GNN architecture that is universally effective across a wide range of graph machine learning tasks.
This may be attributed to the inherently diverse nature of graph-structured data, which results in the
GNN performance being highly sensitive to specific properties of the graph datasets. Consequently,
GNNs that demonstrate high performance on certain benchmark datasets often underperform on
others with distinct properties. For example, early GNNs have been shown to exhibit degraded
performance when applied to non-homophilous graph datasets, where nodes from different classes
are highly interconnected and mixed [45, 46, 32, 11, 9].
However, it is non-trivial to identify and understand critical graph data properties that are highly
influential on GNN performance. Current literature primarily employs what we term as a modeldriven approach, which attempts to model GNN performance using specific heuristics or domain
knowledge derived from network science or graph theory [41, 45]. Although this approach can offer
an in-depth understanding of GNN performance, it can also be time-consuming, subjective, and may
not fully capture the entire spectrum of relevant data properties.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

