A General Theory of Correct, Incorrect, and Extrinsic
Equivariance

Dian Wang1

Xupeng Zhu1 Jung Yeon Park1 Mingxi Jia2∗ Guanang Su3∗
Robert Platt1 Robin Walters1
1
Northeastern University 2 Brown University 3 University of Minnesota

{wang.dian,zhu.xup,park.jungy,r.platt,r.walters}@northeastern.edu
mingxi_jia@brown.edu su000265@umn.edu

Abstract
Although equivariant machine learning has proven effective at many tasks, success
depends heavily on the assumption that the ground truth function is symmetric
over the entire domain matching the symmetry in an equivariant neural network. A
missing piece in the equivariant learning literature is the analysis of equivariant
networks when symmetry exists only partially in the domain. In this work, we
present a general theory for such a situation. We propose pointwise definitions of
correct, incorrect, and extrinsic equivariance, which allow us to quantify continuously the degree of each type of equivariance a function displays. We then study
the impact of various degrees of incorrect or extrinsic symmetry on model error.
We prove error lower bounds for invariant or equivariant networks in classification
or regression settings with partially incorrect symmetry. We also analyze the potentially harmful effects of extrinsic equivariance. Experiments validate these results
in three different environments.

1

Introduction

Equivariant neural networks [9, 10] have proven to
be an effective way to improve generalization and
sample efficiency in many machine learning tasks.
(a) Correct
(b) Incorrect
(c) Extrinsic
This is accomplished by encoding task-level symmetry into the structure of the network architecture Figure 1: An example of correct, incorrect, and
so that the model does not need to explicitly learn extrinsic equivariance. The ground truth functhe symmetry from the data. However, encoding tion f (x) is shown in black and its probability
a fixed type of symmetry like this can be limiting density function p(x) is shown in orange. If we
when the model symmetry does not exactly match model f (x) using a G-invariant network where
the symmetry of the underlying function being G is a reflection group that negates x, different
modeled, i.e., when there is a symmetry mismatch. f (x) and p(x) will lead to correct, incorrect, and
For example, consider the digit image classifica- extrinsic equivariance. See Section 3 for details.
tion task. Is it helpful to model this problem using
a model that is invariant to 180-degree rotation of the image? For some digits, the label is invariant
(e.g., 0 and 8). However, for other digits, the label changes under rotation (e.g., 6 and 9), suggesting
that a rotationally symmetric model would be inappropriate here. However, recent work [58] suggests
that this is not necessarily the case – symmetric models are sometimes helpful even when a symmetry
mismatch exists between the problem and model. This raises the question – do the advantages
obtained by using a symmetric model outweigh the errors introduced by the symmetry mismatch?
∗

Work done as students at Northeastern University

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

