Domain Watermark: Effective and Harmless Dataset
Copyright Protection is Closed at Hand

Junfeng Guo1,∗, Yiming Li2,3,∗ , Lixu Wang4 , Shu-Tao Xia5 , Heng Huang1 , Cong Liu6 , Bo Li7,8
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
2
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
4
Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University
5
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
6
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, UC Riverside
7
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
8
Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago
{gjf2023,heng}@umd.edu; li-ym@zju.edu.cn;
lixuwang2025@u.northwestern.edu;
xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn; congl@ucr.edu; lbo@illinois.edu

Abstract
The prosperity of deep neural networks (DNNs) is largely benefited from opensource datasets, based on which users can evaluate and improve their methods.
In this paper, we revisit backdoor-based dataset ownership verification (DOV),
which is currently the only feasible approach to protect the copyright of opensource datasets. We reveal that these methods are fundamentally harmful given
that they could introduce malicious misclassification behaviors to watermarked
DNNs by the adversaries. In this paper, we design DOV from another perspective by making watermarked models (trained on the protected dataset) correctly
classify some ‘hard’ samples that will be misclassified by the benign model.
Our method is inspired by the generalization property of DNNs, where we find
a hardly-generalized domain for the original dataset (as its domain watermark).
It can be easily learned with the protected dataset containing modified samples.
Specifically, we formulate the domain generation as a bi-level optimization and
propose to optimize a set of visually-indistinguishable clean-label modified data
with similar effects to domain-watermarked samples from the hardly-generalized
domain to ensure watermark stealthiness. We also design a hypothesis-test-guided
ownership verification via our domain watermark and provide the theoretical analyses of our method. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets are conducted, which verify the effectiveness of our method and its resistance to potential
adaptive methods. The code for reproducing main experiments is available at
https://github.com/JunfengGo/Domain-Watermark.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been applied to a wide range of domains and have shown
human-competitive performance. The great success of DNNs heavily relies on the availability of
various open-source datasets (e.g., CIFAR [1] and ImageNet [2]). With these high-quality datasets,
researchers can evaluate and improve the proposed methods upon them. Currently, most of these
datasets limit their usage to education or research purpose and are prohibited from commercial applications without authorization. How to protect their copyrights is of great significance [3, 4, 5, 6].
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence to Yiming Li.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

