Partial Matrix Completion
Elad Hazan ⇤
Princeton University
Google DeepMind
Varun Kanade ⇤
University of Oxford

Adam Tauman Kalai ⇤
Microsoft Research

Clara Mohri ⇤
Harvard University

Y. Jennifer Sun ⇤
Princeton University
Google DeepMind

Abstract
The matrix completion problem aims to reconstruct a low-rank matrix based on a
revealed set of possibly noisy entries. Prior works consider completing the entire
matrix with generalization error guarantees. However, the completion accuracy
can be drastically different over different entries. This work establishes a new
framework of partial matrix completion, where the goal is to identify a large
subset of the entries that can be completed with high confidence. We propose an
efficient algorithm with the following provable guarantees. Given access to samples
from an unknown and arbitrary distribution, it guarantees: (a) high accuracy over
completed entries, and (b) high coverage of the underlying distribution. We also
consider an online learning variant of this problem, where we propose a low-regret
algorithm based on iterative gradient updates. Preliminary empirical evaluations
are included.

1

Introduction

In the classical matrix completion problem, a subset of entries of a matrix are revealed and the
goal is to reconstruct the full matrix. This is in general impossible, but if the matrix is assumed to
be low rank and the distribution over revealed entries is uniformly random, then it can be shown
that reconstruction is possible. A common application of matrix completion is in recommendation
systems. For example, the rows of the matrix can correspond to users, the columns to movies, and an
entry of the matrix is the preference score for the user over the corresponding movie. The completed
entries can then be used to predict user preferences over unseen movies. The low rank assumption in
this case is justified if the preference of users over movies is mostly determined by a small number of
latent factors such as the genre, director, artistic style, and so forth.
However, in many cases, it is both infeasible and unnecessary to complete the entire matrix. First
consider the trivial example of movie recommendations with users and movies coming from two
countries A and B, where each user rates random movies only from their country. Without any cross
ratings of users from country A on movies from country B or vice versa, it is impossible to accurately
complete these entries. A solution here is straightforward: partition the users and movies into their
respective groups and then complete only the part of the matrix corresponding to user ratings of
movies from their own country.
In reality, many users have categories of movies with few or no ratings based on genre, language, or
time period. For such users, it is difficult to accurately complete unrated movie categories which they
do not like to watch from those which they have not even been exposed to. Thus it may be preferable
to abstain from making rating predictions for such users on these unpredictable categories. This is
⇤

Authors ordered alphabetically

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

