From ViT Features to Training-free Video Object
Segmentation via Streaming-data Mixture Models

Roy Uziel
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
uzielr@post.bgu.ac.il

Or Dinari
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
dinari@post.bgu.ac.il

Oren Freifeld
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
orenfr@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
In the task of semi-supervised video object segmentation, the input is the binary
mask of an object in the first frame, and the desired output consists of the corresponding masks of that object in the subsequent frames. Existing leading solutions
have two main drawbacks: 1) an expensive and typically-supervised training on
videos; 2) a large memory footprint during inference. Here we present a trainingfree solution, with a low-memory footprint, that yields state-of-the-art results. The
proposed method combines pre-trained deep learning-based features (trained on
still images) with more classical methods for streaming-data clustering. Designed
to adapt to temporal concept drifts and generalize to diverse video content without relying on annotated images or videos, the method eliminates the need for
additional training or fine-tuning, ensuring fast inference and immediate applicability to new videos. Concretely, we represent an object via a dynamic ensemble
of temporally- and spatially-coherent mixtures over a representation built from
pre-trained ViT features and positional embeddings. A convolutional conditional
random field further improves spatial coherence and helps reject outliers. We
demonstrate the efficacy of the method on key benchmarks: the DAVIS-2017 and
YouTube-VOS 2018 validation datasets. Moreover, by the virtue of the low-memory
footprint of the compact cluster-based representation, the method scales gracefully
to high-resolution ViT features. Our code is available at https://github.com/BGUCS-VIL/Training-Free-VOS.

1

Introduction

Video Object Segmentation (VOS), a key computer-vision task, aims to distinguish objects of interest
from the background across a sequence of video frames. In Semi-supervised VOS (SVOS), the
topic of this paper, the user provides the mask of the object in the first frame (while in the case of
unsupervised VOS, no mask is given), and the task is to propagate that mask to the next frames.
Prior to the revolution of Deep Learning (DL), SVOS relied heavily on traditional techniques like
color-based segmentation, point trajectories, and optical flow. However, the emergence of DL-based
methods has significantly outpaced those traditional techniques. Thus, today DL-based methods
dominate the field of SVOS. Note that according to the standard terminology in the area of VOS, the
term "semi-supervised" in the name SVOS refers to the nature of the task (that is, the fact that a user
provides the mask in the first frame), not the nature of the solution. In other words, solutions to the
SVOS task can be either supervised, semi-supervised, or unsupervised. For example, a supervised
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

