PanoGRF: Generalizable Spherical Radiance Fields
for Wide-baseline Panoramas
Zheng Chen1∗, Yan-Pei Cao2 , Yuan-Chen Guo1 , Chen Wang1 , Ying Shan2 , Song-Hai Zhang1
1
Tsinghua University 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
China
{chenz20,guoyc19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn caoyanpei@gmail.com
cw.chenwang@outlook.com yingsshan@tencent.com shz@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Achieving an immersive experience enabling users to explore virtual environments
with six degrees of freedom (6DoF) is essential for various applications such
as virtual reality (VR). Wide-baseline panoramas are commonly used in these
applications to reduce network bandwidth and storage requirements. However,
synthesizing novel views from these panoramas remains a key challenge. Although existing neural radiance field methods can produce photorealistic views
under narrow-baseline and dense image captures, they tend to overfit the training views when dealing with wide-baseline panoramas due to the difficulty in
learning accurate geometry from sparse 360◦ views. To address this problem, we
propose PanoGRF, Generalizable Spherical Radiance Fields for Wide-baseline
Panoramas, which construct spherical radiance fields incorporating 360◦ scene priors. Unlike generalizable radiance fields trained on perspective images, PanoGRF
avoids the information loss from panorama-to-perspective conversion and directly
aggregates geometry and appearance features of 3D sample points from each
panoramic view based on spherical projection. Moreover, as some regions of the
panorama are only visible from one view while invisible from others under wide
baseline settings, PanoGRF incorporates 360◦ monocular depth priors into spherical depth estimation to improve the geometry features. Experimental results on
multiple panoramic datasets demonstrate that PanoGRF significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art generalizable view synthesis methods for wide-baseline panoramas
(e.g., OmniSyn) and perspective images (e.g., IBRNet, NeuRay). Poject Page:
https://thucz.github.io/PanoGRF/.

1

Introduction

The rise of 360◦ cameras and virtual reality headsets has fueled the popularity of 360◦ images
among photographers and tourists. Commercial VR platforms, such as Matterport 2 , enable users to
experience virtual walks in 360◦ scenes by interpolating between panoramas [17]. Wide-baseline
panoramas are frequently employed on these platforms for capture and network transmission to
reduce storage space and bandwidth requirements. Consequently, synthesizing novel views from
wide-baseline panoramas is an essential task for providing a seamless six degrees of freedom (6DoF)
experience to users.
However, synthesizing novel views from a pair of wide baseline panoramas encounters two primary
challenges. First, the input views are sparse, causing existing state-of-the-art methods such as
NeRF [21] to struggle in learning accurate geometry due to the shape-radiance ambiguity [37],
∗
2

Work done during an internship at ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
Matterport: https://matterport.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

