Wasserstein Quantum Monte Carlo:
A Novel Approach for Solving
the Quantum Many-Body Schrödinger Equation

Kirill Neklyudov
Vector Institute
Jannes Nys
Institute of Physics & Center for Quantum Science and Engineering
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)

Luca Thiede
Vector Institute
Univeristy of Toronto

Juan Felipe Carrasquilla
Vector Institute
Univeristy of Waterloo

Alireza Makhzani
Vector Institute
Univeristy of Toronto

Qiang Liu
UT Austin

Max Welling
Microsoft Research
AI4Science

Abstract
Solving the quantum many-body Schrödinger equation is a fundamental and challenging problem in the fields of quantum physics, quantum chemistry, and material
sciences. One of the common computational approaches to this problem is Quantum Variational Monte Carlo (QVMC), in which ground-state solutions are obtained
by minimizing the energy of the system within a restricted family of parameterized
wave functions. Deep learning methods partially address the limitations of traditional QVMC by representing a rich family of wave functions in terms of neural
networks. However, the optimization objective in QVMC remains notoriously hard
to minimize and requires second-order optimization methods such as natural gradient. In this paper, we first reformulate energy functional minimization in the space
of Born distributions corresponding to particle-permutation (anti-)symmetric wave
functions, rather than the space of wave functions. We then interpret QVMC as
the Fisher–Rao gradient flow in this distributional space, followed by a projection
step onto the variational manifold. This perspective provides us with a principled framework to derive new QMC algorithms, by endowing the distributional
space with better metrics, and following the projected gradient flow induced by
those metrics. More specifically, we propose “Wasserstein Quantum Monte Carlo”
(WQMC), which uses the gradient flow induced by the Wasserstein metric, rather
than the Fisher–Rao metric, and corresponds to transporting the probability mass,
rather than teleporting it. We demonstrate empirically that the dynamics of WQMC
results in faster convergence to the ground state of molecular systems.

1

Introduction

Access to the wave function of a quantum many-body system allows us to study strongly correlated
quantum matter, starting from the fundamental building blocks. For example, the solution of the timeindependent electronic Schrödinger equation provides all the chemical properties of a given atomic
state, which have numerous applications in chemistry and materials design. However, obtaining
the exact wave function is fundamentally challenging, with a complexity scaling exponentially with
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
Correspondence to: <k.necludov@gmail.com>, <makhzani@vectorinstitute.ai>

