On the Planning Abilities of Large Language Models :
A Critical Investigation

Karthik Valmeekam
School of Computing & AI
Arizona State University Tempe.
kvalmeek@asu.edu

Matthew Marquez
School of Computing & AI
Arizona State University, Tempe.
mmarqu22@asu.edu

Sarath Sreedharan∗
Department of Computer Science,
Colorado State University, Fort Collins.
sarath.sreedharan@colostate.edu

Subbarao Kambhampati
School of Computing & AI
Arizona State University, Tempe.
rao@asu.edu

Abstract
Intrigued by the claims of emergent reasoning capabilities in LLMs trained on
general web corpora, in this paper, we set out to investigate their planning capabilities. We aim to evaluate (1) the effectiveness of LLMs in generating plans
autonomously in commonsense planning tasks and (2) the potential of LLMs as a
source of heuristic guidance for other agents (AI planners) in their planning tasks.
We conduct a systematic study by generating a suite of instances on domains similar to the ones employed in the International Planning Competition and evaluate
LLMs in two distinct modes: autonomous and heuristic. Our findings reveal that
LLMs’ ability to generate executable plans autonomously is rather limited, with the
best model (GPT-4) having an average success rate of ∼12% across the domains.
However, the results in the heuristic mode show more promise. In the heuristic
mode, we demonstrate that LLM-generated plans can improve the search process
for underlying sound planners and additionally show that external verifiers can
help provide feedback on the generated plans and back-prompt the LLM for better
plan generation.

1

Introduction

It would be no exaggeration to say that transformer-based large language models (LLMs) have
revolutionized the field of natural language processing (NLP). Kicked off by the advances presented
by the GPT-x models developed by OpenAI [27], these types of language models currently provide
state-of-the-art performance in many of the standard NLP tasks. Although LLMs were originally
developed mostly to do word sequence completion tasks, with no guarantees about the completion
beyond its coherence, there have been increasing claims and anecdotal evidence that they have other
emergent capabilities that are not normally associated with sequence completion. Indeed, the hints of
such emergent capabilities has started a veritable land rush, with researchers probing (prompting) and
studying LLM behavior almost as if they were artificial organisms (c.f. [16]). Of particular interest
to us in this paper is the thread of efforts that aim to investigate (and showcase) reasoning abilities
of LLMs–including commonsense reasoning [35, 29, 7], logical reasoning [33], and even ethical
reasoning [15]. The macro-tenor of the drumbeat of these works has been suggesting that LLM’s are
indeed capable of doing such kinds of reasoning [19, 37, 4].
∗

Author was at Arizona State University during part of this work

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

