Hierarchical Decomposition of Prompt-Based
Continual Learning:
Rethinking Obscured Sub-optimality

Liyuan Wang1 , Jingyi Xie1 , Xingxing Zhang1∗, Mingyi Huang1 , Hang Su1 , Jun Zhu1∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint Center for ML, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
wly19@tsinghua.org.cn, jingyi_xie96@163.com, xxzhang1993@gmail.com
huangmingyi2002@126.com, {suhangss, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Prompt-based continual learning leverages pre-trained knowledge for downstream
continual learning, and has almost reached the performance pinnacle under supervised pre-training. However, our empirical study reveals that the current strategies
fall short of their full potential under the more realistic self-supervised pre-training,
which is essential for handling vast quantities of unlabeled data in practice. This
is largely due to the difficulty of task-specific knowledge being incorporated into
instructed representations via prompt parameters and predicted by uninstructed
representations at test time. To overcome such sub-optimality, we conduct a theoretical analysis of the continual learning objective in the context of pre-training, and
decompose it into hierarchical components: within-task prediction, task-identity
inference, and task-adaptive prediction. Based on these empirical and theoretical
insights, we propose Hierarchical Decomposition (HiDe-)Prompt, an innovative
approach that explicitly optimizes the hierarchical components with an ensemble
of task-specific prompts and statistics of both uninstructed and instructed representations, further with the coordination of a contrastive regularization strategy. Our
extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of HiDe-Prompt and
its robustness to pre-training paradigms in continual learning (e.g., up to 15.01%
and 9.61% lead on Split CIFAR-100 and Split ImageNet-R, respectively). Our
code is available at https://github.com/thu-ml/HiDe-Prompt.

1

Introduction

In the realm of artificial intelligence, continual learning has become an area of significant interest.
One of the pivotal techniques that greatly facilitate this domain is pre-training, which not only delivers
positive knowledge transfer but also enhances resilience to catastrophic forgetting [27, 23, 37, 26, 43].
A recent innovation is the implementation of prompt-based methodologies, which freeze a pretrained transformer backbone and employ a few prompt parameters to steer representation learning.
Such approaches typically involve construction of adaptive prompts for each task and inference
of appropriate prompts during the test phase. By exploring prompt architectures to accommodate
task-sharing and task-specific knowledge, this emerging direction demonstrates distinct superiority,
almost reaching the upper bound of continual learning performance under supervised pre-training.
Nonetheless, given that robust pre-trained models typically necessitate the learning of substantial
amounts of unlabeled data in a self-supervised manner, the influence of pre-training paradigms
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

