Segment Anything in High Quality

Lei Ke∗1,2

Mingqiao Ye∗1 Martin Danelljan1 Yifan Liu1 Yu-Wing Tai3
Chi-Keung Tang2 Fisher Yu1
1
2
3
ETH Zürich
HKUST
Dartmouth College

Abstract
The recent Segment Anything Model (SAM) represents a big leap in scaling up
segmentation models, allowing for powerful zero-shot capabilities and flexible
prompting. Despite being trained with 1.1 billion masks, SAM’s mask prediction
quality falls short in many cases, particularly when dealing with objects that have
intricate structures. We propose HQ-SAM, equipping SAM with the ability to
accurately segment any object, while maintaining SAM’s original promptable
design, efficiency, and zero-shot generalizability. Our careful design reuses and
preserves the pre-trained model weights of SAM, while only introducing minimal
additional parameters and computation. We design a learnable High-Quality Output
Token, which is injected into SAM’s mask decoder and is responsible for predicting
the high-quality mask. Instead of only applying it on mask-decoder features, we
first fuse them with early and final ViT features for improved mask details. To train
our introduced learnable parameters, we compose a dataset of 44K fine-grained
masks from several sources. HQ-SAM is only trained on the introduced detaset of
44k masks, which takes only 4 hours on 8 GPUs. We show the efficacy of HQ-SAM
in a suite of 10 diverse segmentation datasets across different downstream tasks,
where 8 out of them are evaluated in a zero-shot transfer protocol. Our code and
pretrained models are at https://github.com/SysCV/SAM-HQ.

1

Introduction

Accurate segmentation of diverse objects is fundamental for a wide range of scene understanding
applications, including image/video editing, robotic perception, and AR/VR. Trained with billionscale mask labels, the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [21] was recently released as a foundational
vision model for general image segmentation. SAM is capable of segmenting a wide range of objects,
parts, and visual structures in diverse scenarios, by taking a prompt consisting of points, a bounding
box, or a coarse mask as input. Its zero-shot segmentation abilities have led to a rapid paradigm shift,
as it can be transferred to numerous applications through simple prompting.
While SAM has achieved impressive performance, its segmentation results are still unsatisfactory
in many cases. In particular, SAM suffers from two key problems: 1) Coarse mask boundaries,
often even neglecting the segmentation of thin object structures, as shown in Figure 1. 2) Incorrect
predictions, broken masks, or large errors in challenging cases. This is often related to SAM
misinterpreting thin structures, such as the kite lines in the rightmost column of Figure 1. These types
of failures severely limit the applicability and effectiveness of foundational segmentation models,
such as SAM, in particular for automated annotation and image/video editing tasks, where highly
accurate image masks are crucial.
We propose HQ-SAM, which can predict highly accurate segmentation masks, even in very challenging cases (see Figure 1), without compromising the strong zero-shot capabilities and flexibility of the
* Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

