Exact Generalization Guarantees for (Regularized)
Wasserstein Distributionally Robust Models
Waïss Azizian, Franck Iutzeler, Jérôme Malick
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP
Grenoble, 38000, France
firstname.lastname@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr

Abstract
Wasserstein distributionally robust estimators have emerged as powerful models
for prediction and decision-making under uncertainty. These estimators provide
attractive generalization guarantees: the robust objective obtained from the training distribution is an exact upper bound on the true risk with high probability.
However, existing guarantees either suffer from the curse of dimensionality, are restricted to specific settings, or lead to spurious error terms. In this paper, we show
that these generalization guarantees actually hold on general classes of models, do
not suffer from the curse of dimensionality, and can even cover distribution shifts
at testing. We also prove that these results carry over to the newly-introduced
regularized versions of Wasserstein distributionally robust problems.

1

Introduction

1.1

Generalization and (Wasserstein) Distributionally Robust Models

We consider the fundamental question of generalization of machine learning models. Let us denote
by fθ the loss induced by a model parametrized by θ for some uncertain variable ξ (typically a data
point). When ξ follows some distribution P, seeking the best parameter θ writes as minimizing the
expected loss
min Eξ∼P [fθ (ξ)] .
θ∈Θ

We usually do not have a direct knowledge of P but rather we have access to samples (ξi )ni=1
independently drawn from P. The empirical risk minimization approach then consists in minimizing
b n = 1 Pn δξ (as a proxy for the
the expected loss over the associated empirical distribution P
i=1 i
n
expected loss over P), i.e.,
!
n
1X
min Eξ∼ bPn [fθ (ξ)] =
fθ (ξi ) .
θ∈Θ
n i=1

Classical statistical learning theory ensures that, with high probability, EP [fθ ] is close to E bPn [fθ ] up
√
to O(1/ n) error terms, see e.g., the monographs Boucheron et al. (2013); Wainwright (2019).

A practical drawback of empirical risk minimization is that it can lead to over-confident decisions
(when E bPn [fθ ] < EP [fθ ], the real loss can be higher that the empirical one (Esfahani and Kuhn,
2018)). In addition, this approach is also sensitive to distribution shifts between training and application. To overcome these drawbacks, an approach gaining momentum in machine learning is
distributionally robust optimization, which consists in minimizing the worst expectation of the loss
bn:
when the distribution lives in a neighborhood of P
min sup Eξ∼Q [fθ (ξ)] ,
(1)
θ∈Θ

Q∈U ( b
Pn )

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

