Randomized and Deterministic Maximin-share
Approximations for Fractionally Subadditive
Valuations
Hannaneh Akrami
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Graduiertenschule Informatik
Universität des Saarlandes
hakrami@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Kurt Mehlhorn
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Universität des Saarlandes
mehlhorn@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Masoud Seddighin
Tehran Institute for Advanced Studies
m.seddighin@teias.institute

Golnoosh Shahkarami
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Graduiertenschule Informatik
Universität des Saarlandes
gshahkar@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
We consider the problem of guaranteeing maximin-share (MMS) when allocating
a set of indivisible items to a set of agents with fractionally subadditive (XOS)
valuations. For XOS valuations, it has been previously shown that for some instances no allocation can guarantee a fraction better than 1/2 of maximin-share to
all the agents. Also, a deterministic allocation exists that guarantees 0.219225 of
the maximin-share of each agent. Our results involve both deterministic and randomized allocations. On the deterministic side, we improve the best approximation
guarantee for fractionally subadditive valuations to 3/13 = 0.230769. We develop
new ideas on allocating large items in our allocation algorithm which might be of
independent interest. Furthermore, we investigate randomized algorithms and the
Best-of-both-worlds fairness guarantees. We propose a randomized allocation that
is 1/4-MMS ex-ante and 1/8-MMS ex-post for XOS valuations. Moreover, we
prove an upper bound of 3/4 on the ex-ante guarantee for this class of valuations.

1

Introduction

Fair allocation has been a central problem in economics for decades. This problem arises naturally in
real-world applications such as advertising, negotiation, rent sharing, inheritance, etc Caragiannis
et al. (2019); Dehghani et al. (2018); Dickerson et al. (2014); Foley (1967); Nash Jr (1950); Varian
(1973). In discrete fair division, the basic scenario is that we want to distribute a set M of m
indivisible items among n agents, such that the allocation is deemed fair by the agents. Each agent i
has a valuation function vi : 2M → R+ that represents her happiness for receiving a subset of items.
How do we evaluate fairness? This question has been the subject of intense debates in various contexts,
including philosophy, economics, distributive justice, and mathematics. Since the introduction of
the cake-cutting1 problem Steinhaus (1948), scientists have suggested several different notions to
evaluate fairness. The challenge is that a fairness notion must be both reasonable in terms of justice
and implementable in practice. Conceived by Steinhaus, proportionality is one of the most natural
1

Cake-cutting is the continuous version of the fair allocation problem where the resource is a divisible cake.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

