De novo Drug Design using Reinforcement Learning
with Multiple GPT Agents

Xiuyuan Hu1,2∗, Guoqing Liu2†, Yang Zhao1 , Hao Zhang1†
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Microsoft Research AI4Science
huxy22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, guoqingliu@microsoft.com,
zhao-yang@tsinghua.edu.cn, haozhang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
De novo drug design is a pivotal issue in pharmacology and a new area of focus in
AI for science research. A central challenge in this field is to generate molecules
with specific properties while also producing a wide range of diverse candidates.
Although advanced technologies such as transformer models and reinforcement
learning have been applied in drug design, their potential has not been fully realized.
Therefore, we propose MolRL-MGPT, a reinforcement learning algorithm with
multiple GPT agents for drug molecular generation. To promote molecular diversity,
we encourage the agents to collaborate in searching for desirable molecules in
diverse directions. Our algorithm has shown promising results on the GuacaMol
benchmark and exhibits efficacy in designing inhibitors against SARS-CoV-2
protein targets. The codes are available at: https://github.com/HXYfighter/
MolRL-MGPT.

1

Introduction

In recent years, significant strides have been made in computer-aided drug discovery (CADD) thanks
to the development of various fields, including proteomics, genomics and deep learning [13, 66]. The
conventional drug discovery process is typically time-consuming and financially demanding, with a
low success rate. However, advanced machine learning techniques have the potential to reverse this
predicament, greatly benefiting the economy and society’s development [50, 58]. Currently, a major
issue in the field of pharmacology is goal-directed de novo drug design, which involves generating
new drug molecules with specific biochemical properties, such as designing compounds with high
binding affinity to a designated protein target [15, 38]. Despite the numerous proposed machine
learning algorithms for molecular generation, the chemical space is vast, and the relationship between
molecular properties and structures is intricate, making it challenging to obtain satisfactory results in
practical applications [42].
Molecular diversity is a critical concern in drug design because a diverse set of candidates can provide
more choices for downstream screening and avoid drug resistance and unknown side effects [12, 41].
However, existing algorithms encounter challenges in designing diverse drug molecules. Many
algorithms tend to generate sets of highly similar compounds, which is of little value for the subsequent
drug development process.
Over the past several years, generative language models have made remarkable strides in natural
language processing, vision, and audio. Among these models, the generative pre-trained transformer
(GPT) is particularly notable, which has demonstrated impressive capabilities of language under∗
†

Work was done while Xiuyuan Hu was a research intern at Microsoft Research.
Corresponding author: Hao Zhang (1st), Guoqing Liu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

