Riemannian Residual Neural Networks
Isay Katsman∗
Yale University
isay.katsman@yale.edu
Aaron Lou
Stanford University
aaronlou@stanford.edu

Eric M. Chen∗ , Sidhanth Holalkere∗
Cornell University
{emc348, sh844}@cornell.edu
Ser-Nam Lim†
University of Central Florida
sernam@ucf.edu

Anna Asch
Cornell University
aca89@cornell.edu

Christopher De Sa
Cornell University
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Recent methods in geometric deep learning have introduced various neural networks to operate over data that lie on Riemannian manifolds. Such networks are
often necessary to learn well over graphs with a hierarchical structure or to learn
over manifold-valued data encountered in the natural sciences. These networks
are often inspired by and directly generalize standard Euclidean neural networks.
However, extending Euclidean networks is difficult and has only been done for
a select few manifolds. In this work, we examine the residual neural network
(ResNet) and show how to extend this construction to general Riemannian manifolds in a geometrically principled manner. Originally introduced to help solve
the vanishing gradient problem, ResNets have become ubiquitous in machine
learning due to their beneficial learning properties, excellent empirical results, and
easy-to-incorporate nature when building varied neural networks. We find that our
Riemannian ResNets mirror these desirable properties: when compared to existing
manifold neural networks designed to learn over hyperbolic space and the manifold
of symmetric positive definite matrices, we outperform both kinds of networks in
terms of relevant testing metrics and training dynamics.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, it is common to represent data as vectors in Euclidean space (i.e. Rn ). The
primary reason for such a choice is convenience, as this space has a classical vectorial structure,
a closed-form distance formula, and a simple inner-product computation. Moreover, the myriad
existing Euclidean neural network constructions enable performant learning.
Despite the ubiquity and success of Euclidean embeddings, recent research [41] has brought attention
to the fact that several kinds of complex data require manifold considerations. Such data are various
and range from covariance matrices, represented as points on the manifold of symmetric positive
definite (SPD) matrices [26], to angular orientations, represented as points on tori, found in the
context of robotics [43]. However, generalizing Euclidean neural network tools to manifold structures
such as these can be quite difficult in practice. Most prior works design network architectures for a
specific manifold [11, 17], thereby inefficiently necessitating a specific design for each new manifold.
We address this issue by extending Residual Neural Networks [23] to Riemannian manifolds in a way
that naturally captures the underlying geometry. We construct our network by parameterizing vector
fields and leveraging geodesic structure (provided by the Riemannian exp map) to “add" the learned
* indicates equal contribution.
†
Work done while at Meta AI.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

