Better Correlation and Robustness: A
Distribution-Balanced Self-Supervised Learning
Framework for Automatic Dialogue Evaluation

Peiwen Yuan, Xinglin Wang, Jiayi Shi, Bin Sun, Yiwei Li, Kan Li∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
{peiwenyuan,wangxinglin,shijiayi,binsun,liyiwei,likan}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Turn-level dialogue evaluation models (TDEMs), using self-supervised learning
(SSL) framework, have achieved state-of-the-art performance in open-domain dialogue evaluation. However, these models inevitably face two potential problems.
First, they have low correlations with humans on medium coherence samples as the
SSL framework often brings training data with unbalanced coherence distribution.
Second, the SSL framework leads TDEM to nonuniform score distribution. There
is a danger that the nonuniform score distribution will weaken the robustness of
TDEM through our theoretical analysis. To tackle these problems, we propose
Better Correlation and Robustness (BCR), a distribution-balanced self-supervised
learning framework for TDEM. Given a dialogue dataset, BCR offers an effective
training set reconstructing method to provide coherence-balanced training signals
and further facilitate balanced evaluating abilities of TDEM. To get a uniform
score distribution, a novel loss function is proposed, which can adjust adaptively
according to the uniformity of score distribution estimated by kernel density estimation. Comprehensive experiments on 17 benchmark datasets show that vanilla
BERT-base using BCR outperforms SOTA methods significantly by 11.3% on
average. BCR also demonstrates strong generalization ability as it can lead multiple SOTA methods to attain better correlation and robustness. Code and datasets:
https://github.com/ypw0102/Better-Correlation-and-Robustness.

1

Introduction

Evaluating model-generated responses efficiently and accurately can facilitate the hyperparameter
tuning and comparison among models, which is essential for the research of open-domain dialogue
system (Bao et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2021; Feng et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023). Therefore, economical
and practical automatic metrics are widely applied instead of human evaluation during development
phase. However, the referenced automatic metrics, assessing dialogue based on the golden response
(e.g. BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020b)), have been shown to
be inaccurate for dialogue evaluation (Liu et al., 2016; Deriu et al., 2021) due to the one-to-many
nature of dialogue (Zhao et al., 2017). Fortunately, the unreferenced metrics, especially the turn-level
dialogue evaluation models (TDEMs) (Mehri and Eskénazi, 2020b,a; Huang et al., 2020; Ye et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2021a, 2022b), have achieved a favorable budget between efficiency and accuracy.
Nevertheless, existing TDEMs still perform worse correlations with human judgements on medium
coherence samples (samples with human ranking scores falling within the interval [0.25, 0.75]) and
lack robustness as shown in Figure 1. We argue that these problems stem from the self-supervised
learning (SSL) paradigm, which generally constructs positive and negative samples to strengthen
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

