Optimistic Exploration in Reinforcement
Learning Using Symbolic Model Estimates

Sarath Sreedharan
Department of Computer Science
Colorado State University
ssreedh3@colostate.edu

Michael Katz
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
michael.katz1@ibm.com

Abstract
There has been an increasing interest in using symbolic models along with reinforcement learning (RL) problems, where these coarser abstract models are used as
a way to provide RL agents with higher level guidance. However, most of these
works are inherently limited by their assumption of having an access to a symbolic
approximation of the underlying problem. To address this issue, we introduce a new
method for learning optimistic symbolic approximations of the underlying world
model. We will see how these representations, coupled with fast diverse planners
developed by the automated planning community, provide us with a new paradigm
for optimistic exploration in sparse reward settings. We investigate the possibility
of speeding up the learning process by generalizing learned model dynamics across
similar actions with minimal human input. Finally, we evaluate the method, by
testing it on multiple benchmark domains and compare it with other RL strategies.
Project Website: https://optimistic-model-learn.github.io/

1

Introduction

A popular trend in recent years is using symbolic planning models with reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithms. Works have shown how these models could be used to provide guidance to RL
agents [37, 26, 12], to provide explanations [33], and as an interface to receive guidance and advice
from humans [21]. Coupled with the fact that advances in automated planning has made available a
number of robust tools that RL researchers could adapt directly to their problems (cf. [11, 29, 31]),
these methods have the potential to help addressing many problems faced by state-of-the-art RL
methods. However, a major hurdle to using these methods is the need to access a complete and correct
symbolic model of the underlying sequential-decision problems. While there have been efforts from
the planning community to learn such models [19, 38], most of those methods have focused on cases
where the models are synthesized from a set of plan traces, hence corresponding to the traditional
offline reinforcement learning setting. Interestingly, very few works have been done in synthesizing
such models in the arguably more prominent RL paradigm, namely, online RL.
To fill this gap, in this paper we propose a novel algorithm to learn relevant fragments of symbolic
models in an online fashion. We show how it could be used to address one of the central problems
within RL, namely effective exploration. We show how our method allows us to perform goal-directed
optimistic exploration, while providing rigorous theoretical guarantees. The exploration mechanism
leverages two distinct components: (a) a representation that captures the most optimistic model that
is consistent with the set of observations received, and (b) the use of a fast and suboptimal diverse
planner that generates multiple possible exploration paths, which are still goal-directed.
The idea of optimistic exploration is not new within the context of RL. The most prominent method
being the RMax algorithm [5]. RMax modifies the reward function to develop agents that are
optimistic under uncertainty. Our use of symbolic models, however, allows us to maintain an
optimistic hypothesis regarding the underlying transition function. Coupled with a goal-directed
planner, this lets us perform directed exploration in sparse reward settings, where we have a clear
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

