DSR: Dynamical Surface Representation as Implicit
Neural Networks for Protein
Daiwen Sun1 , He Huang2,1 , Yao Li2,3 , Xinqi Gong1,2∗, Qiwei Ye2∗
1
Institute for Mathematical Sciences, School of Mathematics,
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
3
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
sundaiwen@ruc.edu.cn, huanghe@baai.ac.cn, liyao17@tsinghua.org.cn,
xinqigong@ruc.edu.cn, qwye@baai.ac.cn

Abstract
We propose a novel neural network-based approach to modeling protein dynamics
using an implicit representation of a protein’s surface in 3D and time. Our method
utilizes the zero-level set of signed distance functions (SDFs) to represent protein
surfaces, enabling temporally and spatially continuous representations of protein
dynamics. Our experimental results demonstrate that our model accurately captures
protein dynamic trajectories and can interpolate and extrapolate in 3D and time.
Importantly, this is the first study to introduce this method and successfully model
large-scale protein dynamics. This approach offers a promising alternative to
current methods, overcoming the limitations of first-principles-based and deep
learning methods, and provides a more scalable and efficient approach to modeling
protein dynamics. Additionally, our surface representation approach simplifies
calculations and allows identifying movement trends and amplitudes of protein
domains, making it a useful tool for protein dynamics research. Codes are available
at https://github.com/Sundw-818/DSR, and we have a project webpage that shows
some video results, https://sundw-818.github.io/DSR/.

1

Introduction

Proteins, which are made up of chains of amino acids, are essential molecules in living organisms.
Protein with specific three-dimensional structures are responsible for a wide range of biological
processes such as enzymatic reactions, transport of molecules, and structural support. However,
proteins are not static objects in vivo, but constantly in motion, with individual amino acids vibrating,
rotating, and shifting in response to the change of environment. The biological functions of proteins
are fulfilled by their dynamical behaviors, and researchers study the dynamics and functions of
proteins by molecular dynamics(MD) simulations[1, 2].
First-principles molecular dynamics use the forces calculated from the electronic states by solving the
Schrödinger equation (namely, density functional theory) to compute the coordinate trajectories[3],
with programs such as VASP[4] and GPAW[5]. However, the computational expense of MD typically
increases exponentially in relation to the number of electronic degrees of freedom. In order to reduce
the computational cost, empirical force field (classical force field) models with simplified functional
forms are employed in MD simulation, such as AMBER[6, 7], CHARMM[8, 9], and GROMOS[10–
12], which are designed to capture the bonded and non-bonded interactions between atoms. Besides,
machine learning techniques can be employed to fit force fields or potential energy surfaces[13–16].
These force field-based methods are much faster than ab initio methods without exhaustive QM
∗

Correspondence to: Xinqi Gong<xinqigong@ruc.edu.cn>, Qiwei Ye <qwye@baai.ac.cn>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

