Training Your Image Restoration Network Better with
Random Weight Network as Optimization Function

Man Zhou1

Naishan Zheng1,2 Yuan Xu1 Chunle Guo3 Chongyi Li3†∗
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
University of Science and Technology of China, China
3
Nankai University, China
man.zhou@ntu.edu.cn, lichongyi25@gmail.com

Abstract
The blooming progress made in deep learning-based image restoration has been
largely attributed to the availability of high-quality, large-scale datasets and advanced network structures. However, optimization functions such as L1 and L2 are
still de facto. In this study, we propose to investigate new optimization functions to
improve image restoration performance. Our key insight is that “random weight
network can be acted as a constraint for training better image restoration networks”.
However, not all random weight networks are suitable as constraints. We draw
inspiration from Functional theory and show that alternative random weight networks should be represented in the form of a strict mathematical manifold. We
explore the potential of our random weight network prototypes that satisfy this
requirement: Taylor’s unfolding network, invertible neural network, central difference convolution, and zero-order filtering. We investigate these prototypes from
four aspects: 1) random weight strategies, 2) network architectures, 3) network
depths, and 4) combinations of random weight networks. Furthermore, we devise
the random weight in two variants: the weights are randomly initialized only once
during the entire training procedure, and the weights are randomly initialized in
each training epoch. Our approach can be directly integrated into existing networks
without incurring additional training and testing computational costs. We perform
extensive experiments across multiple image restoration tasks, including image
denoising, low-light image enhancement, and guided image super-resolution to
demonstrate the consistent performance gains achieved by our method.

1

Introduction

Image restoration is a challenging task that involves recovering a latent clear image from a given
degraded observation. This task is highly ill-posed as there are infinite feasible results for a single degraded image [1, 2]. Researchers have tackled this problem through two main approaches: traditional
optimization methods [3, 4, 5] and deep learning-based methods [2, 6, 7].
Traditional methods formulate image restoration as an optimization problem and use various image
priors to regularize the solution space of the latent clear image, such as low-rank prior [4, 5], dark
channel prior [8, 9, 10], graph-based prior [11, 12], total variation regularization [13, 14], and sparse
image priors [15, 16]. However, these priors require carefully designed priors and involve iteration
optimization, making them computationally expensive.
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown promising results in image restoration
tasks [17, 18, 19]. These methods have three key components: data, model, and optimization function.
∗†

corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

