Policy Finetuning in Reinforcement Learning
via Design of Experiments using Offline Data

Ruiqi Zhang
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
rqzhang@berkeley.edu

Andrea Zanette
Department of EECS
University of California, Berkeley
zanette@berkeley.edu

Abstract
In some applications of reinforcement learning, a dataset of pre-collected experience is already available but it is also possible to acquire some additional online
data to help improve the quality of the policy. However, it may be preferable to
gather additional data with a single, non-reactive exploration policy and avoid the
engineering costs associated with switching policies.
In this paper we propose an algorithm with provable guarantees that can leverage
an offline dataset to design a single non-reactive policy for exploration. We theoretically analyze the algorithm and measure the quality of the final policy as a
function of the local coverage of the original dataset and the amount of additional
data collected.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a general framework for data-driven, sequential decision making
[Puterman, 1994, Sutton and Barto, 2018]. In RL, a common goal is to identify a near-optimal policy,
and there exist two main paradigms: online and offline RL.
Online RL is effective when the practical cost of a bad decision is low, such as in simulated environments (e.g., [Mnih et al., 2015, Silver et al., 2016]). In online RL, a well designed learning algorithm
starts from tabula rasa and implements a sequence of policies with a value that should approach that
of an optimal policy. When the cost of making a mistake is high, such as in healthcare [Gottesman
et al., 2018] and in self-driving [Kiran et al., 2021], an offline approach is preferred. In offline RL,
the agent uses a dataset of pre-collected experience to extract a policy that is as good as possible. In
this latter case, the quality of the policy that can be extracted from the dataset is limited by the quality
of the dataset.
Many applications, however, fall between these two opposite settings: for example, a company that
sells products online has most likely recorded the feedback that it has received from its customers, but
can also collect a small amount of additional strategic data in order to improve its recommendation
engine. While in principle an online exploration algorithm can be used to collect fresh data, in
practice there are a number of practical engineering considerations that require the policy to be
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

