Learning Universal Policies via Text-Guided
Video Generation
Yilun Du∗ †‡ , Mengjiao Yang * ‡§ , Bo Dai ‡¶ , Hanjun Dai ‡ , Ofir Nachum ‡ ,
Joshua B. Tenenbaum † , Dale Schuurmans ‡|| , Pieter Abbeel §
†
MIT
Google DeepMind‡ UC Berkeley§ Georgia Tech¶ University of Alberta||
https://universal-policy.github.io/

Abstract
A goal of artificial intelligence is to construct an agent that can solve a wide variety
of tasks. Recent progress in text-guided image synthesis has yielded models with
an impressive ability to generate complex novel images, exhibiting combinatorial
generalization across domains. Motivated by this success, we investigate whether
such tools can be used to construct more general-purpose agents. Specifically, we
cast the sequential decision making problem as a text-conditioned video generation
problem, where, given a text-encoded specification of a desired goal, a planner
synthesizes a set of future frames depicting its planned actions in the future, after
which control actions are extracted from the generated video. By leveraging text
as the underlying goal specification, we are able to naturally and combinatorially
generalize to novel goals. The proposed policy-as-video formulation can further
represent environments with different state and action spaces in a unified space of
images, which, for example, enables learning and generalization across a variety of
robot manipulation tasks. Finally, by leveraging pretrained language embeddings
and widely available videos from the internet, the approach enables knowledge
transfer through predicting highly realistic video plans for real robots2 .

1

Introduction

Building models that solve a diverse set of tasks has become a dominant paradigm in the domains
of vision and language. In natural language processing, large pretrained models have demonstrated
remarkable zero-shot learning of new language tasks [1, 2, 3]. Similarly, in computer vision, models
such as those proposed in [4, 5] have shown remarkable zero-shot classification and object recognition
capabilities. A natural next step is to use such tools to construct agents that can complete different
decision making tasks across many environments.
However, training such agents faces the inherent challenge of environmental diversity, since different
environments operate with distinct state action spaces (e.g., the joint space and continuous controls
in MuJoCo are fundamentally different from the image space and discrete actions in Atari). Such
diversity hampers knowledge sharing, learning, and generalization across tasks and environments.
Although substantial effort has been devoted to encoding different environments with universal tokens
in a sequence modeling framework [6], it is unclear whether such an approach can preserve the
rich knowledge embedded in pretrained vision and language models and leverage this knowledge to
transfer to downstream reinforcement learning (RL) tasks. Furthermore, it is difficult to construct
reward functions that specify different tasks across environments.
In this work, we address the challenges in environment diversity and reward specification by leveraging video (i.e., image sequences) as a universal interface for conveying action and observation
∗
2

denotes equal contribution. Correspondence to yilundu@mit.edu and sherryy@berkeley.edu.
See video visualizations at https://universal-policy.github.io.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

