DORIS-MAE:
Scientific Document Retrieval using Multi-level
Aspect-based Queries
Jianyou Wang ⇤

Kaicheng Wang ⇤

Xiaoyue Wang

Leon Bergen †

Prudhviraj Naidu

Ramamohan Paturi †

Laboratory for Emerging Intelligence
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
{jiw101, kaw036, xiw027, prnaidu, lbergen, rpaturi} @ ucsd.edu

Abstract
In scientific research, the ability to effectively retrieve relevant documents based on
complex, multifaceted queries is critical. Existing evaluation datasets for this task
are limited, primarily due to the high cost and effort required to annotate resources
that effectively represent complex queries. To address this, we propose a novel task,
Scientific DOcument Retrieval using Multi-level Aspect-based quEries (DORISMAE), which is designed to handle the complex nature of user queries in scientific
research. We developed a benchmark dataset within the field of computer science,
consisting of 100 human-authored complex query cases. For each complex query,
we assembled a collection of 100 relevant documents and produced annotated
relevance scores for ranking them. Recognizing the significant labor of expert
annotation, we also introduce Anno-GPT, a scalable framework for validating the
performance of Large Language Models (LLMs) on expert-level dataset annotation
tasks. LLM annotation of the DORIS-MAE dataset resulted in a 500x reduction in
cost, without compromising quality. Furthermore, due to the multi-tiered structure
of these complex queries, the DORIS-MAE dataset can be extended to over 4,000
sub-query test cases without requiring additional annotation. We evaluated 17
recent retrieval methods on DORIS-MAE, observing notable performance drops
compared to traditional datasets. This highlights the need for better approaches
to handle complex, multifaceted queries in scientific research. Our dataset and
codebase are available at https://github.com/Real-Doris-Mae/Doris-Mae-Dataset.

1

Introduction

Scientists often have complex questions that require thorough exploration within various parts
of their field (Figure 1). Finding relevant scientific literature, one of many challenges in this
process, can be especially difficult when dealing with multi-faceted queries. These queries typically
encompass numerous interconnected topics and require an information retrieval (IR) system capable
of recognizing and responding to this level of complexity.
⇤
†

Equal Contribution
Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

