Fast Optimal Locally Private Mean Estimation
via Random Projections

Hilal Asi
Apple Inc.
hilal.asi94@gmail.com

Vitaly Feldman
Apple Inc.
vitaly.edu@gmail.com

Huy L. Nguyen
Northeastern University
hu.nguyen@northeastern.edu

Jelani Nelson
UC Berkeley
minilek@berkeley.edu

Kunal Talwar
Apple Inc.
kunal@kunaltalwar.org

Abstract
We study the problem of locally private mean estimation of high-dimensional
vectors in the Euclidean ball. Existing algorithms for this problem either incur suboptimal error or have high communication and/or run-time complexity. We propose
a new algorithmic framework, ProjUnit, for private mean estimation that yields
algorithms that are computationally efficient, have low communication complexity,
and incur optimal error up to a 1 + o(1)-factor. Our framework is deceptively
simple: each randomizer projects its input to a random low-dimensional subspace,
normalizes the result, and then runs an optimal algorithm such as PrivUnitG in the
lower-dimensional space. In addition, we show that, by appropriately correlating
the random projection matrices across devices, we can achieve fast server run-time.
We mathematically analyze the error of the algorithm in terms of properties of
the random projections, and study two instantiations. Lastly, our experiments
for private mean estimation and private federated learning demonstrate that our
algorithms empirically obtain nearly the same utility as optimal ones while having
significantly lower communication and computational cost.

1

Introduction

Distributed estimation of the mean, or equivalently the sum, of vectors v1 , . . . , vn ∈ Rd is a
fundamental problem in distributed optimization and federated learning. For example, in the latter,
each of n devices may compute some update to parameters of a machine learning model based
Pnon its
local data, at which point a central server wishes to apply all updates to the model, i.e. add i=1 vi
to the vector of parameters. The typical desire to keep local data private necessitates methods for
computing this sum while preserving privacy of the local data on each individual device, so that
the central server essentially only learns the noisy sum and (almost) nothing about each individual
summand vi [20, 11].
The gold standard for measuring privacy preservation is via the language of differential privacy [21].
In this work, we study this problem in the setting of local differential privacy (LDP). We consider (oneround) protocols for which there exists some randomized algorithm R : Rd → M (called the local
randomizer), such that each device i sends R(vi ) to the server. We say the protocol is ε-differentially
private if for any v, v ′ ∈ Rd and any event S ⊆ M, Pr(R(v) ∈ S) ≤ eε Pr(R(v ′ ) ∈ S). If ε = 0
then the distribution of R(v) is independent of v, and hence the output of R(·) reveals nothing about
the local data (perfect privacy); meanwhile if ε = ∞ then the distributions of R(v) and R(v ′ ) can be
arbitrarily far, so that in fact one may simply set R(x) = x and reveal local data in the clear (total
lack of privacy). Thus, ε ≥ 0 is typically called the privacy loss of a protocol.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

