Federated Learning with Bilateral Curation for
Partially Class-Disjoint Data

Ziqing Fan1,2 , Ruipeng Zhang1,2 , Jiangchao Yao1,2 , Bo Han3 , Ya Zhang1,2 , Yanfeng Wang1,2,B
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 Hong Kong Baptist University
{zqfan_knight, zhangrp, sunarker}@sjtu.edu.cn
bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, {ya_zhang, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Partially class-disjoint data (PCDD), a common yet under-explored data formation
where each client contributes a part of classes (instead of all classes) of samples,
severely challenges the performance of federated algorithms. Without full classes,
the local objective will contradict the global objective, yielding the angle collapse
problem for locally missing classes and the space waste problem for locally existing
classes. As far as we know, none of the existing methods can intrinsically mitigate
PCDD challenges to achieve holistic improvement in the bilateral views (both
global view and local view) of federated learning. To address this dilemma, we are
inspired by the strong generalization of simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF)
on the imbalanced data, and propose a novel approach called FedGELA where the
classifier is globally fixed as a simplex ETF while locally adapted to the personal
distributions. Globally, FedGELA provides fair and equal discrimination for all
classes and avoids inaccurate updates of the classifier, while locally it utilizes the
space of locally missing classes for locally existing classes. We conduct extensive
experiments on a range of datasets to demonstrate that our FedGELA achieves
promising performance (averaged improvement of 3.9% to FedAvg and 1.5% to
best baselines) and provide both local and global convergence guarantees. Source
code is available at: https://github.com/MediaBrain-SJTU/FedGELA.

1

Introduction

Partially class-disjoint data (PCDD) [13, 18, 21] refers to an emerging situation in federated learning [14, 22, 43, 46, 50] where each client only possesses information on a subset of categories, but all
clients in the federation provide the information on the whole categories. For instance, in landmark
detection [39] for thousands of categories with data locally preserved, most contributors only have a
subset of categories of landmark photos where they live or traveled before; and in the diagnosis of
Thyroid diseases, due to regional diversity different hospitals may have shared and distinct Thyroid
diseases [10]. It is usually difficult for each party to acquire the full classes of samples, as the
participants may be lack of domain expertise or limited by demographic discrepancy. Therefore, how
to efficiently handle the partially class-disjoint data is a critical (yet under-explored) problem in
real-world federated learning applications for the pursuit of personal and generic interests.
Prevalent studies mainly focus on the general heterogeneity without specially considering the PCDD
challenges: generic federated leaning (G-FL) algorithms adopt a uniform treatment of all classes
and mitigate personal differences by imposing constraints on local training [17, 19], modifying
logits [21, 47] adjusting the weights of submitted gradients [37] or generating synthetic data [54]; in
contrast, personalized federated learning (P-FL) algorithms place relatively less emphasis on locally
missing classes and selectively share either partial network parameters [1, 6] or class prototypes [33]
to minimize the impact of personal characteristics, thereby separating the two topics. Those methods
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

