Conformal Prediction for Uncertainty-Aware
Planning with Diffusion Dynamics Model

Jiankai Sun
Stanford University
jksun@stanford.edu

Yiqi Jiang
Stanford University
yqjiang@stanford.edu

Parth Talpur Nobel
Stanford University
ptnobel@stanford.edu

Jianing Qiu
Imperial College London
jianing.qiu17@imperial.ac.uk

Mykel Kochenderfer
Stanford University
mykel@stanford.edu

Mac Schwager
Stanford University
schwager@stanford.edu

Abstract
Robotic applications often involve working in environments that are uncertain,
dynamic, and partially observable. Recently, diffusion models have been proposed
for learning trajectory prediction models trained from expert demonstrations, which
can be used for planning in robot tasks. Such models have demonstrated a strong
ability to overcome challenges such as multi-modal action distributions, highdimensional output spaces, and training instability. It is crucial to quantify the
uncertainty of these dynamics models when using them for planning. In this
paper, we quantify the uncertainty of diffusion dynamics models using Conformal
Prediction (CP). Given a finite number of exchangeable expert trajectory examples
(called the “calibration set”), we use CP to obtain a set in the trajectory space (called
the “coverage region”) that is guaranteed to contain the output of the diffusion
model with a user-defined probability (called the “coverage level”). In PlanCP,
inspired by concepts from conformal prediction, we modify the loss function
for training the diffusion model to include a quantile term to encourage more
robust performance across the variety of training examples. At test time, we then
calibrate PlanCP with a conformal prediction process to obtain coverage sets for
the trajectory prediction with guaranteed coverage level. We evaluate our algorithm
on various planning tasks and model-based offline reinforcement learning tasks
and show that it reduces the uncertainty of the learned trajectory prediction model.
As a by-product, our algorithm PlanCP outperforms prior algorithms on existing
offline RL benchmarks and challenging continuous planning tasks. Our method can
be combined with most model-based planning approaches to produce uncertainty
estimates of the closed-loop system.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty is a major challenge in robotics, arising from a variety of sources, including errors
in modeling, sensing, planning, and control [1, 2, 3]. Understanding the effect of uncertainty is
important for developing successful motion strategies, as it allows robots to anticipate and plan
for unexpected events. Therefore, planning with uncertainty is a crucial challenge in robotics and
accurately modeling this uncertainty is important for ensuring the safety and reliability of robotic
systems, particularly in safety-critical applications. A range of techniques, such as probabilistic
modeling [4] and robust optimization [5, 6], can be used to account for the uncertainty of dynamics
models in robotics.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

