FaceComposer: A Unified Model for
Versatile Facial Content Creation
Jiayu Wang∗1 , Kang Zhao∗1 , Yifeng Ma∗2 , Shiwei Zhang1 , Yingya Zhang1 ,
Yujun Shen3 , Deli Zhao1 , Jingren Zhou1
1

Alibaba Group

2

Tsinghua University

3

Ant Group

{wangjiayu.wjy,zhaokang.zk,mayifeng.myf,zhangjin.zsw,yingya.zyy,jingren.zhou}@alibaba-inc.com
{shenyujun0302,zhaodeli}@gmail.com

Abstract
This work presents FaceComposer, a unified generative model that accomplishes
a variety of facial content creation tasks, including text-conditioned face synthesis,
text-guided face editing, face animation etc. Based on the latent diffusion
framework, FaceComposer follows the paradigm of compositional generation
and employs diverse face-specific conditions, e.g., Identity Feature and Projected
Normalized Coordinate Code, to release the model creativity at all possible. To
support text control and animation, we clean up some existing face image datasets
and collect around 500 hours of talking-face videos, forming a high-quality largescale multi-modal face database. A temporal self-attention module is incorporated
into the U-Net structure, which allows learning the denoising process on the
mixture of images and videos. Extensive experiments suggest that our approach
not only achieves comparable or even better performance than state-of-the-arts on
each single task, but also facilitates some combined tasks with one-time forward,
demonstrating its potential in serving as a foundation generative model in face
domain. We further develop an interface such that users can enjoy our one-step
service to create, edit, and animate their own characters. Code, dataset, model, and
interface will be made publicly available.

1

Introduction

Due to the rapid development of generative models, such as diffusion models (DMs) [10, 15, 47],
VAEs [21], GANs [6] and flow models [5] in the computer vision area, automatic content creation has
recently received an increasing amount of attention for its real-world applications. Benefiting from
these generative models, facial content creation as a critical part has recently achieved impressive
progress and simultaneously shows great application potential, e.g., virtual digital human, artistic
creation, and intelligent customer service.
Existing face generative models [20, 23, 39, 61] are usually developed as highly customized systems,
meaning that one model can only handle one task. However, this design poses two significant
challenges: 1) hard to accomplish complex tasks, such as integrating face creating, editing and then
animating the generated face in a single step; 2) redundant consumption of memory and computation.
For example, one needs to train and save a number of models to build a multi-functional system,
and perform complicated inference processes. The challenges could inevitably limit its further
applications and development.
To tackle these problems, we propose compositional FaceComposer in this work, a unified model
that is capable of simultaneously tackling versatile facial tasks, including face generation, face editing,
* Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

