Uncovering motifs of concurrent signaling across
multiple neuronal populations

Evren Gokcen1 , Anna I. Jasper2 , Alison Xu2 ,
Adam Kohn*,2,3,4 , Christian K. Machens*,5 , Byron M. Yu*,1,6
1
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Dominick Purpura Dept. of Neuroscience, 3 Dept. of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
4
Dept. of Systems and Computational Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
5
Champalimaud Neuroscience Programme, Champalimaud Foundation
6
Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
egokcen@cmu.edu, {anna.jasper, alison.xu, adam.kohn}@einsteinmed.edu,
christian.machens@neuro.fchampalimaud.org, byronyu@cmu.edu
*
Denotes equal contribution.

Abstract
Modern recording techniques now allow us to record from distinct neuronal populations in different brain networks. However, especially as we consider multiple
(more than two) populations, new conceptual and statistical frameworks are needed
to characterize the multi-dimensional, concurrent flow of signals among these
populations. Here, we develop a dimensionality reduction framework that determines (1) the subset of populations described by each latent dimension, (2) the
direction of signal flow among those populations, and (3) how those signals evolve
over time within and across experimental trials. We illustrate these features in
simulation, and further validate the method by applying it to previously studied
recordings from neuronal populations in macaque visual areas V1 and V2. Then
we study interactions across select laminar compartments of areas V1, V2, and
V3d, recorded simultaneously with multiple Neuropixels probes. Our approach
uncovered signatures of selective communication across these three areas that
related to their retinotopic alignment. This work advances the study of concurrent
signaling across multiple neuronal populations.

1

Introduction

Cortical circuits functionally involve feedforward, feedback, and horizontal interactions between
many neuronal populations that span distinct areas and layers. Recording techniques now allow us to
record from many neurons across these populations [1–3] (Fig. 1a). To capitalize on the scientific
opportunities presented by these recordings, however, new conceptual and statistical frameworks are
needed, particularly as we consider communication across multiple (more than two) populations.
Characterizing interactions between just two populations is a challenging high-dimensional problem.
Dimensionality reduction techniques have therefore been increasingly used for this purpose [4–7].
Methods like canonical correlation analysis (CCA) [8] and its probabilistic variants [9], in particular,
identify a low-dimensional set of latent variables that parsimoniously describe the interactions
between two populations. This cross-population shared-latent model has inspired several extensions
targeted toward neural recordings [10–14].
Communication between two populations, however, occurs bidirectionally and likely concurrently,
and disentangling this concurrent communication is a substantial challenge in neuroscience. A
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

