PRED: Pre-training via Semantic Rendering on
LiDAR Point Clouds
Hao Yang1,3 Haiyang Wang1 Di Dai2 Liwei Wang1,2
1
Center for Data Science, Peking University
2
National Key Laboratory of General Artiﬁcial Intelligence, School of Intelligence
Science and Technology, Peking University 3 Pazhou Lab
{haoy@stu, wanghaiyang@stu, didai@stu, wanglw@cis}.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-training is crucial in 3D-related ﬁelds such as autonomous driving where
point cloud annotation is costly and challenging. Many recent studies on point
cloud pre-training, however, have overlooked the issue of incompleteness, where
only a fraction of the points are captured by LiDAR, leading to ambiguity during the training phase. On the other hand, images offer more comprehensive
information and richer semantics that can bolster point cloud encoders in addressing the incompleteness issue inherent in point clouds. Yet, incorporating
images into point cloud pre-training presents its own challenges due to occlusions,
potentially causing misalignments between points and pixels. In this work, we
propose PRED, a novel image-assisted pre-training framework for outdoor point
clouds in an occlusion-aware manner. The main ingredient of our framework is
a Birds-Eye-View (BEV) feature map conditioned semantic rendering, leveraging the semantics of images for supervision through neural rendering. We further
enhance our model’s performance by incorporating point-wise masking with a
high mask ratio (95%). Extensive experiments demonstrate PRED’s superiority
over prior point cloud pre-training methods, providing signiﬁcant improvements
on various large-scale datasets for 3D perception tasks. Codes will be available at
https://github.com/PRED4pc/PRED.

1

Introduction

Pre-training is a fundamental task in deep learning, serving as a powerful tool to harness the potential
of copious unlabeled data and enhance the results of downstream tasks. This is especially critical in
3D-related ﬁelds, including autonomous driving, where the annotation of point clouds is both laborious and expensive, contrasting with the relative ease of amassing large volumes of unlabeled point
cloud data (59). To tackle this challenge, we present PRED (PRE-training via semantic renDering),
a novel framework designed to pre-train point cloud processors using multi-view images.
With the tremendous advancements in masked signal modeling within the realms of image and
natural language processing (16; 12; 2), recent studies (55; 30; 62; 17; 61; 6) have delved into
applying masked auto-encoders to pre-training in the ﬁeld of point clouds. These works ﬁrstly apply
patch masking to the input point clouds, then employ an encoder-decoder framework to reconstruct
the point clouds, as depicted in Figure 1(a). Apart from masked auto-encoders, other researchers (52;
59; 64; 22; 34; 8) have explored point cloud pre-training through contrastive learning. Here, positive
pairs are generated by applying varied data augmentations to the point clouds, as demonstrated
in Figure 1(b). Despite these signiﬁcant strides, there remains a blind spot regarding the inherent
incompleteness of point clouds, which is a ubiquitous issue in outdoor LiDAR datasets. For example
in nuScenes (4), a large-scale outdoor LiDAR dataset, over 30% of the labeled objects contain fewer
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

