Searching for Optimal Per-Coordinate Step-sizes
with Multidimensional Backtracking

Frederik Kunstner
Victor S. Portella Mark Schmidt†
Nick Harvey
{kunstner,victorsp,schmidtm,nickhar}@cs.ubc.ca
University of British Columbia
Canada CIFAR AI Chair (Amii)†

Abstract
The backtracking line-search is an effective technique to automatically tune the
step-size in smooth optimization. It guarantees similar performance to using the
theoretically optimal step-size. Many approaches have been developed to instead
tune per-coordinate step-sizes, also known as diagonal preconditioners, but none of
the existing methods are provably competitive with the optimal per-coordinate stepsizes. We propose multidimensional backtracking, an extension of the backtracking
line-search to find good diagonal preconditioners for smooth convex problems. Our
key insight is that the gradient with respect to the step-sizes, also known as hypergradients, yields separating hyperplanes that let us search for good preconditioners
using cutting-plane methods. As black-box cutting-plane approaches like the ellipsoid method are computationally prohibitive, we develop an efficient algorithm
tailored to our setting. Multidimensional backtracking is provably competitive with
the best diagonal preconditioner and requires no manual tuning.

1

Introduction

When training machine learning models, tuning the hyperparameters of the optimizer is often a major
challenge. For example, finding a reasonable step-size hyperparameter for gradient descent typically
involves trial-and-error or a costly grid search. In smooth optimization, a common approach to set the
step-size without user input is a backtracking line-search: start with a large step-size, and decrease
it when it is too big to make sufficient progress. For ill-conditioned problems, however, there are
limits to the improvement achievable by tuning the step-size. Per-coordinate step-sizes—also known
as diagonal preconditioners—can drastically improve performance. Many approaches have been
developed to automatically tune per-coordinate step-sizes. Those are often described as “adaptive”
methods, but the meaning of this term varies widely, from describing heuristics that set per-coordinate
step-sizes, to ensuring performance guarantees as if a particular property of the problem were known
in advance. Yet, even on the simplest case of a smooth and strongly convex deterministic problem
where a good fixed diagonal preconditioner exists (i.e., one that reduces the condition number), none
of the existing adaptive methods are guaranteed to find per-coordinate step-sizes that improve the
convergence rate. We discuss approaches to adaptive methods in the next section.
Contribution. We propose multidimensional backtracking, an extension of the standard backtracking
line-search to higher dimension, to automatically find good per-coordinate step-sizes. Our method
recovers
√ the convergence rate of gradient descent with the optimal preconditioner for the problem, up
to a 2d factor where d is the number of coordinates. This is a direct generalization of the line-search
guarantee, with a penalty depending on dimension due to the extra degrees of freedom, as expected.
1.1 Adaptive step-sizes and preconditioning methods
Adaptive and parameter-free methods in online learning are an example where adaptive methods
have a well-defined meaning. AdaGrad (McMahan and Streeter, 2010; Duchi et al., 2011) and
Coin Betting (Orabona and Pál, 2016; Orabona and Tommasi, 2017) can adapt to problem-specific
constants without user input and have strong guarantees, even in the adversarial setting. However,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

