Learning Energy-Based Prior Model with
Diffusion-Amortized MCMC
Peiyu Yu1
yupeiyu98@g.ucla.edu

Yaxuan Zhu1
yaxuanzhu@g.ucla.edu

Xiaojian Ma2,4
xiaojian.ma@ucla.edu

Ruiqi Gao3
ruiqig@google.com

Sirui Xie2
srxie@ucla.edu
Song-Chun Zhu4
sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Ying Nian Wu1
ywu@stat.ucla.edu
1

3

UCLA Department of Statistics 2 UCLA Department of Computer Science
Google DeepMind 4 Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)

Abstract
Latent space Energy-Based Models (EBMs), also known as energy-based priors,
have drawn growing interests in the field of generative modeling due to its flexibility in the formulation and strong modeling power of the latent space. However,
the common practice of learning latent space EBMs with non-convergent shortrun MCMC for prior and posterior sampling is hindering the model from further
progress; the degenerate MCMC sampling quality in practice often leads to degraded generation quality and instability in training, especially with highly multimodal and/or high-dimensional target distributions. To remedy this sampling issue, in this paper we introduce a simple but effective diffusion-based amortization
method for long-run MCMC sampling and develop a novel learning algorithm for
the latent space EBM based on it. We provide theoretical evidence that the learned
amortization of MCMC is a valid long-run MCMC sampler. Experiments on several image modeling benchmark datasets demonstrate the superior performance of
our method compared with strong counterparts1 .

1

Introduction

Generative modeling of data distributions has achieved impressive progress with the fast development of deep generative models in recent years [1–9]. It provides a powerful framework that allows
successful applications in synthesizing data of different modalities [10–15], extracting semantically
meaningful data representation [16–18] as well as other important domains of unsupervised or semisupervised learning [19–21]. A fundamental and powerful branch of generative modeling is the Deep
Latent Variable Model (DLVM). Typically, DLVM assumes that the observation (e.g., a piece of
text or images) is generated by its corresponding low-dimensional latent variables via a top-down
generator network [1–3]. The latent variables are often assumed to follow a non-informative prior
distribution, such as a uniform or isotropic Gaussian distribution. While one can directly learn a
deep top-down generator network to faithfully map the non-informative prior distribution to the data
distribution, learning an informative prior model in the latent space could further improve the ex1

Code and data available at https://github.com/yuPeiyu98/Diffusion-Amortized-MCMC.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

