Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
are Zero-Shot Classifiers
Priyank Jaini∗
Google DeepMind
Toronto
pjaini@google.com

Kevin Clark∗
Google DeepMind
Toronto
kevclark@google.com

Abstract
The excellent generative capabilities of text-to-image diffusion models suggest
they learn informative representations of image-text data. However, what knowledge their representations capture is not fully understood, and they have not been
thoroughly explored on downstream tasks. We investigate diffusion models by
proposing a method for evaluating them as zero-shot classifiers. The key idea is
using a diffusion model’s ability to denoise a noised image given a text description
of a label as a proxy for that label’s likelihood. We apply our method to Stable Diffusion and Imagen, using it to probe fine-grained aspects of the models’ knowledge
and comparing them with CLIP’s zero-shot abilities. They perform competitively
with CLIP on a wide range of zero-shot image classification datasets. Additionally,
they achieve state-of-the-art results on shape/texture bias tests and can successfully
perform attribute binding while CLIP cannot. Although generative pre-training
is prevalent in NLP, visual foundation models often use other methods such as
contrastive learning. Based on our findings, we argue that generative pre-training
should be explored as a compelling alternative for vision-language tasks.

1

Introduction

Large models pre-trained on internet-scale data can adapt effectively to a variety of downstream tasks.
Increasingly, they are being used as zero-shot learners with no task-specific training, such as with
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) for images and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) for text. In natural language
processing, many successful pre-trained models are generative (i.e., language models). However,
generative pre-training is less commonly used for visual tasks. Until recently, the usual practice for
vision problems was to pre-train models on labeled datasets such as Imagenet (Deng et al., 2009), or
JFT (Sun et al., 2017). Later research in visual and vision-language problems has led to image-text
models pre-trained primarily using either contrastive losses (Radford et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021;
Yuan et al., 2021) or autoencoding tasks (Vincent et al., 2010; He et al., 2022).
On the other hand, generative text-to-image models based on denoising diffusion probabilistic models
(Ho et al., 2020) such as Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022a), Dalle-2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), and Stable
Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022) can generate realistic high-resolution images and generalize to
diverse text prompts. Their strong performance suggests that they learn effective representations of
image-text data. However, their ability to transfer to downstream discriminative tasks and how they
compare to other pre-trained models has not been explored thoroughly.
In this paper, we investigate these questions by transferring Imagen and Stable Diffusion (SD) to
discriminative tasks. While previous studies have used representations from diffusion models for
downstream tasks (Brempong et al., 2022; Burgert et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2023), we instead propose
∗

equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

