On the Connection between Pre-training Data
Diversity and Fine-tuning Robustness
Vivek Ramanujan⇤ † Thao Nguyen⇤†
Sewoong Oh† Ludwig Schmidt†⇧ Ali Farhadi†⇧
†
University of Washington ⇧ Allen Institute for AI
{thaottn,ramanv}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Pre-training has been widely adopted in deep learning to improve model performance, especially when the training data for a target task is limited. In our work, we
seek to understand the implications of this training strategy on the generalization
properties of downstream models. More specifically, we ask the following question:
how do properties of the pre-training distribution affect the robustness of a finetuned model? The properties we explore include the label space, label semantics,
image diversity, data domains, and data quantity of the pre-training distribution.
We find that the primary factor influencing downstream effective robustness [44] is
data quantity, while other factors have limited significance. For example, reducing
the number of ImageNet pre-training classes by 4⇥ while increasing the number of
images per class by 4⇥ (that is, keeping total data quantity fixed) does not impact
the robustness of fine-tuned models. We demonstrate our findings on pre-training
distributions drawn from various natural and synthetic data sources, primarily using
the iWildCam-WILDS distribution shift as a test for robustness.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning is a popular technique to deal with data scarcity, improve training speed, or transfer
useful inductive biases that can benefit downstream tasks [28, 8, 10]. In the domain of computer
vision, pre-training on ImageNet in particular has been the de-facto standard for obtaining features
to solve a wide range of vision tasks, such as object detection [34, 9, 18], segmentation [5, 16], and
action recognition [42]. While there exists previous work that seeks to pinpoint specific properties of
ImageNet-trained features that benefit downstream performance [19, 24, 23, 38], the analysis is often
done with respect to model accuracy. Our work instead examines the robustness of fine-tuned models
to natural distribution shifts. Instead of looking at architecture variations and pre-training algorithm
as done in prior work [38, 14, 49], we focus on the role of the pre-training data. This data-centric
approach has been validated by past work [27, 29, 13], which show that the training data distribution
plays a larger role than training methods or architecture in influencing model robustness.
Robustness under distribution shifts is a fundamental concern for producing reliable machine learning
systems: a model can perform in unexpected and undesirable ways when there is a mismatch between
the data distribution encountered in deployment and the one on which the model is trained [36, 22].
For example, a self-driving car should be able to generalize to a wide variety of weather scenarios to
be considered safe, some of which it may not have seen during training. In our work, we focus on
these forms of natural distribution shifts [33, 22]—named so because they are induced by real-world
processes—and study what aspects of the source dataset could help fine-tuned models become more
robust to these shifts. We tackle this question along five different ablation axes: (i) Data quantity,
(ii) Label granularity, (iii) Label semantics, (iv) Image diversity, and (v) Data sources. Through a
⇤

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

