Self-supervised video pretraining yields robust and
more human-aligned visual representations

Nikhil Parthasarathy†

S. M. Ali Eslami João Carreira
Google DeepMind

Olivier J. Hénaff

Abstract
Humans learn powerful representations of objects and scenes by observing how
they evolve over time. Yet, outside of specific tasks that require explicit temporal
understanding, static image pretraining remains the dominant paradigm for learning visual foundation models. We question this mismatch, and ask whether video
pretraining can yield visual representations that bear the hallmarks of human perception: generalisation across tasks, robustness to perturbations, and consistency with
human judgements. To that end we propose a novel procedure for curating videos,
and develop a contrastive framework which learns from the complex transformations therein. This simple paradigm for distilling knowledge from videos, called
VITO, yields general representations that far outperform prior video pretraining
methods on image understanding tasks, and image pretraining methods on video
understanding tasks. Moreover, VITO representations are significantly more robust
to natural and synthetic deformations than image-, video-, and adversarially-trained
ones. Finally, VITO’s predictions are strongly aligned with human judgements,
surpassing models that were specifically trained for that purpose. Together, these
results suggest that video pretraining could be a simple way of learning unified,
robust, and human-aligned representations of the visual world.

1

Introduction

With the explosion of recent AI breakthroughs, humans now interact with and depend on the outputs
of these models at an unprecedented rate. It is therefore increasingly important that these models be
aligned with human abilities, judgements, and preferences. In the context of computer vision systems,
human alignment can be quantified with accurate generalization across a wide range of tasks [1–3],
robustness to various input deformations [4], and consistency with human perceptual judgements
[5]. While each of these challenges has been tackled separately, progress along one axis has often
come at the expense of the others. For example, gains in robustness [6] or temporal understanding
[7–9] have thus far come at the cost of spatial understanding, and scaling the model and dataset size,
while improving task-generality and robustness [10, 11], can be detrimental for their consistency with
human perception [11, 12].
In this work we question this trend, and ask whether improvements to all aspects of human alignment
can be made with the appropriate pretraining methodology. Specifically, humans and animals have
long been thought to learn from the dynamic evolution of natural scenes [13–15] and we hypothesize
that artificial visual systems will be more aligned by appropriately leveraging natural video pretraining.
In particular, while many current self-supervised methods [16–19] learn representations that are
invariant to synthetic augmentations that capture important image priors such as scale-, color-, and
translation-invariance, these represent a small part of the complex (and signal-rich) changes in pose,
viewpoint, and motion that are captured from natural videos. Predicting the evolution of videos is
also a natural means of learning intuitive physics and model-based reasoning [20–22].
†

Current affiliation: NYU Center for Neural Science, work done while interning at DeepMind.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

