Read and Reap the Rewards:
Learning to Play Atari with the Help of Instruction
Manuals
Yue Wu1∗ , Yewen Fan1 , Paul Pu Liang1 , Amos Azaria2 , Yuanzhi Li1,3 , Tom Mitchell1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Ariel University, 3 Microsoft Research
∗
ywu5@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
High sample complexity has long been a challenge for RL. On the other hand,
humans learn to perform tasks not only from interaction or demonstrations, but
also by reading unstructured text documents, e.g., instruction manuals. Instruction
manuals and wiki pages are among the most abundant data that could inform
agents of valuable features and policies or task-specific environmental dynamics
and reward structures. Therefore, we hypothesize that the ability to utilize humanwritten instruction manuals to assist learning policies for specific tasks should
lead to a more efficient and better-performing agent. We propose the Read and
Reward framework. Read and Reward speeds up RL algorithms on Atari games by
reading manuals released by the Atari game developers. Our framework consists
of a QA Extraction module that extracts and summarizes relevant information
from the manual and a Reasoning module that evaluates object-agent interactions
based on information from the manual. An auxiliary reward is then provided to
a standard A2C RL agent, when interaction is detected. Experimentally, various
RL algorithms obtain significant improvement in performance and training speed
when assisted by our design. Code at github.com/Holmeswww/RnR.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved impressive performance in a variety of tasks, such as Atari
(Mnih et al., 2015; Badia et al., 2020), Go (Silver et al., 2017), or autonomous driving (Fuchs et al.,
2021; Kiran et al., 2022), and is hypothesized to be an important step toward artificial intelligence
(Silver et al., 2021). However, RL still faces a great challenge when applied to complicated, realworld-like scenarios (Shridhar et al., 2020b; Szot et al., 2021) due to its low sample efficiency. The
Skiing game in Atari, for example, requires the skier (agent) to ski down a snowy hill and hit the
objective gates in the shortest time, while avoiding obstacles. Such an intuitive game with simple
controls (left, right) still required 80 billion frames to solve with existing RL algorithms (Badia et al.,
2020), roughly equivalent to 100 years of non-stop playing.
Observing the gap between RL and human performance, we identify an important cause: the lack of
knowledge and understanding about the game. One of the most available sources of information, that
is often used by humans to solve real-world problems, is unstructured text, e.g., books, instruction
manuals, and wiki pages. In addition, unstructured language has been experimentally verified as
a powerful and flexible source of knowledge for complex tasks (Tessler et al., 2021). Therefore,
we hypothesize that RL agents could benefit from reading and understanding publicly available
instruction manuals and wiki pages.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

