Graph of Circuits with GNN for Exploring the
Optimal Design Space

1

Aditya Hemant Shahane1 Swapna Manjiri2 Ankesh Jain2 Sandeep Kumar1,2,3
Bharti School of Telecommunication Technology and Management 2 Electrical Engineering
3
Yardi School of Artificial Intelligence
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
{bsy217530,een212025,ankesh,ksandeep}@iitd.ac.in

Abstract
The design automation of analog circuits poses significant challenges in terms
of the large design space, complex interdependencies between circuit specifications, and resource-intensive simulations. To address these challenges, this paper
presents an innovative framework called the Graph of Circuits Explorer (GCX).
Leveraging graph structure learning along with graph neural networks, GCX enables the creation of a surrogate model that facilitates efficient exploration of the
optimal design space within a semi-supervised learning framework which reduces
the need for large labeled datasets. The proposed approach comprises three key
stages. First, we learn the geometric representation of circuits and enrich it with
technology information to create a comprehensive feature vector. Subsequently,
integrating feature-based graph learning with few-shot and zero-shot learning enhances the generalizability in predictions for unseen circuits. Finally, we introduce
two algorithms namely, EASCO and ASTROG which upon integration with GCX
optimize the available samples to yield the optimal circuit configuration meeting
the designer’s criteria. The effectiveness of the proposed approach is demonstrated
through simulated performance evaluation of various circuits, using derived parameters in 180 nm CMOS technology. Furthermore, the generalizability of the
approach is extended to higher-order topologies and different technology nodes
such as 65 nm and 45 nm CMOS process nodes.

1

Introduction

Designing Electronic Design Automation (EDA) tools for analog circuits is challenging as it involves
optimizing multiple parameters and their non-linear dependencies. Machine learning models are
increasingly being integrated within EDA tools aiming to make this process flexible and suited for
analog design across different circuits and technology nodes. Instead of simulation-based global
optimization [14], which can be time-consuming for stricter requirements [8], a surrogate-modelassisted optimization approach using less computationally expensive approximation models have
been proposed.
Regarding surrogate models, Bayesian optimization and Gaussian process models have been more
effective than standard artificial neural networks and radial basis functions. However, Gaussian
process modeling is computationally expensive [3], and as circuit complexity increases, inter-sample
relations become harder to capture, training time increases and generalization ability is lost. To address
these challenges, graph-based models that integrate Graph neural networks (GNNs) [5, 22, 17, 29]
have emerged as a powerful technique in high-level synthesis, behavior modeling [9], placement
and routing [20, 18, 28, 13], analog and mixed-signal layout exploration [25], making them a
plausible choice for graph-based surrogate models. Graphs capture both topological and featurebased information, resulting in faster modeling and optimization of complex systems. Despite their
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

