Unbounded Differentially Private Quantile and
Maximum Estimation
David Durfee
Anonym Inc.
david@anonymco.com

Abstract
In this work we consider the problem of differentially private computation of
quantiles for the data, especially the highest quantiles such as maximum, but with
an unbounded range for the dataset. We show that this can be done efficiently
through a simple invocation of AboveThreshold, a subroutine that is iteratively
called in the fundamental Sparse Vector Technique, even when there is no upper
bound on the data. In particular, we show that this procedure can give more
accurate and robust estimates on the highest quantiles with applications towards
clipping that is essential for differentially private sum and mean estimation. In addition, we show how two invocations can handle the fully unbounded data setting.
Within our study, we show that an improved analysis of AboveThreshold can
improve the privacy guarantees for the widely used Sparse Vector Technique that
is of independent interest. We give a more general characterization of privacy loss
for AboveThreshold which we immediately apply to our method for improved
privacy guarantees. Our algorithm only requires one 𝑂(𝑛) pass through the data,
which can be unsorted, and each subsequent query takes 𝑂(1) time. We empirically compare our unbounded algorithm with the state-of-the-art algorithms in
the bounded setting. For inner quantiles, we find that our method often performs
better on non-synthetic datasets. For the maximal quantiles, which we apply
to differentially private sum computation, we find that our method performs
significantly better.

1

Introduction

In statistics, quantiles are values that divide the data into specific proportions, such as median
that divides the data in half. Quantiles are a central statistical method for better understanding a
dataset. However, releasing quantile values could leak information about specific individuals within
a sensitive dataset. As a result, it becomes necessary to ensure that individual privacy is ensured
within this computation. Differential privacy offers a rigorous method for measuring the amount
that one individual can change the output of a computation. Due it’s rigorous guarantees, differential
privacy has become the gold standard for measuring privacy. This measurement method then offers
an inherent tradeoff between accuracy and privacy with outputs of pure noise achieving perfect
privacy. Thus, the goal of designing algorithms for differentially private quantile computation is to
maximize accuracy for a given level of privacy.
There are a variety of previous methods for computing a given quantile of the dataset that we will
cover in Section 1.2 , but each of these requires known bounds on the dataset. The most effective
and practical method invokes the exponential mechanism Smith (2011). For computing multiple
quantiles this method can be called iteratively. Follow-up work showed that it could be called
recursively by splitting the dataset at each call to reduce the privacy cost of composition Kaplan
et al. (2022). Further, a generalization can be called efficiently in one shot Gillenwater et al. (2021).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

