Model-free Posterior Sampling via Learning Rate
Randomization
Daniil Tiapkin1,2 Denis Belomestny3,2 Daniele Calandriello4 Éric Moulines1,5
Remi Munos4 Alexey Naumov2 Pierre Perrault6 Michal Valko4 Pierre Ménard7
1
CMAP, École Polytechnique 2 HSE University 3 Duisburg-Essen University
4
Google DeepMind 5 Mohamed Bin Zayed University of AI, UAE 6 IDEMIA 7 ENS Lyon
{daniil.tiapkin,eric.moulines}@polytechnique.edu
denis.belomestny@uni-due.de
{dcalandriello,munos,valkom}@google.com anaumov@hse.ru
pierre.perrault@outlook.com pierre.menard@ens-lyon.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce Randomized Q-learning (RandQL), a novel randomized model-free algorithm for regret minimization in episodic Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs). To the best of our knowledge, RandQL is the first tractable
model-free posterior sampling-based algorithm. We analyze the performance of
RandQL in both tabular and non-tabular metric
√ space settings. In tabular MDPs,
e H 5 SAT ), where H is the planning
RandQL achieves a regret bound of order O(
horizon, S is the number of states, A is the number of actions, and T is the number
of episodes. For a metric state-action space, RandQL enjoys a regret bound of ore 5/2 T (dz +1)/(dz +2) ), where dz denotes the zooming dimension. Notably,
der O(H
RandQL achieves optimistic exploration without using bonuses, relying instead on a
novel idea of learning rate randomization. Our empirical study shows that RandQL
outperforms existing approaches on baseline exploration environments.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton and Barto 1998), an agent learns to interact with an unknown
environment by acting, observing the next state, and receiving a reward. The agent’s goal is to
maximize the sum of the collected rewards. To achieve this, the agent can choose to use model-based
or model-free algorithms. In model-based algorithms, the agent builds a model of the environment by
inferring the reward function and the transition kernel that produces the next state. The agent then
plans in this model to find the optimal policy. In contrast, model-free algorithms directly learn the
optimal policy, which is the mapping of a state to an optimal action, or equivalently, the optimal
Q-values, which are the mapping of a state-action pair to the expected return of an optimal policy
starting by taking the given action at the given state.
Although empirical evidence suggests that model-based algorithms are more sample efficient than
model-free algorithms [Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011, Schulman et al., 2015]; model-free approaches offer several advantages. These include smaller time and space complexity, the absence
of a need to learn an explicit model, and often simpler algorithms. As a result, most of the recent
breakthroughs in deep RL, such as those reported by Mnih et al. [2013], Schulman et al. [2015, 2017],
Haarnoja et al. [2018], have been based on model-free algorithms, with a few notable exceptions,
such as Schrittwieser et al. [2020], Hessel et al. [2021]. Many of these model-free algorithms [Mnih
et al., 2013, Van Hasselt et al., 2016, Lillicrap et al., 2016] are rooted in the well-known Q-learning
algorithm of Watkins and Dayan [1992]. Q-learning is an off-policy learning technique where the
agent follows a behavioral policy while simultaneously incrementally learning the optimal Q-values
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

