Feature learning via mean-field Langevin dynamics:
classifying sparse parities and beyond

Taiji Suzuki1,2 , Denny Wu3,4 , Kazusato Oko1,2 , Atsushi Nitanda2,5
1

University of Tokyo, 2 RIKEN AIP, 3 New York University,
4
Flatiron Institute, 5 Kyushu Institute of Technology

taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, dennywu@nyu.edu,
oko-kazusato@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp, nitanda@ai.kyutech.ac.jp

Abstract
Neural network in the mean-field regime is known to be capable of feature learning,
unlike the kernel (NTK) counterpart. Recent works have shown that mean-field
neural networks can be globally optimized by a noisy gradient descent update
termed the mean-field Langevin dynamics (MFLD). However, all existing guarantees for MFLD only considered the optimization efficiency, and it is unclear if this
algorithm leads to improved generalization performance and sample complexity
due to the presence of feature learning. To fill this important gap, in this work we
study the sample complexity of MFLD in learning a class of binary classification
problems. Unlike existing margin bounds for neural networks, we avoid the typical
norm control by utilizing the perspective that MFLD optimizes the distribution of
parameters rather than the parameter itself; this leads to an improved analysis of the
sample complexity and convergence rate. We apply our general framework to the
learning of k-sparse parity functions, where we prove that unlike kernel methods,
two-layer neural networks optimized by MFLD achieves a sample complexity
where the degree k is “decoupled” from the exponent in the dimension dependence.

1

Introduction

Mean-field Langevin dynamics. The optimization dynamics of two-layer neural networks in the
mean-field regime can be described by a nonlinear partial differential equation of the distribution of
parameters (Nitanda and Suzuki, 2017; Chizat and Bach, 2018; Mei et al., 2018; Rotskoff and VandenEijnden, 2018; Sirignano and Spiliopoulos, 2020). Such a description has multiple advantages: (i)
global convergence guarantees can be obtained by exploiting convexity of the loss function, and
(ii) the parameters are allowed to evolve away from initialization and learn informative features, in
contrast to the neural tangent kernel (“lazy”) regime (Jacot et al., 2018).
Among the gradient-based optimization algorithms for mean-field neural networks, the mean-field
Langevin dynamics (MFLD) (Mei et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2019) is particularly attractive due to the
recently established quantitative optimization guarantees. MFLD arises from a noisy gradient descent
update on the parameters, where Gaussian noise is injected to the gradient to encourage “exploration”.
It has been shown that MFLD globally optimizes an entropy-regularized convex functional in the
space of measures, and for the infinite-width and continuous-time dynamics, the convergence rate is
exponential under suitable isoperimetric conditions (Nitanda et al., 2022; Chizat, 2022). Furthermore,
uniform-in-time estimates of the particle discretization error have also been established (Suzuki et al.,
2023a; Chen et al., 2022), meaning that optimization guarantees for the infinite-dimensional problem
can be effectively translated to a finite-width neural network.
However, existing analyses of MFLD only considered the optimization of neural networks; this alone
does not demonstrate the benefit of mean-field regime nor the presence of feature learning. Therefore,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

