Implicit variance regularization in non-contrastive SSL

Manu Srinath Halvagal1,2,∗

1

Axel Laborieux1,∗

Friedemann Zenke1,2

{firstname.lastname}@fmi.ch
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland
2
Faculty of Science, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland
∗
These authors contributed equally.

Abstract
Non-contrastive self-supervised learning (SSL) methods like BYOL and SimSiam
rely on asymmetric predictor networks to avoid representational collapse without
negative samples. Yet, how predictor networks facilitate stable learning is not fully
understood. While previous theoretical analyses assumed Euclidean losses, most
practical implementations rely on cosine similarity. To gain further theoretical
insight into non-contrastive SSL, we analytically study learning dynamics in conjunction with Euclidean and cosine similarity in the eigenspace of closed-form
linear predictor networks. We show that both avoid collapse through implicit
variance regularization albeit through different dynamical mechanisms. Moreover,
we find that the eigenvalues act as effective learning rate multipliers and propose a
family of isotropic loss functions (IsoLoss) that equalize convergence rates across
eigenmodes. Empirically, IsoLoss speeds up the initial learning dynamics and
increases robustness, thereby allowing us to dispense with the exponential moving
average (EMA) target network typically used with non-contrastive methods. Our
analysis sheds light on the variance regularization mechanisms of non-contrastive
SSL and lays the theoretical grounds for crafting novel loss functions that shape
the learning dynamics of the predictor’s spectrum.

1

Introduction

SSL has emerged as a powerful method to learn useful representations from vast quantities of
unlabeled data [1–8]. In SSL, the network’s objective is to “pull” together its outputs for two
differently augmented versions of the same input, so that they learn representations that are predictive
across randomized transformations [9]. To avoid the trivial solution whereby the network output
becomes constant, also called representational collapse, SSL methods use either a contrastive objective
to “push” apart representations of unrelated images [2, 3, 10–13] or other non-contrastive strategies.
Non-contrastive methods comprise explicit variance regularization techniques [6, 7, 14], whitening
approaches [15, 16], and asymmetric losses as in Bootstrap Your Own Latent (BYOL) [1] and
SimSiam [5]. Asymmetric losses break symmetry between the two branches by passing one of the
representations through a predictor network and stopping gradients from flowing through the other
“target” branch. How this architectural modification prevents representational collapse is not obvious
and has been the focus of several theoretical [17–21] and empirical studies [22–24]. A significant
advance was provided by Tian et al. [17] who showed that linear predictors align with the correlation
matrix of the embeddings, and proposed the closed-form predictor DirectPred based on this insight.
However, previous analyses assumed a Euclidean loss at the output [17–19, 21] except [20], whereas
practical implementations typically use the cosine loss [1, 5] which yields superior performance on
downstream tasks. This difference raises the question whether analysis based on the Euclidean loss
provides an accurate account of the learning dynamics under the cosine loss.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

