When Do Graph Neural Networks Help with Node
Classification? Investigating the Impact of Homophily
Principle on Node Distinguishability
Sitao Luan1,2 , Chenqing Hua1,2 , Minkai Xu4 , Qincheng Lu1 , Jiaqi Zhu1 ,
Xiao-Wen Chang1,† , Jie Fu2,5,† , Jure Leskovec4,† , Doina Precup1,2,3,†
{sitao.luan@mail, chenqing.hua@mail, qincheng.lu@mail, jiaqi.zhu@mail, chang@cs,
dprecup@cs}.mcgill.ca, {minkai, jure}@cs.stanford.edu, jiefu@ust.hk
1
McGill University; 2 Mila - Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute; 3 Google DeepMind;
4
Stanford University; 5 HKUST; † Corresponding Authors

Abstract
Homophily principle, i.e., nodes with the same labels are more likely to be connected, has been believed to be the main reason for the performance superiority of
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) over Neural Networks on node classification tasks.
Recent research suggests that, even in the absence of homophily, the advantage of
GNNs still exists as long as nodes from the same class share similar neighborhood
patterns [38]. However, this argument only considers intra-class Node Distinguishability (ND) but neglects inter-class ND, which provides incomplete understanding
of homophily on GNNs. In this paper, we first demonstrate such deficiency with
examples and argue that an ideal situation for ND is to have smaller intra-class ND
than inter-class ND. To formulate this idea and study ND deeply, we propose Contextual Stochastic Block Model for Homophily (CSBM-H) and define two metrics,
Probabilistic Bayes Error (PBE) and negative generalized Jeffreys divergence, to
quantify ND. With the metrics, we visualize and analyze how graph filters, node
degree distributions and class variances influence ND, and investigate the combined
effect of intra- and inter-class ND. Besides, we discovered the mid-homophily
pitfall, which occurs widely in graph datasets. Furthermore, we verified that, in
real-work tasks, the superiority of GNNs is indeed closely related to both intraand inter-class ND regardless of homophily levels. Grounded in this observation,
we propose a new hypothesis-testing based performance metric beyond homophily,
which is non-linear, feature-based and can provide statistical threshold value for
GNNs’ the superiority. Experiments indicate that it is significantly more effective
than the existing homophily metrics on revealing the advantage and disadvantage
of graph-aware modes on both synthetic and benchmark real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have gained popularity in recent years as a powerful tool for graphbased machine learning tasks. By combining graph signal processing and convolutional neural
networks, various GNN architectures have been proposed [27, 19, 50, 36, 23], and have been shown
to outperform traditional neural networks (NNs) in tasks such as node classification (NC), graph
classification, link prediction and graph generation. The success of GNNs is believed to be rooted in
the homophily principle (assumption) [42], which states that connected nodes tend to have similar
attributes [18], providing extra useful information to the aggregated features over the original node
features. Such relational inductive bias is thought to be a major contributor to the superiority of
GNNs over NNs on various tasks [4]. On the other hand, the lack of homophily, i.e., heterophily, is
considered as the main cause of the inferiority of GNNs on heterophilic graphs, because nodes from
different classes are connected and mixed, which can lead to indistinguishable node embeddings,
making the classification task more difficult for GNNs [57, 55, 37]. Numerous models have been
proposed to address the heterophily challenge lately [46, 57, 55, 37, 5, 32, 7, 54, 21, 34, 31, 51, 35].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

