Identifiability Guarantees for Causal
Disentanglement from Soft Interventions

Jiaqi Zhang
LIDS, MIT
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
Chandler Squires
LIDS, MIT
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Kristjan Greenewald
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research

Akash Srivastava
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research

Karthikeyan Shanmugam∗
IBM Research

Caroline Uhler
LIDS, MIT
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Abstract
Causal disentanglement aims to uncover a representation of data using latent variables that are interrelated through a causal model. Such a representation is identifiable if the latent model that explains the data is unique. In this paper, we focus on
the scenario where unpaired observational and interventional data are available,
with each intervention changing the mechanism of a latent variable. When the
causal variables are fully observed, statistically consistent algorithms have been
developed to identify the causal model under faithfulness assumptions. We here
show that identifiability can still be achieved with unobserved causal variables,
given a generalized notion of faithfulness. Our results guarantee that we can recover the latent causal model up to an equivalence class and predict the effect of
unseen combinations of interventions, in the limit of infinite data. We implement
our causal disentanglement framework by developing an autoencoding variational
Bayes algorithm and apply it to the problem of predicting combinatorial perturbation effects in genomics.

1

Introduction

The discovery of causal structure from observational and interventional data is important in many
fields including statistics, biology, sociology, and economics [42, 17]. Directed acyclic graph (DAG)
models enable scientists to reason about causal questions, e.g., predicting the effects of interventions
or determining counterfactuals [46]. Traditional causal structure learning has considered the setting
where the causal variables are observed [21]. While sufficient in many applications, this restriction is
limiting in most regimes where the available datasets are either perceptual (e.g., images) or very-high
dimensional (e.g., the expression of > 20k human genes). In an imaging dataset, learning a causal
graph on the pixels themselves would not only be difficult since there is no common coordinate
system across images (pixel i in one image may have no relationship with pixel i in another image)
but of questionable utility due to the relative meaninglessness of interventions on individual pixels.
Similar problems are also present when working with very high-dimensional data. For example,
∗

Currently at Google Research. Contributions to this work were made when affiliated with IBM research.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

