Fair Streaming Principal Component Analysis:
Statistical and Algorithmic Viewpoint

Junghyun Lee∗ Hanseul Cho∗ Se-Young Yun Chulhee Yun
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST
{jh_lee00, jhs4015, yunseyoung, chulhee.yun}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Fair Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a problem setting where we aim to
perform PCA while making the resulting representation fair in that the projected
distributions, conditional on the sensitive attributes, match one another. However,
existing approaches to fair PCA have two main problems: theoretically, there has
been no statistical foundation of fair PCA in terms of learnability; practically,
limited memory prevents us from using existing approaches, as they explicitly rely
on full access to the entire data. On the theoretical side, we rigorously formulate fair
PCA using a new notion called probably approximately fair and optimal (PAFO)
learnability. On the practical side, motivated by recent advances in streaming
algorithms for addressing memory limitation, we propose a new setting called fair
streaming PCA along with a memory-efficient algorithm, fair noisy power method
(FNPM). We then provide its statistical guarantee in terms of PAFO-learnability,
which is the first of its kind in fair PCA literature. Lastly, we verify the efficacy
and memory efficiency of our algorithm on real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic fairness ensures that machine learning algorithms do not propagate nor exacerbate bias,
which may lead to discriminatory decision-making (Barocas and Selbst, 2016) and thus has been
a very active area of research. This has direct implications in our everyday life, including but not
limited to criminal justice (Kirchner et al., 2016), education (Kizilcec and Lee, 2021), and more. See
Mehrabi et al. (2021) for a comprehensive survey of bias and fairness in machine learning.
Often, one needs to consider fairness for a large number of high-dimensional data points. One of the
standard tools for dealing with such high-dimensional data is PCA (Hotelling, 1933; Pearson, 1901),
a classical yet still one of the most popular algorithms for performing interpretable dimensionality
reduction. It has been adapted as a baseline and/or standard tool in exploratory data analysis, whose
application ranges from natural sciences, engineering (Abdi and Williams, 2010; Jolliffe and Cadima,
2016), and even explainable AI (Li et al., 2023; Tjoa and Guan, 2021). Due to its ubiquity and wide
applicability, several works study defining fairness in PCA and developing a fair variant of it. A
recent line of research (Kleindessner et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2022; Olfat and Aswani, 2019) defines
PCA fairness in the context of fair representation (Zemel et al., 2013) in that the projected group
conditional distributions should match.
However, existing fair PCA approaches suffer from two problems. Theoretically, they provide no
statistical foundation of fair PCA or guarantees for their algorithms. By statistical foundation, we
mean the usual PAC-learnability (Shalev-Schwartz and Ben-David, 2014) guarantees, e.g., sample
complexity for ensuring optimality in explained variance and fairness constraint with high probability.
∗

Equal contributions

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

