HASSOD: Hierarchical Adaptive Self-Supervised
Object Detection

Shengcao Cao1 Dhiraj Joshi2 Liang-Yan Gui1 Yu-Xiong Wang1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 IBM Research
1
{cao44,lgui,yxw}@illinois.edu 2 djoshi@us.ibm.com

Abstract
The human visual perception system demonstrates exceptional capabilities in learning without explicit supervision and understanding the part-to-whole composition
of objects. Drawing inspiration from these two abilities, we propose Hierarchical
Adaptive Self-Supervised Object Detection (HASSOD), a novel approach that
learns to detect objects and understand their compositions without human supervision. HASSOD employs a hierarchical adaptive clustering strategy to group regions
into object masks based on self-supervised visual representations, adaptively determining the number of objects per image. Furthermore, HASSOD identifies
the hierarchical levels of objects in terms of composition, by analyzing coverage
relations between masks and constructing tree structures. This additional selfsupervised learning task leads to improved detection performance and enhanced
interpretability. Lastly, we abandon the inefficient multi-round self-training process
utilized in prior methods and instead adapt the Mean Teacher framework from
semi-supervised learning, which leads to a smoother and more efficient training
process. Through extensive experiments on prevalent image datasets, we demonstrate the superiority of HASSOD over existing methods, thereby advancing the
state of the art in self-supervised object detection. Notably, we improve Mask
AR from 20.2 to 22.5 on LVIS, and from 17.0 to 26.0 on SA-1B. Project page:
https://HASSOD-NeurIPS23.github.io.

1

Introduction

The development of human visual perception is remarkable for two key abilities: 1) Humans begin
learning to perceive objects in their environment through observation alone [25], without needing
to learn the names of these objects from external supervision. 2) Moreover, human perception
operates in a hierarchical manner, enabling individuals to recognize the part-to-whole composition of
objects [2, 23]. These characteristic capabilities offer valuable insights into the learning processes
of object detectors, which still heavily rely on the availability and quality of fine-grained training
data. For example, the state-of-the-art detection/segmentation model, Segment Anything Model
(SAM) [18], is developed on a dataset of 11 million images and 1 billion object masks. It remains an
open question how to effectively learn to detect objects and recognize their compositions from even
larger-scale datasets (e.g., LAION-5B [26]) without such object-level annotations.
In prior work on self-supervised object detection [37, 38], a two-stage discover-and-learn paradigm is
adopted: 1) Self-supervised visual representations [5, 15] are obtained, and a saliency-based method
is employed to extract the most prominent one or few objects. 2) Subsequently, an object detector
is trained based on these pseudo-labels, sometimes involving multiple rounds of self-training for
refinement. However, despite such attempts to eliminate the need for external supervision, several
weaknesses persist in these approaches: 1) Narrow coverage of objects. The focus on only one or few
objects per image in previous methods undermines their ability to fully exploit the learning signals in
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

