For SALE: State-Action Representation Learning
for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Scott Fujimoto
Mila, McGill University

Wei-Di Chang
McGill University

Edward J. Smith
McGill University

Shixiang Shane Gu
Google DeepMind

Doina Precup
Mila, McGill University

David Meger
Mila, McGill University

Abstract
In the field of reinforcement learning (RL), representation learning is a proven tool
for complex image-based tasks, but is often overlooked for environments with lowlevel states, such as physical control problems. This paper introduces SALE, a novel
approach for learning embeddings that model the nuanced interaction between state
and action, enabling effective representation learning from low-level states. We
extensively study the design space of these embeddings and highlight important
design considerations. We integrate SALE and an adaptation of checkpoints for
RL into TD3 to form the TD7 algorithm, which significantly outperforms existing
continuous control algorithms. On OpenAI gym benchmark tasks, TD7 has an
average performance gain of 276.7% and 50.7% over TD3 at 300k and 5M time
steps, respectively, and works in both the online and offline settings.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is notoriously sample inefficient, particularly when compared to more
straightforward paradigms in machine learning, such as supervised learning. One possible explanation is the usage of the Bellman equation in most off-policy RL algorithms [Mnih et al., 2015,
Lillicrap et al., 2015], which provides a weak learning signal due to an approximate and non-stationary
learning target [Fujimoto et al., 2022].
A near-universal solution to sample inefficiency in deep learning is representation learning, whereby
intermediate features are learned to capture the underlying structure and patterns of the data. These
features can be found independently from the downstream task and considerations such as the learning
horizon and dynamic programming. While feature learning of this type has found some success in
the RL setting, it has been mainly limited to vision-based environments [Jaderberg et al., 2017, Oord
et al., 2018, Anand et al., 2019, Laskin et al., 2020, Stooke et al., 2021, Yarats et al., 2022].
On the other hand, the application of representation learning to low-level states is much less common.
At first glance, it may seem unnecessary to learn a representation over an already-compact state vector.
However, we argue that the difficulty of a task is often defined by the complexity of the underlying
dynamical system, rather than the size of the observation space. This means that regardless of the
original observation space, there exists an opportunity to learn meaningful features by capturing the
interaction between state and action.
SALE. In this paper, we devise state-action learned embeddings (SALE), a method that learns
embeddings jointly over both state and action by modeling the dynamics of the environment in latent
space. Extending prior work [Ota et al., 2020], we introduce three important design considerations
Corresponding author: scott.fujimoto@mail.mcgill.ca
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

