Smoothing the Landscape Boosts the Signal for SGD
Optimal Sample Complexity for Learning Single Index Models

Alex Damian
Princeton University
ad27@princeton.edu

Eshaan Nichani
Princeton University
eshnich@princeton.edu

Rong Ge
Duke University
rongge@cs.duke.edu

Jason D. Lee
Princeton University
jasonlee@princeton.edu

Abstract
We focus on the task of learning a single index model σ(w⋆ · x) with respect to
the isotropic Gaussian distribution in d dimensions. Prior work has shown that
the sample complexity of learning w⋆ is governed by the information exponent k ⋆
of the link function σ, which is defined as the index of the⋆ first nonzero Hermite
coefficient of σ. Ben Arous et al. [1] showed that n ≳ dk −1 samples suffice for
learning w⋆ and that this is tight for online SGD. However, the CSQ lower bound
⋆
for gradient based methods only shows that n ≳ dk /2 samples are necessary. In
this work, we close the gap between the upper and lower bounds by showing that
⋆
online SGD on a smoothed loss learns w⋆ with n ≳ dk /2 samples. We also draw
connections to statistical analyses of tensor PCA and to the implicit regularization
effects of minibatch SGD on empirical losses.

1

Introduction

Gradient descent-based algorithms are popular for deriving computational and statistical guarantees
for a number of high-dimensional statistical learning problems [2, 3, 1, 4–6]. Despite the fact that
the empirical loss is nonconvex and in the worst case computationally intractible to optimize, for
a number of statistical learning tasks gradient-based methods still converge to good solutions with
polynomial runtime and sample complexity. Analyses in these settings typically study properties of
the empirical loss landscape [7], and in particular the number of samples needed for the signal of the
gradient arising from the population loss to overpower the noise in some uniform sense. The sample
complexity for learning with gradient descent is determined by the landscape of the empirical loss.
One setting in which the empirical loss landscape showcases rich behavior is that of learning a
single-index model. Single index models are target functions of the form f ∗ (x) = σ(w⋆ · x), where
w⋆ ∈ S d−1 is the unknown relevant direction and σ is the known link function. When the covariates
are drawn from the standard d-dimensional Gaussian distribution, the shape of the loss landscape is
governed by the information exponent k ⋆ of the link function σ, which characterizes the curvature of
the loss landscape around the origin. Ben Arous et al. [1] show that online stochastic gradient descent
⋆
on the empirical loss can recover w∗ with n ≳ dmax(1,k −1) samples; furthermore, they present a
⋆
lower bound showing that for a class of online SGD algorithms, dmax(1,k −1) samples are indeed
necessary.
However, gradient descent can be suboptimal for various statistical learning problems, as it only relies
on local information in the loss landscape and is thus prone to getting stuck in local minima. For
learning a single index model, the Correlational Statistical Query (CSQ) lower bound only requires
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

