FACTORIZED C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING:
Going Beyond Multi-view Redundancy

Paul Pu Liang1∗ , Zihao Deng2∗ , Martin Q. Ma1∗
James Zou3 , Louis-Philippe Morency1 , Ruslan Salakhutdinov1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 University of Pennsylvania, 3 Stanford University
pliang@cs.cmu.edu,zihaoden@cs.cmu.edu,qianlim@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
In a wide range of multimodal tasks, contrastive learning has become a particularly
appealing approach since it can successfully learn representations from abundant
unlabeled data with only pairing information (e.g., image-caption or video-audio
pairs). Underpinning these approaches is the assumption of multi-view redundancy
- that shared information between modalities is necessary and sufficient for downstream tasks. However, in many real-world settings, task-relevant information is
also contained in modality-unique regions: information that is only present in one
modality but still relevant to the task. How can we learn self-supervised multimodal
representations to capture both shared and unique information relevant to downstream tasks? This paper proposes FACTOR CL, a new multimodal representation
learning method to go beyond multi-view redundancy. FACTOR CL is built from
three new contributions: (1) factorizing task-relevant information into shared and
unique representations, (2) capturing task-relevant information via maximizing MI
lower bounds and removing task-irrelevant information via minimizing MI upper
bounds, and (3) multimodal data augmentations to approximate task relevance without labels. On large-scale real-world datasets, FACTOR CL captures both shared
and unique information and achieves state-of-the-art results on six benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Learning representations from different modalities is a central paradigm in machine learning [48].
Today, a popular learning method is to first pre-train general representations on unlabeled multimodal
data before fine-tuning on task-specific labels [10, 40, 47, 48, 50]. These current multimodal pretraining approaches have largely been inherited from prior work in multi-view learning [13, 58]
that exploit a critical assumption of multi-view redundancy: the property that shared information
between modalities is almost exactly what is relevant for downstream tasks [70, 73, 76]. When this
assumption holds, approaches based on contrastive pre-training to capture shared information [13, 41,
61, 72], followed by fine-tuning to keep task-relevant shared information [76], have seen successful
applications in learning from images and captions [61], video and audio [3], speech and transcribed
text [58], and instructions and actions [21]. However, our paper studies two fundamental limitations
in the application of contrastive learning (CL) to broader real-world multimodal settings (see Figure 1
for a visual depiction and experimental results showing the performance drop of CL):
1. Low shared information relevant to tasks: There exists a wide range of multimodal tasks
involving small amounts of shared information, such as between cartoon images and figurative
captions (i.e., not literal but metaphoric or idiomatic descriptions of the images [52, 88]). In these
situations, standard multimodal CL will only receive a small percentage of information from the
learned representations and struggle to learn the desired task-relevant information.
2. High unique information relevant to tasks: Many real-world modalities can provide unique
information not present in other modalities. Examples include healthcare with medical sensors or
robotics with force sensors [45, 49]. Standard CL will discard task-relevant unique information,
leading to poor downstream performance.
∗

First three authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

