Self-supervised Graph Neural Networks via
Low-Rank Decomposition

Liang Yang 1 , Runjie Shi 1 , Qiuliang Zhang 1 , Bingxin Niu 1 ,
Zhen Wang 2 , Xiaochun Cao 3 , Chuan Wang 4∗
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN),
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology,
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
4
Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
yangliang@vip.qq.com, shirunjie2020@163.com, 3463194784@qq.com
niubingxin666@163.com, w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn,
caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wangchuan@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
Self-supervised learning is introduced to train graph neural networks (GNNs) by
employing propagation-based GNNs designed for semi-supervised learning tasks.
Unfortunately, this common choice tends to cause two serious issues. Firstly, global
parameters cause the model lack the ability to capture the local property. Secondly,
it is difficult to handle networks beyond homophily without label information. This
paper tends to break through the common choice of employing propagation-based
GNNs, which aggregate representations of nodes belonging to different classes and
tend to lose discriminative information. If the propagation in each ego-network
is just between the nodes from the same class, the obtained representation matrix should follow the low-rank characteristic. To meet this requirement, this
paper proposes the Low-Rank Decomposition-based GNNs (LRD-GNN-Matrix)
by employing Low-Rank Decomposition to the attribute matrix. Furthermore, to
incorporate long-distance information, Low-Rank Tensor Decomposition-based
GNN (LRD-GNN-Tensor) is proposed by constructing the node attribute tensor
from selected similar ego-networks and performing Low-Rank Tensor Decomposition. The employed tensor nuclear norm facilitates the capture of the long-distance
relationship between original and selected similar ego-networks. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance and the robustness of LRD-GNNs.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been successfully employed by many fields including computer
vision (CV), natural language processing (NLP), information retrieval (IR), etc [1, 2, 3]. Vanilla
GNNs, such as Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) [4] and Graph Attention Network (GAT) [5],
are designed for semi-supervised node classification task, where part of nodes are labeled. To make
models adaptive to networks beyond hompohily, flexible GNNs with more trainable parameters are
proposed, such as JKNet [6], GCNII [7], H2GCN [8], FAGCN [9] and GPRGNN [10]. The role of
label information is more critical for these flexible GNNs.
Inspired by the superior performance in CV and NLP, self-supervised learning, especially contrastive
learning, is introduced to training GNNs. While a large number of methods are proposed, they can
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

