Finding Safe Zones of Markov Decision Processes
Policies
Lee Cohen
TTI-Chicago

Yishay Mansour
Tel-Aviv University
Google Research

Michal Moshkovitz
Bosch Center for AI

Abstract
Given a policy of a Markov Decision Process, we define a S AFE Z ONE as a subset
of states, such that most of the policy’s trajectories are confined to this subset.
The quality of a S AFE Z ONE is parameterized by the number of states and the
escape probability, i.e., the probability that a random trajectory will leave the
subset. S AFE Z ONES are especially interesting when they have a small number
of states and low escape probability. We study the complexity of finding optimal
S AFE Z ONES, and show that in general, the problem is computationally hard. Our
main result is a bi-criteria approximation learning algorithm with a factor of almost
2 approximation for both the escape probability and S AFE Z ONE size, using a
polynomial size sample complexity.

1

Introduction

Most research in reinforcement learning (RL) deals with learning an optimal policy for some Markov
Decision Process (MDP). One notable exception to that is Safe RL which addresses the concept
of safety. Traditional Safe RL focuses on finding the best policy that meets safety requirements,
typically by either adjusting the objective to include the safety requirements and then optimizing
for it, or incorporating additional safety constraints to the exploration. In both of these cases, the
safety requirements should be pre-specified. Anomaly Detection is the problem of identifying patterns
in data that are unexpected, i.e., anomalies (see, e.g., Chandola et al. (2009) for survey). This
paper introduces the S AFE Z ONE problem, which addresses the safety of a specific Markov decision
process (MDP) policy by detecting anomalous events rather than finding a policy that satisfies some
pre-defined safety constraints.
Consider a finite horizon MDP and a policy (a mapping from states to actions). The policy induces a
Markov Chain (MC) on the MDP. Given a subset of states, a trajectory escapes it if at least one of
its states is not in the subset. The escape probability of a subset is the probability that a randomly
sampled trajectory will escape it. A S AFE Z ONE is a subset of states whose quality is measured by (1)
its escape probability and (2) its size. If a S AFE Z ONE has low escape probability, we consider it safe
(hence escaping is the anomaly). We emphasize that safety is policy-dependent and that different
policies could have different S AFE Z ONES.
Trivial solutions for S AFE Z ONE include the entire states set (minimal escape probability of 0,
maximal size), and the empty set (minimal size, maximal escape probability of 1). The goal is to
find a S AFE Z ONE with a good balance: a relatively small size but still safe enough (small escape
probability). More precisely, given an upper bound over the escape probability, ρ > 0, the goal of the
learner is to find the smallest S AFE Z ONE with escape probability at most ρ using trajectory sampling.
We address an unknown environment, by which we mean no prior knowledge of the transition
function or the policy used. The learner is only given access to random trajectories generated by the
induced Markov chain. For many applications, if a small S AFE Z ONE exists, it is useful to find it.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

