Masked Image Residual Learning for Scaling Deeper
Vision Transformers
Guoxi Huang

Hongtao Fu

Adrian G. Bors†

Baidu Inc.
huangguoxi@baidu.com

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
m202173233@hust.edu.cn

University of York
adrian.bors@york.ac.uk

Abstract
Deeper Vision Transformers (ViTs) are more challenging to train. We expose a
degradation problem in deeper layers of ViT when using masked image modeling
(MIM) for pre-training. To ease the training of deeper ViTs, we introduce a selfsupervised learning framework called Masked Image Residual Learning (MIRL),
which significantly alleviates the degradation problem, making scaling ViT along
depth a promising direction for performance upgrade. We reformulate the pretraining objective for deeper layers of ViT as learning to recover the residual of the
masked image. We provide extensive empirical evidence showing that deeper ViTs
can be effectively optimized using MIRL and easily gain accuracy from increased
depth. With the same level of computational complexity as ViT-Base and ViT-Large,
we instantiate 4.5× and 2× deeper ViTs, dubbed ViT-S-54 and ViT-B-48. The
deeper ViT-S-54, costing 3× less than ViT-Large, achieves performance on par with
ViT-Large. ViT-B-48 achieves 86.2% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet. On one hand,
deeper ViTs pre-trained with MIRL exhibit excellent generalization capabilities
on downstream tasks, such as object detection and semantic segmentation. On the
other hand, MIRL demonstrates high pre-training efficiency. With less pre-training
time, MIRL yields competitive performance compared to other approaches. Code
and pretrained models are available at: https://github.com/russellllaputa/MIRL.

1

Introduction

Transformer architecture [46] has become the de-facto standard in natural language processing (NLP).
A major driving force behind the success of Transformers in NLP is the self-supervised learning
method called masked language modeling (MLM) [10]. MLM significantly expends the generalization
capabilities of Transformers, with the underlying principle being very intuitive - removing portions
of a sentence and learning to predict the removed content. Recent advancements in computer vision
have been profoundly inspired by the scaling successes of Transformers in conjunction with MLM
in NLP, successively introducing the Vision Transformer (ViT) [13] and masked image modeling
(MIM) for training generalizable vision models. The concept of MIM is as straightforward as MLM;
its pre-training objective is to predict masked image patches based on the unmasked image patches,
thereby capturing rich contextual information.
This paper first reveals that MIM can induce negative optimization in deeper layers of ViT, which
not only constrains the generalization performance of ViT but also hinders its scaling along the
depth dimension. Previous work [55, 37] suggests that deeper layers of ViT are more properly
pre-trained by using MIM, the conclusions of which contradict our observation. Another branch of
work [6, 50, 4, 25, 37] tentatively suggests that, due to the lack of semantic information in MIM, the
shallower layers of ViTs are more effectively pre-trained than the deeper layers. In our preliminary
experiments in Sec. 2.2, we demonstrate that replacing the deeper Transformer blocks pre-trained
by using MIM with randomly initialized blocks does not degrade performance, which supports our
†

Corresponding author. Work done when H. Fu was an intern at Baidu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

