Zero-Shot Anomaly Detection via Batch Normalization
Aodong Li∗
UC Irvine
Marius Kloft
TU Kaiserslautern

Chen Qiu∗
Bosch Center for AI

Padhraic Smyth
UC Irvine

Maja Rudolph†
Bosch Center for AI

Stephan Mandt†
UC Irvine

Abstract
Anomaly detection (AD) plays a crucial role in many safety-critical application
domains. The challenge of adapting an anomaly detector to drift in the normal data
distribution, especially when no training data is available for the “new normal", has
led to the development of zero-shot AD techniques. In this paper, we propose a
simple yet effective method called Adaptive Centered Representations (ACR) for
zero-shot batch-level AD. Our approach trains off-the-shelf deep anomaly detectors
(such as deep SVDD) to adapt to a set of inter-related training data distributions in
combination with batch normalization, enabling automatic zero-shot generalization
for unseen AD tasks. This simple recipe, batch normalization plus meta-training, is
a highly effective and versatile tool. Our theoretical results guarantee the zero-shot
generalization for unseen AD tasks; our empirical results demonstrate the first
zero-shot AD results for tabular data and outperform existing methods in zero-shot
anomaly detection and segmentation on image data from specialized domains. Code
is at https://github.com/aodongli/zero-shot-ad-via-batch-norm

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection (AD)—the task of identifying data instances deviating from the norm [65]—plays
a significant role in numerous application domains, such as fake review identification, bot detection
in social networks, tumor recognition, and industrial fault detection. AD is particularly crucial in
safety-critical applications where failing to recognize anomalies, for example, in a chemical plant or
a self-driving car, can risk lives.
Consider a medical setting where an anomaly detector encounters a batch of medical images from
different patients. The medical images have been recorded with a new imaging technology different
from the training data, or the patients are from a demographic the anomaly detector has not been
trained on. Our goal is to develop an anomaly detector that can still process such data using
batches, assigning low scores to normal images and high scores to anomalies (i.e., images that differ
systematically) without retraining. To achieve this zero-shot adaptation, we exploit the fact that
anomalies are rare. Given a new batch of test data, a zero-shot AD method [18, 36, 51, 71] has to
detect which features are typical of the majority of normal samples and which features are atypical.
We propose Adaptive Centered Representations (ACR), a lightweight zero-shot AD method that
combines two simple ideas: batch normalization and meta-training. Assuming an overall majority
of "normal" samples, a randomly-sampled batch will typically have more normal samples than
anomalies. The effect of batch normalization is then to draw these normal samples closer to the
center (in its recentering and scaling operation), while anomalies will end up further away from the
center. Notably, this scaling and centering is robust to a distribution shift in the input, allowing a
∗

Equal contribution † Joint supervision.

Correspondence to: aodongl1@uci.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

