Learning Adversarial Low-rank Markov Decision
Processes with Unknown Transition and
Full-information Feedback
Canzhe Zhao
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
canzhezhao@sjtu.edu.cn

Ruofeng Yang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wanshuiyin@sjtu.edu.cn

Baoxiang Wang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
bxiangwang@cuhk.edu.cn

Xuezhou Zhang
Boston University
xuezhouz@bu.edu

Shuai Li∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we study the low-rank MDPs with adversarially changed losses
in the full-information feedback setting. In particular, the unknown transition
probability kernel admits a low-rank matrix decomposition [Uehara et al., 2022],
and the loss functions may change adversarially but are revealed to the learner
at the end of each episode. We propose a policy optimization-based algorithm
e 5/6 A1/2 d ln(1 + M )/(1 − γ)2 ) regret
POLO, and we prove that it attains the O(K
guarantee, where d is rank of the transition kernel (and hence the dimension of
the unknown representations), A is the cardinality of the action space, M is the
cardinality of the model class that contains all the plausible representations, and
γ is the discounted factor. Notably, our algorithm is oracle-efficient and has a
regret guarantee with no dependence on the size of potentially arbitrarily large
√
γ2
state space. Furthermore, we also prove an Ω( 1−γ
dAK) regret lower bound for
this problem, showing that low-rank MDPs are statistically more difficult to learn
than linear MDPs in the regret minimization setting. To the best of our knowledge,
we present the first algorithm that interleaves representation learning, exploration,
and exploitation to achieve the sublinear regret guarantee for RL with nonlinear
function approximation and adversarial losses.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), the goal is to learn a (near) optimal policy through the interactions
between the learner and the environment, which is typically modeled as the Markov decision processes
(MDPs) [Feinberg, 1996]. When the state and action spaces are finite, many works have established
the minimax (near) optimal regret guarantees for MDPs with finite horizon [Azar et al., 2017] and
MDPs with infinite horizon [Tossou et al., 2019, He et al., 2021b]. In real applications of RL,
however, the state and action spaces may be arbitrarily large and even infinite, which may lead to the
curse of dimensionality. To tackle this issue, a common approach is function approximation, which
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

