Extraction and Recovery of Spatio-Temporal Structure
in Latent Dynamics Alignment with Diffusion Models

Yule Wang
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, 30332 USA
yulewang@gatech.edu

Zijing Wu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, 30332 USA
zwu381@gatech.edu

Chengrui Li
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, 30332 USA
cnlichengrui@gatech.edu

Anqi Wu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, 30332 USA
anqiwu@gatech.edu

Abstract
In the field of behavior-related brain computation, it is necessary to align raw neural
signals against the drastic domain shift among them. A foundational framework
within neuroscience research posits that trial-based neural population activities rely
on low-dimensional latent dynamics, thus focusing on the latter greatly facilitates
the alignment procedure. Despite this field’s progress, existing methods ignore
the intrinsic spatio-temporal structure during the alignment phase. Hence, their
solutions usually lead to poor quality in latent dynamics structures and overall
performance. To tackle this problem, we propose an alignment method ERDiff,
which leverages the expressivity of the diffusion model to preserve the spatiotemporal structure of latent dynamics. Specifically, the latent dynamics structures of
the source domain are first extracted by a diffusion model. Then, under the guidance
of this diffusion model, such structures are well-recovered through a maximum
likelihood alignment procedure in the target domain. We first demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed method on a synthetic dataset. Then, when applied
to neural recordings from the non-human primate motor cortex, under both crossday and inter-subject settings, our method consistently manifests its capability
of preserving the spatio-temporal structure of latent dynamics and outperforms
existing approaches in alignment goodness-of-fit and neural decoding performance.
Codes are available at: https://github.com/alexwangNTL/ERDiff.

1

Introduction

A key challenge severely impeding the scalability of behavior-related neural computational applications is their robustness to the distribution shift of neural recordings over time and subjects [1].
Given a behavior model trained on previous neural recordings (e.g., velocity predictor for human
with paralysis [2]), it usually suffers performance degradation when applied to new neural recordings
due to the neural distribution shift [3, 4]. Thus, for long-term usability and stable performance of the
trained neural decoding model, high-quality alignment between the neural recordings used for training
(i.e., source domain) and new recordings for testing (i.e., target domain) is of vital importance.
Distribution alignment is an important task at the heart of unsupervised transfer learning [5, 6]. The
goal is to align the target domain to the source domain so that the trained model in the source domain
can be applied to the target domain after eliminating the distribution shift. However, due to issues such
as instabilities and low signal-to-noise ratio [7], raw neural spiking activities are noisy and ambiguous
[8, 9], causing difficulties in aligning the distributions of these high-dimensional signals directly.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

