Scalable Membership Inference Attacks
via Quantile Regression

Martin Bertran ⋆
Amazon AWS AI/ML

Shuai Tang ⋆
Amazon AWS AI/ML

Michael Kearns
University of Pennsylvania
Amazon AWS AI/ML

Jamie Morgenstern
University of Washington
Amazon AWS AI/ML

Aaron Roth
University of Pennsylvania
Amazon AWS AI/ML

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
Amazon AWS AI/ML

Abstract
Membership inference attacks are designed to determine, using black box access to
trained models, whether a particular example was used in training or not. Membership inference can be formalized as a hypothesis testing problem. The most
effective existing attacks estimate the distribution of some test statistic (usually the
model’s confidence on the true label) on points that were (and were not) used in
training by training many shadow models—i.e. models of the same architecture as
the model being attacked, trained on a random subsample of data. While effective,
these attacks are extremely computationally expensive, especially when the model
under attack is large.
We introduce a new class of attacks based on performing quantile regression on
the distribution of confidence scores induced by the model under attack on points
that are not used in training. We show that our method is competitive with state-ofthe-art shadow model attacks, while requiring substantially less compute because
our attack requires training only a single model. Moreover, unlike shadow model
attacks, our proposed attack does not require any knowledge of the architecture of
the model under attack and is therefore truly “black-box". We show the efficacy of
this approach in an extensive series of experiments on various datasets and model
architectures. Our code is available at github.com/amazon-science/quantile-mia.

1

Introduction

The basic goal of privacy-preserving machine learning is to find models that are predictive on some
underlying data distribution, without being disclosive of the particular data points on which they were
trained. The simplest kind of attack that can be launched on a trained model—falsifying privacy
guarantees—is a membership inference attack. A membership inference attack, informally, is a
statistical test that is able to reliably determine whether a particular data point was included in the
training set used to train the model or not.
Almost all membership inference attacks are based on the observation that models tend to overfit their
training sets in different ways. In particular, they tend to systematically predict higher confidence
in the true labels of data points from their training set, compared to points drawn from the same
distribution not in their training set. The confidence that a model places on the true label of a
data-point is thus a natural test statistic to build a membership-inference hypothesis test around. A
0
Martin and Shuai are the lead authors, and other authors are ordered alphabetically.
lop,shuat}@amazon.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

{maber-

