Hierarchical Gaussian Mixture based Task Generative
Model for Robust Meta-Learning

Yizhou Zhang1∗, Jingchao Ni2∗‡ , Wei Cheng3 , Zhengzhang Chen3 , Liang Tong4∗ ,
Haifeng Chen3 , Yan Liu1
1
University of Southern California 2 AWS AI Labs
3
NEC Laboratories America 4 Stellar Cyber Inc.
1
{zhangyiz,yanliu.cs}@usc.edu; 2 nijingchao@gmail.com;
3
{weicheng,zchen,haifeng}@nec-labs.com; 4 ltong@stellarcyber.ai

Abstract
Meta-learning enables quick adaptation of machine learning models to new tasks
with limited data. While tasks could come from varying distributions in reality,
most of the existing meta-learning methods consider both training and testing tasks
as from the same uni-component distribution, overlooking two critical needs of a
practical solution: (1) the various sources of tasks may compose a multi-component
mixture distribution, and (2) novel tasks may come from a distribution that is unseen
during meta-training. In this paper, we demonstrate these two challenges can be
solved jointly by modeling the density of task instances. We develop a metatraining framework underlain by a novel Hierarchical Gaussian Mixture based Task
Generative Model (HTGM). HTGM extends the widely used empirical process
of sampling tasks to a theoretical model, which learns task embeddings, fits the
mixture distribution of tasks, and enables density-based scoring of novel tasks. The
framework is agnostic to the encoder and scales well with large backbone networks.
The model parameters are learned end-to-end by maximum likelihood estimation
via an Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm. Extensive experiments on
benchmark datasets indicate the effectiveness of our method for both sample
classification and novel task detection.

1

Introduction

Training models in small data regimes is of fundamental importance. It demands a model’s ability to
quickly adapt to new environments and tasks. To compensate for the lack of training data for each
task, meta-learning (a.k.a. learning to learn) has become an essential paradigm for model training by
generalizing meta-knowledge across tasks [41, 8]. While most existing meta-learning approaches
were built upon an assumption that all training/testing tasks are sampled from the same distribution, a
more realistic scenario should accommodate training tasks that lie in a mixture of distributions, and
testing tasks that may belong to or deviate from the learned distributions. For example, in recent
medical research, a global model is typically trained on the historical medical records of a certain
set of patients in the database [40, 49]. However, due to the uniqueness of individuals (e.g., gender,
age, genetics) [43], patients’ data have a substantial discrepancy, and the pre-trained model may
demonstrate significant demographic or geographical biases when testing on a new patient [35, 10].
This issue can be mitigated by personalized medicine approaches [5, 31], where each patient is
regarded as a task, and the pre-trained model is fine-tuned (i.e., personalized) on a support set of a few
records collected in a short period (e.g., a few weeks) from every patient for adaptation. In this case,
the training tasks (i.e., patients) could be sampled from a mixture of distributions (e.g., different age
∗

This work was done primarily at NEC Laboratories America. ‡ Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

