Adaptive SGD with Polyak stepsize and Line-search:
Robust Convergence and Variance Reduction

Xiaowen Jiang
CISPA∗
xiaowen.jiang@cispa.de

Sebastian U. Stich
CISPA∗
stich@cispa.de

Abstract
The recently proposed stochastic Polyak stepsize (SPS) and stochastic linesearch (SLS) for SGD have shown remarkable effectiveness when training overparameterized models. However, two issues remain unsolved in this line of work.
First, in non-interpolation settings, both algorithms only guarantee convergence to
a neighborhood of a solution which may result in a worse output than the initial
guess. While artificially decreasing the adaptive stepsize has been proposed to
address this issue (Orvieto et al. [44]), this approach results in slower convergence
rates under interpolation. Second, intuitive line-search methods equipped with
variance-reduction (VR) fail to converge (Dubois-Taine et al. [14]). So far, no VR
methods successfully accelerate these two stepsizes with a convergence guarantee.
In this work, we make two contributions: Firstly, we propose two new robust
variants of SPS and SLS, called AdaSPS and AdaSLS, which achieve optimal
asymptotic rates in both strongly-convex or convex and interpolation or noninterpolation settings, except for the case when we have both strong convexity
and non-interpolation. AdaSLS requires no knowledge of problem-dependent
parameters, and AdaSPS requires only a lower bound of the optimal function value
as input. Secondly, we propose a novel VR method that can use Polyak stepsizes or
line-search to achieve acceleration. When it is equipped with AdaSPS or AdaSLS,
the resulting algorithms obtain the optimal rate for optimizing convex smooth
functions. Finally, numerical experiments on synthetic and real datasets validate
our theory and demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) [46] and its variants [7] are among the most preferred algorithms
for training modern machine learning models. These methods only compute stochastic gradients
in each iteration, which is often more efficient than computing a full batch gradient. However, the
performance of SGD is highly sensitive to the choice of the stepsize. Common strategies use a
fixed stepsize schedule, such as keeping it constant or decreasing it over time. Unfortunately, the
theoretically optimal schedules are disparate across different function classes [8], and usually depend
on problem parameters that are often unavailable, such as the Lipschitz constant of the gradient. As a
result, a heavy tuning of the stepsize parameter is required, which is typically expensive in practice.
Instead of fixing the stepsize schedule, adaptive SGD methods adjust the stepsize on the fly [15, 26].
These algorithms often require less hyper-parameter tuning and still enjoy competitive performance in
practice. Stochastic Polyak Stepsize (SPS) [34, 6, 45] is one of such recent advances. It has received
rapid growing interest due to two factors: (i) the only required parameter is the individual optimal
function value which is often available in many machine learning applications and (ii) its adaptivity
∗

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

