Decision-Aware Actor-Critic with Function
Approximation and Theoretical Guarantees

Sharan Vaswani
Simon Fraser University
vaswani.sharan@gmail.com
Reza Babanezhad
Samsung - SAIT AI Lab, Montreal
babanezhad@gmail.com

Amirreza Kazemi
Simon Fraser University
aka208@sfu.ca
Nicolas Le Roux
Microsoft Research, Mila
nicolas@le-roux.name

Abstract
Actor-critic (AC) methods are widely used in reinforcement learning (RL), and
benefit from the flexibility of using any policy gradient method as the actor and
value-based method as the critic. The critic is usually trained by minimizing the TD
error, an objective that is potentially decorrelated with the true goal of achieving a
high reward with the actor. We address this mismatch by designing a joint objective
for training the actor and critic in a decision-aware fashion. We use the proposed
objective to design a generic, AC algorithm that can easily handle any function
approximation. We explicitly characterize the conditions under which the resulting
algorithm guarantees monotonic policy improvement, regardless of the choice of
the policy and critic parameterization. Instantiating the generic algorithm results
in an actor that involves maximizing a sequence of surrogate functions (similar to
TRPO, PPO), and a critic that involves minimizing a closely connected objective.
Using simple bandit examples, we provably establish the benefit of the proposed
critic objective over the standard squared error. Finally, we empirically demonstrate
the benefit of our decision-aware actor-critic framework on simple RL problems.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a framework for solving problems involving sequential decisionmaking under uncertainty, and has found applications in games [38, 50], robot manipulation tasks [55,
64] and clinical trials [45]. RL algorithms aim to learn a policy that maximizes the long-term return by
interacting with the environment. Policy gradient (PG) methods [59, 54, 29, 25, 47] are an important
class of algorithms that can easily handle function approximation and structured state-action spaces,
making them widely used in practice. PG methods assume a differentiable parameterization of the
policy and directly optimize the return with respect to the policy parameters. Typically, a policy’s
return is estimated by using Monte-Carlo samples obtained via environment interactions [59]. Since
the environment is stochastic, this approach results in high variance in the estimated return, leading
to higher sample-complexity (number of environment interactions required to learn a good policy).
Actor-critic (AC) methods [29, 43, 5] alleviate this issue by using value-based approaches [52, 58] in
conjunction with PG methods, and have been empirically successful [20, 23]. In AC algorithms, a
value-based method (“critic”) is used to approximate a policy’s estimated value, and a PG method
(“actor”) uses this estimate to improve the policy towards obtaining higher returns.
Though AC methods have the flexibility of using any method to independently train the actor and
critic, it is unclear how to train the two components jointly in order to learn good policies. For
example, the critic is typically trained via temporal difference (TD) learning and its objective is
to minimize the value estimation error across all states and actions. For large real-world Markov
decision processes (MDPs), it is intractable to estimate the values across all states and actions, and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

