Model and Feature Diversity for Bayesian Neural
Networks in Mutual Learning

Cuong Pham1

Cuong C. Nguyen2
Trung Le1
Dinh Phung 1,4
3
1
Gustavo Carneiro
Thanh-Toan Do
1
Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University, Australia
2
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide, Australia
3
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
4
VinAI, Vietnam
{cuong.pham1, trunglm, dinh.phung, toan.do}@monash.edu
cuong.nguyen@adelaide.edu.au, g.carneiro@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) offer probability distributions for model parameters, enabling uncertainty quantification in predictions. However, they often
underperform compared to deterministic neural networks. Utilizing mutual learning
can effectively enhance the performance of peer BNNs. In this paper, we propose a
novel approach to improve BNNs performance through deep mutual learning. The
proposed approaches aim to increase diversity in both network parameter distributions and feature distributions, promoting peer networks to acquire distinct features
that capture different characteristics of the input, which enhances the effectiveness
of mutual learning. Experimental results demonstrate significant improvements in
the classification accuracy, negative log-likelihood, and expected calibration error
when compared to traditional mutual learning for BNNs.

1

Introduction

Bayesian neural networks [22] (BNNs) provide a probability distribution over the model parameters,
which allows for uncertainty quantification in the model’s predictions. This is especially useful in
situations where making accurate predictions is crucial, and having a measure of uncertainty can
inform decision-making. This measurement is essential for many applications, including continual
learning, active learning, and robust operation. To measure uncertainty, we can learn the posterior
distribution after observing data through methods like Variational Inference (VI) [1, 16] and Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [37, 21, 3]. The variational approach for BNNs involves selecting prior
distributions and approximate posterior distributions over neural network weights, offering a more
memory-efficient and flexible approach compared to MCMC.
However, despite their advantages, Bayesian neural networks using variational inference often find it
difficult to match the performance of BNNs using the MCMC approach, as well as deterministic neural
networks. To address this performance gap, various methods have been explored [26, 28, 31, 8, 24, 14].
One promising method is knowledge distillation [13, 27, 17, 25, 12], which involves training a smaller
network (student) to mimic the behaviour of a larger, more complex network (teacher) to achieve
comparable performance with fewer computational resources. This idea has been investigated for
compressing BNNs [18, 36, 30]. Although it is efficient to train the student in this manner, selecting
the right teacher model which can guide the student during training may be difficult to a certain extent.
In [18, 36, 30], the authors use teacher models, which are BNNs trained with Stochastic Gradient
Langevin Dynamics (SGLD), resulting in prohibitive storage costs. Additionally, this knowledge
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

