Zero-One Laws of Graph Neural Networks

Sam Adam-Day∗
Department of Mathematics
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
sam.adam-day@cs.ox.ac.uk

Theodor-Mihai Iliant
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
theodor-mihai.iliant@lmh.ox.ac.uk

İsmail İlkan Ceylan
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
ismail.ceylan@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are the de facto standard deep learning architectures
for machine learning on graphs. This has led to a large body of work analyzing
the capabilities and limitations of these models, particularly pertaining to their
representation and extrapolation capacity. We offer a novel theoretical perspective on the representation and extrapolation capacity of GNNs, by answering the
question: how do GNNs behave as the number of graph nodes become very large?
Under mild assumptions, we show that when we draw graphs of increasing size
from the Erdős-Rényi model, the probability that such graphs are mapped to a
particular output by a class of GNN classifiers tends to either zero or to one. This
class includes the popular graph convolutional network architecture. The result
establishes ‘zero-one laws’ for these GNNs, and analogously to other convergence
laws, entails theoretical limitations on their capacity. We empirically verify our
results, observing that the theoretical asymptotic limits are evident already on
relatively small graphs.

1

Introduction

Graphs are common structures for representing relational data in a wide range of domains, including
physical [35], chemical [7, 18], and biological [42, 10] systems, which sparked interest in machine
learning over graphs. Graph neural networks (GNNs) [33, 14] have become prominent models for
graph machine learning for a wide range of tasks, owing to their capacity to explicitly encode desirable
relational inductive biases [5]. One important virtue of these architectures is that every GNN model
can be applied to arbitrarily large graphs, since in principle the model parameters are independent
of the graph size. This raises the question: how do GNNs behave as the number of nodes becomes
very large? When acting as binary classifiers, GNNs can be thought of as parametrizing Boolean
properties of (labelled) graphs. A classical method of specifying such properties is through first-order
formulas, which allow for precise definitions using a formal language [9]. The celebrated ‘zero-one
law’ for first-order logic [13, 8] provides a crisp answer to the question of the asymptotic behaviour
of such properties: as graphs of increasing size are drawn from the Erdős-Rényi distribution, the
probability that a first-order property holds either tends to zero or to one.
∗

Alternative email address: me@samadamday.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

