A polar prediction model for learning to represent
visual transformations
Pierre-Étienne H. Fiquet1

Eero P. Simoncelli1,2

Center for Neural Science, New York University
Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute
{pef246, eero.simoncelli}@nyu.edu
1

2

Abstract
All organisms make temporal predictions, and their evolutionary fitness level
depends on the accuracy of these predictions. In the context of visual perception,
the motions of both the observer and objects in the scene structure the dynamics of
sensory signals, allowing for partial prediction of future signals based on past ones.
Here, we propose a self-supervised representation-learning framework that extracts
and exploits the regularities of natural videos to compute accurate predictions.
We motivate the polar architecture by appealing to the Fourier shift theorem and
its group-theoretic generalization, and we optimize its parameters on next-frame
prediction. Through controlled experiments, we demonstrate that this approach
can discover the representation of simple transformation groups acting in data.
When trained on natural video datasets, our framework achieves better prediction
performance than traditional motion compensation and rivals conventional deep
networks, while maintaining interpretability and speed. Furthermore, the polar
computations can be restructured into components resembling normalized simple
and direction-selective complex cell models of primate V1 neurons. Thus, polar
prediction offers a principled framework for understanding how the visual system
represents sensory inputs in a form that simplifies temporal prediction.

1

Introduction

The fundamental problem of vision can be framed as that of representing images in a form that is
more useful for performing visual tasks, be they estimation, recognition, or motor action. Perhaps
the most general “task” is that of temporal prediction, which has been proposed as a fundamental
goal for unsupervised learning of visual representations [1]. Previous research along these lines has
generally focused on estimating stable representations rather than using them to predict: for example,
extracting slow features [2], or finding sparse codes that have slow amplitudes and phases [3].
In video processing and computer vision, a common strategy for temporal prediction is to first
estimate local translational motion, and then (assuming no acceleration) use this to warp and/or copy
previous content to predict the next frame. Such motion compensation is a fundamental component
in video compression schemes as MPEG [4]. These video coding standards are the result of decades
of engineering effort [5], and have enabled reliable and efficient digital video communication that
is now commonplace. But motion estimation is a difficult nonlinear problem, and existing methods
fail in regions where temporal evolution is not translational and smooth: for example, expanding or
rotating motions, discontinuous motion at occlusion boundaries, or mixtures of motion arising from
semi-transparent surfaces (e.g., viewing the world through a dirty pane of glass). In compression
schemes, these failures of motion estimation lead to prediction errors, which must then be adjusted
by sending additional corrective bits.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

