Stabilized Neural Differential Equations for Learning
Dynamics with Explicit Constraints

Alistair White
Technical University of Munich
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research

Niki Kilbertus
Technical University of Munich
Hemholtz AI, Munich

Maximilian Gelbrecht
Technical University of Munich
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
Niklas Boers
Technical University of Munich
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
University of Exeter
{alistair.white, niki.kilbertus, maximilian.gelbrecht, n.boers}@tum.de

Abstract
Many successful methods to learn dynamical systems from data have recently
been introduced. However, ensuring that the inferred dynamics preserve known
constraints, such as conservation laws or restrictions on the allowed system states,
remains challenging. We propose stabilized neural differential equations (SNDEs),
a method to enforce arbitrary manifold constraints for neural differential equations.
Our approach is based on a stabilization term that, when added to the original
dynamics, renders the constraint manifold provably asymptotically stable. Due
to its simplicity, our method is compatible with all common neural differential
equation (NDE) models and broadly applicable. In extensive empirical evaluations,
we demonstrate that SNDEs outperform existing methods while broadening the
types of constraints that can be incorporated into NDE training.

1

Introduction

Advances in machine learning have recently spurred hopes of displacing or at least enhancing the
process of scientific discovery by inferring natural laws directly from observational data. In particular,
there has been a surge of interest in data-driven methods for learning dynamical laws in the form of
differential equations directly from data [18, 67, 16, 23, 3, 11]. Assuming there is a ground truth
system with dynamics governed by an ordinary differential equation
du(t)
= f (u(t), t) (with initial condition u(0) = u0 )
dt

(1)

with u : R → Rn and f : Rn × R → Rn , the question is whether we can learn f from (potentially
noisy and irregularly sampled) observations (ti , u(ti ))N
i=1 .
Neural ordinary differential equations (NODEs) provide a prominent and successful method for this
task, which leverages machine learning by directly parameterizing the vector field f of the ODE as a
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

