Beyond MLE: Convex Learning for Text Generation

Chenze Shao∗ 1,2 , Zhengrui Ma∗ 1,2 , Min Zhang3 & Yang Feng† 1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Future Science and Engineering, Soochow University
chenzeshao@tencent.com, mazhengrui21b@ict.ac.cn
zhangminmt@hotmail.com, fengyang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is a statistical method used to estimate
the parameters of a probability distribution that best explain the observed data.
In the context of text generation, MLE is often used to train generative language
models, which can then be used to generate new text. However, we argue that MLE
is not always necessary and optimal, especially for closed-ended text generation
tasks like machine translation. In these tasks, the goal of model is to generate
the most appropriate response, which does not necessarily require it to estimate
the entire data distribution with MLE. To this end, we propose a novel class
of training objectives based on convex functions, which enables text generation
models to focus on highly probable outputs without having to estimate the entire
data distribution. We investigate the theoretical properties of the optimal predicted
distribution when applying convex functions to the loss, demonstrating that convex
functions can sharpen the optimal distribution, thereby enabling the model to better
capture outputs with high probabilities. Experiments on various text generation
tasks and models show the effectiveness of our approach. It enables autoregressive
models to bridge the gap between greedy and beam search, and facilitates the
learning of non-autoregressive models with a maximum improvement of 9+ BLEU
points. Moreover, our approach also exhibits significant impact on large language
models (LLMs), substantially enhancing their generative capability on various tasks.
Source code is available at https://github.com/ictnlp/Convex-Learning.

1

Introduction

Text generation is an important field within natural language processing that aims to generate
human-like texts for specific tasks. It can be broadly divided into two categories: open-ended and
closed-ended text generation. Open-ended tasks encourage the model to produce novel and diverse
outputs without a specific expected outcome or structure. Representative tasks in this category include
language modeling [41, 7], chatbot [64], storytelling [13], etc. In contrast, closed-ended tasks are
more constrained and adhere to specific rules or formats. Representative tasks in this category include
machine translation [8, 2], text summarization [45], etc.
In recent years, learning neural probabilistic models with maximum likelihood estimation has become
the dominant approach for both open-ended and closed-ended text generation [5, 2, 7]. Maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) is a statistical method used to estimate the parameters of a probability
distribution that maximize the likelihood of the observed data [33]. Since directly maximizing the
∗
†

Equal contribution. Order determined by coin flip.
Corresponding author: Yang Feng

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

