L2-Uniform Stability of Randomized Learning
Algorithms: Sharper Generalization Bounds and
Confidence Boosting

Xiao-Tong Yuan
School of Intelligence Science and Technology
Nanjing University
Suzhou, 215163, China
xtyuan1980@gmail.com

Ping Li
VecML Inc. www.vecml.com
Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
pingli98@gmail.com

Abstract
Exponential generalization bounds with near-optimal rates have recently been
established for uniformly stable algorithms (Feldman and Vondrák, 2019; Bousquet
et al., 2020). We seek to extend these best known high probability bounds from
deterministic learning algorithms to the regime of randomized learning. One simple
approach for achieving this goal is to define the stability for the expectation over
the algorithm’s randomness, which may result in sharper parameter but only leads
to guarantees regarding the on-average generalization error. Another natural option
is to consider the stability conditioned on the algorithm’s randomness, which is
way more stringent but may lead to generalization with high probability jointly
over the randomness of sample and algorithm. The present paper addresses such
a tension between these two alternatives and makes progress towards relaxing it
inside a classic framework of confidence-boosting. To this end, we first introduce a
novel concept of L2 -uniform stability that holds uniformly over data but in secondmoment over the algorithm’s randomness. Then as a core contribution of this work,
we prove a strong exponential bound on the first-moment of generalization error
under the notion of L2 -uniform stability. As an interesting consequence of the
bound, we show that a bagging-based meta algorithm leads to near-optimal generalization with high probability jointly over the randomness of data and algorithm.
We further substantialize these generic results to stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
to derive sharper exponential bounds for convex or non-convex optimization with
natural time-decaying learning rates, which have not been possible to prove with
the existing stability-based generalization guarantees.

1

Introduction

In many statistical learning problems, we are interested in designing a randomized algorithm A :
Z N × R 7→ W that maps a training data sample S = {Zi }i∈[N ] ∈ Z N with an algorithm’s random
parameter ξ ∈ R to a model A(S, ξ) ∈ W. Here Z and R are some measurable sets, and W is a
closed subset of an Euclidean space. The ultimate goal is to find a suitable algorithm such that the
following population risk evaluated at the model should be as small as possible:
R(A(S, ξ)) := EZ [ℓ(A(S, ξ); Z)],
where Z ∈ Z and ℓ : W × Z 7→ R+ is a non-negative bounded loss function whose value ℓ(w; z)
measures the loss evaluated at z with parameter w. It is generally the case that the underlying data
distribution is unknown, and in this case the data points Zi are usually assumed to be independent.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

