DreamWaltz: Make a Scene with Complex 3D
Animatable Avatars
Yukun Huang1,2∗ † , Jianan Wang1∗ ‡ , Ailing Zeng1 , He Cao1 , Xianbiao Qi1 , Yukai Shi1 ,
Zheng-Jun Zha2 , Lei Zhang1
1
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
2
University of Science and Technology of China

(a) Princess Elsa in different poses.

(b) Uzumaki Naruto in dance moves.

(c) Woody dances with Stormtrooper.

(d) Woody sits on: (Left) a chair; (Right) a chair made of cheese.

Figure 1: DreamWaltz is a text-to-3D-avatar generation framework, which can (a, b) create complex
3D animatable avatars from texts, (c, d) ready for 3D scene composition with diverse interactions.

Abstract
We present DreamWaltz, a novel framework for generating and animating complex
3D avatars given text guidance and parametric human body prior. While recent
methods have shown encouraging results for text-to-3D generation of common
objects, creating high-quality and animatable 3D avatars remains challenging. To
create high-quality 3D avatars, DreamWaltz proposes 3D-consistent occlusionaware Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) to optimize implicit neural representations
with canonical poses. It provides view-aligned supervision via 3D-aware skeleton
conditioning which enables complex avatar generation without artifacts and multiple faces. For animation, our method learns an animatable 3D avatar representation
from abundant image priors of diffusion model conditioned on various poses, which
could animate complex non-rigged avatars given arbitrary poses without retraining.
Extensive evaluations demonstrate that DreamWaltz is an effective and robust
approach for creating 3D avatars that can take on complex shapes and appearances
as well as novel poses for animation. The proposed framework further enables
the creation of complex scenes with diverse compositions, including avatar-avatar,
avatar-object and avatar-scene interactions. See https://dreamwaltz3d.github.io/ for
more vivid 3D avatar and animation results.

1

Introduction

The creation and animation of 3D digital avatars are essential for various applications, including film
and cartoon production, video game design, and immersive media such as AR and VR. However,
∗

Equal contribution.
Work done during an internship at IDEA.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

