NCDL: A Framework for Deep Learning on
non-Cartesian Lattices
Usman R. Alim
Department of Computer Science
University of Calgary
Calgary, Alberta
ualim@ucalgary.ca

Joshua J. Horacsek
Department of Computer Science
University of Calgary
Calgary, Alberta
j.horacsek@ncdl.ai

Abstract
The use of non-Cartesian grids is a niche but important topic in sub-fields of the
numerical sciences, such as simulation and scientific visualization. However, nonCartesian approaches are virtually unexplored in machine learning. This is likely
due to the difficulties in the representation of data on non-Cartesian domains and
the lack of support for standard machine learning operations on non-Cartesian data.
This paper proposes a new data structure called the lattice tensor which generalizes
traditional tensor spatio-temporal operations to lattice tensors, enabling the use
of standard machine learning algorithms on non-Cartesian data. We introduce
a software library that implements this new data structure and demonstrate its
effectiveness on various problems. Our method provides a general framework for
machine learning on non-Cartesian domains, addressing the challenges mentioned
above and filling a gap in the current literature.

1

Introduction

Machine learning heavily relies on tensors to represent multi-dimensional data. However, tensors are
inherently Cartesian, and representing data solely on Cartesian grids can be restrictive. Certain data
may be more naturally suited to alternative grid structures. For example, raw image data from most
imaging sensors is not Cartesian; a Bayer filter represents blue and red data with Cartesian structure,
but green data has quincunx (checkerboard) structure. There is also abundant literature showing that
hexagonal grids are superior to Cartesian grids when representing isotropically band-limited natural
images [4, 34, 32, 38, 3]. Representing data in these domains using traditional Cartesian tensors
can be inefficient and lead to inaccuracies depending on the distribution the data belongs to. For the
distribution of natural images, which have relatively isotropic behaviour in the Fourier domain, it is
well known that using alternative grids yields better image representations [38].
Another reason to use exotic grids is that alternative structures can have significantly different
approximation capabilities. Again, turning to the hexagonal lattice as an example, which is well
known as the optimal sampling lattice in 2D [4], if one samples a 2D signal with a number of samples,
a hexagonal sampling reduces the memory consumption by approximately 14% [32]. This follows
from a simple argument in the Fourier domain; sampling a band-limited signal periodizes that function
in the Fourier domain. If one’s sampling pattern is hexagonal (the optimal circle packing pattern)
then less information is lost when the signal is hexagonally periodized. This effect compounds as
dimensionality increases; for example the body-centered-cubic (BCC) lattice is 30% more efficient
than the Cartesian lattice (for isotropically band-limited functions)1 .
However, though these grid structures show promise in other areas of numerical sciences, they are
relatively unexplored in the context of machine learning. There is no user-friendly, general, and
1

The face-centered-cubic (FCC) lattice is also attractive, as it minimizes aliasing.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

