RDumb: A simple approach that questions our
progress in continual test-time adaptation
Ori Press1⋆

Steffen Schneider1,2
1

Matthias Kümmerer1†

Matthias Bethge1†

University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center, Germany
2
EPFL, Geneva, Switzerland

Abstract
Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) allows to update pre-trained models to changing data
distributions at deployment time. While early work tested these algorithms for
individual fixed distribution shifts, recent work proposed and applied methods for
continual adaptation over long timescales. To examine the reported progress in
the field, we propose the Continually Changing Corruptions (CCC) benchmark to
measure asymptotic performance of TTA techniques. We find that eventually all
but one state-of-the-art methods collapse and perform worse than a non-adapting
model, including models specifically proposed to be robust to performance collapse.
In addition, we introduce a simple baseline, “RDumb”, that periodically resets the
model to its pretrained state. RDumb performs better or on par with the previously
proposed state-of-the-art in all considered benchmarks. Our results show that
previous TTA approaches are neither effective at regularizing adaptation to avoid
collapse nor able to outperform a simplistic resetting strategy.

1

Introduction

Biological vision is remarkably robust at adapting to continually changing environments. Imagine
cycling through the forest on a cloudy day and observing the world around you: You will encounter
a wide variety of animals and objects, and be able to recognize them without effort. Even as the
weather changes, rain sets in, or you start cycling faster, the human visual system effortlessly adapts
and robustly estimates the surroundings [45]. Equipping machine vision with similar capabilities is a
long-standing and unsolved challenge, with numerous applications in autonomous driving, medical
imaging, and quality control, to name a few.
Techniques for improving the robustness to domain shifts of ImageNet-scale [37] classification
models include pre-training of large models on diverse and/or large-scale datasets [26, 33, 50] and
robustification of smaller models by specifically designed data augmentation [11, 14, 36]. While
these techniques are applied during training time, recent work [8, 28, 29, 30, 35, 38, 47, 48] explored
possibilities of further adapting models by Test-Time Adaptation (TTA). Such methods continuously
update a given pretrained model exclusively using their input data, without having access to its labels.
Test-time entropy minimization (Tent; 47) has become a foundation for state-of-the-art TTA methods.
Given an input stream of images, Tent updates a pretrained classification model by minimizing the
entropy of its outputs, thereby continuously increasing the model’s confidence in its predictions for
every input image.
Previous TTA work [8, 28, 29, 35, 38, 47, 54] evaluate their models on ImageNet-C [13] or smaller
scale image classification benchmarks [18, 20]. ImageNet-C consists of 75 copies of the ImageNet
validation set, wherein each copy is corrupted according to 15 different noises at 5 different severity
⋆

ori.press@bethgelab.org. † Joint senior authors. Code: https://github.com/oripress/CCC.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

