G RAPH PATCHER: Mitigating Degree Bias for
Graph Neural Networks via Test-time Augmentation

Mingxuan Ju1 , Tong Zhao2 , Wenhao Yu1 , Neil Shah2 , Yanfang Ye1
1
University of Notre Dame, 2 Snap Inc.
1
{mju2,wyu1,yye7}@nd.edu; 2 {tzhao,nshah}@snap.com

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that graph neural networks (GNNs) exhibit strong biases
towards the node degree: they usually perform satisfactorily on high-degree nodes
with rich neighbor information but struggle with low-degree nodes. Existing works
tackle this problem by deriving either designated GNN architectures or training
strategies specifically for low-degree nodes. Though effective, these approaches unintentionally create an artificial out-of-distribution scenario, where models mainly
or even only observe low-degree nodes during the training, leading to a downgraded
performance for high-degree nodes that GNNs originally perform well at. In light
of this, we propose a test-time augmentation framework, namely G RAPH PATCHER,
to enhance test-time generalization of any GNNs on low-degree nodes. Specifically,
G RAPH PATCHER iteratively generates virtual nodes to patch artificially created
low-degree nodes via corruptions, aiming at progressively reconstructing target
GNN’s predictions over a sequence of increasingly corrupted nodes. Through this
scheme, G RAPH PATCHER not only learns how to enhance low-degree nodes (when
the neighborhoods are heavily corrupted) but also preserves the original superior
performance of GNNs on high-degree nodes (when lightly corrupted). Additionally,
G RAPH PATCHER is model-agnostic and can also mitigate the degree bias for either
self-supervised or supervised GNNs. Comprehensive experiments are conducted
over seven benchmark datasets and G RAPH PATCHER consistently enhances common GNNs’ overall performance by up to 3.6% and low-degree performance by
up to 6.5%, significantly outperforming state-of-the-art baselines. The source code
is publicly available at https://github.com/jumxglhf/GraphPatcher.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have gained significant popularity as a powerful approach for
learning representations of graphs, achieving state-of-the-art performance on various predictive tasks,
such as node classification [22, 38, 9], link prediction [50, 53], and graph classification [43, 47, 11].
These tasks further form the archetypes of many real-world applications, such as recommendation
systems [45, 3], predicative user behavior models [31, 52], and molecular property prediction [51, 48].
While existing GNNs are highly proficient at capturing information from rich neighborhoods (i.e.,
high-degree nodes), recent studies [13, 25, 36, 55] have revealed a significant performance degradation
of GNNs when dealing with nodes that have sparse neighborhoods (i.e., low-degree nodes). This
observation can be attributed to the fact that GNNs make predictions based on the distribution of
node neighborhoods [27]. According to this line of theory, GNNs struggle with low-degree nodes
due to the limited amount of available neighborhood information, which may not be able to precisely
depict the learned distributions. Empirically, as shown in Figure 1, the classification accuracy of
GCN [22] proportionally decays as the node degree decreases, resulting in a performance gap of
∼20% accuracy. Furthermore, the sub-optimal performance of GNNs on low-degree nodes can be
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

