The Emergence of Essential Sparsity in
Large Pre-trained Models: The Weights that Matter

Ajay Jaiswal1 , Shiwei Liu1,2 , Tianlong Chen1 , Zhangyang Wang1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Eindhoven University of Technology
{ajayjaiswal, shiwei.liu, tianlong.chen, atlaswang}@utexas.edu
1

Abstract
Large pre-trained transformers are show-stealer in modern-day deep learning,
and it becomes crucial to comprehend the parsimonious patterns that exist within
them as they grow in scale. With exploding parameter counts, Lottery Ticket
Hypothesis (LTH) and its variants, have lost their pragmatism in sparsifying them
due to high computation and memory bottleneck of repetitive train-prune-retrain
routine of iterative magnitude pruning (IMP) which worsens with increasing model
size. This paper comprehensively studies induced sparse patterns across multiple
large pre-trained vision and language transformers. We propose the existence of
– “essential sparsity” defined with a sharp dropping point beyond which the
performance declines much faster w.r.t the rise of sparsity level, when we directly
remove weights with the smallest magnitudes in one-shot without re-training.
We also find essential sparsity to hold valid for N:M sparsity patterns as well
as on modern-scale large language models (Vicuna-7B/13B). We also present
an intriguing emerging phenomenon of abrupt sparsification during the pretraining of BERT, i.e., BERT suddenly becomes heavily sparse in pre-training after
certain iterations. Moreover, our observations also indicate a counter-intuitive
finding that BERT trained with a larger amount of pre-training data tends to have a
better ability to condense knowledge in comparatively relatively fewer parameters.
Lastly, we investigate the effect of the pre-training loss on essential sparsity and
discover that self-supervised learning (SSL) objectives trigger stronger emergent
sparsification properties than supervised learning (SL). Our codes are available at
https://github.com/VITA-Group/essential_sparsity.

1

Introduction

Enormous increases in scale often permeate systems with unique new behavior. Transformers [1],
swiftly after their introduction are scaling every day, dramatically improving the state-of-the-art performance on a wide array of real-world computer vision [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], natural language processing
[8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16] applications and leaderboards. With the astonishing explosion of
parameter counts (millions to billions) in the past few years, while chasing performance gains, finetuning these large pre-trained models with non-industry standard hardware is becoming seemingly
impossible, in addition to expensive inference and steep environmental cost. For instance, GPT-3
[17] contains 175 billion parameters and requires at least five 80GB A100 GPUs for inference [18].
In the hustle of building gigantic models, a parallel and growing field of model compression has
been exploring the prospects to compress these gigantic models at the cost of marginal/no sacrifice
in performance. Among many efforts for compressing models and accelerating inference, network
pruning [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26], which removes the least important components from the
model, varying from the low granularity (e.g., individual weights) to the high granularity (such as
blocks, filters, and attention heads), stands out as one of the most effective techniques. Despite the
enormous success of the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) [27] and its variants for small-scale neural
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

