Data Portraits: Recording Foundation Model Training
Data
Marc Marone Benjamin Van Durme
Johns Hopkins University
{mmarone1,vandurme}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Foundation models are trained on increasingly immense and opaque datasets. Even
while these models are now key in AI system building, it can be difficult to answer
the straightforward question: has the model already encountered a given example
during training? We therefore propose a widespread adoption of Data Portraits:
artifacts that record training data and allow for downstream inspection. First we
outline the properties of such an artifact and discuss how existing solutions can be
used to increase transparency. We then propose and implement a solution based
on data sketching, stressing fast and space efficient querying. Using our tools, we
document a popular language modeling corpus (The Pile) and a recently released
code modeling dataset (The Stack). We show that our solution enables answering
questions about test set leakage and model plagiarism. Our tool is lightweight and
fast, costing only 3% of the dataset size in overhead. We release a live interface of
our tools at dataportraits.org and call on dataset and model creators to release Data
Portraits as a complement to current documentation practices.

1

Introduction

Modern AI is driven by large models trained on large datasets, displaying emergent capabilities as
they scale [5]. Despite the foundational nature of these models, it is a natural question to ask of some
example, “Was this seen during training?” Understanding the contents of large, opaque, web-scraped
datasets is important to assessing downstream model behavior. Web datasets can contain leaked
test sets, harmful text, or low quality information; these impact downstream models [12, 26, 15, 8].
Documentation artifacts for datasets and models have been proposed and adopted by the community
[14, 27, among others]. However, less work has dealt with tooling to support large dataset inspection.
We suggest that existing practices around foundation models can be improved through the widespread
adoption of Data Portraits: artifacts that record training data and allow for efficient inspection.
The critical property of a data portrait is membership inference: whether an example was part of a
data collection. In discussing these tools we consider three perspectives: content creators (owners),
scientists, and content consumers. Creators wish to know whether a dataset contains their content (e.g.
copywritten code). Scientists may seek to understand model behavior by assessing test set leakage
or knowledge memorization. Content consumers (including downstream applications) may want to
know if a model is plagiarizing or citing existing resources.
Our contributions are two-fold. First we call for documentation artifacts based on membership
inference, discussing the properties and tradeoffs around existing solutions. We then introduce our
own implementation of such an artifact and use it to document a widely used large language model
(LLM) corpus: the Pile [13]. We also document a recent code language modeling corpus: the Stack
[22]. Our artifact uses data sketching (compressed or approximate views of data, [6]) to enable
millisecond latency and minimal compute requirements, using only ∼ 3% of the original dataset size.
We release our tools and a live demo at dataportraits.org.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

