Kernel Stein Discrepancy thinning: a theoretical
perspective of pathologies and a practical fix with
regularization

1

Clément Bénard1
Brian Staber1
Sébastien Da Veiga2
Safran Tech, Digital Sciences & Technologies, 78114 Magny-Les-Hameaux, France
2
ENSAI, CREST, F-35000 Rennes, France
{clement.benard, brian.staber}@{safrangroup.com}
sebastien.da-veiga@ensai.fr

Abstract
Stein thinning is a promising algorithm proposed by Riabiz et al. [2022] for postprocessing outputs of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). The main principle is to
greedily minimize the kernelized Stein discrepancy (KSD), which only requires the
gradient of the log-target distribution, and is thus well-suited for Bayesian inference.
The main advantages of Stein thinning are the automatic remove of the burn-in
period, the correction of the bias introduced by recent MCMC algorithms, and the
asymptotic properties of convergence towards the target distribution. Nevertheless,
Stein thinning suffers from several empirical pathologies, which may result in
poor approximations, as observed in the literature. In this article, we conduct a
theoretical analysis of these pathologies, to clearly identify the mechanisms at stake,
and suggest improved strategies. Then, we introduce the regularized Stein thinning
algorithm to alleviate the identified pathologies. Finally, theoretical guarantees
and extensive experiments show the high efficiency of the proposed algorithm. An
implementation of regularized Stein thinning as the kernax library in python and
JAX is available at https://gitlab.com/drti/kernax.

1

Introduction

Bayesian inference is a powerful approach to solve statistical tasks, and is especially efficient to
incorporate prior expert knowledge of the studied system, or to provide uncertainties of the estimated
quantities. Bayesian methods have thus demonstrated a high empirical performance for a wide
range of applications, in particular in the fields of physics and computational biology, to just name a
few. However, the Bayesian framework often leads to the evaluation of expectations with respect
to a posterior distribution, which is not tractable [Green et al., 2015], except in the specific case of
conjugate prior distribution and likelihood, which hardly occurs in practice. To overcome this issue,
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is one of the most commonly used computational methods to
estimate these integrals. Indeed, MCMC algorithms iteratively generate a sample, which follows
the targeted posterior distribution, as the Markov chain converges to its stationary state [Robert and
Casella, 1999, Brooks et al., 2011]. Consequently, the quality of the resulting estimates strongly
depends on the convergence of the MCMC and how its output is post-processed. Standard postprocessing procedures of MCMC outputs consist in removing the first iterations, called the burn-in
period, and thinning the Markov chain with a constant frequency. Burn-in removal aims at reducing
the bias introduced by the random initialization of the Markov chain. The R̂ convergence diagnosis
of Gelman et al. [1995] is, for instance, a well known method for determining the burn-in period. On
the other hand, thinning the Markov chain allows for compressing the MCMC output and may also
reduce the correlation between the iteratively selected points. More recently, promising kernel-based
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

