Probabilistic Exponential Integrators

Nathanael Bosch
Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen
nathanael.bosch@uni-tuebingen.de
Philipp Hennig
Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen
philipp.hennig@uni-tuebingen.de

Filip Tronarp
Lund University
filip.tronarp@matstat.lu.se

Abstract
Probabilistic solvers provide a flexible and efficient framework for simulation,
uncertainty quantification, and inference in dynamical systems. However, like
standard solvers, they suffer performance penalties for certain stiff systems, where
small steps are required not for reasons of numerical accuracy but for the sake
of stability. This issue is greatly alleviated in semi-linear problems by the probabilistic exponential integrators developed in this paper. By including the fast,
linear dynamics in the prior, we arrive at a class of probabilistic integrators with
favorable properties. Namely, they are proven to be L-stable, and in a certain case
reduce to a classic exponential integrator—with the added benefit of providing a
probabilistic account of the numerical error. The method is also generalized to
arbitrary non-linear systems by imposing piece-wise semi-linearity on the prior via
Jacobians of the vector field at the previous estimates, resulting in probabilistic
exponential Rosenbrock methods. We evaluate the proposed methods on multiple
stiff differential equations and demonstrate their improved stability and efficiency
over established probabilistic solvers. The present contribution thus expands the
range of problems that can be effectively tackled within probabilistic numerics.

1

Introduction

Dynamical systems appear throughout science and engineering, and their accurate and efficient
simulation is a key component in many scientific problems. There has also been a surge of interest
in the intersection with machine learning, both regarding the usage of machine learning methods
to model and solve differential equations [36, 18, 35], and in a dynamical systems perspective on
machine learning methods themselves [8, 5]. This paper focuses on the numerical simulation of
dynamical systems within the framework of probabilistic numerics, which treats the numerical solvers
themselves as probabilistic inference methods [11, 12, 33]. In particular, we expand the range of
problems that can be tackled within this framework and introduce a new class of stable probabilistic
numerical methods for stiff ordinary differential equations (ODEs).
Stiff equations are problems for which certain implicit methods perform much better than explicit ones
[10]. But implicit methods come with increased computational complexity per step, as they typically
require solving a system of equations. Exponential integrators are an alternative class of methods for
efficiently solving large stiff problems [48, 16, 7, 15]. They are based on the observation that, if the
ODE has a semi-linear structure, the linear part can be solved exactly and only the non-linear part
needs to be numerically approximated. The resulting methods are formulated in an explicit manner
and do not require solving a system of equations, while achieving similar or better stability than
implicit methods. However, such methods have not yet been formulated probabilistically.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

