Language-based Action Concept Spaces Improve
Video Self-Supervised Learning

Kanchana Ranasinghe
Stony Brook University
kranasinghe@cs.stonybrook.edu

Michael Ryoo
Stony Brook University
mryoo@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Recent contrastive language image pre-training has led to learning highly transferable and robust image representations. However, adapting these models to
video domain with minimal supervision remains an open problem. We explore a
simple step in that direction, using language tied self-supervised learning to adapt
an image CLIP model to the video domain. A backbone modified for temporal
modeling is trained under self-distillation settings with train objectives operating
in an action concept space. Feature vectors of various action concepts extracted
from a language encoder using relevant textual prompts construct this space. A
large language model aware of actions and their attributes generates the relevant
textual prompts. We introduce two train objectives, concept distillation and concept alignment, that retain generality of original representations while enforcing
relations between actions and their attributes. Our approach improves zero-shot
and linear probing performance on three action recognition benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Actions in videos are defined by individual objects, their relationships, and interaction [1, 2]. Video
self-supervised learning focuses on discovering representations aware of such action attributes directly
from video content with no human supervision [3]. Particularly in the case of videos, where manual
human annotation can be both expensive and noisy, such self-supervised approaches are invaluable.
A recent variant of self-supervision explores learning with loosely paired image-caption pairs, leading
to highly transferable and robust representations such as CLIP [4]. These approaches obtain zero-shot
performance often comparable to fully-supervised methods. However, their counterparts in the video
domain [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] do not exhibit the same generality. In fact, some approaches training
CLIP on videos [11, 12] perform subpar to image-CLIP under zero-shot settings (see Table 2). Such
behaviour can be attributed to lesser availability and more noisy nature of labelled (or paired caption)
video datasets [3]. This motivates exploration into self-supervised learning (SSL) techniques that can
learn from videos under less supervision while utilizing existing image CLIP [4] like representations.
Existing state-of-the-art video SSL approaches [13, 14] learn highly transferable representations from
videos, but combining these with image CLIP representations is not straightforward. In fact, despite
methods like SVT [13] being able to utilize image SSL representations [15] for weight initialization
to achieve better performance, using image CLIP representations instead for weight initialization
leads to performance subpar to image CLIP (see Table 4). This raises necessity for alternate video
SSL approaches compatible with CLIP like image representations and is our key motivation.
In this work, we explore self-supervised learning techniques that adapt image CLIP models [4] to
video domain under entirely self-supervised settings, dependent on no form of video level labels
or captions. Under this setting, natural language can still provide strong cues regarding attributes
that compose an action category [16, 17]. We leverage this idea to propose a novel language-based
self-supervised learning objective. Following a standard self-distillation and multi-view based SSL
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

