Neural Algorithmic Reasoning
Without Intermediate Supervision

Gleb Rodionov
Yandex Research
Moscow, Russia
rodionovgleb@yandex-team.ru

Liudmila Prokhorenkova
Yandex Research
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
ostroumova-la@yandex-team.ru

Abstract
Neural algorithmic reasoning is an emerging area of machine learning focusing
on building models that can imitate the execution of classic algorithms, such as
sorting, shortest paths, etc. One of the main challenges is to learn algorithms that
are able to generalize to out-of-distribution data, in particular with significantly
larger input sizes. Recent work on this problem has demonstrated the advantages of
learning algorithms step-by-step, giving models access to all intermediate steps of
the original algorithm. In this work, we instead focus on learning neural algorithmic
reasoning only from the input-output pairs without appealing to the intermediate
supervision. We propose simple but effective architectural improvements and also
build a self-supervised objective that can regularise intermediate computations of
the model without access to the algorithm trajectory. We demonstrate that our
approach is competitive to its trajectory-supervised counterpart on tasks from the
CLRS Algorithmic Reasoning Benchmark and achieves new state-of-the-art results
for several problems, including sorting, where we obtain significant improvements.
Thus, learning without intermediate supervision is a promising direction for further
research on neural reasoners.

1

Introduction

Building neural networks that can reason has been a desired goal for decades of research. While the
ability to reason can be defined and measured in various ways, most of them represent a challenge for
current models, solving which can allow the community to use such models for complex real-world
problems. Significant progress has been achieved in the reasoning abilities of language models
(Touvron et al., 2023, Hoffmann et al., 2022), where reasoning can be described as the ability to
answer questions or solve logical and mathematical problems in formal (Polu and Sutskever, 2020)
or natural language (Lewkowycz et al., 2022, Jiang et al., 2023). However, the essential part of this
progress is inseparable from the large scale of such models, which is needed to abstract over complex
language structures (Wei et al., 2022).
Recent research considers classic algorithms as a universal tool to define reasoning on simple instances
like sets of objects and relations between them, making algorithmic modeling a popular domain
for testing neural networks and highlighting current reasoning limitations of existing architectures
(Zaremba and Sutskever, 2014, Kaiser and Sutskever, 2015, Trask et al., 2018, Kool et al., 2019,
Dwivedi et al., 2023, Yan et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2020b).
Neural algorithmic reasoning is an area of machine learning focusing on building models that
can execute classic algorithms (Veličković and Blundell, 2021). The motivation is to combine the
advantages of neural networks (processing raw and noisy input data) with the appealing properties
of algorithms (theoretical guarantees and strong generalization). Assuming that we have a neural
network capable of solving a classic algorithmic task, we can incorporate it into a more complex
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

