SpatialRank: Urban Event Ranking with NDCG
Optimization on Spatiotemporal Data

Xun Zhou ∗
Department of Business Analytics
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
xun-zhou@uiowa.edu

Bang An
Department of Business Analytics
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
bang-an@uiowa.edu
Yongjian Zhong
Department of Computer Science
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
yongjian-zhong@uiowa.edu

Tianbao Yang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
tianbao-yang@tamu.edu

Abstract
The problem of urban event ranking aims at predicting the top-k most risky locations of future events such as traffic accidents and crimes. This problem is
of fundamental importance to public safety and urban administration especially
when limited resources are available. The problem is, however, challenging due to
complex and dynamic spatio-temporal correlations between locations, uneven distribution of urban events in space, and the difficulty to correctly rank nearby locations
with similar features. Prior works on event forecasting mostly aim at accurately
predicting the actual risk score or counts of events for all the locations. Rankings
obtained as such usually have low quality due to prediction errors. Learning-to-rank
methods directly optimize measures such as Normalized Discounted Cumulative
Gain (NDCG), but cannot handle the spatiotemporal autocorrelation existing among
locations. In this paper, we bridge the gap by proposing a novel spatial event ranking approach named SpatialRank. SpatialRank features adaptive graph convolution
layers that dynamically learn the spatiotemporal dependencies across locations
from data. In addition, the model optimizes through surrogates a hybrid NDCG loss
with a spatial component to better rank neighboring spatial locations. We design
an importance-sampling with a spatial filtering algorithm to effectively evaluate
the loss during training. Comprehensive experiments on three real-world datasets
demonstrate that SpatialRank can effectively identify the top riskiest locations of
crimes and traffic accidents and outperform state-of-the-art methods in terms of
NDCG by up to 12.7%.

1

Introduction

Given a risk score defined based on historical urban events (e.g., crimes, traffic accidents) in a study
area as well as the socio-environmental attributes (e.g., travel demands, weather, road network)
associated with the events, the goal of the urban event ranking problem is to learn a model that can
predict the ranking of the top-k riskiest locations of future events.
∗

corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

