Strategic Apple Tasting

Keegan Harris
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
keeganh@cmu.edu

Chara Podimata
MIT & Archimedes/Athena RC
Cambridge, MA 02142
podimata@mit.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Abstract
Algorithmic decision-making in high-stakes domains often involves assigning decisions to agents with incentives to strategically modify their input to the algorithm.
In addition to dealing with incentives, in many domains of interest (e.g. lending
and hiring) the decision-maker only observes feedback regarding their policy for
rounds in which they assign a positive decision to the agent; this type of feedback is
often referred to as apple tasting (or one-sided) feedback. We formalize this setting
as an online learning problem with apple-tasting feedback where a principal makes
decisions about a sequence of T agents, each of which is represented by a context
that may be strategically modified. Our goal is to achieve sublinear strategic regret,
which compares the performance of the principal to that of the best fixed policy in
hindsight, if the agents were truthful when√revealing their contexts. Our main result
is a learning algorithm which incurs Õ( T ) strategic regret when the sequence
of agents is chosen stochastically. We also give an algorithm capable of handling
adversarially-chosen agents, albeit at the cost of Õ(T (d+1)/(d+2) ) strategic regret
(where d is the dimension of the context). Our algorithms can be easily adapted to
the setting where the principal receives bandit feedback—this setting generalizes
both the linear contextual bandit problem (by considering agents with incentives)
and the strategic classification problem (by allowing for partial feedback).

1

Introduction

Algorithmic systems have recently been used to aid in or automate decision-making in high-stakes
domains (including lending and hiring) in order to, e.g., improve efficiency or reduce human bias
[12, 1]. When subjugated to algorithmic decision-making in high-stakes settings, individuals have an
incentive to strategically modify their observable attributes to appear more qualified. Such behavior
is often observed in practice. For example, credit scores are often used to predict the likelihood an
individual will pay back a loan on time if given one. Online articles with titles like “9 Ways to Build
and Improve Your Credit Fast” are ubiquitous and offer advice such as “pay credit card balances strategically” in order to improve one’s credit score with minimal effort [46]. In hiring, common advice
ranges from curating a list of keywords to add to one’s resume, to using white font in order to “trick”
automated resume scanning software [23, 2]. If left unaccounted for, such strategic manipulations
could result in individuals being awarded opportunities for which they are not qualified for, possibly
at the expense of more deserving candidates. As a result, it is critical to keep individuals’ incentives
in mind when designing algorithms for learning and decision-making in high-stakes settings.
In addition to dealing with incentives, another challenge of designing learning algorithms for highstakes settings is the possible selection bias introduced by the way decisions are made. In particular,
decision-makers often only have access to feedback about the deployed policy from individuals that
have received positive decisions (e.g., the applicant is given the loan, the candidate is hired to the job
and then we can evaluate how good our decision was). In the language of online learning, this type of
feedback is known as apple tasting (or one-sided) feedback. When combined, these two complications
(incentives & one-sided feedback) have the potential to amplify one other, as algorithms can learn
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

