Estimating Riemannian Metric with
Noise-Contaminated Intrinsic Distance
Jiaming Qiu
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center
jqiu3@fredhutch.org

Xiongtao Dai
Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Health
University of California, Berkeley
xdai@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We extend metric learning by studying the Riemannian manifold structure of the
underlying data space induced by similarity measures between data points. The
key quantity of interest here is the Riemannian metric, which characterizes the
Riemannian geometry and defines straight lines and derivatives on the manifold.
Being able to estimate the Riemannian metric allows us to gain insights into
the underlying manifold and compute geometric features such as the geodesic
curves. We model the observed similarity measures as noisy responses generated
from a function of the intrinsic geodesic distance between data points. A new
local regression approach is proposed to learn the Riemannian metric tensor and
its derivatives based on a Taylor expansion for the squared geodesic distances,
accommodating different types of data such as continuous, binary, or comparative
responses. We develop theoretical foundation for our method by deriving the rates
of convergence for the asymptotic bias and variance of the estimated metric tensor.
The proposed method is shown to be versatile in simulation studies and real data
applications involving taxi trip time in New York City and MNIST digits.

1

Introduction

With increasing data complexity, it has received increasing attention for capturing the geometric
structure of the data space characterized by a Riemannian manifold, which consists of two vital parts:
the coordinate system and the Riemannian metric. Manifold learning attempts to find low-dimensional
representations as coordinates for the high-dimensional data [23, 27, 7]. Yet existing methods
generally assume the local geometry is given, e.g., by the Euclidean distance between ambient data
points, leading to non-isometric methods that distort the data geometry in the embedded space. On
the other hand, many methods have been proposed to consider the Riemannian metric, including
parametric estimation [17, 16, 15]; multi-metric learning [12]; pushforward via the Laplacian operator
[21]; pull-back via Jacobian of generative models [1, 2]; Bayesian approach based on arc length
of Gaussian process [14]; and dynamics of evolving probability when time-indexed samples are
available [24]. It is also possible to recover the manifold in an abstract setting with only similarity
measures among data points [9].
We propose to estimate the Riemannian metric utilizing similarity measures between data points
when data coordinates are available. Suppose that data are generated from an unknown Riemannian
manifold, while the Euclidean distance between the coordinates may not reflect the underlying
geometry. We model the observed similarity measures between data points as noise-contaminated
intrinsic distances, which are then used to characterize the intrinsic geometry on the Riemannian
manifold. The targeted Riemannian metric is estimated in a data-driven fashion, which enables path
finding via geodesics and calculus on the manifold in which the data reside.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

