MuSe-GNN: Learning Unified Gene Representation
From Multimodal Biological Graph Data

Tianyu Liu
Yale University
tianyu.liu@yale.edu

Yuge Wang
Yale University
yuge.wang@yale.edu

Rex Ying
Yale University
rex.ying@yale.edu

Hongyu Zhao*
Yale University
hongyu.zhao@yale.edu
*: Corresponding author

Abstract
Discovering genes with similar functions across diverse biomedical contexts poses
a significant challenge in gene representation learning due to data heterogeneity. In
this study, we resolve this problem by introducing a novel model called Multimodal
Similarity Learning Graph Neural Network, which combines Multimodal Machine
Learning and Deep Graph Neural Networks to learn gene representations from
single-cell sequencing and spatial transcriptomic data. Leveraging 82 training
datasets from 10 tissues, three sequencing techniques, and three species, we create
informative graph structures for model training and gene representations generation,
while incorporating regularization with weighted similarity learning and contrastive
learning to learn cross-data gene-gene relationships. This novel design ensures
that we can offer gene representations containing functional similarity across
different contexts in a joint space. Comprehensive benchmarking analysis shows
our model’s capacity to effectively capture gene function similarity across multiple
modalities, outperforming state-of-the-art methods in gene representation learning
by up to 97.5%. Moreover, we employ bioinformatics tools in conjunction with
gene representations to uncover pathway enrichment, regulation causal networks,
and functions of disease-associated or dosage-sensitive genes. Therefore, our
model efficiently produces unified gene representations for the analysis of gene
functions, tissue functions, diseases, and species evolution.

1

Introduction

Progress in biological technology has broadened the variety of biological data, facilitating the examination of intricate biological systems. A prime example of such technology is single-cell sequencing,
which allows for the comprehensive characterization of genetic information within individual cells
[38, 78]. This technology provides access to the full range of a cell’s transcriptomics, epigenomics
and proteomics information, including gene expression (scRNA-seq) [46, 114], chromatin accessibility (scATAC-seq) [20, 17], methylation [60, 68] and anti-bodies [85]. By sequencing cells from the
same tissue at various time points, we can gain insight into patterns of cellular activity over time [30].
Moreover, spatial information of cellular activity represents an equally vital, additional dimension.
Such data are defined as spatial data. All of these data are known as multi-omics data, and integrating
multi-omics data for combined analysis poses a significant challenge.
However, the traditional idea of multi-omics data integration known as using cells as anchors [56, 87,
39, 12, 21, 76] is only partially suitable because of the following two challenges. 1. Different omics
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

