Decomposing Novel into Known: Part Concept
Learning For 3D Novel Class Discovery

Jun Xiao
Haiyong Jiang∗
School of AI
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
wengtingyu18@mails.ucas.ac.cn,{xiaojun,haiyong.jiang}@ucas.ac.cn
Tingyu Weng

Abstract
In this work, we address 3D novel class discovery (NCD) that discovers novel
classes from an unlabeled dataset by leveraging the knowledge of disjoint known
classes. The key challenge of 3D NCD is that learned features by known class
recognition are heavily biased and hinder generalization to novel classes. Since
geometric parts are more generalizable across different classes, we propose to
decompose novel into known parts, coined DNIK, to mitigate the above problems.
DNIK learns a part concept bank encoding rich part geometric patterns from known
classes so that novel 3D shapes can be represented as part concept compositions to
facilitate cross-category generalization. Moreover, we formulate three constraints
on part concepts to ensure diverse part concepts without collapsing. A part relation
encoding module (PRE) is also developed to leverage part-wise spatial relations for
better recognition. We construct three 3D NCD tasks for evaluation and extensive
experiments show that our method achieves significantly superior results than
SOTA baselines (+11.7%, +14.1%, and +16.3% improvements on average for
three tasks, respectively). Code and data will be released.

1

Introduction

3D recognition is fundamental for 3D tasks and plays a critical role in many applications such as
robotics and autonomous vehicles. Recently, deep learning-based 3D recognition [24, 25, 45] has
achieved remarkable progress in this task. Unfortunately, most methods are limited to annotated
classes in the training set (i.e., known classes), and cannot recognize novel classes like human beings,
which limits the robustness of 3D recognition in the real world. Therefore, it is crucial and valuable
to investigate the 3D novel class discovery task (NCD) so that 3D recognition can discover novel
classes by leveraging the knowledge of known classes.
Though 2D NCD has been extensively investigated, a straightforward extension of 2D NCD methods [7, 19] to 3D NCD usually performs poorly due to the feature bias problem [32], i.e., the learned
features are heavily biased towards known classes and have difficulty in generalizing to novel classes.
The main factors lie in two aspects. First, learned feature representations are usually dominated by
known classes while being oblivious to novel classes. Second, 3D recognition usually focuses on
shortcut features [8, 12] only capture a special global structure or local regions specific to known
classes [21] as shown in Fig. 1.
In this work, we tackle the above problems based on the observation that humans can subconsciously
decompose shapes into familiar part concepts, which along with their spatial relations provide
effective cues for recognizing different novel shapes [13, 18]. Therefore part concepts can bridge
the gaps between known shapes and those novel ones with a shared part space, thus alleviating the
∗

Haiyong is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

