MIMEx:
Intrinsic Rewards from Masked Input Modeling

Toru Lin
University of California, Berkeley
toru@berkeley.edu

Allan Jabri
University of California, Berkeley
ajabri@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Exploring in environments with high-dimensional observations is hard. One promising approach for exploration is to use intrinsic rewards, which often boils down to
estimating “novelty” of states, transitions, or trajectories with deep networks. Prior
works have shown that conditional prediction objectives such as masked autoencoding can be seen as stochastic estimation of pseudo-likelihood. We show how this
perspective naturally leads to a unified view on existing intrinsic reward approaches:
they are special cases of conditional prediction, where the estimation of novelty can
be seen as pseudo-likelihood estimation with different mask distributions. From
this view, we propose a general framework for deriving intrinsic rewards – Masked
Input Modeling for Exploration (MIMEx) – where the mask distribution can be
flexibly tuned to control the difficulty of the underlying conditional prediction task.
We demonstrate that MIMEx can achieve superior results when compared against
competitive baselines on a suite of challenging sparse-reward visuomotor tasks.

1

Introduction

In supervised learning (SL), it is often assumed that data is given, i.e. the data collection process
has been handled by humans. In reinforcement learning (RL), however, agents need to collect
their own data and update their policy based on the collected data. The problem of how data is
collected is known as the exploration problem. Agents face the exploration-exploitation trade-off to
balance between maximizing its cumulative rewards (exploitation) and improving its knowledge of
the environment by collecting new data (exploration). Exploration is therefore of central importance
in the study of RL; it is the only way through which an agent can learn decision-making from scratch.
Simple exploration heuristics like using ϵ-greedy policy [22, 23] and adding Gaussian action noise
[21, 30, 31] are often too inefficient to solve challenging tasks with sparse reward. Meanwhile,
designing dense reward functions is intractable to scale to many tasks across environments, due to the
amount of domain knowledge and engineering effort needed. Training agents with intrinsic rewards,
i.e. providing exploration bonuses that agents jointly optimize with extrinsic rewards, is a promising
way to inject bias into exploration. This exploration bonus is often derived from a notion of “novelty”,
such that agent receives higher bonus in more “novel” states. In classical count-based methods [35],
for example, the exploration bonus is derived from state visitation counts directly. To scale to high
dimensional states, recent works often derive the exploration bonus from either (1) pseudo-counts
[4, 24, 39] (i.e. approximate state visitation counts) or (2) prediction error from a proxy model. In the
latter case, the proxy model is responsible for representing the relative novelty of states, for example
with respect to learned forward models [25, 34] or randomly initialized networks [8].
While count-based (including pseudo-counts) methods and prediction-error-based methods are typically viewed as distinct approaches for intrinsic reward [1, 2, 20], these methods often boil down
to similar formulations in practice. That is, they rely on the same underlying idea of estimating
Code available at https://github.com/ToruOwO/mimex.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

