Train Once and Explain Everywhere: Pre-training
Interpretable Graph Neural Networks

Jun Yin∗
Central South University
yinjun2000@csu.edu.cn

Chaozhuo Li∗
Microsoft Research Asia
cli@microsoft.com

Jianxun Lian
Microsoft Research Asia
jianxun.lian@microsoft.com

Hao Yan
Central South University
CSUyh1999@csu.edu.cn

Senzhang Wang†
Central South University
szwang@csu.edu.cn

Abstract
Intrinsic interpretable graph neural networks aim to provide transparent predictions
by identifying the influential fraction of the input graph that guides the model
prediction, i.e., the explanatory subgraph. However, current interpretable GNNs
mostly are dataset-specific and hard to generalize to different graphs. A more
generalizable GNN interpretation model which can effectively distill the universal
structural patterns of different graphs is until-now unexplored. Motivated by the
great success of recent pre-training techniques, we for the first time propose the
Pre-training Interpretable Graph Neural Network (π-GNN3 ) to distill the universal
interpretability of GNNs by pre-training over synthetic graphs with ground-truth explanations. Specifically, we introduce a structural pattern learning module to extract
diverse universal structure patterns and integrate them together to comprehensively
represent the graphs of different types. Next, a hypergraph refining module is
proposed to identify the explanatory subgraph by incorporating the universal structure patterns with local edge interactions. Finally, the task-specific predictor is
cascaded with the pre-trained π-GNN model and fine-tuned over downstream tasks.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that π-GNN significantly surpasses the leading
interpretable GNN baselines with up to 9.98% interpretation improvement and
16.06% classification accuracy improvement. Meanwhile, π-GNN pre-trained
on graph classification task also achieves the top-tier interpretation performance
on node classification task, which further verifies its promising generalization
performance among different downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Although graph neural networks (GNNs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] have achieved remarkable success in various
applications [6, 7, 8, 9], their black-box nature prevents humans from understanding the inner
decision-making mechanism [10, 11]. This issue calls for the development of intrinsic interpretable
GNNs [12, 13, 14], which can reveal the mystery of "Which fraction of the input graph is the most
vital and leads to the model prediction?" Intrinsic interpretable GNNs aim to identify an influential
subgraph of the input graph, i.e., the explanation, and make final predictions under the guidance of the
explanatory subgraph [12, 13, 14]. Constructing interpretable GNNs makes it possible to investigate
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
3
Our code and datasets are available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/PI-GNN-F86C

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

