Module-wise Adaptive Distillation for Multimodality
Foundation Models
Chen Liang
Georgia Tech
cliang73@gatech.edu
Ming-Hsuan Yang
UC Merced, Google Research
minghsuan@google.com
Tuo Zhao
Georgia Tech
tourzhao@gatech.edu

Jiahui Yu
Google Research
jiahuiyu@google.com
Matthew Brown
Google Research
mtbr@google.com

Boqing Gong
Google Research
bgong@google.com

Yin Cui
NVIDIA Research
richardaecn@gmail.com

Tianyi Zhou
University of Maryland, College Park
tianyi@umd.edu

Abstract
Pre-trained multimodal foundation models have demonstrated remarkable generalizability but pose challenges for deployment due to their large sizes. One effective
approach to reducing their sizes is layerwise distillation, wherein small student
models are trained to match the hidden representations of large teacher models
at each layer. Motivated by our observation that certain architecture components,
referred to as modules, contribute more significantly to the student’s performance
than others, we propose to track the contributions of individual modules by recording the loss decrement after distillation each module and choose the module with a
greater contribution to distill more frequently. Such an approach can be naturally
formulated as a multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, where modules and loss
decrements are considered as arms and rewards, respectively. We then develop
a modified-Thompson sampling algorithm named OPTIMA to address the nonstationarity of module contributions resulting from model updating. Specifically,
we leverage the observed contributions in recent history to estimate the changing
contribution of each module and select modules based on these estimations to
maximize the cumulative contribution. We evaluate the effectiveness of OPTIMA
through distillation experiments on various multimodal understanding and image
captioning tasks, using the CoCa-Large model [48] as the teacher model.

1

Introduction

Large pre-trained multimodality foundation models have demonstrated remarkable generalizability on
a wide range of tasks, e.g., image classification, image-text retrieval, and visual question answering
[27, 18, 49, 46, 48]. These models often contain several architectural components (referred to as
modules), each acquiring knowledge of one or more modalities through pre-training. For example,
[27] introduce a dual-encoder architecture composed of an image encoder and a text encoder, which
are jointly pre-trained to align an image with the corresponding text. This process equips each encoder
with both the unimodal representation power and the crossmodal alignment capability. [48] further
add a multimodal decoder on top of the dual-encoder architecture. The decoder learns a joint visual
and textual representation and obtains the multimodal understanding knowledge. However, the sizes
of these models have reached billions of parameters, and the number of modules will further scale to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

