PAC-Bayes Generalization Certificates for Learned
Inductive Conformal Prediction
Apoorva Sharma
NVIDIA Research
apoorvas@nvidia.com
Heng Yang
Harvard University
& NVIDIA Research
hengy@nvidia.com

Sushant Veer
NVIDIA Research
sveer@nvidia.com
Marco Pavone
Stanford University
& NVIDIA Research
mpavone@nvidia.com

Asher Hancock
Princeton University
ah4775@princeton.edu
Anirudha Majumdar
Princeton University
ani.majumdar@princeton.edu

Abstract
Inductive Conformal Prediction (ICP) provides a practical and effective approach
for equipping deep learning models with uncertainty estimates in the form of
set-valued predictions which are guaranteed to contain the ground truth with high
probability. Despite the appeal of this coverage guarantee, these sets may not be
efficient: the size and contents of the prediction sets are not directly controlled, and
instead depend on the underlying model and choice of score function. To remedy
this, recent work has proposed learning model and score function parameters using
data to directly optimize the efficiency of the ICP prediction sets. While appealing,
the generalization theory for such an approach is lacking: direct optimization of
empirical efficiency may yield prediction sets that are either no longer efficient on
test data, or no longer obtain the required coverage on test data. In this work, we
use PAC-Bayes theory to obtain generalization bounds on both the coverage and
the efficiency of set-valued predictors which can be directly optimized to maximize
efficiency while satisfying a desired test coverage. In contrast to prior work, our
framework allows us to utilize the entire calibration dataset to learn the parameters
of the model and score function, instead of requiring a separate hold-out set for
obtaining test-time coverage guarantees. We leverage these theoretical results to
provide a practical algorithm for using calibration data to simultaneously finetune the parameters of a model and score function while guaranteeing test-time
coverage and efficiency of the resulting prediction sets. We evaluate the approach
on regression and classification tasks, and outperform baselines calibrated using a
Hoeffding bound-based PAC guarantee on ICP, especially in the low-data regime.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models have rapidly proliferated across numerous applications, including
safety-critical ones such as autonomous vehicles [Schwarting et al., 2018, Waymo, 2021], medical
diagnosis [Ahsan et al., 2022], and drug discovery [Vamathevan et al., 2019]. Due to the severity of
outcomes in these applications, decision making cannot solely hinge on “point” predictions from the
ML model, but must also encapsulate a measure of the uncertainty in the predictions. As a result,
accurate uncertainty estimation is a cornerstone of robust and trustworthy ML systems; however,
overly-optimistic or overly-conservative estimates limit their usefulness. In this paper, we will present
a method that builds upon inductive conformal prediction (ICP) [Vovk et al., 2005] and probably
approximately correct (PAC) Bayes theory [McAllester, 1998] to furnish uncertainty estimates that
provably control the uncertainty estimate’s conservatism while achieving desired correctness rates.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

