TARTARUS: A Benchmarking Platform for Realistic And
Practical Inverse Molecular Design

AkshatKumar Nigam1 , Robert Pollice2,3,∗ , Gary Tom3,4 , Kjell Jorner3 ,
John Willes4 , Luca Thiede3 , Anshul Kundaje1 , and Alán Aspuru-Guzik3,4,5,6
1
Stanford University. 2 University of Groningen. 3 University of Toronto.
4
Vector Institute. 5 Lebovic Fellow. 6 Canadian Institue for Advanced Research.
∗
r.pollice@rug.nl

Abstract
The efficient exploration of chemical space to design molecules with intended
properties enables the accelerated discovery of drugs, materials, and catalysts, and
is one of the most important outstanding challenges in chemistry. Encouraged by
the recent surge in computer power and artificial intelligence development, many
algorithms have been developed to tackle this problem. However, despite the emergence of many new approaches in recent years, comparatively little progress has
been made in developing realistic benchmarks that reflect the complexity of molecular design for real-world applications. In this work, we develop a set of practical
benchmark tasks relying on physical simulation of molecular systems mimicking
real-life molecular design problems for materials, drugs, and chemical reactions.
Additionally, we demonstrate the utility and ease of use of our new benchmark
set by demonstrating how to compare the performance of several well-established
families of algorithms. Surprisingly, we find that model performance can strongly
depend on the benchmark domain. We believe that our benchmark suite will help
move the field towards more realistic molecular design benchmarks, and move the
development of inverse molecular design algorithms closer to designing molecules
that solve existing problems in both academia and industry alike.

1

Introduction

Inverse molecular design, which involves crafting molecules with specific optimal properties [1],
poses a critical optimization challenge prevalent across various scientific fields. It holds particular
significance in chemistry for designing drugs, catalysts, and materials. Each of these scenarios requires
a complex balance between multiple desired properties for a realistic inverse design. Yet, the majority
of comparisons between molecular design algorithms are primarily carried out on oversimplified
tasks, thereby providing limited insights into their potential performance when confronting intricate
design challenges commonplace in chemistry [2–4]. While simplistic and cost-effective benchmarks
serve as vital tools during the initial stages of algorithm development, facilitating rapid testing and
informed design choices, the lack of more realistic benchmarks obstructs their adoption by domain
experts in chemistry or materials science. Our work aims to bridge this gap.
In this study, we propose a modular suite of design objectives directly inspired by problems regarding
new materials, drugs, and chemical reactions. These problems rely on well-established simulation
methods in computational chemistry, such as force fields, semi-empirical quantum chemistry, and
density functional approximations. We test multiple popular molecular design algorithms on these
objectives, offering an exemplary performance comparison. The design approaches selected represent some of the most important algorithm classes in the field. We also examine the impact of
representations on the performance of some algorithms. Finally, we provide detailed instructions for
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

