MVDiffusion: Enabling Holistic Multi-view Image
Generation with Correspondence-Aware Diffusion

Shitao Tang1∗

Fuyang Zhang1∗ Jiacheng Chen1
1
Simon Fraser University

2

Peng Wang2
Bytedance

Yasutaka Furukawa1

“This kitchen is a charming blend of rustic and modern, featuring a large reclaimed wood island with marble countertop, a sink
surrounded by cabinets. A stainless-steel refrigerator stands tall. To the right of the sink, built-in wooden cabinets painted in a muted.”



     

“A living room with multiple couches and a coffee table. A wooden book shelf filled with lots of books next to a door. A white refrigerator
sitting next to a wooden bench.”

...

 

  

...
 

    

 

Figure 1: MVDiffusion synthesizes consistent multi-view images. Top: generating perspective crops
which can be stitched into panorama; Bottom: generating coherent multi-view images from depths.

Abstract
This paper introduces MVDiffusion, a simple yet effective method for generating
consistent multi-view images from text prompts given pixel-to-pixel correspondences (e.g., perspective crops from a panorama or multi-view images given depth
maps and poses). Unlike prior methods that rely on iterative image warping and
inpainting, MVDiffusion simultaneously generates all images with a global awareness, effectively addressing the prevalent error accumulation issue. At its core,
MVDiffusion processes perspective images in parallel with a pre-trained text-toimage diffusion model, while integrating novel correspondence-aware attention
layers to facilitate cross-view interactions. For panorama generation, while only
trained with 10k panoramas, MVDiffusion is able to generate high-resolution
photorealistic images for arbitrary texts or extrapolate one perspective image to a
360-degree view. For multi-view depth-to-image generation, MVDiffusion demonstrates state-of-the-art performance for texturing a scene mesh. The project page is
at https://mvdiffusion.github.io/.
*Equal contribution. Contact the authors at shitaot@sfu.ca.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

