BERT Lost Patience
Won’t Be Robust to Adversarial Slowdown
Zachary Coalson, Gabriel Ritter, Rakesh Bobba, and Sanghyun Hong
Oregon State University
{coalsonz, ritterg, bobbar, hongsa}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we systematically evaluate the robustness of multi-exit language models against adversarial slowdown. To audit their robustness, we design a slowdown
attack that generates natural adversarial text bypassing early-exit points. We use
the resulting WAFFLE attack as a vehicle to conduct a comprehensive evaluation of
three multi-exit mechanisms with the GLUE benchmark against adversarial slowdown. We then show our attack significantly reduces the computational savings
provided by the three methods in both white-box and black-box settings. The more
complex a mechanism is, the more vulnerable it is to adversarial slowdown. We
also perform a linguistic analysis of the perturbed text inputs, identifying common
perturbation patterns that our attack generates, and comparing them with standard
adversarial text attacks. Moreover, we show that adversarial training is ineffective
in defeating our slowdown attack, but input sanitization with a conversational
model, e.g., ChatGPT, can remove perturbations effectively. This result suggests
that future work is needed for developing efficient yet robust multi-exit models.
Our code is available at: https://github.com/ztcoalson/WAFFLE

1

Introduction

A key factor behind the recent advances in natural language processing is the scale of language
models pre-trained on a large corpus of data. Compared to BERT [5] with 110 million parameters that
achieves the GLUE benchmark score [36] of 81% from three years ago, T5 [29] improves the score
to 90% with 100× more parameters. However, pre-trained language models with this scale typically
require large memory and high computational costs to run inferences, making them challenging in
scenarios where latency and computations are limited.
To address this issue, input-adaptive multi-exit mechanisms [32, 41, 45, 40, 42, 48, 21, 44] have been
proposed. By attaching internal classifiers (or early exits) to each intermediate layer of a pre-trained
language model, the resulting multi-exit language model utilizes these exits to stop its forward pass
preemptively, when the model is confident about its prediction at any exit point. This prevents models
from spending excessive computation for “easy” inputs, where shallow models are sufficient for
correct predictions, and therefore reduces the post-training workloads while preserving accuracy.
In this work, we study the robustness of multi-exit language models to adversarial slowdown. Recent
work [10] showed that, against multi-exit models developed for computer vision tasks, an adversary
can craft human-imperceptible input perturbations to offset their computational savings. However, it
has not yet been shown that the input-adaptive methods proposed in language domains are susceptible
to such input perturbations. It is also unknown why these perturbations cause slowdown and how
similar they are to those generated by standard adversarial attacks. Moreover, it is unclear if existing
defenses, e.g., adversarial training [43], proposed in the community can mitigate slowdown attacks.
Our contributions. To bridge this gap, we first develop WAFFLE, a slowdown attack that generates
natural adversarial text that bypasses early-exits. We illustrate how our attack works in Figure 1.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

