Predicting a Protein’s Stability
under a Million Mutations
Jeffrey Ouyang-Zhang
UT Austin
jozhang@utexas.edu

Daniel J. Diaz
UT Austin
danny.diaz@utexas.edu

Adam R. Klivans
UT Austin
klivans@cs.utexas.edu

Philipp Krähenbühl
UT Austin
philkr@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Stabilizing proteins is a foundational step in protein engineering. However, the
evolutionary pressure of all extant proteins makes identifying the scarce number of
mutations that will improve thermodynamic stability challenging. Deep learning
has recently emerged as a powerful tool for identifying promising mutations. Existing approaches, however, are computationally expensive, as the number of model
inferences scales with the number of mutations queried. Our main contribution is
a simple, parallel decoding algorithm. Our Mutate Everything is capable of predicting the effect of all single and double mutations in one forward pass. It is even
versatile enough to predict higher-order mutations with minimal computational
overhead. We build our Mutate Everything on top of ESM2 and AlphaFold, neither
of which were trained to predict thermodynamic stability. We trained on the MegaScale cDNA proteolysis dataset and achieved state-of-the-art performance on single
and higher-order mutations on S669, ProTherm, and ProteinGym datasets. Our
code is available at https://github.com/jozhang97/MutateEverything.

1

Introduction

Protein engineering is the discipline of mutating a natural protein sequence to improve properties for
industrial [5, 78] and pharmaceutical applications [2, 25, 41]. However, evolution simultaneously
optimizes several properties of a protein within its native environment, resulting in proteins with
marginal thermodynamic stability (∼ 5-15 kcal/mol) [39] which become non-functional in an industrial setting. Therefore, repurposing a natural protein for biotechnological applications usually
begins with identifying non-deleterious mutations that stabilize the structure. With a stabilized
structure, downstream engineering goals, which often require exploring destabilizing mutations,
become tractable. Historically, this process has been bottlenecked by the requirements of extensive
laboratory characterization of rational designs [33, 79] or directed evolution libraries [4, 12, 21, 22].
The recent explosion in biological data [9, 29, 72, 73] has enabled deep learning frameworks to
accelerate the identification of stabilizing mutations. A successfully stabilized protein often requires
several mutations. However, current frameworks do not take into account epistatic interactions
between multiple mutations. Thus, to significantly accelerate protein engineering, it is critical to
efficiently navigate the epistatic landscape of higher-order mutations [10, 69]. However, due to its
combinatorial nature, thorough exploration quickly becomes computationally prohibitive.
In this paper, we introduce Mutate Everything to directly predict changes in thermodynamic stability
(∆∆G) for all single and higher-order mutations jointly. Mutate Everything is a parallel decoding
algorithm that works in conjunction with a sequence model for predicting thermodynamic stability.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

