k-Means Clustering with Distance-Based Privacy

Alessandro Epasto
Google Research
aepasto@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Shyam Narayanan
MIT
shyamsn@mit.edu

Peilin Zhong
Google Research
peilinz@google.com

Abstract
In this paper, we initiate the study of Euclidean clustering with Distance-based
privacy. Distance-based privacy is motivated by the fact that it is often only
needed to protect the privacy of exact, rather than approximate, locations. We
provide constant-approximate algorithms for k-means and k-median clustering,
with additive error depending only on the attacker’s precision bound ρ, rather
than the radius Λ of the space. In addition, we empirically demonstrate that
our algorithm performs significantly better than previous differentially private
clustering algorithms, as well as naive distance-based private clustering baselines.

1

Introduction

Two of the most fundamental and widely studied problems in unsupervised machine learning are
the k-means and k-median clustering problems. Solving these clustering problems can allow us to
group together data efficiently, and hence extract valuable and concise information from massive
datasets. The goal of the k-means (resp., k-median) clusteringPproblem is: given a dataset
P X of points,
construct a set C of k centers to minimize the clustering cost x∈X d(x, C)2 (resp., x∈X d(x, C)),
where d(x, C) represents the minimum distance between the data point x and the closest center in C.
In general, machine learning and data mining algorithms are prone to leaking sensitive information
about individuals who contribute data points. In certain scenarios, this can lead to severe consequences,
including losses of billions of dollars [60] or even the loss of human lives [10]. Thus, providing
accurate algorithms that protect data privacy has become crucial in algorithm design. Over the past
decade, the notion of differential privacy (DP) [31] has emerged as the gold standard for privacypreserving algorithms, both in theory and in practice, and has been implemented by several major
companies and the US Census [34, 68, 30, 1]. Informally, DP requires the output distribution of the
algorithm to remain almost identical whenever a single data point is altered. (See Section 2 for a
formal definition.) Hence, even the knowledge of all but one data point, along with the output of the
algorithm, still cannot reveal significant information about the final data point.
The importance of k-means and k-median clustering, as well as preserving data privacy, has led to a
large interest in designing differentially private clustering algorithms in Euclidean space [14, 62, 36,
47, 59, 73, 64, 65, 71, 38, 9, 63, 48, 70, 69, 44, 49, 17, 61, 19, 13, 24, 33, 25, 56]. Here, the goal is
to design a differentially private set of k centers, such that the clustering cost with respect to these
centers is only a small factor larger than the optimal (non-private) clustering cost. Importantly, the
work of [70, 44, 25] led to efficient polynomial-time and differentially private algorithms that achieve
constant multiplicative approximation ratios.
While we can obtain DP algorithms with low multiplicative error, all such algorithms also require an
additional additive error. If Λ is the radius of a ball that is promised to contain all data points, even the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

