FedGame: A Game-Theoretic Defense against
Backdoor Attacks in Federated Learning

Jinyuan Jia ∗
The Pennsylvania State University
jinyuan@psu.edu
Dinuka Sahabandu
University of Washington
sdinuka@uw.edu
Bhaskar Ramasubramanian
Western Washington University
ramasub@wwu.edu

Zhuowen Yuan ∗
UIUC
zhuowen3@illinois.edu

Luyao Niu
University of Washington
luyaoniu@uw.edu

Arezoo Rajabi
University of Washington
rajabia@uw.edu

Bo Li
UIUC
lbo@illinois.edu

Radha Poovendran
University of Washington
rp3@uw.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) provides a distributed training paradigm where multiple
clients can jointly train a global model without sharing their local data. However,
recent studies have shown that FL offers an additional surface for backdoor attacks.
For instance, an attacker can compromise a subset of clients and thus corrupt the
global model to misclassify an input with a backdoor trigger as the adversarial
target. Existing defenses for FL against backdoor attacks usually detect and exclude
the corrupted information from the compromised clients based on a static attacker
model. However, such defenses are inadequate against dynamic attackers who
strategically adapt their attack strategies. To bridge this gap, we model the strategic
interactions between the defender and dynamic attackers as a minimax game. Based
on the analysis of the game, we design an interactive defense mechanism FedGame.
We prove that under mild assumptions, the global model trained with FedGame
under backdoor attacks is close to that trained without attacks. Empirically, we
compare FedGame with multiple state-of-the-art baselines on several benchmark
datasets under various attacks. We show that FedGame can effectively defend
against strategic attackers and achieves significantly higher robustness than baselines. Our code is available at: https://github.com/AI-secure/FedGame.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [21, 28] aims to train a global model over training data that are distributed
across multiple clients (e.g., mobile phones, IoT devices) in an iterative manner. In each communication round, a cloud server shares its global model with selected clients. Then, each selected client
uses the global model to initialize its local model, utilizes its local training dataset to train the local
model, and sends the local model update to the server. Finally, the server uses an aggregation rule to
integrate local model updates from clients to update its global model.
Due to the distributed nature of FL, many studies [3, 4, 5, 21, 44] have shown that FL is vulnerable to
backdoor attacks [11, 18, 26, 27, 30, 33, 37, 40, 41, 55, 59]. For instance, an attacker can compromise
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

