Continuous Parametric Optical Flow

Jianqin Luo∗

Zhexiong Wan∗

Yuxin Mao

Bo Li

Yuchao Dai†

Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Information Acquisition and Processing

Abstract
In this paper, we present continuous parametric optical flow, a parametric representation of dense and continuous motion over arbitrary time interval. In contrast
to existing discrete-time representations (i.e.flow in between consecutive frames),
this new representation transforms the frame-to-frame pixel correspondences to
dense continuous flow. In particular, we present a temporal-parametric model that
employs B-splines to fit point trajectories using a limited number of frames. To
further improve the stability and robustness of the trajectories, we also add an
encoder with a neural ordinary differential equation (NODE) to represent features
associated with specific times. We also contribute a synthetic dataset and introduce
two evaluation perspectives to measure the accuracy and robustness of continuous
flow estimation. Benefiting from the combination of explicit parametric modeling
and implicit feature optimization, our model focuses on motion continuity and
outperforms the flow-based and point-tracking approaches for fitting long-term and
variable sequences.

1

Introduction

Motion estimation, which characterizes the movement of targets over time, is crucial for video
understanding tasks like keypoint tracking [1] or video interpolation [2]. It also provides accurate
priors for 3D tasks such as non-rigid structure-from-motion [3, 4] and simultaneous localization and
mapping [5]. Fine-grained motion understanding is necessary to achieve pixel-level correspondence,
which is usually studied as an optical flow estimation problem. Some traditional methods [6, 7]
based on variational optimization or recent deep methods focusing on the Tracking-Any-Point (TAP)
task [8, 9] both attempt to estimate long-range flow for tracking points across multi-frames.
While these approaches have made significant progress in modeling correspondences, there still exist
two obstacles to explaining and predicting practical motion, as shown in Fig. 1. First, the point
trajectories generated by these approaches only reflect the possible locations at certain moments
instead of real motion trends because the frame-to-frame correspondence is temporally discrete
and lacks enough inter-frame information to describe continuous point motion. Second, optical
flow-based methods could achieve dense but short-term point mapping while recent point trackers
tend to strengthen long-term tracking for sparse points. Neither can efficiently realize dense and
long-term tracking simultaneously.
In this paper, we aim to estimate the dense and continuous pixel correspondence with the continuous
flow that provides the moving trajectory from reference time to arbitrary target times within the whole
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†
‡

Corresponding author (daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn).
Project page: https://npucvr.github.io/CPFlow .

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

