A-N E SI: A Scalable Approximate Method
for Probabilistic Neurosymbolic Inference

Emile van Krieken
University of Edinburgh
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Emile.van.Krieken@ed.ac.uk
Jakub M. Tomczak
Eindhoven University of Technology

Thiviyan Thanapalasingam
University of Amsterdam

Frank van Harmelen, Annette ten Teije
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

Abstract
We study the problem of combining neural networks with symbolic reasoning.
Recently introduced frameworks for Probabilistic Neurosymbolic Learning (PNL),
such as DeepProbLog, perform exponential-time exact inference, limiting the
scalability of PNL solutions. We introduce Approximate Neurosymbolic Inference
(A-N E SI): a new framework for PNL that uses neural networks for scalable
approximate inference. A-N E SI 1) performs approximate inference in polynomial
time without changing the semantics of probabilistic logics; 2) is trained using data
generated by the background knowledge; 3) can generate symbolic explanations
of predictions; and 4) can guarantee the satisfaction of logical constraints at test
time, which is vital in safety-critical applications. Our experiments show that
A-N E SI is the first end-to-end method to solve three neurosymbolic tasks with
exponential combinatorial scaling. Finally, our experiments show that A-N E SI
achieves explainability and safety without a penalty in performance.

1

Introduction

Recent work in neurosymbolic learning combines neural perception with symbolic reasoning [52, 38],
using symbolic knowledge to constrain the neural network [19], to learn perception from weak
supervision signals [36], and to improve data efficiency [5, 57]. Many neurosymbolic methods use
a differentiable logic such as fuzzy logics [5, 17] or probabilistic logics [35, 57, 16]. We call the
latter Probabilistic Neurosymbolic Learning (PNL) methods. PNL methods add probabilities over
discrete truth values to maintain all logical equivalences from classical logic, unlike fuzzy logics
[54]. However, performing inference requires solving the weighted model counting (WMC) problem,
which is computationally exponential [13], significantly limiting the kind of tasks that PNL can solve.
We study how to scale PNL to exponentially complex tasks using deep generative modelling [51].
Our method called Approximate Neurosymbolic Inference (A-N E SI), introduces two neural networks
that perform approximate inference over the WMC problem. The prediction model predicts the output
of the system, while the explanation model computes which worlds (i.e. which truth assignment
to a set of logical symbols) best explain a prediction. We use a novel training algorithm to fit both
models with data generated using background knowledge: A-N E SI samples symbol probabilities
from a prior and uses the symbolic background knowledge to compute likely outputs given these
probabilities. We train both models on these samples. See Figure 1 for an overview.
A-N E SI combines all benefits of neurosymbolic learning with scalability. Our experiments on the
Multi-digit MNISTAdd problem [35] show that, unlike other approaches, A-N E SI scales almost
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

