Non-Rigid Shape Registration via
Deep Functional Maps Prior

Puhua Jiang1,2#
Mingze Sun1#
Ruqi Huang1∗
1. Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, China 2. Peng Cheng Lab, China

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a learning-based framework for non-rigid shape registration without correspondence supervision. Traditional shape registration techniques
typically rely on correspondences induced by extrinsic proximity, therefore can
fail in the presence of large intrinsic deformations. Spectral mapping methods
overcome this challenge by embedding shapes into, geometric or learned, highdimensional spaces, where shapes are easier to align. However, due to the dependency on abstract, non-linear embedding schemes, the latter can be vulnerable with
respect to perturbed or alien input. In light of this, our framework takes the best
of both worlds. Namely, we deform source mesh towards the target point cloud,
guided by correspondences induced by high-dimensional embeddings learned from
deep functional maps (DFM). In particular, the correspondences are dynamically
updated according to the intermediate registrations and filtered by consistency prior,
which prominently robustify the overall pipeline. Moreover, in order to alleviate the
requirement of extrinsically aligned input, we train an orientation regressor on a set
of aligned synthetic shapes independent of the training shapes for DFM. Empirical
results show that, with as few as dozens of training shapes of limited variability, our
pipeline achieves state-of-the-art results on several benchmarks of non-rigid point
cloud matching, but also delivers high-quality correspondences between unseen
challenging shape pairs that undergo both significant extrinsic and intrinsic deformations, in which case neither traditional registration methods nor intrinsic methods
work. The code is available at https://github.com/rqhuang88/DFR.

1

Introduction

Estimating correspondences between deformable shapes is a fundamental task in computer vision
and graphics, with a significant impact on an array of applications including robotic vision [50],
animation [40], 3D reconstruction [58], to name a few. In this paper, we tackle the challenging task
of estimating correspondences between unstructured point clouds sampled from surfaces undergoing
significant non-rigid deformations.
In fact, this task has attracted increasing interest [59; 26; 35; 24; 8] in shape matching community.
These methods all follow a data-driven approach to learn embedding schemes, which project point
clouds into certain high-dimensional spaces. By lifting to high-dimensional spaces, the non-rigid
deformations are better characterized than in the ambient space, R3 . The optimal transformations
and therefore the correspondences are then estimated in the embedded spaces. Despite the great
progresses, such approaches suffer from the following limitations: 1) Their performance on unseen
shapes is largely unwarranted; 2) The learned high-dimensional embeddings lack intuitive geometric
meaning, and the induced correspondences are difficult to evaluate and analyze without ground-truth
labels.
∗

# indicates equal contribution. Corresponding author: ruqihuang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

