Latent Diffusion for Language Generation

Justin Lovelace∗ Varsha Kishore Chao Wan Eliot Shekhtman
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY

Kilian Q. Weinberger

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved great success in modeling continuous data modalities such as images, audio, and video, but have seen limited use in discrete domains
such as language. Recent attempts to adapt diffusion to language have presented
diffusion as an alternative to existing pretrained language models. We view diffusion and existing language models as complementary. We demonstrate that
encoder-decoder language models can be utilized to efficiently learn high-quality
language autoencoders. We then demonstrate that continuous diffusion models
can be learned in the latent space of the language autoencoder, enabling us to
sample continuous latent representations that can be decoded into natural language
with the pretrained decoder. We validate the effectiveness of our approach for
unconditional, class-conditional, and sequence-to-sequence language generation.
We demonstrate across multiple diverse data sets that our latent language diffusion models are significantly more effective than previous diffusion language
models. Our code is available at https://github.com/justinlovelace/
latent-diffusion-for-language.

1

Introduction

Although originally introduced by Sohl-Dickstein et al. [61] in 2015, diffusion models did not see
widespread use until Ho et al. [22] demonstrated their viability for high-quality image generation in
2020. Since then, research has driven rapid improvements and they have recently surpassed generative
adversarial networks on image generation benchmarks [12] and autoregressive models on density
estimation benchmarks [30], outclassing generative modeling paradigms that have dominated those
areas for the better part of a decade. Diffusion models are now, arguably, the most widely used class
of generative models for continuous data modalities such as images, audio, and video [54, 32, 23].
The widespread success of diffusion models across a variety of domains and applications makes them
appealing for language generation. However, they have seen less use in discrete domains, where the
gradual transition of discrete states to Gaussian noise (and vice versa) is not as natural as in continuous
domains. Prior work proposes to learn continuous diffusion models in the space of learnable word
embeddings and decodes the continuous generations with a rounding step [36]. However, combining
representation learning with the diffusion objective requires careful regularization to avoid collapse.
One breakthrough in image generation was the introduction of latent diffusion [51], where diffusion
models are trained to produce samples from the latent distribution of a pretrained autoencoder. This
offloads the task of generating high-frequency details to the autoencoder and enables the diffusion
process to focus on the high-level semantics of images. In this paper, we explore the viability of
latent diffusion for text generation. We claim that this approach is particularly well-suited for discrete
modalities because it offloads the challenge of modeling a discrete distribution to the autoencoder
and simplifies the diffusion process by restricting it to the continuous, latent feature space.
We introduce Latent Diffusion for Language Generation (LD4LG), a method that leverages the latent
space of a pretrained encoder-decoder network (e.g. BART [35], T5 [50]) to learn a high-quality
∗

Correspondence to <jl3353@cornell.edu>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

