Mechanic: A Learning Rate Tuner

Ashok Cutkosky
Boston University
Boston, MA
ashok@cutkosky.com

Aaron Defazio
Meta, FAIR
New York, NY
adefazio@meta.com

Harsh Mehta
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
harshm@google.com

Abstract
We introduce a technique for tuning the learning rate scale factor of any base optimization algorithm and schedule automatically, which we call MECHANIC. Our
method provides a practical realization of recent theoretical reductions for accomplishing a similar goal in online convex optimization. We rigorously evaluate
MECHANIC on a range of large scale deep learning tasks with varying batch sizes,
schedules, and base optimization algorithms. These experiments demonstrate that
depending on the problem, MECHANIC either comes very close to, matches or
even improves upon manual tuning of learning rates.

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning is driven by first-order stochastic optimization algorithms. These are algorithms that are designed to solve the classical stochastic optimization problem:
min F (x) = min E[f (x, z)]
z

d

where z is a minibatch of examples, x ∈ R is the model parameters, and f is the loss incurred by
using weights x on the minibatch z. A first-order algorithm follows the protocol:
1. Output a tth iterate xt .
2. Sample a random minibatch zt .
3. Compute gt = ∇f (xt , zt ) (the gradient is taken with respect to xt only).
4. Possibly update some internal algorithm state based upon gt in preparation for computing
the next iterate xt+1 .
The prototypical such optimization algorithm is stochastic gradient descent (SGD), which exemplifies the attractive features of this approach: it is computationally cheap (running in O(d) time per
update), and with proper tuning obtains minimax optimal convergence guarantees [1, 2]. Modern
practice makes use of a wide range of variants of SGD, such SGD with momentum, AdaGrad [3],
Adam [4], AdamW [5] or Lion [6]. Interest in such improvements to SGD is driven by the increasing computational demands of training large neural networks: better optimization means cheaper
training, which translates to significant savings in terms of time, cost, and environmental impact.
Most modern algorithms for training neural networks are equipped with a scalar “scale factor” or
“learning rate” hyperparameter s ∈ R. Roughly speaking, these algorithms produce iterates of the
form xt+1 = xt + s · ut where ut is some update vector produced as a function of the observed
gradients g1 , . . . , gt (we will use bold font for vectors in Rd like u and normal font for all other
quantities like s). As an example, the classical SGD algorithm sets ut = −ηt gt for some sequence
of scalars {ηt } typically called the schedule. The formula for the SGD update is:
xt+1 = x1 − s ·

t
X

ηi gi .

i=1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

(1)

