DiffAttack: Evasion Attacks Against Diffusion-Based
Adversarial Purification
Mintong Kang
UIUC
mintong2@illinois.edu

Dawn Song
UC Berkeley
dawnsong@berkeley.edu

Bo Li
UIUC
lbo@illinois.edu

Abstract
Diffusion-based purification defenses leverage diffusion models to remove crafted
perturbations of adversarial examples and achieve state-of-the-art robustness. Recent studies show that even advanced attacks cannot break such defenses effectively,
since the purification process induces an extremely deep computational graph which
poses the potential problem of vanishing/exploding gradient, high memory cost, and
unbounded randomness. In this paper, we propose an attack technique DiffAttack to
perform effective and efficient attacks against diffusion-based purification defenses,
including both DDPM and score-based approaches. In particular, we propose a
deviated-reconstruction loss at intermediate diffusion steps to induce inaccurate
density gradient estimation to tackle the problem of vanishing/exploding gradients.
We also provide a segment-wise forwarding-backwarding algorithm, which leads
to memory-efficient gradient backpropagation. We validate the attack effectiveness
of DiffAttack compared with existing adaptive attacks on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet.
We show that DiffAttack decreases the robust accuracy of models compared with
SOTA attacks by over 20% on CIFAR-10 under ℓ∞ attack (ϵ = 8/255), and over
10% on ImageNet under ℓ∞ attack (ϵ = 4/255). We conduct a series of ablations
studies, and we find 1) DiffAttack with the deviated-reconstruction loss added
over uniformly sampled time steps is more effective than that added over only
initial/final steps, and 2) diffusion-based purification with a moderate diffusion
length is more robust under DiffAttack.

1

Introduction

Since deep neural networks (DNNs) are found vulnerable to adversarial perturbations [52, 20],
improving the robustness of neural networks against such crafted perturbations has become important,
especially in safety-critical applications [18, 5, 54]. In recent years, many defenses have been
proposed, but they are attacked again by more advanced adaptive attacks [7, 30, 11, 12]. One recent
line of defense (diffusion-based purification) leverages diffusion models to purify the input images
and achieves the state-of-the-art robustness. Based on the type of diffusion models the defense
utilizes, diffusion-based purification can be categorized into score-based purification [34] which uses
the score-based diffusion model [49] and DDPM-based purification [4, 62, 57, 51, 55, 56] which uses
the denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) [25]. Recent studies show that even the most
advanced attacks [12, 34] cannot break these defenses due to the challenges of vanishing/exploding
gradient, high memory cost, and large randomness. In this paper, we aim to explore the vulnerabilities
of such diffusion-based purification defenses, and design a more effective and efficient adaptive attack
against diffusion-based purification, which will help to better understand the properties of diffusion
process and motivate future defenses.
In particular, the diffusion-based purification defenses utilize diffusion models to first diffuse the
adversarial examples with Gaussian noises and then perform sampling to remove the noises. In this
way, the hope is that the crafted adversarial perturbations can also be removed since the training
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

