Disentangled Counterfactual Learning for Physical
Audiovisual Commonsense Reasoning

Changsheng Lv1,2∗ , Shuai Zhang1,2∗ , Yapeng Tian3 , Mengshi Qi1,2B† , and Huadong Ma1,2
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Telecommunications Software and Multimedia
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Dallas
{lvchangsheng, zshuai, qms, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn, yapeng.tian@utdallas.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Disentangled Counterfactual Learning (DCL) approach
for physical audiovisual commonsense reasoning. The task aims to infer objects’
physics commonsense based on both video and audio input, with the main challenge
is how to imitate the reasoning ability of humans. Most of the current methods fail
to take full advantage of different characteristics in multi-modal data, and lacking causal reasoning ability in models impedes the progress of implicit physical
knowledge inferring. To address these issues, our proposed DCL method decouples
videos into static (time-invariant) and dynamic (time-varying) factors in the latent
space by the disentangled sequential encoder, which adopts a variational autoencoder (VAE) to maximize the mutual information with a contrastive loss function.
Furthermore, we introduce a counterfactual learning module to augment the model’s
reasoning ability by modeling physical knowledge relationships among different
objects under counterfactual intervention. Our proposed method is a plug-and-play
module that can be incorporated into any baseline. In experiments, we show that
our proposed method improves baseline methods and achieves state-of-the-art
performance. Our source code is available at https://github.com/Andy20178/DCL.

1

Introduction

Humans acquire physical commonsense knowledge through integrating multi-modal information and
have the ability to reason the physical properties of previously unseen objects in the real world [1].
Whether inferring the physical properties of unseen objects (“this object is probably made of wood”)
or solving practical problems (“which object would make a bigger mess if dropped”) [2], such
reasoning abilities represent a sophisticated challenge in the realm of machine intelligence, and play
the important role in robust robot navigation [3] as well as AR/VR [4]. In this work, we utilize
audiovisual question answering as a proxy task to advance the machine’s capacity for physical
commonsense reasoning.
The major challenge in physical commonsense reasoning is how to develop methods that can extract
and reason the implicit physical knowledge from abundant multi-modal data, especially video
inputs. This requires the ability to process complex video information, identify the category and
the corresponding physical property of each object, and understand the causal relationships among
objects. These cognitive processes are similar to those that humans use to know, learn, and reason
about the physical world. Current existing methods [5, 6, 7, 8] often extract generic visual features
from videos that contain human-object interactions, resulting in a mixed feature representation that
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

