DiffUTE: Universal Text Editing Diffusion Model

Haoxing Chen1,2 , Zhuoer Xu1 , Zhangxuan Gu1∗ Jun Lan1 , Xing Zheng1 ,
Yaohui Li2 , Changhua Meng1 , Huijia Zhu1 , Weiqiang Wang1
1 Ant Group 2 Nanjing University
hx.chen@hotmail.com, {xuzhuoer.xze,guzhangxuan.gzx}@antgroup.com

Abstract
Diffusion model based language-guided image editing has achieved great success recently. However, existing state-of-the-art diffusion models struggle with
rendering correct text and text style during generation. To tackle this problem,
we propose a universal self-supervised text editing diffusion model (DiffUTE),
which aims to replace or modify words in the source image with another one while
maintaining its realistic appearance. Specifically, we build our model on a diffusion
model and carefully modify the network structure to enable the model for drawing
multilingual characters with the help of glyph and position information. Moreover,
we design a self-supervised learning framework to leverage large amounts of web
data to improve the representation ability of the model. Experimental results show
that our method achieves an impressive performance and enables controllable
editing on in-the-wild images with high fidelity. Our code will be avaliable in
https://github.com/chenhaoxing/DiffUTE.

1

Introduction

Due to the significant progress of social media platforms and artificial intelligence Xu et al. [2022a],
Gu et al. [2023], Zhang et al. [2022a], image editing technology has become a common demand.
Specifically, AI-based technology Niu et al. [2023], Chen et al. [2023] has significantly lowered
the threshold for fancy image editing, which traditionally required professional software and laborintensive manual operations. Deep neural networks can now achieve remarkable results in various
image editing tasks, such as image inpainting Feng et al. [2022], image colorization Zhang et al.
[2022b], and object replacement Kwon and Ye [2022], by learning from rich paired data. Futhermore,
recent advances in diffusion models Brack et al. [2023], Brooks et al. [2023], Saharia et al. [2022a]
enable precise control over generation quality and diversity during the diffusion process. By incorporating a text encoder, diffusion models can be adapted to generate natural images following text
instructions, making them well-suited for image editing.
Despite the impressive results, existing image editing methods still encounter numerous challenges.
As a typical task, scene text editing is widely used in practical applications such as text-image
synthesis, advertising photo editing, text-image correction and augmented reality translation. It aims
to replace text instances (i.e., the foreground) in an image without compromising the background.
However, the fine-grained and complex structures of text instances raise two major challenges: (i)
How to transfer text style and retain background texture. Specifically, text style includes factors
such as font, color, orientation, stroke size, and spatial perspective. It is difficult to precisely capture
the complete text style in the source image due to the complexity of the background. (ii) How to
maintain the consistency of the edited background especially for complex scenes, e.g., menus and
street store signs.
∗ Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

