Small batch deep reinforcement learning

Johan Obando-Ceron ∗
Mila, Université de Montréal
jobando0730@gmail.com

Marc G. Bellemare
Mila, Université de Montréal
bellemam@mila.quebec

Pablo Samuel Castro
Google DeepMind
Mila, Université de Montréal
psc@google.com

Abstract
In value-based deep reinforcement learning with replay memories, the batch size
parameter specifies how many transitions to sample for each gradient update.
Although critical to the learning process, this value is typically not adjusted when
proposing new algorithms. In this work we present a broad empirical study that
suggests reducing the batch size can result in a number of significant performance
gains; this is surprising, as the general tendency when training neural networks
is towards larger batch sizes for improved performance. We complement our
experimental findings with a set of empirical analyses towards better understanding
this phenomenon.

1

Introduction

One of the central concerns for deep reinforcement learning (RL) is how to efficiently make the most
use of the collected data for policy improvement. This is particularly important in online settings,
where RL agents learn while interacting with an environment, as interactions can be expensive. Since
the introduction of DQN [Mnih et al., 2015], one of the core components of most modern deep RL
algorithms is the use of a finite replay memory where experienced transitions are stored. During
learning, the agent samples mini-batches from this memory to update its network parameters.
Since the policy used to collect transitions is changing throughout learning, the replay memory
contains data coming from a mixture of policies (that differ from the agent’s current policy), and
results in what is known as off-policy learning. In contrast with training data for supervised learning
problems, online RL data is highly non-stationary. Still, at any point during training the replay
memory exhibits a distribution over transitions, which the agent samples from at each learning step.
The number of sampled transitions at each learning step is known as the batch size, and is meant to
produce an unbiased estimator of the underlying data distribution. Thus, in theory, larger batch sizes
should be more accurate representations of the true distribution.
Some in the supervised learning community suggest that learning with large batch sizes leads to
better optimization [Shallue et al., 2019], since smaller batches yield noisier gradient estimations.
Contrastingly, others have observed that larger batch sizes tend to converge to “sharper” optimization
landscapes, which can result in worsened generalization [Keskar et al., 2017]; smaller batches, on the
other hand, seem to result in “flatter” landscapes, resulting in better generalization.
Learning dynamics in deep RL are drastically different than those observed in supervised learning,
in large part due to the data non-stationarity mentioned above. Given that the choice of batch size
will have a direct influence on the agent’s sample efficiency and ultimate performance, developing a
better understanding of its impact is critical. Surprisingly, to the best of our knowledge there have
been no studies exploring the impact of the choice of batch size in deep RL. Most recent works have
focused on related questions, such as the number of gradient updates per environment step [Nikishin
et al., 2022, D’Oro et al., 2023, Sokar et al., 2023], but have kept the batch size fixed.
∗

Work done during an internship at Google DeepMind

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

