CL ADDER: Assessing Causal Reasoning in
Language Models

Zhijing Jin1,2,∗, Yuen Chen1,∗, Felix Leeb1,∗, Luigi Gresele1,∗,
Ojasv Kamal , Zhiheng Lyu4 , Kevin Blin2 , Fernando Gonzalez2 , Max Kleiman-Weiner5 ,
Mrinmaya Sachan2 , Bernhard Schölkopf1
1
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 2 ETH Zürich 3 IIT Kharagpur
4
University of Hong Kong 5 University of Washington
jinzhi@ethz.ch
chenyuen0103@berkeley.edu
fleeb@tue.mpg.de
luigi.gresele@tue.mpg.de
3

Abstract
The ability to perform causal reasoning is widely considered a core feature of intelligence. In this work, we investigate whether large language models (LLMs) can
coherently reason about causality. Much of the existing work in natural language
processing (NLP) focuses on evaluating commonsense causal reasoning in LLMs,
thus failing to assess whether a model can perform causal inference in accordance
with a set of well-defined formal rules. To address this, we propose a new NLP
task, causal inference in natural language, inspired by the “causal inference engine”
postulated by Judea Pearl et al. We compose a large dataset, CL ADDER, with
10K samples: based on a collection of causal graphs and queries (associational,
interventional, and counterfactual), we obtain symbolic questions and ground-truth
answers, through an oracle causal inference engine. These are then translated into
natural language. We evaluate multiple LLMs on our dataset, and we introduce
and evaluate a bespoke chain-of-thought prompting strategy, C AUSAL C OT. We
show that our task is highly challenging for LLMs, and we conduct an in-depth
analysis to gain deeper insights into the causal reasoning abilities of LLMs.1

1

Introduction
Once we really understand the logic behind causal thinking, we could emulate it
on modern computers and create an “artificial scientist”.
— Pearl and Mackenzie [2018]

Causal reasoning is believed to be one of the hallmarks of human intelligence [29, 68]. The ability to
draw causal inferences from available information is crucial for scientific understanding and rational
decision-making: for example, knowing whether smoking causes cancer might enable consumers
to make a more informed decision [17, 18]; assessing the causal effect of a vaccine is essential for
effective policy-making during a pandemic [14, 44, 72, 97]; and understanding the interplay behind
family background, education and income helps devise effective education policies [10, 11, 30, 73].
Our opening quote therefore mirrors the aspirations of many scientists in artificial intelligence
and causal inference: to construct a machine capable of performing sound causal reasoning, and
able to answer causal questions at scale and with ease. Recent advances in large language models
(LLMs) have brought about a paradigm shift in natural language processing (NLP) and artificial
intelligence [7, 15, 39, 56, 76, 103, inter alia]. These transformative developments raise the question
of whether these machines are already capable of causal reasoning: Do LLMs understand causality?
∗

Main contributors.
Our data is open-sourced at https://huggingface.co/datasets/causalNLP/cladder, and our code
can be found at https://github.com/causalNLP/cladder.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

