List and Certificate Complexities in Replicable
Learning
Peter Dixon1 , A. Pavan 2 , Jason Vander Woude3 , and N. V. Vinodchandran4
1
Independent Researcher
tooplark@gmail.com
2
Iowa State University
pavan@cs.iastate.edu
3
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
jasonvw@huskers.unl.edu
4
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
vinod@cse.unl.edu

Abstract
We investigate replicable learning algorithms. Informally a learning algorithm is
replicable if the algorithm outputs the same canonical hypothesis over multiple runs
with high probability, even when different runs observe a different set of samples
from the unknown data distribution. In general, such a strong notion of replicability
is not achievable. Thus we consider two feasible notions of replicability called
list replicability and certificate replicability. Intuitively, these notions capture the
degree of (non) replicability. The goal is to design learning algorithms with optimal
list and certificate complexities while minimizing the sample complexity. Our
contributions are the following.
– We first study the learning task of estimating the biases of d coins, up to
an additive error of ε, by observing samples. For this task, we design a
(d + 1)-list replicable algorithm. To complement this result, we establish
that the list complexity is optimal, i.e there are no learning algorithms with a
list size smaller than d + 1 for this task. We also design learning algorithms
with certificate complexity Õ(log d). The sample complexity of both these
2
algorithms is Õ( dε2 ) where ε is the approximation error parameter (for a
constant error probability).
– In the PAC model, we show that any hypothesis class that is learnable with
d-nonadaptive statistical queries can be learned via a (d + 1)-list replicable
algorithm and also via a Õ(log d)-certificate replicable algorithm. The sample
2
complexity of both these algorithms is Õ( νd2 ) where ν is the approximation
error of the statistical query. We also show that for the concept class dT HRESHOLD, the list complexity is exactly d + 1 with respect to the uniform
distribution.
To establish our upper bound results we use rounding schemes induced by geometric
partitions with certain properties. We use Sperner/KKM Lemma to establish the
lower bound results.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

