AVOIDDS: Aircraft Vision-based Intruder Detection
Dataset and Simulator
Sydney M. Katz
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Stanford University
smkatz@stanford.edu

Elysia Q. Smyers
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
elysia@cs.stanford.edu
Anthony L. Corso
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Stanford University
acorso@stanford.edu

Mykel J. Kochenderfer
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Stanford University
mykel@stanford.edu

Abstract
Designing robust machine learning systems remains an open problem, and there
is a need for benchmark problems that cover both environmental changes and
evaluation on a downstream task. In this work, we introduce AVOIDDS, a realistic object detection benchmark for the vision-based aircraft detect-and-avoid
problem. We provide a labeled dataset consisting of 72,000 photorealistic images
of intruder aircraft with various lighting conditions, weather conditions, relative
geometries, and geographic locations. We also provide an interface that evaluates
trained models on slices of this dataset to identify changes in performance with
respect to changing environmental conditions. Finally, we implement a fullyintegrated, closed-loop simulator of the vision-based detect-and-avoid problem
to evaluate trained models with respect to the downstream collision avoidance
task. This benchmark will enable further research in the design of robust machine learning systems for use in safety-critical applications. The AVOIDDS
dataset and code are publicly available at https://purl.stanford.edu/hj293cv5980
and https://github.com/sisl/VisionBasedAircraftDAA, respectively.

1

Introduction

The use of machine learning in high stakes applications will require the design of robust systems that
perform well in a wide range of environmental conditions [1]–[3]. For example, a learning-based
perception system designed for use in aviation will need to handle changing environmental conditions
such as weather and time of day. In addition, these systems are often components of an autonomy
stack, and their performance should be evaluated both in isolation and with respect to the downstream
task of the system in which they operate [4], [5]. For the aviation example, perception models
should not only be evaluated based on isolated metrics on a test set such as mean average precision
but also on downstream tasks such as collision avoidance. Benchmark systems that allow for this
comprehensive evaluation are needed to build robust machine learning systems.
A number of recent benchmark datasets such as WILDS [3] and MetaShift [6] contain distribution
shifts due to environmental changes; however, these datasets only allow for evaluation on a test
set and generally do not provide evaluation capabilities for downstream decision-making tasks.
While recent work has highlighted the importance of task-specific design and evaluation, there
is a lack of standardized and accessible benchmarks in this area [4], [5], [7], [8]. To provide a
benchmark environment that covers both environmental changes and task-specific evaluation, we
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

