Adaptive Linear Estimating Equations

Mufang Ying
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University - New Brunswick
my426@scarletmail.rutgers.edu

Koulik Khamaru
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University - New Brunswick
k1241@stat.rutgers.edu

Cun-Hui Zhang
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University - New Brunswick
czhang@stat.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Sequential data collection has emerged as a widely adopted technique for enhancing the efficiency of data gathering processes. Despite its advantages, such data
collection mechanism often introduces complexities to the statistical inference
procedure. For instance, the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimator in an adaptive linear regression model can exhibit non-normal asymptotic behavior, posing
challenges for accurate inference and interpretation. In this paper, we propose a
general method for constructing debiased estimator which remedies this issue. It
makes use of the idea of adaptive linear estimating equations, and we establish
theoretical guarantees of asymptotic normality, supplemented by discussions on
achieving near-optimal asymptotic variance. A salient feature of our estimator is
that in the context of multi-armed bandits, our estimator retains the non-asymptotic
performance of the least squares estimator while obtaining asymptotic normality
property. Consequently, this work helps connect two fruitful paradigms of adaptive
inference: a) non-asymptotic inference using concentration inequalities and b)
asymptotic inference via asymptotic normality.

1

Introduction

Adaptive data collection arises as a common practice in various scenarios, with a notable example
being the use of (contextual) bandit algorithms. Algorithms like these aid in striking a balance
between exploration and exploitation trade-offs within decision-making processes, encompassing
domains such as personalized healthcare and web-based services [35, 24, 3, 22]. For instance, in
personalized healthcare, the primary objective is to choose the most effective treatment for each
patient based on their individual characteristics, such as medical history, genetic profile, and living
environment. Bandit algorithms can be used to allocate treatments based on observed response, and
the algorithm updates its probability distribution to incorporate new information as patients receive
treatment and their response is observed. Over time, the algorithm can learn which treatments are the
most effective for different types of patients.
Although the adaptivity in data collection improves the quality of data, the sequential nature (non-iid)
of the data makes the inference procedure quite challenging [34, 26, 5, 28, 27, 10, 30, 29]. There is a
lengthy literature on the problem of parameter estimation in the adaptive design setting. In a series of
work [15, 19, 17], the authors studied the consistency of the least squares estimator for an adaptive
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

