Cones 2: Customizable Image Synthesis
with Multiple Subjects

Zhiheng Liu1∗† Yifei Zhang2∗† Yujun Shen3 Kecheng Zheng3 Kai Zhu1,4
Ruili Feng1,4 Yu Liu4 Deli Zhao4 Jingren Zhou4 Yang Cao1‡
1

USTC

2

SJTU

3

Ant Group

4

Alibaba Group

Abstract
Synthesizing images with user-specified subjects has received growing attention
due to its practical applications. Despite the recent success in single subject
customization, existing algorithms suffer from high training cost and low success
rate along with increased number of subjects. Towards controllable image synthesis
with multiple subjects as the constraints, this work studies how to efficiently
represent a particular subject as well as how to appropriately compose different
subjects. We find that the text embedding regarding the subject token already serves
as a simple yet effective representation that supports arbitrary combinations without
any model tuning. Through learning a residual on top of the base embedding, we
manage to robustly shift the raw subject to the customized subject given various
text conditions. We then propose to employ layout, a very abstract and easyto-obtain prior, as the spatial guidance for subject arrangement. By rectifying
the activations in the cross-attention map, the layout appoints and separates the
location of different subjects in the image, significantly alleviating the interference
across them. Both qualitative and quantitative experimental results demonstrate
our superiority over state-of-the-art alternatives under a variety of settings for
multi-subject customization. Project page can be found here.

1

Introduction

The remarkable achievements of text-to-image generation models [1–14], have garnered widespread
attention due to their ability to generate high-quality and diverse images. To allow synthesizing
images with user-specified subjects, customized generation techniques [15–17] propose to fine-tune
the pre-trained models on a few subject-specific images. Despite the notable success in single subject
customization [15–20], multi-subject customization remains seldom explored but better aligns with
the practical demands in real life.
Recent studies [16, 17] have investigated multi-subject customization through joint training, which
tunes the model with all subjects of interest simultaneously. Such a strategy has two drawbacks.
First, they require learning separate models for each subject combination, which may suffer from
exponential growth when the number of subjects increase. For example, the customization of objects
{A, B, C} fails to inherit the knowledge obtained from the customization of objects {A, B}. Second,
different subjects may interfere with each other, causing the issues that some subjects fail to show up
in the final synthesis or the subject attribute gets confused among subjects (e.g., a cat with the features
of another dog). This phenomenon is particularly evident when the semantic similarity between
subjects is high (see Fig. 4).
∗

Equal contribution.
Work performed during internship at Alibaba DAMO Academy.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

