EmbodiedGPT: Vision-Language Pre-Training via
Embodied Chain of Thought

Yao Mu1 , Qinglong Zhang2 , Mengkang Hu1 , Wenhai Wang3 , Mingyu Ding∗ ,1 , Jun Jin4 ,
Bin Wang4 , Jifeng Dai2,5 , Yu Qiao2 , Ping Luo∗,1,2
1
The University of Hong Kong, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory,
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 4 Noah’s Ark Laboratory 5 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Embodied AI is a crucial frontier in robotics, capable of planning and executing
action sequences for robots to accomplish long-horizon tasks in physical environments. In this work, we introduce EmbodiedGPT, an end-to-end multi-modal
foundation model for embodied AI, empowering embodied agents with multi-modal
understanding and execution capabilities. To achieve this, we have made the following efforts: (i) We craft a large-scale embodied planning dataset, termed EgoCOT.
The dataset consists of carefully selected videos from the Ego4D dataset, along
with corresponding high-quality language instructions. Specifically, we generate a
sequence of sub-goals with the "Chain of Thoughts" mode for effective embodied
planning. (ii) We introduce an efficient training approach to EmbodiedGPT for
high-quality plan generation, by adapting a 7B large language model (LLM) to the
EgoCOT dataset via prefix tuning. (iii) We introduce a paradigm for extracting
task-related features from LLM-generated planning queries to form a closed loop
between high-level planning and low-level control. Extensive experiments show
the effectiveness of EmbodiedGPT on embodied tasks, including embodied planning, embodied control, visual captioning, and visual question answering. Notably,
EmbodiedGPT significantly enhances the success rate of the embodied control
task by extracting more effective features. It has achieved a remarkable 1.6 times
increase in success rate on the Franka Kitchen benchmark and a 1.3 times increase
on the Meta-World benchmark, compared to the BLIP-2 baseline fine-tuned with
the Ego4D dataset. More demos, code, and dataset information can be found at our
homepage.

1

Introduction

Embodied AI tasks, e.g., embodied planning, embodied VQA, and embodied control, aim to imbue
robots with the ability to perceive, reason, and act within their environment, enabling them to
perform long-horizon plans and execute actions autonomously based on real-time observations.
Recently, large language models (LLMs) such as GPT4 [1] and PaLM-E [2], have shown promising
language understanding, reasoning, and "chain-of-thought" capabilities. Such advances may open new
possibilities for developing robots capable of processing natural language instructions, performing
multi-modal "chain-of-thought", and planning actions in physical environments.
Large-scale datasets play important roles in training large language models. For example, OpenCLIP
trains its ViT-G/14 model on the LAION-2B dataset [3], which contains 2B image-language pairs.
Unlike general-purpose visual language tasks that can get a huge amount of weakly labeled imagecaption pairs from the Internet, embodied AI tasks require egocentric data in robotics domains. Also,
∗

Corresponding authors: Mingyu Ding and Ping Luo ({dingmyu, pluo.lhi}@gmail.com)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

