The expressive power of pooling in Graph Neural
Networks
Filippo Maria Bianchi∗
Dept. of Mathematics and Statistics
UiT the Arctic University of Norway
NORCE, Norwegian Research Centre AS
filippo.m.bianchi@uit.no

Veronica Lachi∗
Dept. of Information Engineering and Mathematics
University of Siena
veronica.lachi@student.unisi.it

Abstract
In Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), hierarchical pooling operators generate local
summaries of the data by coarsening the graph structure and the vertex features.
While considerable attention has been devoted to analyzing the expressive power
of message-passing (MP) layers in GNNs, a study on how graph pooling affects the
expressiveness of a GNN is still lacking. Additionally, despite the recent advances
in the design of pooling operators, there is not a principled criterion to compare
them. In this work, we derive sufficient conditions for a pooling operator to fully
preserve the expressive power of the MP layers before it. These conditions serve
as a universal and theoretically grounded criterion for choosing among existing
pooling operators or designing new ones. Based on our theoretical findings, we
analyze several existing pooling operators and identify those that fail to satisfy the
expressiveness conditions. Finally, we introduce an experimental setup to verify
empirically the expressive power of a GNN equipped with pooling layers, in terms
of its capability to perform a graph isomorphism test.

1

Introduction

Significant effort has been devoted to characterizing the expressive power of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) in terms of their capabilities for testing graph isomorphism [34]. This has led to a better
understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of GNNs and opened up new avenues for developing
advanced GNN models that go beyond the limitations of such algorithms [32]. The more powerful
a GNN, the larger the set of non-isomorphic graphs that it can distinguish by generating distinct
representations for them. GNNs with appropriately formulated message-passing (MP) layers are
as effective as the Weisfeiler-Lehman isomorphism test (WL test) in distinguish graphs [38], while
higher-order GNN architectures can match the expressiveness of the k-WL test [29]. Several
approaches have been developed to enhance the expressive power of GNNs by incorporating random
features into the nodes [33, 1], by using randomized weights in the network architecture [42], or
by using compositions of invariant and equivariant functions [27]. Despite the progress made in
understanding the expressive power of GNNs, the results are still limited to flat GNNs consisting of a
stack of MP layers followed by a final readout [38, 5].
Inspired by pooling in convolutional neural networks, recent works introduced hierarchical pooling
operators that enable GNNs to learn increasingly abstract and coarser representations of the input
graphs [39, 9]. By interleaving MP with pooling layers that gradually distill global graph properties
through the computation of local summaries, it is possible to build deep GNNs that improve the
accuracy in graph classification [8, 4] and node classification tasks [18, 26].
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

