Linguistic Binding in Diffusion Models:
Enhancing Attribute Correspondence
through Attention Map Alignment

Royi Rassin
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
rassinroyi@gmail.com

Eran Hirsch
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
eran.hirsch@biu.ac.il

Shauli Ravfogel
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
Allen Institute for AI, Israel
shauli.ravfogel@gmail.com

Daniel Glickman
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
danielglickman1@gmail.com

Yoav Goldberg
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
Allen Institute for AI, Israel
yoav.goldberg@gmail.com

Gal Chechik
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
NVIDIA, Israel
gal.chechik@biu.ac.il

Abstract
Text-conditioned image generation models often generate incorrect associations
between entities and their visual attributes. This reflects an impaired mapping
between linguistic binding of entities and modifiers in the prompt and visual
binding of the corresponding elements in the generated image. As one example, a
query like “a pink sunflower and a yellow flamingo” may incorrectly produce an
image of a yellow sunflower and a pink flamingo. To remedy this issue, we propose
SynGen, an approach which first syntactically analyses the prompt to identify
entities and their modifiers, and then uses a novel loss function that encourages the
cross-attention maps to agree with the linguistic binding reflected by the syntax.
Specifically, we encourage large overlap between attention maps of entities and
their modifiers, and small overlap with other entities and modifier words. The loss
is optimized during inference, without retraining or fine-tuning the model. Human
evaluation on three datasets, including one new and challenging set, demonstrate
significant improvements of SynGen compared with current state of the art methods.
This work highlights how making use of sentence structure during inference can
efficiently and substantially improve the faithfulness of text-to-image generation.1

1

Introduction

Diffusion models for text-conditioned image generation produce impressive realistic images [1, 2, 3,
4]. Users control the generated content through natural-language text prompts that can be rich and
complex. Unfortunately, in many cases the generated images are not faithful to the text prompt [5, 6].
Specifically, one very common failure mode results from improper binding, where modifier words
fail to influence the visual attributes of the entity-nouns to which they are grammatically related.
1

We make our code publicly available https://github.com/RoyiRa/Syntax-Guided-Generation

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

