ID and OOD Performance Are Sometimes
Inversely Correlated on Real-world Datasets

Damien Teney
Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland
damien.teney@idiap.ch
Seong Joon Oh
University of Tübingen, Germany
coallaoh@gmail.com

Yong Lin
Hong Kong Uni. of Science and Technology
ylindf@connect.ust.hk
Ehsan Abbasnejad
University of Adelaide, Australia
ehsan.abbasnejad@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Context. Several studies have compared the in-distribution (ID) and out-ofdistribution (OOD) performance of models in computer vision and NLP. They
report a frequent positive correlation, but surprisingly, almost never an inverse
correlation that would be indicative of a necessary trade-off. Such inverse patterns
are possible theoretically, and their occurrence in practice is important to determine
whether ID performance can serve as a proxy for OOD generalization.
Findings. This paper shows that inverse correlations between ID and OOD performance do happen with multiple real-world datasets, not only in artificial worst-case
settings. We explain theoretically how these cases arise and how past studies
missed them because of improper methodologies that examined a biased selection
of models.
Implications. Our observations lead to recommendations that contradict those
found in much of the current literature.
• High OOD performance sometimes requires trading off ID performance.
• Focusing on ID performance alone may not lead to optimal OOD performance.
It may produce diminishing (eventually negative) returns in OOD performance.
• In these cases, studies on OOD generalization that use ID performance for model
selection (a common recommended practice) will necessarily miss the bestperforming models, making these studies blind to a whole range of phenomena.

1

Introduction

Past observations. This paper complements existing studies that empirically compare in-distribution
(ID) and out-of-distribution1 (OOD) performance of deep learning models [2, 6, 25, 22, 24, 42, 50].
It has long been known that models applied to OOD data suffer a drop in performance, e.g. in
classification accuracy. The above studies show that, despite this gap, ID and OOD performance are
often positively correlated2 across models on benchmarks in computer vision [25] and NLP [24].
Past explanations. Frequent positive correlations are surprising because inverse correlations are
similarly possible theoretically. Indeed, ID and OOD data contain different associations between
labels and features. One could imagine e.g. that an image background is associated with class C1
ID and class C2 OOD. The more a model relies on the presence of this background, the better its
1
2

We use “OOD” to refer to test data conforming to covariate shifts [41] w.r.t. the training data.
We use “correlation” to refer both to linear and non-linear relationships.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

