CaMP: Causal Multi-policy Planning for Interactive
Navigation in Multi-room Scenes

Xiaohan Wang

Yuehu Liu

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics
Xi’an Jiaotong University
wuhanwxh2016@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics
Xi’an Jiaotong University
liuyh@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Xinhang Song

Beibei Wang

Institute of Computing Technology
Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Science
xinhang.song@vipl.ict.ac.cn

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics
Xi’an Jiaotong University
wangbb@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Shuqiang Jiang
Institute of Computing Technology
Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Science
sqjiang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Visual navigation has been widely studied under the assumption that there may
be several clear routes to reach the goal. However, in more practical scenarios
such as a house with several messy rooms, there may not. Interactive Navigation
(InterNav) considers agents navigating to their goals more effectively with object
interactions, posing new challenges of learning interaction dynamics and extra
action space. Previous works learn single vision-to-action policy with the guidance
of designed representations. However, the causality between actions and outcomes
is prone to be confounded when the attributes of obstacles are diverse and hard to
measure. Learning policy for long-term action planning in complex scenes also
leads to extensive inefficient exploration. In this paper, we introduce a causal
diagram of InterNav clarifying the confounding bias caused by obstacles. To
address the problem, we propose a multi-policy model that enables the exploration
of counterfactual interactions as well as reduces unnecessary exploration. We
develop a large-scale dataset containing 600k task episodes in 12k multi-room
scenes based on the ProcTHOR simulator and showcase the effectiveness of our
method with the evaluations on our dataset.

1

Introduction

Embodied AI, incorporating internet intelligence such as vision, language, and reasoning into
an embodiment, aims to deploy autonomous agents in real-world environments [16]. In Visual
Navigation, a cornerstone task, agents navigate to the goal in static environments where the movement
of scene objects is avoided. In a practical scenario an indoor robot may need to navigate in a house with
multiple rooms and get blocked by obstacles(see Figure 1). Interactive Navigation (InterNav)[39, 36]
considers navigating more efficiently with object interaction rather than merely moving forward and
turning around.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

