Diffused Redundancy in Pre-trained Representations

Vedant Nanda ∗
University of Maryland &
MPI-SWS

Till Speicher
MPI-SWS

John P. Dickerson
University of Maryland

Soheil Feizi
University of Maryland

Krishna P. Gummadi
MPI-SWS

Adrian Weller
The Alan Turing Institute
& University of Cambridge

Abstract
Representations learned by pre-training a neural network on a large dataset are
increasingly used successfully to perform a variety of downstream tasks. In this
work, we take a closer look at how features are encoded in such pre-trained representations. We find that learned representations in a given layer exhibit a degree of diffuse redundancy, i.e., any randomly chosen subset of neurons in the
layer that is larger than a threshold size shares a large degree of similarity with
the full layer and is able to perform similarly as the whole layer on a variety
of downstream tasks. For example, a linear probe trained on 20% of randomly
picked neurons from the penultimate layer of a ResNet50 pre-trained on ImageNet1k achieves an accuracy within 5% of a linear probe trained on the full
layer of neurons for downstream CIFAR10 classification. We conduct experiments on different neural architectures (including CNNs and Transformers) pretrained on both ImageNet1k and ImageNet21k and evaluate a variety of downstream tasks taken from the VTAB benchmark. We find that the loss & dataset
used during pre-training largely govern the degree of diffuse redundancy and the
“critical mass” of neurons needed often depends on the downstream task, suggesting that there is a task-inherent redundancy-performance Pareto frontier. Our
findings shed light on the nature of representations learned by pre-trained deep
neural networks and suggest that entire layers might not be necessary to perform many downstream tasks. We investigate the potential for exploiting this redundancy to achieve efficient generalization for downstream tasks and also draw
caution to certain possible unintended consequences. Our code is available at
https://github.com/nvedant07/diffused-redundancy.

1

Introduction

Over the years, many architectures have been proposed (such as [50, 16, 23]) that achieve competitive accuracies on many benchmarks [45]. A key reason for the success of these models is their
ability to learn useful representations of data [28]. While these models continue to get better, understanding the properties of underlying learned representations continues to be a challenge.
Prior works have attempted to understand representations learned by deep neural networks through
the lens of mutual information between the representations, inputs, and outputs [49] and hypothesize
that neural networks perform well because of a “compression” phase where mutual information
between inputs and representations decreases. Additionally, recent works have found that many
neurons are polysemantic, i.e., one neuron can encode multiple “concepts” [10, 39], and that one can
∗

Correspondence to: vnanda@mpi-sws.org

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

