SG×P : A Sorghum Genotype × Phenotype Prediction
Dataset and Benchmark
Zeyu Zhang, Robert Pless
George Washington University
zeyu|pless@gwu.edu

Nadia Shakoor
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
NShakoor@danforthcenter.org

Austin Carnahan, Abby Stylianou
Saint Louis University
austin.carnahan|abby.stylianou@slu.edu

Abstract
Large scale field-phenotyping approaches have the potential to solve important
questions about the relationship of plant genotype to plant phenotype. Computational approaches to measuring the phenotype (the observable plant features) are
required to address the problem at a large scale, but machine learning approaches to
extract phenotypes from sensor data struggle without access to (a) sufficiently large,
organized multi-sensor datasets, (b) field trials that have a large scale and significant
number of genotypes, (c) full genetic sequencing of those phenotypes, and (d)
datasets sufficiently organized so that algorithm centered researchers can directly
address the real biological problems. Here, we present SG×P , a novel benchmark
dataset from a large-scale field trial consisting of the complete genotype of over
300 sorghum varieties, and time sequences of imagery from several field plots
growing each variety, taken with RGB and laser 3D scanner imaging. To lower
the barrier to entry and facilitate further developments, we provide a set of well
organized, multi-sensor imagery and corresponding genomic data. We implement
baseline deep learning based phenotyping approaches to create baseline results
for individual sensors and multi-sensor fusion for detecting genetic mutations
with known impacts. We also provide and support an open-ended challenge by
identifying thousands of genetic mutations whose phenotypic impacts are currently
unknown. A web interface for machine learning researchers and practitioners to
share approaches, visualizations and hypotheses supports engagement with plant
biologists to further the understanding of the sorghum genotype×phenotype relationship. The full dataset, leaderboard (including baseline results) and discussion
forums can be found at http://sorghumsnpbenchmark.com.

1

Introduction

A plant’s phenome is defined by its physical and biochemical characteristics, and is the result
of the interaction of its genome and its environment. Finding large scale associations between
genetic data and measured phenotypes in realistic conditions has the potential to transform real world
agricultural systems, by enabling knowledge-driven breeding to improve crop output or performance.
This is especially important as there is an ever increasing need for crops that are, for example, more
capable of feeding the world, more drought tolerant or otherwise resistant to climate change, or less in
need of energy intensive inputs like synthetic fertilizers. In this work we promote research in this area
by creating benchmark datasets with large scale, multimodal imagery and genetic data from hundreds
of sorghum crop variants grown in real-world field conditions. Sorghum is immensely important for
both food and energy purposes, as it is used extensively as a grain crop and as a source of biofuel, and
has proven to be productive in a variety of environments and resilient to an ever changing climate.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

