WCLD: Curated Large Dataset of Criminal Cases
from Wisconsin Circuit Courts
Elliott Ash1∗ Naman Goel2∗ Nianyun Li1∗ Claudia Marangon1∗ Peiyao Sun1∗
1
Center for Law & Economics, ETH Zurich
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
{elliott.ash,claudia.marangon}@gess.ethz.ch, naman.goel@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Machine learning based decision-support tools in criminal justice systems are
subjects of intense discussions and academic research. There are important open
questions about the utility and fairness of such tools. Academic researchers often
rely on a few small datasets that are not sufficient to empirically study various
real-world aspects of these questions. In this paper, we contribute WCLD, a curated
large dataset of 1.5 million criminal cases from circuit courts in the U.S. state of
Wisconsin. We used reliable public data from 1970 to 2020 to curate attributes
like prior criminal counts and recidivism outcomes. The dataset contains large
number of samples from five racial groups, in addition to information like sex
and age (at judgment and first offense). Other attributes in this dataset include
neighborhood characteristics obtained from census data, detailed types of offense,
charge severity, case decisions, sentence lengths, year of filing etc. We also provide
pseudo-identifiers for judge, county and zipcode. The dataset will not only enable
researchers to more rigorously study algorithmic fairness in the context of criminal
justice, but also relate algorithmic challenges with various systemic issues. We also
discuss in detail the process of constructing the dataset and provide a datasheet.
The WCLD dataset is available at https://clezdata.github.io/wcld/.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms are increasingly being used or proposed to be used in various sensitive
use-cases, including criminal justice. In such scenarios, a major concern is that the algorithms
can perpetuate and amplify different forms of social biases. There is plenty of empirical evidence
supporting this concern in the literature (1). For example, the seminal work by ProPublica (2) found
COMPAS, a recidivism risk estimation tool, to be unfair against black defendants: making different
errors for different demographic groups and at different rates. While any component in the machine
learning pipeline can introduce bias and there are also fundamental limitations of algorithms (3; 4),
it is also widely acknowledged that training and evaluation datasets are major contributors (5; 6) to
unfairness in algorithms. Therefore, it is important for academic researchers to have access to large
datasets to study the problem rigorously. Further, the datasets should also contain rich information to
allow understanding the interaction of data and algorithmic issues with various systemic issues. A
standard research dataset used in this context is the COMPAS dataset (7). While this dataset has been
extremely useful so far in bringing attention to some of the issues with machine learning algorithms,
it is often limiting in improving our understanding of the algorithms’ behavior because of its small
size and other limitations (discussed in Section 2). Further, researchers often use synthetic datasets
and simulations (8; 9; 10; 11; 12) to complement their analysis. Availability of large scale real-world
datasets will bring more grounding to this complementary analysis approach (13; 9).
∗

Authors are ordered alphabetically.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

