Implicit Bias of Gradient Descent for Logistic
Regression at the Edge of Stability

Jingfeng Wu
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
uuujf@jhu.edu

Vladimir Braverman
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
vb21@rice.edu

Jason D. Lee
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
jasonlee@princeton.edu

Abstract
Recent research has observed that in machine learning optimization, gradient
descent (GD) often operates at the edge of stability (EoS) [Cohen et al., 2021],
where the stepsizes are set to be large, resulting in non-monotonic losses induced
by the GD iterates. This paper studies the convergence and implicit bias of constantstepsize GD for logistic regression on linearly separable data in the EoS regime.
Despite the presence of local oscillations, we prove that the logistic loss can be
minimized by GD with any constant stepsize over a long time scale. Furthermore,
we prove that with any constant stepsize, the GD iterates tend to infinity when
projected to a max-margin direction (the hard-margin SVM direction) and converge
to a fixed vector that minimizes a strongly convex potential when projected to
the orthogonal complement of the max-margin direction. In contrast, we also
show that in the EoS regime, GD iterates may diverge catastrophically under the
exponential loss, highlighting the superiority of the logistic loss. These theoretical
findings are in line with numerical simulations and complement existing theories
on the convergence and implicit bias of GD for logistic regression, which are only
applicable when the stepsizes are sufficiently small.

1

Introduction

Gradient descent (GD) is a foundational algorithm for machine learning optimization that motivates
many popular algorithms. Theoretically, the behavior of GD is well understood when the stepsize is
small. In this regard, one of the most classic results is the descent lemma (see, e.g., Section 1.2.3 in
Nesterov et al. [2018]):
Lemma (Descent lemma, simplified version). Suppose that supw ∇2 L(w) 2 ≤ β 1 , then
L(w+ ) ≤ L(w) − η · (1 − ηβ/2) · ∥∇L(w)∥22 ,

where w+ := w − η · ∇L(w).

When the targeted function is smooth (such as logistic regression) and the stepsize is small (0 < η <
β/2), the descent lemma ensures a monotonic decrease of the function value by performing each
GD step. Building upon this, a sequence of iterates produced by GD with small stepsizes provably
minimizes the function value in various settings (see, e.g., Lan [2020]).
For a more modern example, a recent line of research has established the implicit bias of GD
with small stepsizes (see Soudry et al. [2018], Ji and Telgarsky [2018] and references thereafter).
Specifically, they consider GD for optimizing logistic regression (besides other loss functions) on
1
The uniformly bounded Hessian norm condition is stated for simplicity and can be relaxed in many ways.
For example, it can be replaced by requiring L(·) to be β-smooth. For another example, it can also be replaced
with sup0≤λ≤1 ∇2 L(λ · w + (1 − λ) · w+ ) 2 ≤ β.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

