D4: Improving LLM Pretraining via Document
De-Duplication and Diversification
Kushal Tirumala*
Meta AI Research

Daniel Simig*
Meta AI Research

Armen Aghajanyan
Meta AI Research

Ari S. Morcos
Meta AI Research

Abstract
Over recent years, an increasing amount of compute and data has been poured
into training large language models (LLMs), usually by doing one-pass learning
on as many tokens as possible randomly selected from large-scale web corpora.
While training on ever-larger portions of the internet leads to consistent performance improvements, the size of these improvements diminishes with scale, and
there has been little work exploring the effect of data selection on pre-training
and downstream performance beyond simple de-duplication methods such as MinHash. Here, we show that careful data selection (on top of de-duplicated data) via
pre-trained model embeddings can speed up training (20% efficiency gains) and
improves average downstream accuracy on 16 NLP tasks (up to 2%) at the 6.7B
model scale. Furthermore, we show that repeating data intelligently consistently
outperforms baseline training (while repeating random data performs worse than
baseline training). Our results indicate that clever data selection can significantly
improve LLM pre-training, calls into question the common practice of training
for a single epoch on as much data as possible, and demonstrates a path to keep
improving our models past the limits of randomly sampling web data.

1

Introduction

Due to computational limits, initial work on language model pre-training focused on training models
on small, high-quality text datasets such as BookCorpus [61] and Wikipedia [32]. More recently,
however, catalyzed by works like [40], advancements in large language models (LLMs) have been
driven by leveraging large collections of unlabeled, uncurated data derived from snapshots of the
internet (CommonCrawl [41, 16, 39]), trading off small quantities of heavily-curated data for huge
quantities of less-curated data. Because of the dramatic increase in data quantity, these strategies have
resulted in higher performance models and have sparked a new paradigm wherein massive, largely
unfiltered datasets are utilized for training [11, 50, 46].
Despite the essential role that large-scale web data now play in LM pre-training, data curation and
selection for large-scale web data have not been thoroughly explored. This is primarily due to the
universality of compute and data scaling laws [25, 20] which give practitioners a low-risk way to
reliably improve LM performance by merely adding “more” data, not necessarily the “right” data.
Indeed, the data selection method used to model scaling laws (along with the data selection methods
used in most LLM pre-training pipelines) involves simply randomly sampling tokens from web data
dumps that have been put through a combination of simple heuristic filtering (e.g., to eliminate very
short strings) and very near match de-duplication [27].
If we continue relying on scaling laws to improve LLMs, we will quickly hit diminishing returns
due to the power-law nature of scaling laws. We will therefore need exponentially more data to
maintain a consistent marginal improvement, which may prove especially challenging as we are fast
*

Equal contribution. Correspondence emails: ktirumala@meta.com, simigd@gmail.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

