Symbol-LLM: Leverage Language Models for
Symbolic System in Visual Human Activity Reasoning

Xiaoqian Wu

Yong-Lu Li∗
Jianhua Sun
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Cewu Lu∗

{enlighten, yonglu_li, gothic, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Human reasoning can be understood as a cooperation between the intuitive, associative “System-1” and the deliberative, logical “System-2”. For existing System1-like methods in visual activity understanding, it is crucial to integrate System-2
processing to improve explainability, generalization, and data efficiency. One
possible path of activity reasoning is building a symbolic system composed of
symbols and rules, where one rule connects multiple symbols, implying human
knowledge and reasoning abilities. Previous methods have made progress, but are
defective with limited symbols from handcraft and limited rules from visual-based
annotations, failing to cover the complex patterns of activities and lacking compositional generalization. To overcome the defects, we propose a new symbolic
system with two ideal important properties: broad-coverage symbols and rational
rules. Collecting massive human knowledge via manual annotations is expensive
to instantiate this symbolic system. Instead, we leverage the recent advancement of
LLMs (Large Language Models) as an approximation of the two ideal properties,
i.e., Symbols from Large Language Models (Symbol-LLM). Then, given an image,
visual contents from the images are extracted and checked as symbols and activity
semantics are reasoned out based on rules via fuzzy logic calculation. Our method
shows superiority in extensive activity understanding tasks. Code and data are
available at https://mvig-rhos.com/symbol_llm.

1

Introduction

Human reasoning can be understood as a cooperation between two cognitive systems: the intuitive,
associative “System-1” and the deliberative, logical “System-2” [25]. An example of System-2
reasoning is illustrated in Fig. 1a. A feather and an iron ball are dropped at the same height in
a vacuum, which one will land first? Human intelligence derives the answer from the Universal
Gravitation Law, i.e., reasoning in a physical symbolic system to avoid intuitive errors. As a critical
component in building AI systems, visual activity understanding urgently needs System-2 reasoning.
Previous works [26, 17, 30, 19] typically establish the mapping between visual inputs and natural
language, where knowledge is embedded into some non-symbolic form such as the weights of
language models [24]. Though effective, these System-1-like methods depend on large-scale visual
data, thus suffering from diminishing marginal utility. Also, it fails in explainability and generalization
due to black-box computing. Thus, it is important to integrate System-2 reasoning.
With one glance at an image, we can effortlessly ground visual inputs to symbols/concepts and apply
commonsense reasoning to imagine the world beyond the pixels, a process similar to the gravity
case. Fig. 1b shows a possible path for System-2 visual reasoning for human activity: a symbolic
system composed of symbols and rules. One rule “Hip seated in a boat ∧ Hands control an
engine ∧ Hands hold onto the side of a boat |= Human ride a boat” connects symbols
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

