Contrastive Retrospection: honing in on critical steps
for rapid learning and generalization in RL

Chen Sun∗
Mila, Université de Montréal
sunchipsster@gmail.com

Wannan Yang
New York University
winnieyangwn96@gmail.com

Dane Malenfant
McGill University
dane.malenfant@mila.quebec

Thomas Jiralerspong
Mila, Université de Montréal
thomas.jiralerspong
@mila.quebec

Benjamin Alsbury-Nealy
University of Toronto, SilicoLabs Incorporated
benjamin.alsbury.nealy@silicolabs.ca

Yoshua Bengio
Mila, Université de Montréal, CIFAR
yoshua.bengio@mila.quebec

Blake Richards*
Mila, McGill University
Learning in Machines & Brains, CIFAR
blake.richards@mila.quebec

Abstract
In real life, success is often contingent upon multiple critical steps that are distant in
time from each other and from the final reward. These critical steps are challenging
to identify with traditional reinforcement learning (RL) methods that rely on the
Bellman equation for credit assignment. Here, we present a new RL algorithm that
uses offline contrastive learning to hone in on these critical steps. This algorithm,
which we call Contrastive Retrospection (ConSpec), can be added to any existing
RL algorithm. ConSpec learns a set of prototypes for the critical steps in a task
by a novel contrastive loss and delivers an intrinsic reward when the current state
matches one of the prototypes. The prototypes in ConSpec provide two key benefits
for credit assignment: (i) They enable rapid identification of all the critical steps.
(ii) They do so in a readily interpretable manner, enabling out-of-distribution
generalization when sensory features are altered. Distinct from other contemporary
RL approaches to credit assignment, ConSpec takes advantage of the fact that it is
easier to retrospectively identify the small set of steps that success is contingent
upon (and ignoring other states) than it is to prospectively predict reward at every
taken step. ConSpec greatly improves learning in a diverse set of RL tasks. The
code is available at the link: https://github.com/sunchipsster1/ConSpec.

1

Introduction

In real life, succeeding in a given task often involves multiple critical steps. For example, consider
the steps necessary for getting a paper accepted at a conference. One must (i) generate a good idea,
(ii) conduct mathematical analyses or experiments, (iii) write a paper, and finally, (iv) respond to
reviewers in a satisfactory manner. These are the critical steps necessary for success and skipping
any of these steps will lead to failure. Humans are able to learn these specific critical steps even
though they are interspersed among many other tasks in daily life that are not directly related to the
goal. Humans are also able to generalize knowledge about these steps to a myriad of new projects
throughout an academic career that can span different topics, and sometimes, even different fields.
∗

Co-corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

