Stable and low-precision training for large-scale
vision-language models

Mitchell Wortsman∗1

Tim Dettmers∗1

Luke Zettlemoyer12

Ali Farhadi†1

Ari Morcos†2

Ludwig Schmidt†134

Abstract
We introduce new methods for 1) accelerating and 2) stabilizing training for large
language-vision models. 1) For acceleration, we introduce SwitchBack, a linear
layer for int8 quantized training which provides a speed-up of 13-25% while
matching the performance of bfloat16 training within 0.1 percentage points for
the 1B parameter CLIP ViT-Huge—the largest int8 training to date. Our main
focus is int8 as GPU support for float8 is rare, though we also analyze float8
training through simulation. While SwitchBack proves effective for float8, we
show that standard techniques are also successful if the network is trained and
initialized so that large feature magnitudes are discouraged, which we accomplish
via layer-scale initialized with zeros. 2) For stability, we analyze loss spikes and
find they consistently occur 1-8 iterations after the squared gradients become underestimated by their AdamW second moment estimator. As a result, we recommend
an AdamW-Adafactor hybrid which avoids loss spikes when training a CLIP
ViT-Huge model and outperforms gradient clipping at the scales we test.

1

Introduction

Large models trained on large datasets have recently led to multiple breakthroughs in machine
learning such as GPT-3 [5] and PaLM [11]. While many components are necessary for successful
large-scale training, two critical elements are training speed and stability. To enable further progress,
we must ensure that 1) training is fast—the model should be able to see a lot of data even if it is large,
and 2) training is stable—large models should not suffer from loss spikes which degrade performance.
We study these two directions in the context of contrastive language-image pre-training (CLIP) [46].
We examine CLIP-style models because of their importance in computer vision: CLIP-style models
reach state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of image classification tasks [46, 64, 44, 7]
and underlie image generation methods such as DALLE·2 [49] and Stable Diffusion [51]. Our
contributions towards fast training and stable training are as follows.
Towards fast training, we introduce SwitchBack, a linear layer for quantized training with int8
precision which matches the performance of the bfloat16 [63] baseline within 0.1 percentage points
for CLIP ViT-Huge—a larger model than considered in the original CLIP paper. Linear layers account
for the majority of the compute in standard transformer models, usually more than 90%, comprising
the key, query, value, and out projection of the attention blocks as well as the multilayer perceptron.
We perform all linear layers in low-precision (int8) while retaining other layers, such as layer norms,
in higher precision. With this setup, we observe end-to-end speedups between 13 and 25% for CLIP
ViT-Huge training: 25% compared to a standard linear layer implemented using the PyTorch [43]
autograd python module and 13% compared to the standard PyTorch layer which include background
CUDA/C++ optimizations which are difficult to replicate for custom layers.
University of Washington. 2 Meta AI Research, FAIR Team. 3 Allen Institute for AI. 4 LAION. ∗ Equal
contribution. † Equal senior contribution.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

