Accelerating Monte Carlo Tree Search with
Probability Tree State Abstraction

Yangqing Fu
Ming Sun
Buqing Nie
Yue Gao∗
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{frank79110, mingsun, niebuqing, yuegao}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithms such as AlphaGo and MuZero
have achieved superhuman performance in many challenging tasks. However, the
computational complexity of MCTS-based algorithms is influenced by the size of
the search space. To address this issue, we propose a novel probability tree state
abstraction (PTSA) algorithm to improve the search efficiency of MCTS. A general
tree state abstraction with path transitivity is defined. In addition, the probability
tree state abstraction is proposed for fewer mistakes during the aggregation step.
Furthermore, the theoretical guarantees of the transitivity and aggregation error
bound are justified. To evaluate the effectiveness of the PTSA algorithm, we
integrate it with state-of-the-art MCTS-based algorithms, such as Sampled MuZero
and Gumbel MuZero. Experimental results on different tasks demonstrate that
our method can accelerate the training process of state-of-the-art algorithms with
10% − 45% search space reduction.

1

Introduction

With the advancement of reinforcement learning (RL), AlphaGo is the first algorithm that can
defeat human professional players in the game of Go [1]. With no supervised learning of expert
moves in AlphaGo Zero [2] to restructured self-play in AlphaZero [3], until the recent MuZero that
conducts Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) in hidden state space with a learned dynamics model [4].
MuZero presents a powerful generalization framework that allows the algorithm to learn without a
perfect simulator in complex tasks. Recently, EfficientZero [5] has made significant progress in the
sample efficiency of MCTS-based algorithms. This development has opened up new possibilities for
real-world applications, including robotics and self-driving.
When dealing with complex decision-making problems, increasing the search depth is necessary
to achieve more accurate exploration in the decision space, but this also leads to higher time and
space complexity [6, 7]. For instance, MuZero trained for 12 hours with 1000 TPUs to learn the Go
game, and for a single Atari game, it needs 40 TPUs for 12 hours of training [4]. One approach to
reduce the computation is the state abstraction method, which aggregates states based on a certain
similarity measure to obtain a near-optimal policy [8, 9, 10]. state abstraction is a crucial technique
in reinforcement learning (RL) that enables efficient planning, exploration, and generalization [11].
To reduce the search space of MCTS, previous studies have shown the potential of specific state
abstraction techniques [12, 13, 14, 15]. However, finding the minimum abstract state space in these
studies is an NP-Hard problem [16]. To our knowledge, this work is the first to define path transitivity
in the formulation of tree state abstraction, which enables the discovery of the minimum abstract state
space in polynomial time. Additionally, recent MCTS-based algorithms utilize neural networks to
∗
Corresponding author.
Code available at https://github.com/FYQ0919/PTSA-MCTS

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

