Mass-Producing Failures of Multimodal Systems with
Language Models

Shengbang Tong∗

Erik Jones∗
Jacob Steinhardt
UC Berkeley
{tsb, erjones, jsteinhardt}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Deployed multimodal systems can fail in ways that evaluators did not anticipate.
In order to find these failures before deployment, we introduce M ULTI M ON, a
system that automatically identifies systematic failures—generalizable, naturallanguage descriptions of patterns of model failures. To uncover systematic failures,
M ULTI M ON scrapes a corpus for examples of erroneous agreement: inputs that
produce the same output, but should not. It then prompts a language model (e.g.,
GPT-4) to find systematic patterns of failure and describe them in natural language.
We use M ULTI M ON to find 14 systematic failures (e.g., “ignores quantifiers”) of
the CLIP text-encoder, each comprising hundreds of distinct inputs (e.g., “a shelf
with a few/many books”). Because CLIP is the backbone for most state-of-the-art
multimodal models, these inputs produce failures in Midjourney 5.1, DALL-E,
VideoFusion, and others. M ULTI M ON can also steer towards failures relevant to
specific use cases, such as self-driving cars. We see M ULTI M ON as a step towards
evaluation that autonomously explores the long tail of potential system failures. 2

1

Introduction

Text-based multimodal systems, which produce images [Rombach et al., 2022], 3d scenes [Poole
et al., 2022], and videos [Singer et al., 2022] from text, are extensively tested for failures during
development, yet routinely fail at deployment [Rando et al., 2022]. This gap exists in part because
evaluators struggle to anticipate and test for all possible failures beforehand.
To close this gap, we seek evaluation systems for multimodal models that are systematic and humancompatible. Systematic evaluations must peer into the long tail of possible model behaviors; this
means that systems cannot assume a priori what behaviors to look for, or be bottlenecked by human
labor. Human-compatible evaluations must be useful to the system designer; this means they should
describe patterns of behavior beyond giving examples, and be steerable towards the designer’s goals.
Towards satisfying these desiderata, we construct a system, M ULTI M ON, that uses large language
models to identify failures of multimodal systems (Section 3). M ULTI M ON scrapes individual failures
from a corpus, categorizes them into systematic failures (expressed in natural language), then flexibly
generates novel instances. M ULTI M ON works autonomously, improves as language models scale,
and produces failures that transfer across a range of multimodal systems.
To systematically scrape for individual failures, M ULTI M ON exploits erroneous agreement. Specifically, we observe that if two inputs produce the same output but have different semantics, at least
one of them must be wrong. We can test whether two inputs produce the same output by comparing
their CLIP embeddings, since many multimodal models encode inputs with CLIP before generating
∗
2

Equal contribution
Code for M ULTI M ON is available at https://github.com/tsb0601/MultiMon

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

