Sheaf Hypergraph Networks

Iulia Duta
University of Cambridge
id366@cam.ac.uk

Giulia Cassarà
University of Rome, La Sapienza
giulia.cassara@uniroma1.it

Fabrizio Silvestri
University of Rome, La Sapienza
fabrizio.silvestri@uniroma1.it

Pietro Liò
University of Cambridge
pl219@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Higher-order relations are widespread in nature, with numerous phenomena involving complex interactions that extend beyond simple pairwise connections. As
a result, advancements in higher-order processing can accelerate the growth of
various fields requiring structured data. Current approaches typically represent
these interactions using hypergraphs. We enhance this representation by introducing cellular sheaves for hypergraphs, a mathematical construction that adds
extra structure to the conventional hypergraph while maintaining their local, higherorder connectivity. Drawing inspiration from existing Laplacians in the literature,
we develop two unique formulations of sheaf hypergraph Laplacians: linear and
non-linear. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that incorporating sheaves into
the hypergraph Laplacian provides a more expressive inductive bias than standard
hypergraph diffusion, creating a powerful instrument for effectively modelling
complex data structures. We employ these sheaf hypergraph Laplacians to design
two categories of models: Sheaf Hypergraph Neural Networks and Sheaf Hypergraph Convolutional Networks. These models generalize classical Hypergraph
Networks often found in the literature. Through extensive experimentation, we
show that this generalization significantly improves performance, achieving top
results on multiple benchmark datasets for hypergraph node classification.

1

Introduction

The prevalence of relational data in real-world scenarios has led to rapid development and widespread
adoption of graph-based methods in numerous domains [1–4]. However, a major limitation of graphs
is their inability to represent interactions that goes beyond pairwise relations. In contrast, realworld interactions are often complex and multifaceted. There is evidence that higher-order relations
frequently occur in neuroscience [5, 6], chemistry [7], environmental science [8, 9] and social
networks [10]. Consequently, learning powerful and meaningful representations for hypergraphs has
emerged as a promising and rapidly growing subfield of deep learning [11–16]. However, current
hypergraph-based models struggle to capture higher-order relationships effectively. As described
in [17], conventional hypergraph neural networks often suffer from the problem of over-smoothing.
As we propagate the information inside the hypergraph, the representations of the nodes become
uniform across neighbourhoods. This effect hampers the capability of hypergraph models to capture
local, higher-order nuances.
More powerful and flexible mathematical constructs are required to capture real-world interactions’
complexity better. Sheaves provide a suitable enhancement for graphs that allow for more diverse
and expressive representations. A cellular sheaf [18] enables to attach data to a graph, by associating
vector spaces to the nodes, together with a mechanism of transferring the information along the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

