On the Robustness of Mechanism Design
under Total Variation Distance
Anuran Makur
Purdue University
amakur@purdue.edu

Marios Mertzanidis
Purdue University
mmertzan@purdue.edu

Alexandros Psomas
Purdue University
apsomas@cs.purdue.edu

Athina Terzoglou
Purdue University
aterzogl@purdue.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of designing mechanisms when agents’ valuation functions
are drawn from unknown and correlated prior distributions. In particular, we
are given a prior distribution D, and we are interested in designing a (truthful)
mechanism that has good performance for all “true distributions” that are close
to D in Total Variation (TV) distance. We show that DSIC and BIC mechanisms
in this setting are strongly robust with respect to TV distance, for any bounded
objective function O, extending a recent result of Brustle et al. ([BCD20], EC
2020). At the heart of our result is a fundamental duality property of total variation
distance. As direct applications of our result, we (i) demonstrate how to find
approximately revenue-optimal and approximately BIC mechanisms for weakly
dependent prior distributions; (ii) show how to find correlation-robust mechanisms
when only “noisy” versions of marginals are accessible, extending recent results
of Bei et. al. ([BGLT19], SODA 2019); (iii) prove that prophet-inequality type
guarantees are preserved for correlated priors, recovering a variant of a result of
Dütting and Kesselheim ([DK19], EC 2019); (iv) give a new necessary condition
for a correlated distribution to witness an infinite separation in revenue between
simple and optimal mechanisms, complementing recent results of Psomas et al.
([PSCW22], NeurIPS 2022); (v) give a new condition for simple mechanisms to
approximate revenue-optimal mechanisms for the case of a single agent whose type
is drawn from a correlated distribution that can be captured by a Markov Random
Field, complementing recent results of Cai and Oikonomou ([CO21], EC 2021).

1

Introduction

Mechanism design studies optimization in strategic settings. The designer’s task is to create a
mechanism that interacts with strategic agents, each with their own, private preferences over the
mechanism’s output. The inability to provide meaningful guarantees for important objectives — such
as revenue — when studying mechanism design problems through the lens of worst-case analysis,
has motivated the study of Bayesian mechanisms. In the Bayesian setting, there is a probability
distribution, typically known to the designer, from which agents’ private information — their types —
is drawn, and the designer seeks to maximize an objective function in expectation over the randomness
of the types, and, at the same time, incentivize the agents to report their type truthfully.
While we have greatly deepened our understanding of mechanism design under the Bayesian setting,
when taking this approach to practice, it is natural to ask what happens if the designer has only
partial information about the agents’ type distributions. In recent years, a growing literature studies
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

