Fantastic Weights and How to Find Them:
Where to Prune in Dynamic Sparse Training

Aleksandra I. Nowak∗
Jagiellonian University, Doctoral School of Exact and Natural Sciences;
IDEAS NCBR
aleksandrairena.nowak@docotral.uj.edu.pl
Bram Grooten
Eindhoven University of Technology

Decebal Constantin Mocanu
University of Luxembourg;
Eindhoven University of Technology;
University of Twente

Jacek Tabor
Jagiellonian University,
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science

Abstract
Dynamic Sparse Training (DST) is a rapidly evolving area of research that seeks
to optimize the sparse initialization of a neural network by adapting its topology
during training. It has been shown that under specific conditions, DST is able to
outperform dense models. The key components of this framework are the pruning
and growing criteria, which are repeatedly applied during the training process to
adjust the network’s sparse connectivity. While the growing criterion’s impact on
DST performance is relatively well studied, the influence of the pruning criterion
remains overlooked. To address this issue, we design and perform an extensive
empirical analysis of various pruning criteria to better understand their impact on
the dynamics of DST solutions. Surprisingly, we find that most of the studied
methods yield similar results. The differences become more significant in the
low-density regime, where the best performance is predominantly given by the
simplest technique: magnitude-based pruning.

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning solutions have demonstrated exceptional results in many different disciplines
of science [5, 14, 26]. However, they come at the cost of using an enormous number of parameters.
Consequently, compression methods aim to significantly reduce the model size without introducing
any loss in performance [20, 6].
One approach to sparsifying neural networks is pruning, in which a portion of the weights is
removed at the end of the training based on some predefined importance criterion [31, 21, 20]. More
recently, [15] have found that iterative pruning joined with cautious parameter re-initialization can
identify sparse subnetworks that are able to achieve similar performance to their dense counterparts
when trained from scratch. This result, known as the lottery ticket hypothesis, has launched subsequent
research into methods for identifying and training models that are sparse already at initialization [32,
60, 66, 48, 54].
∗

Work started while visiting University of Twente.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

