Flat Seeking Bayesian Neural Networks

Van-Anh Nguyen1

Tung-Long Vuong1,2
Hoang Phan2,3
Thanh-Toan Do1
1,2
1
Dinh Phung
Trung Le
1
Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University, Australia
2
VinAI, Vietnam
3
New York University, United States

{van-anh.nguyen, tung-long.vuong, toan.do, dinh.phung, trunglm}@monash.edu
hvp2011@nyu.edu

Abstract
Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) provide a probabilistic interpretation for deep
learning models by imposing a prior distribution over model parameters and inferring a posterior distribution based on observed data. The model sampled from the
posterior distribution can be used for providing ensemble predictions and quantifying prediction uncertainty. It is well-known that deep learning models with lower
sharpness have better generalization ability. However, existing posterior inferences
are not aware of sharpness/flatness in terms of formulation, possibly leading to high
sharpness for the models sampled from them. In this paper, we develop theories, the
Bayesian setting, and the variational inference approach for the sharpness-aware
posterior. Specifically, the models sampled from our sharpness-aware posterior, and
the optimal approximate posterior estimating this sharpness-aware posterior, have
better flatness, hence possibly possessing higher generalization ability. We conduct experiments by leveraging the sharpness-aware posterior with state-of-the-art
Bayesian Neural Networks, showing that the flat-seeking counterparts outperform
their baselines in all metrics of interest.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) provide a way to interpret deep learning models probabilistically.
This is done by setting a prior distribution over model parameters and then inferring a posterior
distribution over model parameters based on observed data. This allows us to not only make
predictions, but also quantify prediction uncertainty, which is useful for many real-world applications.
To sample deep learning models from complex and complicated posterior distributions, advanced
particle-sampling approaches such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [41], Stochastic Gradient
HMC (SGHMC) [10], Stochastic Gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) [58], and Stein Variational
Gradient Descent (SVGD) [36] are often used. However, these methods can be computationally
expensive, particularly when many models need to be sampled for better ensembles.
To alleviate this computational burden and enable the sampling of multiple deep learning models from
posterior distributions, variational inference approaches employ approximate posteriors to estimate
the true posterior. These methods utilize approximate posteriors that belong to sufficiently rich
families, which are both economical and convenient to sample from. However, the pioneering works
in variational inference, such as [21, 5, 33], assume approximate posteriors to be fully factorized
distributions, also known as mean-field variational inference. This approach fails to account for
the strong statistical dependencies among random weights of neural networks, limiting its ability
to capture the complex structure of the true posterior and estimate the true model uncertainty. To
overcome this issue, latter works have attempted to provide posterior approximations with richer
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

