Smooth, exact rotational symmetrization
for deep learning on point clouds

Sergey N. Pozdnyakov and Michele Ceriotti
Laboratory of Computational Science and Modelling,
Institute of Materials, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
Lausanne 1015, Switzerland
sergey.pozdnyakov@epfl.ch, michele.ceriotti@epfl.ch

Abstract
Point clouds are versatile representations of 3D objects and have found widespread
application in science and engineering. Many successful deep-learning models
have been proposed that use them as input. The domain of chemical and materials
modeling is especially challenging because exact compliance with physical constraints is highly desirable for a model to be usable in practice. These constraints
include smoothness and invariance with respect to translations, rotations, and permutations of identical atoms. If these requirements are not rigorously fulfilled,
atomistic simulations might lead to absurd outcomes even if the model has excellent accuracy. Consequently, dedicated architectures, which achieve invariance by
restricting their design space, have been developed. General-purpose point-cloud
models are more varied but often disregard rotational symmetry. We propose a
general symmetrization method that adds rotational equivariance to any given
model while preserving all the other requirements. Our approach simplifies the
development of better atomic-scale machine-learning schemes by relaxing the constraints on the design space and making it possible to incorporate ideas that proved
effective in other domains. We demonstrate this idea by introducing the Point Edge
Transformer (PET) architecture, which is not intrinsically equivariant but achieves
state-of-the-art performance on several benchmark datasets of molecules and solids.
A-posteriori application of our general protocol makes PET exactly equivariant,
with minimal changes to its accuracy.

1

Introduction

Contrary to 2D images that are well-described by regular and dense pixel grids, 3D objects usually
have non-uniform resolution and are represented more naturally by an irregular arrangement of points
in 3D. The resulting point clouds are widely used in many domains, including autonomous driving,
augmented reality, and robotics, as well as in chemistry and materials modeling, and are the input
of a variety of dedicated deep-learning techniques[1]. Whenever they are used for applications to
the physical sciences, it is desirable to ensure that the model is consistent with fundamental physical
constraints: invariance to translations, rotations, and permutation of identical particles, as well as
smoothness with respect to geometric deformations[2–4]. In the case of atomistic modeling, the
application domain we focus on here, exact compliance with these requirements is highly sought after.
Lack of smoothness or symmetry breaking are common problems of conventional atomistic modeling
techniques[5, 6]. These have been shown in the past to lead to artifacts ranging from numerical
instabilities[7] (which are particularly critical in the context of high-throughput calculations[8, 9]) to
qualitatively incorrect and even absurd[10, 11] simulation outcomes.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

