Optimization or Architecture:
How to Hack Kalman Filtering

Ido Greenberg
Technion
gido@campus.technion.ac.il

Netanel Yannay
ELTA Systems
natiy4@gmail.com

Shie Mannor
Technion, Nvidia Research
shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
In non-linear filtering, it is traditional to compare non-linear architectures such as
neural networks to the standard linear Kalman Filter (KF). We observe that this
mixes the evaluation of two separate components: the non-linear architecture, and
the parameters optimization method. In particular, the non-linear model is often
optimized, whereas the reference KF model is not. We argue that both should
be optimized similarly, and to that end present the Optimized KF (OKF). We
demonstrate that the KF may become competitive to neural models – if optimized
using OKF. This implies that experimental conclusions of certain previous studies
were derived from a flawed process. The advantage of OKF over the standard KF is
further studied theoretically and empirically, in a variety of problems. Conveniently,
OKF can replace the KF in real-world systems by merely updating the parameters.
Our experiments are published in Github, and the OKF in PyPI.

1

Introduction

The Kalman Filter (KF) [Kalman, 1960] is a celebrated method for linear filtering and prediction,
with applications in many fields including tracking, navigation, control and reinforcement learning
[Zarchan and Musoff, 2000, Kirubarajan, 2002, Kaufmann et al., 2023]. The KF provides optimal
predictions under certain assumptions (namely, linear models with i.i.d noise). In practical problems,
these assumptions are often violated, rendering the KF sub-optimal and motivating the growing field
of non-linear filtering. Many studies demonstrated the benefits of non-linear models over the KF
[Revach et al., 2022, Coskun et al., 2017].
Originally, we sought to join this line of works. Motivated by a real-world Doppler radar problem,
we developed a dedicated non-linear Neural KF (NKF) based on the LSTM sequential model. NKF
achieved significantly better accuracy than the linear KF.
Then, during ablation tests, we noticed that the KF and NKF differ in both architecture and optimization. Specifically, the KF’s noise parameters are traditionally determined by noise estimation [Odelson
et al., 2006]; whereas NKF’s parameters are optimized using supervised learning. To fairly evaluate
the two architectures, we wished to apply the same optimization to both. To that end, we devised an
Optimized KF (OKF, Section 3). KF and OKF have the same linear architecture: OKF only changes
the noise parameters values. Yet, unlike KF, OKF outperformed NKF, which reversed the whole
experimental conclusion, and made the neural network unnecessary for this problem (Section 4).
Our original error was comparing two different model architectures (KF and NKF) that were not
optimized similarly. A review of the non-linear filtering literature reveals that this methodology is
used in many studies. Specifically, for a baseline KF model, the parameters are often tuned by noise
estimation [fa Dai et al., 2020, Aydogmus and Aydogmus, 2015, Revach et al., 2022]; by heuristics
[Jamil et al., 2020, Coskun et al., 2017, Ullah et al., 2019]; or are simply ignored [Gao et al., 2019,
Bai et al., 2020, Zheng et al., 2019], often without public code for examination. Hussein [2014]
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

