FairLISA: Fair User Modeling with Limited Sensitive
Attributes Information
Zheng Zhang1,2

Qi Liu1,2∗ Hao Jiang1,2 Fei Wang1,2 Yan Zhuang1,2
Le Wu3 Weibo Gao1,2 Enhong Chen1,2
1: Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application
University of Science and Technology of China
2: State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
3: Hefei University of Technology
{zhangzheng,jianghao0728,wf314159,zykb,weibogao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn;
{qiliuql,cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn;
lewu.ustc@gmail.com

Abstract
User modeling techniques profile users’ latent characteristics (e.g., preference)
from their observed behaviors, and play a crucial role in decision-making. Unfortunately, traditional user models may unconsciously capture biases related to
sensitive attributes (e.g., gender) from behavior data, even when this sensitive information is not explicitly provided. This can lead to unfair issues and discrimination
against certain groups based on these sensitive attributes. Recent studies have been
proposed to improve fairness by explicitly decorrelating user modeling results and
sensitive attributes. However, most existing approaches assume that fully sensitive
attribute labels are available in the training set, which is unrealistic due to collection
limitations like privacy concerns, and hence bear the limitation of performance. In
this paper, we focus on a practical situation with limited sensitive data and propose
a novel FairLISA framework, which can efficiently utilize data with known and
unknown sensitive attributes to facilitate fair model training. We first propose
a novel theoretical perspective to build the relationship between data with both
known and unknown sensitive attributes with the fairness objective. Then, based on
this, we provide a general adversarial framework to effectively leverage the whole
user data for fair user modeling. We conduct experiments on representative user
modeling tasks including recommender system and cognitive diagnosis. The results
demonstrate that our FairLISA can effectively improve fairness while retaining
high accuracy in scenarios with different ratios of missing sensitive attributes.

1

Introduction

User modeling is a fundamental task in many applications (e.g., recommender system), which aims
to infer latent characteristics through analyzing users’ behavioral information, such as capability and
preference [56]. The results from user modeling serve as an important basis for decision-making,
which might affect users’ lives to some extent [17, 15]. However, recent studies have demonstrated
that biases related to sensitive attributes (e.g., gender, race) can be unconsciously captured from
behavior data, even when this sensitive information is not explicitly provided. This can lead to unfair
user modeling results [3, 23, 45]. For example, college admissions based on user modeling may
underestimate underrepresented demographic groups [48]. Career recommendation shows apparent
gender discrimination even for equally qualified men and women [19]. As such, it is crucial to
consider fairness issues and ensure that users with different sensitive attributes are treated similarly.
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

