Learning to Group Auxiliary Datasets for Molecule

Tinglin Huang1
1

Ziniu Hu2

Rex Ying1

Yale University, 2 University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract
The limited availability of annotations in small molecule datasets presents a challenge to machine learning models. To address this, one common strategy is to
collaborate with additional auxiliary datasets. However, having more data does not
always guarantee improvements. Negative transfer can occur when the knowledge
in the target dataset differs or contradicts that of the auxiliary molecule datasets. In
light of this, identifying the auxiliary molecule datasets that can benefit the target
dataset when jointly trained remains a critical and unresolved problem. Through
an empirical analysis, we observe that combining graph structure similarity and
task similarity can serve as a more reliable indicator for identifying high-affinity
auxiliary datasets. Motivated by this insight, we propose MolGroup1 , which separates the dataset affinity into task and structure affinity to predict the potential
benefits of each auxiliary molecule dataset. MolGroup achieves this by utilizing a routing mechanism optimized through a bi-level optimization framework.
Empowered by the meta gradient, the routing mechanism is optimized toward
maximizing the target dataset’s performance and quantifies the affinity as the gating
score. As a result, MolGroup is capable of predicting the optimal combination of
auxiliary datasets for each target dataset. Our extensive experiments demonstrate
the efficiency and effectiveness of MolGroup, showing an average improvement
of 4.41%/3.47% for GIN/Graphormer trained with the group of molecule datasets
selected by MolGroup on 11 target molecule datasets.

1

Introduction

Predicting and understanding molecular properties is a fundamental task in biomedical and
chemical fields [51, 14, 23, 55], such as evaluating the toxicity of new clinical drugs, characterizing the binding results for the inhibitors
of human β-secretase, and predicting the thermodynamic property of organic molecules. In
recent years, machine learning-based methods
have shown promise in this domain [19, 57, 30,
63, 50]. However, labeling molecules requires
expensive real-world clinical trials and expert
knowledge, making it difficult to collect a large
and diverse labeled dataset for training. This
limited availability of labeled data poses a challenge for traditional machine learning methods,
which struggle to effectively generalize on small
1

Figure 1: Relative improvement of using the combination of target dataset and auxiliary dataset
over only using target dataset: (perf(a, b) −
perf(a))/perf(a), where a is target dataset and b is
auxiliary dataset.

Source code is available at https://github.com/Graph-and-Geometric-Learning/MolGroup.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

