PuzzleFusion: Unleashing the Power of
Diffusion Models for Spatial Puzzle Solving
Sepidehsadat Hosseini, Mohammad Amin Shabani, Saghar Irandoust∗, Yasutaka Furukawa
Simon Fraser University
{sepidh, mshabani, sirandou, furukawa}@sfu.ca

Abstract
This paper presents an end-to-end neural architecture based on Diffusion Models
for spatial puzzle solving, particularly jigsaw puzzle and room arrangement tasks.
In the latter task, for instance, the proposed system takes a set of room layouts
as polygonal curves in the top-down view and aligns the room layout pieces by
estimating their 2D translations and rotations, akin to solving the jigsaw puzzle
of room layouts. A surprising discovery of the paper is that the simple use of
a Diffusion Model effectively solves these challenging spatial puzzle tasks as a
conditional generation process. To enable learning of an end-to-end neural system,
the paper introduces new datasets with ground-truth arrangements: 1) 2D Voronoi
jigsaw dataset, a synthetic one where pieces are generated by Voronoi diagram
of 2D pointset; and 2) MagicPlan dataset, a real one offered by MagicPlan from
its production pipeline, where pieces are room layouts constructed by augmented
reality App by real-estate consumers. The qualitative and quantitative evaluations
demonstrate that our approach outperforms the competing methods by significant
margins in all the tasks. We have provided code and data here.

1

Introduction

Spatial puzzle solving demands meticulous reasoning and arrangement of elements within a given
space. The classic example of jigsaw puzzles, which many of us have enjoyed as a recreational activity, showcases the challenge and satisfaction of such tasks. Applications of jigsaw puzzles extend
beyond mere entertainment, encompassing areas such as the restoration of shattered 2D artwork and
documents Das et al. (2017); McBride and Kimia (2003), image stitching in computer vision Hammoudeh and Pollett (2017), and even DNA sequence assembly in genomics Pop (2009); Marande
and Burger (2007). In real estate, room layout arrangement has emerged as a compelling spatial puzzle task, where consumers leverage mobile devices to scan individual rooms that are to be arranged
into a floorplan.
Spatial puzzle solving poses a considerable challenge even for humans, making it an engaging mental exercise. Addressing this challenge for computational approaches is even more demanding, despite the emergence of deep learning. Current state-of-the-art techniques typically enumerate pairs
of aligned pieces, evaluate their compatibility by learning, and employ optimization or search methods to identify the most likely global arrangement Harel and Ben-Shahar (2021); Hoff and Olver
(2014a); Shih and Lu (2018). However, these approaches struggle to scale as the complexity of
global arrangement increases exponentially with the number of pieces.
This paper makes a breakthrough in spatial puzzle solving with an end-to-end neural architecture
based on Diffusion Models Ho et al. (2020), named PuzzleFusion. The surprising discovery of this
paper is that a Diffusion Model, typically regarded as a powerful generative model, is an effective
∗

Work done while being student at SFU

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

