FLAIR: a Country-Scale Land Cover
Semantic Segmentation Dataset
From Multi-Source Optical Imagery

Anatol Garioud1
Marion Valette1
1

Nicolas Gonthier2 Loic Landrieu2,3
Marc Poupée4 Sébastien Giordano1

Apolline De Wit1
Boris Wattrelos1

French National Institute of Geographical and Forest Information (IGN)
2
Univ Gustave Eiffel, IGN, ENSG, LASTIG
3
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS
4
National School of Geographic Sciences (ENSG)
{firstname.lastname}@ign.fr

Abstract
We introduce the French Land cover from Aerospace ImageRy (FLAIR), an extensive dataset from the French National Institute of Geographical and Forest
Information (IGN) that provides a unique and rich resource for large-scale geospatial analysis. FLAIR contains high-resolution aerial imagery with a ground sample
distance of 20 cm and over 20 billion individually labeled pixels for precise landcover classification. The dataset also integrates temporal and spectral data from
optical satellite time series. FLAIR thus combines data with varying spatial, spectral, and temporal resolutions across over 817 km2 of acquisitions representing
the full landscape diversity of France. This diversity makes FLAIR a valuable
resource for the development and evaluation of novel methods for large-scale
land-cover semantic segmentation and raises significant challenges in terms of
computer vision, data fusion, and geospatial analysis. We also provide powerful uni- and multi-sensor baseline models that can be employed to assess algorithm’s performance and for downstream applications. Through its extent and the
quality of its annotation, FLAIR aims to spur improvements in monitoring and
understanding key anthropogenic development indicators such as urban growth,
deforestation, and soil artificialization. Dataset and codes can be accessed at
https://ignf.github.io/FLAIR/

1

Context

According to a 2015 report by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
[1], approximately 75% of the world’s soils are in fair, poor, or very poor condition. This degradation
poses significant threats to the health and long-term sustainability of ecosystems. Healthy soils
provide invaluable ecosystem services, including: (i) providing natural habitats for numerous plant
and animal species [2], (ii) acting as the largest carbon sink, surpassing the atmosphere and all
combined biomass [3], and (iii) functioning as a rainwater reservoir, supporting food production and
storing freshwater [4].
The degradation of soils and biodiversity is largely attributed to land artificialization [1], which
causes long-term damage to the biological, hydrological, climatic, and agronomic functions of the soil
due to its occupation or use [5, 6]. In order to effectively monitor and manage land artificialization,
public authorities have expressed the need for scalable land-cover monitoring tools. With the
increasing availability of high-quality Earth Observation (EO) data, the French National Institute
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

