Noether Embedding:
Efficient Learning of Temporal Regularities

Chi Gao† Zidong Zhou† Luping Shi∗
Center for Brain-Inspired Computing Research,
Optical Memory National Engineering Research Center,
Tsinghua University - China Electronics Technology HIK Group
Co. Joint Research Center for Brain-Inspired Computing,
IDG / McGovern Institute for Brain Research at Tsinghua University,
Department of Precision Instrument,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
{gaoc20, zzd21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
lpshi@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning to detect and encode temporal regularities (TRs) in events is a prerequisite
for human-like intelligence. These regularities should be formed from limited event
samples and stored as easily retrievable representations. Existing event embeddings,
however, cannot effectively decode TR validity with well-trained vectors, let alone
satisfy the efficiency requirements. We develop Noether Embedding (NE) as the
first efficient TR learner with event embeddings. Specifically, NE possesses the
intrinsic time-translation symmetries of TRs indicated as conserved local energies
in the embedding space. This structural bias reduces the calculation of each TR
validity to embedding each event sample, enabling NE to achieve data-efficient TR
formation insensitive to sample size and time-efficient TR retrieval in constant time
complexity. To comprehensively evaluate the TR learning capability of embedding
models, we define complementary tasks of TR detection and TR query, formulate
their evaluation metrics, and assess embeddings on classic ICEWS14, ICEWS18,
and GDELT datasets. Our experiments demonstrate that NE consistently achieves
about double the F1 scores for detecting valid TRs compared to classic embeddings,
and it provides over ten times higher confidence scores for querying TR intervals.
Additionally, we showcase NE’s potential applications in social event prediction,
personal decision-making, and memory-constrained scenarios.

1

Introduction

Recall the last time you went to a restaurant but waited for half an hour after ordering dishes. You
probably knew something was wrong and may have called the waitperson for help. This behavior
is guided by the temporal regularity (TR) of ‘order dishes –(about 10 minutes)–> have meals’
stored in your brain as schemas (Ghosh & Gilboa, 2014). Such TRs play a significant role in
enabling humans to exhibit flexible out-of-distribution and systematic generalization abilities (Goyal
& Bengio, 2022), and are directly learned from experience through a statistical accumulation of
common event structures (Pudhiyidath et al., 2020), as shown in Figure 1. Since there exist enormous
potential TRs due to a large number of event types and time intervals, detecting valid TRs from all
†

Equal contribution.

* Corresponding author.

The code is publicly available at: https://github.com/KevinGao7/Noether-Embedding.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

