A Combinatorial Algorithm for Approximating the
Optimal Transport in the Parallel and MPC Settings
Nathaniel Lahn
Radford University
nlahn@radford.edu

Sharath Raghvendra
Virginia Tech
sharathr@vt.edu

Kaiyi Zhang⇤
Virginia Tech
kaiyiz@vt.edu

Abstract
Optimal Transport is a popular distance metric for measuring similarity between
distributions. Exact and approximate combinatorial algorithms for computing
the optimal transport distance are hard to parallelize. This has motivated the
development of numerical solvers (e.g. Sinkhorn method) that can exploit GPU
parallelism and produce approximate solutions.
We introduce the first parallel combinatorial algorithm to find an additive "approximation of the OT distance. The parallel complexity of our algorithm
is O(log(n)/"2 ) where n is the total support size for the input distributions. In
Massive Parallel Computation (MPC) frameworks such as Hadoop and MapReduce,
our algorithm computes an "-approximate transport plan in O(log(log(n/"))/"2 )
rounds with O(n/") space per machine; all prior algorithms in the MPC framework
take ⌦(log n) rounds. We also provide a GPU-friendly matrix-based interpretation
of our algorithm where each step of the algorithm is row or column manipulation
of the matrix. Experiments suggest that our combinatorial algorithm is faster than
the state-of-the-art approximate solvers in the GPU, especially for higher values of
n.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) is a useful metric for measuring similarity between distributions and has
numerous applications [2, 4, 5, 9, 12, 29], including image retrieval [28], GAN training [23], and
interpolation between distributions [7]. Given two distributions µ and ⌫, this metric captures the
minimum-cost plan for transporting mass from µ to ⌫.
More formally, in the optimal transport problem, we are given two discrete distributions µ and ⌫
whose supports are the point sets A and B, respectively.
P For each point
P a 2 A (resp. b 2 B), we
associate a probability of µa (resp. ⌫b ) with it such that a2A µa = b2B ⌫b = 1. We refer to each
point of A as a demand point and each point in B as a supply point. For any edge (a, b) 2 A ⇥ B,
we are given a cost c(a, b); we assume that the costs are scaled so that the largest cost edge is 1.
Let c(a, b) be the cost of transporting a supply amount of from b to a. A transport plan is a
function : A ⇥ B ! R 0 that assigns a non-negative value to each edge of G, indicating the
amount of supply transported along the edge. The transport plan is such that the total supplies
transported into (resp. from) any demand (resp. supply) node a 2 A (resp. b 2 B) is bounded
by the demand
(resp. supply) at a (resp. b). The cost of the transport plan, denoted by c( ), is
P
given by (a,b)2A⇥B (a, b)c(a, b). In this optimal transport problem, we are interested in finding
a minimum-cost transport plan that transports all of the supply, denoted by ⇤ . We also define an
⇤

Following convention from Theoretical Computer Science, all authors are ordered in alphabetical order.
The code used for the experiments reported in this paper is available at: https://github.com/kaiyiz/
Combinatorial-Parallel-OT.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

