On the spectral bias of two-layer linear networks

Aditya Varre
EPFL
aditya.varre@epfl.ch

Maria-Luiza Vladarean
EPFL
maria-luiza.vladarean@epfl.ch

Loucas Pillaud-Vivien
Courant Institute of Mathematics, NYU / Flatiron Institute
lpillaudvivien@flatironinstitute.org

Nicolas Flammarion
EPFL
nicolas.flammarion@epfl.ch

Abstract
This paper studies the behaviour of two-layer fully connected networks with linear
activations trained with gradient flow on the square loss. We show how the optimization process carries an implicit bias on the parameters that depends on the
scale of its initialization. The main result of the paper is a variational characterization of the loss minimizers retrieved by the gradient flow for a specific initialization
shape. This characterization reveals that, in the small scale initialization regime,
the linear neural network’s hidden layer is biased toward having a low-rank structure. To complement our results, we showcase a hidden mirror flow that tracks the
dynamics of the singular values of the weights matrices and describe their time
evolution. We support our findings with numerical experiments illustrating the
phenomena.

1

Introduction

The most forceful driver of advancements in the field of Machine Learning over the past decades
has been the success of deep neural networks. Amongst the striking qualities of these models is
the fact that, despite being heavily overparametrized, their optimization consistently yields minima
with good generalization properties. A beckoning research direction is thus to unravel the process
through which neural networks learn internal representations for a given task [Bengio et al., 2013].
Understanding such phenomena is crucial for lowering the interpretability barrier of these models
and developing a principled approach to their training and deployment in practice.
Recent experimental evidence identified one of the likely paths towards achieving these goals as the
study of the inherent regularization properties (or implicit biases) of training algorithms [Neyshabur
et al., 2014, Zhang et al., 2016]. These observations laid the foundation for a new line of work [see,
e.g., Vardi, 2022] whose driving question is which minimum, amongst the many, awaits at the tail
end of optimization.
One of the determining factors for the implicit bias of gradient methods is the initialization scale,
which controls their operational regime as shown by empirical studies [Chizat et al., 2019]. More
precisely, gradient descent with a low-scale initialization is capable of learning rich feature representations from the data. Strikingly, despite overparameterization, the hidden-layer neurons align in the
direction of the features [Chizat et al., 2019, Atanasov et al., 2022] and learning of representations
reflects in the low-rank structure of the hidden layers. Our work aims to precisely explain this
phenomenon and quantify the impact of the initialization scale on feature learning.
Unfortunately, studying such phenomena for the types of neural networks used in practice is mathematically challenging at present due to the non-linearity of their activations. Their less expressive
linear counterparts, however, are more tractable and represent a good proxy due to their non-convex
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

