Neural Data Transformer 2: Multi-context Pretraining
for Neural Spiking Activity

Joel Ye1,2,3 , Jennifer L. Collinger1,3,4,5,6 , Leila Wehbe2,3,7 , Robert Gaunt1,3,4,5,6∗
1

Rehab Neural Engineering Labs, University of Pittsburgh,
2
Neuroscience Institute, Carnegie Mellon University,
3
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, Pittsburgh,
4
Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of Pittsburgh,
5
Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh,
6
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University,
7
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
The neural population spiking activity recorded by intracortical brain-computer
interfaces (iBCIs) contain rich structure. Current models of such spiking activity
are largely prepared for individual experimental contexts, restricting data volume
to that collectable within a single session and limiting the effectiveness of deep
neural networks (DNNs). The purported challenge in aggregating neural spiking
data is the pervasiveness of context-dependent shifts in the neural data distributions.
However, large scale unsupervised pretraining by nature spans heterogeneous
data, and has proven to be a fundamental recipe for successful representation
learning across deep learning. We thus develop Neural Data Transformer 2 (NDT2),
a spatiotemporal Transformer for neural spiking activity, and demonstrate that
pretraining can leverage motor BCI datasets that span sessions, subjects, and
experimental tasks. NDT2 enables rapid adaptation to novel contexts in downstream
decoding tasks and opens the path to deployment of pretrained DNNs for iBCI
control. Code: https://github.com/joel99/context_general_bci

1

Introduction

Intracortical neural spiking activity contains rich statistical structure reflecting the processing it
subserves. For example, motor cortical activity during reaching is characterized with low-dimensional
dynamical models [1, 2], and these models can predict behavior under external perturbation and
provides an interpretive lens for motor learning [3–5]. However, new models are currently prepared
for each experimental context, meaning separate datasets are collected for each cortical phenomena
in each subject, for each session. Meanwhile, spiking activity structure is at least somewhat stable
across these contexts; for example, dominant principal components (PCs) of neural activity can
remain stable across sessions, subjects, and behavioral tasks [6–9]. This structure persists in spite of
turnover in recorded neurons, physiological changes in the subject, or task changes required by the
experiment [10, 11]. Conserved neural population structure suggests the opportunity for models that
span beyond single experimental contexts, enabling more efficient, potent analysis and application.
In this work we focus on one primary use case: neuroprosthetics powered by intracortical brain
computer interfaces (iBCIs). With electrical recordings of just dozens to hundreds of channels
of neuronal population spiking activity, today’s iBCIs can relate this observed neural activity to
behavioral intent, achieving impressive milestones such as high-speed speech decoding [12] and
∗

Correspondence to rag53@pitt.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

