Model-enhanced Vector Index
Hailin Zhang1,2,∗ Yujing Wang2,† Qi Chen2 Ruiheng Chang2 Ting Zhang2
Ziming Miao2 Yingyan Hou2,3,∗ Yang Ding2,4,∗ Xupeng Miao5 Haonan Wang6
Bochen Pang2 Yuefeng Zhan2 Hao Sun2 Weiwei Deng2 Qi Zhang2
Fan Yang2 Xing Xie2 Mao Yang2 Bin Cui1,7,†
1
School of Computer Science & Key Lab of High Confidence
Software Technologies, Peking University 2 Microsoft
3
Aerospace Information Research Institute & Key Laboratory of Target
Cognition and Application Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Carnegie Mellon University 6 National University of Singapore
7
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analysis and Applications, Peking University
1
{z.hl, bin.cui}@pku.edu.cn
2
{yujwang, cheqi, ruihengchang, tinzhan, zimiao, bopa}@microsoft.com
2
{yuefzh, hasun, dedeng, qizhang, fanyang, xingx, maoyang}@microsoft.com
3
houyy@aircas.ac.cn 4 dingyang@iie.ac.cn
5
xupeng@cmu.edu 6 haonan.wang@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Embedding-based retrieval methods construct vector indices to search for document
representations that are most similar to the query representations. They are widely
used in document retrieval due to low latency and decent recall performance.
Recent research indicates that deep retrieval solutions offer better model quality,
but are hindered by unacceptable serving latency and the inability to support
document updates. In this paper, we aim to enhance the vector index with endto-end deep generative models, leveraging the differentiable advantages of deep
retrieval models while maintaining desirable serving efficiency. We propose Modelenhanced Vector Index (MEVI), a differentiable model-enhanced index empowered
by a twin-tower representation model. MEVI leverages a Residual Quantization
(RQ) codebook to bridge the sequence-to-sequence deep retrieval and embeddingbased models. To substantially reduce the inference time, instead of decoding the
unique document ids in long sequential steps, we first generate some semantic
virtual cluster ids of candidate documents in a small number of steps, and then
leverage the well-adapted embedding vectors to further perform a fine-grained
search for the relevant documents in the candidate virtual clusters. We empirically
show that our model achieves better performance on the commonly used academic
benchmarks MSMARCO Passage and Natural Questions, with comparable serving
latency to dense retrieval solutions.

1

Introduction

A web search engine basically consists of two key stages, document retrieval and ranking [52, 24, 47,
9]. The document retrieval stage retrieves candidate documents related to the query, while the ranking
stage re-ranks the documents using precise ranking scores. Accurate ranking models are usually deep
neural networks that predict query and document relevance scores [17, 13]. To guarantee low latency
∗
†

The work was done at Microsoft.
Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

