LogSpecT: Feasible Graph Learning Model from
Stationary Signals with Recovery Guarantees

Shangyuan Liu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
shangyuanliu@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Linglingzhi Zhu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
llzzhu@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Anthony Man-Cho So
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
manchoso@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Graph learning from signals is a core task in graph signal processing (GSP).
A significant subclass of graph signals called the stationary graph signals that
broadens the concept of stationarity of data defined on regular domains to signals
on graphs is gaining increasing popularity in the GSP community [10, 20, 25]. The
most commonly used model to learn graphs from these stationary signals is SpecT
[31], which forms the foundation for nearly all the subsequent, more advanced
models. Despite its strengths, the practical formulation of the model, known as
rSpecT, has been identified to be susceptible to the choice of hyperparameters.
More critically, it may suffer from infeasibility as an optimization problem. In
this paper, we introduce the first condition that ensures the infeasibility of rSpecT
and design a novel model called LogSpecT, along with its practical formulation
rLogSpecT to overcome this issue. Contrary to rSpecT, our novel practical model
rLogSpecT is always feasible. Furthermore, we provide recovery guarantees of
rLogSpecT from modern optimization tools related to epi-convergence, which
could be of independent interest and significant for various learning problems. To
demonstrate the practical advantages of rLogSpecT, a highly efficient algorithm
based on the linearized alternating direction method of multipliers (L-ADMM) that
allows closed-form solutions for each subproblem is proposed with convergence
guarantees. Extensive numerical results on both synthetic and real networks not
only corroborate the stability of our proposed methods, but also highlight their
comparable and even superior performance than existing models.

1

Introduction

Learning with graphs has proved its relevance in many practical areas, such as life science [36, 37],
signal processing [13, 14, 38, 39], and financial engineering [1, 21], to just name a few. However,
there are many cases that the graphs are not readily prepared and only the data closely related to
the graphs can be observed. Hence, a core task in Graph Signal Processing (GSP) is to learn the
underlying graph topology based on the interplay between data and graphs [22].
Among these commonly used data properties, an assumption that is referred to as the graph signal
stationarity [10] is gaining attention [30, 20, 25]. Graph signal stationarity is the extension of the
notion of stationarity from the regular space/time domain to the irregular domain (i.e. graphs).
The latter is a traditional hypothesis in signal processing to capture a special type of statistical
relationship between samples of a temporal signal. It is a cornerstone of many signal processing
methods. Although the graph signal stationarity property is proposed more from a theoretic end, the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

