Triple Eagle: Simple, Fast and Practical
Budget-Feasible Mechanisms

Kai Han∗
School of Computer Science and Technology
Soochow University, P.R.China
hankai@suda.edu.cn

You Wu
School of Computer Science and Technology
Soochow University, P.R.China
20235227129@stu.suda.edu.cn

He Huang
School of Computer Science and Technology
Soochow University, P.R.China
huangh@suda.edu.cn

Shuang Cui
School of Computer Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China
lakers@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
We revisit the classical problem of designing Budget-Feasible Mechanisms (BFMs)
for submodular valuation functions, which has been extensively studied since the
seminal paper of Singer [FOCS’10] due to its wide applications in crowdsourcing
and social marketing. We propose TripleEagle, a novel algorithmic framework for
designing BFMs, based on which we present several simple yet effective BFMs that
achieve better approximation ratios than the state-of-the-art work for both monotone
and non-monotone submodular valuation functions. Moreover, our BFMs are
the first in the literature to achieve linear complexities while ensuring obvious
strategyproofness, making them more practical than the previous BFMs. We
conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the empirical performance of our BFMs,
and the experimental results strongly demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness
of our approach.

1

Introduction

In the celebrated Influence Maximization (IM) problem (e.g., [19, 21, 27]) an advertiser needs to
select some “seed users” in a social network, such that the influence spread caused by “Word-ofMouth” propagation is maximized. However, the users may want some rewards for serving as seeds
and also behave strategically to maximize their utilities. So the advertiser has to pay the users under
some budget B and ensure their truthfulness, besides maximizing the influence spread [36]. Another
similar problem arises in crowdsourcing markets (e.g., Amazon’s Mechanical Turk [1]), where a
crowdsourcing task owner needs to hire some strategic workers to perform a crowdsourcing task and
pay them under a budget, with the goal of maximizing the crowdsourcing revenue [4, 25, 37, 38].
Motivated by the above applications, Singer [35] initiates the studies on budget-feasible mechanism
design, where a buyer needs to select a set S of strategic sellers with private costs from a ground set
N with |N | = n and pay them under a budget B, such that the valuation f (S) is maximized while
ensuring that the sellers report their private costs truthfully. Singer [35] considers a monotone and
submodular valuation function f (·) and adopts a value oracle model where f (X) can be obtained
for all X ⊆ N . Following Singer [35]’s work, a lot of BFMs have been proposed; almost all
of the theoretical studies in this line put their emphasis on improving the approximation ratios of
the proposed BFMs (as elaborated in Sec. 1.1), and many studies have applied BFMs to various
∗

Kai Han is the corresponding author (Email: hankai@suda.edu.cn).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

