Scaling laws for language encoding models in fMRI

Aditya R. Vaidya
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
avaidya@utexas.edu

Richard J. Antonello
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
rjantonello@utexas.edu

Alexander G. Huth
Departments of Computer Science and Neuroscience
The University of Texas at Austin
huth@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Representations from transformer-based unidirectional language models are known
to be effective at predicting brain responses to natural language. However, most
studies comparing language models to brains have used GPT-2 or similarly sized
language models. Here we tested whether larger open-source models such as those
from the OPT and LLaMA families are better at predicting brain responses recorded
using fMRI. Mirroring scaling results from other contexts, we found that brain
prediction performance scales logarithmically with model size from 125M to 30B
parameter models, with ∼15% increased encoding performance as measured by
correlation with a held-out test set across 3 subjects. Similar logarithmic behavior
was observed when scaling the size of the fMRI training set. We also characterized
scaling for acoustic encoding models that use HuBERT, WavLM, and Whisper,
and we found comparable improvements with model size. A noise ceiling analysis
of these large, high-performance encoding models showed that performance is
nearing the theoretical maximum for brain areas such as the precuneus and higher
auditory cortex. These results suggest that increasing scale in both models and data
will yield incredibly effective models of language processing in the brain, enabling
better scientific understanding as well as applications such as decoding.
Large language models have come to dominate the field of AI due to incredible capabilities that range
from reasoning [1] to code generation [2] to even predicting how a human brain would respond to
language [3]. Rapid improvement in these abilities has largely been driven by scale: the most capable
models today use nearly identical architectures to early transformer language models [4], but have
orders of magnitude more parameters and larger training data [5]. Overall, model capabilities–often
measured as zero-shot performance across a range of language tasks–tend to scale logarithmic with
the number of model parameters [6, 7], suggesting that improvements will continue as model scale
increases. Here we test whether these scaling “laws” hold for the task of modeling the human brain.
The human brain is the quintessential language processing system, but there is still much to learn
about how it processes and represents language. One paradigm used for this purpose is the encoding
model: given measured brain responses to natural language, construct a model that predicts those
responses from the natural language stimulus [8–19]. If an encoding model is able to accurately
predict brain responses across a range of new stimuli, then that model must use similar representations
to the brain. High-performing encoding models can then be interpreted to gain insight into the brain’s
computations [20–22] or the function of different brain areas [11, 23–25]. The highest performance
is currently offered by encoding models that are based on large language models such as GPT-2
XL [26]. To build an encoding model, a language model is fed the same language stimuli that the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

