Revisiting Evaluation Metrics for Semantic
Segmentation: Optimization and Evaluation of
Fine-grained Intersection over Union

Zifu Wang1∗ Maxim Berman2
Tinne Tuytelaars1

Amal Rannen-Triki3

Luc Van Gool1,6,7

Philip H.S. Torr4

Jiaqian Yu8

Devis Tuia5

Matthew B. Blaschko1

1

ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
2
Google, Zürich, Switzerland
3
Google DeepMind, London, United Kingdom
4
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
5
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
6
ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
7
INSAIT, Sofia, Bulgaria
8
Samsung Research, Beijing, China

Abstract
Semantic segmentation datasets often exhibit two types of imbalance: class imbalance, where some classes appear more frequently than others and size imbalance,
where some objects occupy more pixels than others. This causes traditional evaluation metrics to be biased towards majority classes (e.g. overall pixel-wise accuracy)
and large objects (e.g. mean pixel-wise accuracy and per-dataset mean intersection
over union). To address these shortcomings, we propose the use of fine-grained
mIoUs along with corresponding worst-case metrics, thereby offering a more holistic evaluation of segmentation techniques. These fine-grained metrics offer less
bias towards large objects, richer statistical information, and valuable insights into
model and dataset auditing. Furthermore, we undertake an extensive benchmark
study, where we train and evaluate 15 modern neural networks with the proposed
metrics on 12 diverse natural and aerial segmentation datasets. Our benchmark
study highlights the necessity of not basing evaluations on a single metric and
confirms that fine-grained mIoUs reduce the bias towards large objects. Moreover,
we identify the crucial role played by architecture designs and loss functions, which
lead to best practices in optimizing fine-grained metrics. The code is available at
https://github.com/zifuwanggg/JDTLosses.

1

Introduction

Every metric reflects a certain property of the result and choosing the right one is important to
emphasize those that we care about. However, this choice may not be easy, as many metrics come
with certain biases [34]. For semantic segmentation, the overall pixel-wise accuracy (Acc) is believed
unsuitable due to its bias towards majority classes, especially given that semantic segmentation
datasets typically have long-tailed class distributions [18]. The mean pixel-wise accuracy (mAcc) is
introduced to counter this issue by averaging pixel-wise accuracy across all classes, and it eventually
became the official evaluation metric in PASCAL VOC 2007 [16], which was one of the earliest
challenges that showcased a segmentation leaderboard. However, mAcc does not account for false
positives, leading to over-segmentation of the results. Consequently, in PASCAL VOC 2008 [17],
∗

Correspondence to: zifu.wang@kuleuven.be

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

