Outlier-Robust Gromov-Wasserstein for Graph Data

Lemin Kong
CUHK
lkong@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Jiajin Li
Stanford University
jiajinli@stanford.edu

Jianheng Tang
HKUST
jtangbf@connect.ust.hk

Anthony Man-Cho So
CUHK
manchoso@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) distance is a powerful tool for comparing and aligning
probability distributions supported on different metric spaces. Recently, GW has
become the main modeling technique for aligning heterogeneous data for a wide
range of graph learning tasks. However, the GW distance is known to be highly
sensitive to outliers, which can result in large inaccuracies if the outliers are given
the same weight as other samples in the objective function. To mitigate this
issue, we introduce a new and robust version of the GW distance called RGW.
RGW features optimistically perturbed marginal constraints within a KullbackLeibler divergence-based ambiguity set. To make the benefits of RGW more
accessible in practice, we develop a computationally efficient and theoretically
provable procedure using Bregman proximal alternating linearized minimization
algorithm. Through extensive experimentation, we validate our theoretical results
and demonstrate the effectiveness of RGW on real-world graph learning tasks, such
as subgraph matching and partial shape correspondence.

1

Introduction

Gromov-Wasserstein distance (GW) [26, 28] acts as a main model tool in data science to compare
data distributions on unaligned metric spaces. Recently, it has received much attention across a host
of applications in data analysis, e.g., shape correspondence [24, 31, 36, 27], graph alignment and
partition [37, 38, 15, 18, 14, 44], graph embedding and classification [41, 43], unsupervised word
embedding and translation [3, 19], generative modeling across incomparable spaces [8, 45].
In practice, the robustness of GW distance suffers heavily from its sensitivity to outliers. Here,
outliers mean the samples with large noise, which usually are far away from the clean samples
or have different structures from the clean samples. The hard constraints on the marginals in the
Gromov-Wasserstein distance require all the mass in the source distribution to be entirely transported
to the target distribution, making it highly sensitive to outliers. When the outliers are weighted
similarly as other clean samples, even a small fraction of outliers corrupted can largely impact the
GW distance value and the optimal coupling, which is unsatisfactory in real-world applications.
To overcome the above issue, some recent works are trying to relax the marginal constraints of
GW distance. [33] introduces a L1 relaxation of mass conservation of the GW distance. However,
this reformulation replaces the strict marginal constraint that the transport plan should be a joint
distribution with marginals as specific distributions by the constraint that only requires the transport
plan to be a joint distribution, which can easily lead to over-relaxation. On another front, [10]
propose a so-called partial GW distance (PGW), which only transports a fraction of mass from
source distribution to target distribution. The formulation of PGW is limited to facilitating mass
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

