Scaling Laws for Hyperparameter Optimization

Arlind Kadra
Representation Learning Lab
University of Freiburg
kadraa@cs.uni-freiburg.de
Martin Wistuba
Amazon Web Services
Amazon Berlin
marwistu@amazon.com

Maciej Janowski
Representation Learning Lab
University of Freiburg
janowski@cs.uni-freiburg.de
Josif Grabocka
Representation Learning Lab
University of Freiburg
grabocka@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Hyperparameter optimization is an important subfield of machine learning that
focuses on tuning the hyperparameters of a chosen algorithm to achieve peak
performance. Recently, there has been a stream of methods that tackle the issue
of hyperparameter optimization, however, most of the methods do not exploit
the dominant power law nature of learning curves for Bayesian optimization. In
this work, we propose Deep Power Laws (DPL), an ensemble of neural network
models conditioned to yield predictions that follow a power-law scaling pattern.
Our method dynamically decides which configurations to pause and train incrementally by making use of gray-box evaluations. We compare our method against
7 state-of-the-art competitors on 3 benchmarks related to tabular, image, and NLP
datasets covering 59 diverse tasks. Our method achieves the best results across all
benchmarks by obtaining the best any-time results compared to all competitors.

1

Introduction

Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) is a major challenge for the Machine Learning community.
Unfortunately, HPO is not yet feasible for Deep Learning (DL) methods due to the high cost of
evaluating multiple configurations. Recently multi-fidelity HPO (a sub-problem of gray-box HPO) has
emerged as a promising paradigm for HPO in DL, by discarding poorly-performing hyperparameter
configurations after observing the validation error on the low-level fidelities of the optimization
procedure [28, 9, 1, 29]. The advantage of multi-fidelity HPO compared to online HPO [7, 38], or
meta-gradient HPO [32, 10, 31] is the ability to tune all types of hyperparameters.
In recent years, a stream of papers highlights the fact that the performance of DL methods is
predictable [14], concretely, that the validation error rate is a power law function of the model size, or
dataset size [41, 40]. Such a power law relationship has been subsequently validated in the domain of
NLP, too [11]. In this paper, we demonstrate that the power-law principle has the potential to be a
game-changer in HPO, because we can evaluate hyperparameter configurations in low-budget regimes
(e.g. after a few epochs), then estimate the performance on the full budget using dataset-specific
power law models. Concretely, we hypothesize and empirically demonstrate that optimization curves
(training epochs versus accuracy, or loss) can be efficiently modeled as simple power law functions.
As a result, we introduce Deep Power Law (DPL) ensembles, a probabilistic surrogate for Bayesian
optimization (BO) that estimates the performance of a hyperparameter configuration at future budgets
using ensembles of deep power law functions. Subsequently, our novel formulation of BO dynamically decides which configurations to pause and train incrementally by relying on the performance
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

