On Certified Generalization in Structured Prediction
Bastian Boll
Image & Pattern Analysis Group
Heidelberg University
bastian.boll@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Christoph Schnörr
Image & Pattern Analysis Group
Heidelberg University
schnoerr@math.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
In structured prediction, target objects have rich internal structure which does not
factorize into independent components and violates common i.i.d. assumptions.
This challenge becomes apparent through the exponentially large output space in
applications such as image segmentation or scene graph generation. We present a
novel PAC-Bayesian risk bound for structured prediction wherein the rate of generalization scales not only with the number of structured examples but also with their
size. The underlying assumption, conforming to ongoing research on generative
models, is that data are generated by the Knothe-Rosenblatt rearrangement of a
factorizing reference measure. This allows to explicitly distill the structure between
random output variables into a Wasserstein dependency matrix. Our work makes a
preliminary step towards leveraging powerful generative models to establish generalization bounds for discriminative downstream tasks in the challenging setting of
structured prediction.

1

Introduction

1.1

Overview

Structured prediction is the task of predicting an output which itself contains internal structure. As an
example, consider the problem of image segmentation. The output to be predicted is an assignment of
semantic classes to each image pixel. However, the segmentation problem is not merely a pixelwise
classification, because each pixel is not independently assigned a semantic class. If two pixels are
adjacent in the image plane, it is more likely that they belong to the same class than to different ones.
A way to remedy this problem is to enumerate all possible segmentations of an image and treat the
problem as classification. However, the output space of this classification is now exponentially large.
This exponential (in the number of pixels) size of the output space indicates a much more difficult
problem than the unstructured case of classification. In fact, it also presents an immediate challenge
for any statistical learning theory which requires assumptions on the number of output classes [44].
From a practical perspective, structured prediction problems present a challenge of label aquisition.
For instance, dense manual segmentation of an image is significantly more labour intensive than
manual classification. In turn, one would expect that pixelwise segmentation of an image contains
much richer information to be exploited in supervised learning. However, this is not represented in
typical statistical learning theory which assumes all data to be independently drawn from the true
underlying distribution. In the extreme case of only a single structured example being available for
training, these statistical learning theories can not make any meaningful statement on generalization.
Addressing this point in particular, [38] presents an analysis of the dependency structure in the output
and proves a risk certificate which decays in both the number of structured examples m and their size
d. Refering back to the example of image segmentation, this amounts to a high-probability bound on
the fraction of misslabeled pixels which decays with the number of labeled pixels observed during
training as opposed to merely the number of segmented images.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

