WITRAN: Water-wave Information Transmission and
Recurrent Acceleration Network for Long-range
Time Series Forecasting

Yuxin Jia Youfang Lin Xinyan Hao Yan Lin Shengnan Guo Huaiyu Wan∗
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing, China
{yuxinjia, yflin, xinyanhao, ylincs, guoshn, hywan}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Capturing semantic information is crucial for accurate long-range time series
forecasting, which involves modeling global and local correlations, as well as discovering long- and short-term repetitive patterns. Previous works have partially addressed these issues separately, but have not been able to address all of them simultaneously. Meanwhile, their time and memory complexities are still not sufficiently
low for long-range forecasting. To address the challenge of capturing different types
of semantic information, we propose a novel Water-wave Information Transmission
(WIT) framework. This framework captures both long- and short-term repetitive
patterns through bi-granular information transmission. It also models global and
local correlations by recursively fusing and selecting information using Horizontal
Vertical Gated Selective Unit (HVGSU). In addition, to improve the computing
efficiency, we propose a generic Recurrent
Acceleration Network (RAN) which
√
reduces the time complexity to O( L) while maintaining the memory complexity
at O(L). Our proposed method, called Water-wave Information Transmission
and Recurrent Acceleration Network (WITRAN), outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods by 5.80% and 14.28% on long-range and ultra-long-range time series
forecasting tasks respectively, as demonstrated by experiments on four benchmark
datasets. The code is available at: https://github.com/Water2sea/WITRAN.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting is a valuable tool across diverse fields, such as energy, traffic, weather and so
on. Compared with short-range time series forecasting, long-range forecasting offers the advantage
of providing individuals with ample time to prepare and make informed decisions. For instance,
accurate long-range traffic and weather forecasts enable individuals to plan their travel arrangements
and attire accordingly. To improve the accuracy of such forecasting, it is essential to utilize longer
historical sequences as input for the forecasting models [Liu et al., 2021, Zeng et al., 2023].
Previous studies [Wu et al., 2023, Nie et al., 2023] have highlighted the importance of capturing
semantic information in long-range time series to achieve accurate predictions. However, the semantic
information in long-range time series is diverse, so how to analyze and capture it becomes a major
challenge. Specifically, semantic information includes two main aspects: (1) Global and local
correlations. The local semantic information usually contains short-range changes within the data,
while the global semantic information reflects the long-range trends present in the time series [Wang
et al., 2023], which can be referred to as global-local semantic information. (2) Long- and shortterm repetitive patterns. Time series often exhibit repetitive patterns at different timescales [Lai
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

