Fused Gromov-Wasserstein Graph Mixup for
Graph-level Classifications

Xinyu Ma1

Xu Chu2∗ Yasha Wang1,3 Yang Lin1 Junfeng Zhao1
Liantao Ma1,3 Wenwu Zhu2
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
3
National Research and Engineering Center of Software Engineering, Peking University
maxinyu@pku.edu.cn, chu_xu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph data augmentation has shown superiority in enhancing generalizability and
robustness of GNNs in graph-level classifications. However, existing methods
primarily focus on the augmentation in the graph signal space and the graph
structure space independently, neglecting the joint interaction between them. In this
paper, we address this limitation by formulating the problem as an optimal transport
problem that aims to find an optimal inter-graph node matching strategy considering
the interactions between graph structures and signals. To solve this problem, we
propose a novel graph mixup algorithm called FGWMixup, which seeks a "midpoint"
of source graphs in the Fused Gromov-Wasserstein (FGW) metric space. To
enhance the scalability of our method, we introduce a relaxed FGW solver that
accelerates FGWMixup by improving the convergence rate from O(t−1 ) to O(t−2 ).
Extensive experiments conducted on five datasets using both classic (MPNNs) and
advanced (Graphormers) GNN backbones demonstrate that FGWMixup effectively
improves the generalizability and robustness of GNNs. Codes are available at
https://github.com/ArthurLeoM/FGWMixup.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [1, 2] have demonstrated promising capabilities in
graph-level classifications, including molecular property prediction [3, 4], social network classification [5], healthcare prediction [6, 7], etc. Nevertheless, similar to other successfully deployed deep
neural networks, GNNs also suffer from data insufficiency and perturbation, requiring the application
of regularization techniques to improve generalizability and robustness [8]. Data augmentation is
widely adopted for regularization in deep learning. It involves creating new training data by applying
various semantic-invariant transformations to the original data, such as cropping or rotating images in
computer vision [9], randomly inserting and rephrasing words in natural language [10, 11], etc. The
augmented data fortify deep neural networks (DNNs) against potential noise and outliers underlying
insufficient samples, enabling DNNs to learn more robust and representative features.
Data augmentation for GNNs requires a unique design due to the distinctive properties of attributed
graphs [12], such as irregular sizes, misaligned nodes, and diverse topologies, which are not encountered when dealing with data in the Euclidean spaces such as images and tabular data. Generally, the
augmentation for GNNs necessitates the consideration of two intertwined yet complementary input
spaces, namely the graph signal space X and the graph structure space A, which are mapped to an
aligned latent space H with GNNs. The graph signal space X consists of node features. Current
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

