Bi-Level Offline Policy Optimization with Limited
Exploration

Wenzhuo Zhou
Department of Statistics
University of California Irvine
wenzhuz3@uci.edu

Abstract
We study offline reinforcement learning (RL) which seeks to learn a good policy
based on a fixed, pre-collected dataset. A fundamental challenge behind this task
is the distributional shift due to the dataset lacking sufficient exploration, especially under function approximation. To tackle this issue, we propose a bi-level
structured policy optimization algorithm that models a hierarchical interaction
between the policy (upper-level) and the value function (lower-level). The lower
level focuses on constructing a confidence set of value estimates that maintain
sufficiently small weighted average Bellman errors, while controlling uncertainty
arising from distribution mismatch. Subsequently, at the upper level, the policy
aims to maximize a conservative value estimate from the confidence set formed
at the lower level. This novel formulation preserves the maximum flexibility of
the implicitly induced exploratory data distribution, enabling the power of model
extrapolation. In practice, it can be solved through a computationally efficient,
penalized adversarial estimation procedure. Our theoretical regret guarantees do
not rely on any data-coverage and completeness-type assumptions, only requiring
realizability. These guarantees also demonstrate that the learned policy represents
the “best effort” among all policies, as no other policies can outperform it. We evaluate our model using a blend of synthetic, benchmark, and real-world datasets for
offline RL, showing that it performs competitively with state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) is a task to learn a good policy using only a pre-collected, fixed
dataset, without further exploration with the environment. This distinctive characteristic positions
offline RL as a promising approach for solving real-world sequential decision-making problems in
healthcare [35, 61], financial marketing [46], robotics [47] and education [32], as acquiring diverse
or expert-quality data in these fields can be costly or practically unattainable.
Arguably, two of the biggest challenges in offline RL are the distributional shift between the datagenerating distribution and those induced by candidate policies, and the stringent requirements on the
properties of function approximation [28]. It has been observed that, in practice, the distributional
mismatch often results in unsatisfactory performance of many existing algorithms, and even amplifying with function approximation [18, 27]. Many prior works [39, 13, 2, 14] crucially rely on a global
data-coverage assumption and completeness-type function approximation condition in a technical
sense. The former necessitates that the dataset to contain any state-action pair with a lower bounded
probability so that the distributional shift can be well calibrated. The latter requires the function class
to be closed under Bellman updates. Both assumptions are particularly strong and are likely to be
violated in practice [58]. Consequently, algorithms that depend on these assumptions may experience
performance degradation and instability [52]. Therefore, it is crucial to develop novel algorithms that
relax these assumptions, offering robust and widely applicable solutions for real-world scenarios.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

