Meet in the Middle: A New Pre-training Paradigm
Anh Nguyen∗ Nikos Karampatziakis∗

Weizhu Chen

Microsoft Azure AI

Abstract
Most language models (LMs) are trained and applied in an autoregressive leftto-right fashion, predicting the next token from the preceding ones. However,
this ignores that the full sequence is available during training. In this paper, we
introduce “Meet in the Middle” (MIM) a new pre-training paradigm that improves
data efficiency by training in two directions, left-to-right and right-to-left, and
encouraging the respective models to agree on their token distribution for each position. While the primary outcome is an improved left-to-right LM, we also obtain
secondary benefits in the infilling task. There, we leverage the two pre-trained directions to propose an infilling procedure that builds the completion simultaneously
from both sides. We conduct extensive experiments on both programming and
natural languages and show that MIM significantly surpasses existing pre-training
paradigms, in left-to-right generation as well as infilling. 2

1

Introduction

Language models (LMs) are becoming essential for various assisted authoring tasks, including text
summarization and code completion. In order to be usable in many different applications, most LMs
must be able to generate the next token from the sequence of previous tokens. Thus, pre-training
has focused on optimizing the model’s ability to predict the next token given the previous tokens
(the prefix), as measured by perplexity. However, this neglects that at pre-training time we also have
access to the subsequent tokens (the suffix). While the suffix cannot be used as an input to the model,
there are other ways to incorporate it into pre-training which have not received much attention in
the literature. In this work we propose a more data-efficient approach, preserving the autoregressive
nature of LMs while fully utilizing pre-training data.
Why should we be interested in alternative pre-training procedures? After all, the main artifact
produced during pre-training is an autoregressive left-to-right LM and the pre-training objective
closely matches both how the LM is applied and the desire to predict the next token well. Nonetheless,
there are still compelling reasons to consider alternative training objectives. First, data efficiency:
current LMs are trained with sparse supervision, only learning from the actual next token. By
exploring denser supervision during training, we aim to improve performance with less data. Second,
related tasks: in real-world scenarios, users may need to infill or modify existing text. Current
left-to-right LMs are limited in this regard, as they cannot use both sides of the insertion position,
often leading to suboptimal results.
In this work, we introduce a novel pre-training paradigm named “Meet in the Middle” (MIM). The
MIM approach is founded on two central principles. Primarily, it introduces an additional right-to-left
LM to complement the standard left-to-right model, enabling both models to co-regularize and benefit
from each other’s context. This improves data efficiency and consistency, with models metaphorically
meeting in the middle by adjusting their output probabilities to agree with one another. Secondarily,
∗
2

Equal Contribution
Code and models available at https://github.com/microsoft/Meet-in-the-Middle

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

