Nonparametric Boundary Geometry in Physics
Informed Deep Learning

Scott Cameron
Oxford University, Instadeep Ltd.
United Kingdom
scameron@instadeep.com

Arnu Pretorius
Instadeep Ltd.
South Africa

Stephen Roberts
Oxford University
United Kingdom

Abstract
Engineering design problems frequently require solving systems of partial differential equations with boundary conditions speciﬁed on object geometries in the
form of a triangular mesh. These boundary geometries are provided by a designer
and are problem dependent. The efﬁciency of the design process greatly beneﬁts
from fast turnaround times when repeatedly solving PDEs on various geometries.
However, most current work that uses machine learning to speed up the solution
process relies heavily on a ﬁxed parameterization of the geometry, which cannot
be changed after training. This severely limits the possibility of reusing a trained
model across a variety of design problems. In this work, we propose a novel neural
operator architecture which accepts boundary geometry, in the form of triangular
meshes, as input and produces an approximate solution to a given PDE as output.
Once trained, the model can be used to rapidly estimate the PDE solution over a
new geometry, without the need for retraining or representation of the geometry
with a pre-speciﬁed parameterization.

1 Introduction
The prospect of applying machine learning to complex computational problems in science and engineering is appealing for a variety of reasons. In particular, surrogate models allow for rapid predictions to be made without performing lengthy and expensive computations. Surrogate models are
especially beneﬁcial in iterative design of technical systems that traditionally rely on sophisticated
simulations. One challenge in such applications is the principled inclusion of inductive biases to
preserve properties of the underlying physics. Various approaches have been proposed, such as directly parameterizing models to obey conservation laws [1; 10], or by the inclusion of constraints
[22; 18]. Of key relevance to this paper is the approach popularly known as Physics Informed Neural
Networks (PINNs) [12].
1.1

Physics informed neural networks

In their simplest form, PINNs are multilayer perceptrons trained to minimize a loss function based
on the residual of some partial differential equation (PDE). The PDE in question is a system of
equations, with solution ϕ, deﬁned on some open region Ω with boundary δΩ:
F (ϕ) := F (x, ϕ, ∇ϕ, . . .) = f (x)
G(ϕ) := G(x, ϕ, ∇ϕ, . . .) = g(x)

x ∈ Ω,
x ∈ δΩ,

(1)
(2)

for some smooth F, G, f, and g. For the vast majority of realistic physical problems, the domain Ω
is a subset of three dimensional Euclidean space R3 . Here we shall furthermore assume that Ω is
bounded and the boundary δΩ is compact. Many algorithms and techniques to solve such systems
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

