LLMScore: Unveiling the Power of Large Language
Models in Text-to-Image Synthesis Evaluation

Yujie Lu1∗, Xianjun Yang1 , Xiujun Li2 , Xin Eric Wang3 , William Yang Wang1
1
University of California, Santa Barbara
2
3
University of Washington
University of California, Santa Cruz
https://github.com/YujieLu10/LLMScore

Abstract
Existing automatic evaluation on text-to-image synthesis can only provide an
image-text matching score, without considering the object-level compositionality,
which results in poor correlation with human judgments. In this work, we propose
LLMScore, a new framework that offers evaluation scores with multi-granularity
compositionality. LLMScore leverages the large language models (LLMs) to
evaluate text-to-image models. Initially, it transforms the image into image-level
and object-level visual descriptions. Then an evaluation instruction is fed into
the LLMs to measure the alignment between the synthesized image and the text,
ultimately generating a score accompanied by a rationale. Our substantial analysis
reveals the highest correlation of LLMScore with human judgments on a wide
range of datasets (Attribute Binding Contrast, Concept Conjunction, MSCOCO,
DrawBench, PaintSkills). Notably, our LLMScore achieves Kendall’s τ correlation
with human evaluations that is 58.8% and 31.2% higher than the commonly-used
text-image matching metrics CLIP and BLIP, respectively.

1

Introduction

In recent years, research in text-to-image synthesis has made significant progress [9, 11, 38, 43].
However, evaluation metrics have lagged behind due to challenges such as accurately capturing
composite text-image alignment (e.g. color, counting, location) [47], interpretably producing the
score, and adaptively evaluating with various objectives.
Established evaluation metrics for text-to-image synthesis like CLIPScore [17] and BLIP [24], while
widely used and highly effective [20, 36], have encountered challenges when it comes to capturing
object-level alignment between text and image [12, 26]. Figure 1 illustrates an example from the
Concept Conjunction dataset [12], given the text prompt “A red book and a yellow vase”,
the left image aligns with the text prompt, while the right image fails to generate a red book, and
the correct color for the vase, also with an extra yellow flower. Human judges can make the
correct and clear assessment (1.00 v.s. 0.45/0.55) of these two images on both overall and error
counting objectives, while the existing metrics (CLIP, NegCLIP [51], BLIP) predicts similar scores
for both images, failing to distinguish the correct image (on the left) from the wrong one (on the
right). Furthermore, these metrics provide a single, non-interpretable score, obscuring the underlying
reasoning behind the alignment of the synthesized images with the given text prompts. Additionally,
these model-based metrics are static, unable to follow varied guidelines that prioritize different
objectives of the text-to-image evaluation. For example, the evaluation can range from accessing
image-level semantics (Overall) to finer object-level details (Error Counting). These issues hinder the
existing metrics from aligning with human evaluations.
∗

Corresponding Author: yujielu10@gmail.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

