The Drunkard’s Odometry:
Estimating Camera Motion in Deforming Scenes

David Recasens
University of Zaragoza

Martin R. Oswald
ETH Zurich, University of Amsterdam

Marc Pollefeys
ETH Zurich, Microsoft

Javier Civera
University of Zaragoza

Abstract
Estimating camera motion in deformable scenes poses a complex and open research
challenge. Most existing non-rigid structure from motion techniques assume to
observe also static scene parts besides deforming scene parts in order to establish
an anchoring reference. However, this assumption does not hold true in certain
relevant application cases such as endoscopies. Deformable odometry and SLAM
pipelines, which tackle the most challenging scenario of exploratory trajectories,
suffer from a lack of robustness and proper quantitative evaluation methodologies. To tackle this issue with a common benchmark, we introduce the Drunkard’s
Dataset, a challenging collection of synthetic data targeting visual navigation and
reconstruction in deformable environments. This dataset is the first large set of
exploratory camera trajectories with ground truth inside 3D scenes where every
surface exhibits non-rigid deformations over time. Simulations in realistic 3D buildings lets us obtain a vast amount of data and ground truth labels, including camera
poses, RGB images and depth, optical flow and normal maps at high resolution
and quality. We further present a novel deformable odometry method, dubbed the
Drunkard’s Odometry, which decomposes optical flow estimates into rigid-body
camera motion and non-rigid scene deformations. In order to validate our data,
our work contains an evaluation of several baselines as well as a novel tracking
error metric which does not require ground truth data. Dataset and code: https:
//davidrecasens.github.io/TheDrunkard’sOdometry/

1

Introduction

Deformable scenes are among the most challenging cases for visual navigation and multi-view
reconstruction. They may also be among the ones with the most relevant potential applications,
ranging from the reconstruction of deforming objects [1], faces [2], hands [3], human bodies [4]
(or animals’ [5]), clothing [6]) or the body interior for medical applications [7, 8, 9, 10]. Among
all potential applications for mapping and navigation in non-rigid scenes, medical ones stand out
as very different from the rest and are the target of our work. In certain medical procedures, such
as endoscopies, a camera navigates inside the human body, performing exploratory trajectories
that extend far beyond its field of view. For the rest of the applications mentioned, the camera
remains nearly or fully stationary and most views have a high degree of overlap. The field of NonRigid Structure from Motion (NRSfM) has experienced significant progress in the last decades, e.g.
[11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. However, most of them address small-scale
reconstructions and are of limited use in medical applications. For the few exceptions that cover
SLAM [25] in deformable scenes (e.g., [7, 8, 10, 26]), there are no clear benchmarks nor datasets to
support and track progress in the field.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

