Simple and Asymmetric Graph Contrastive
Learning without Augmentations

Teng Xiao1∗ , Huaisheng Zhu1∗ , Zhengyu Chen2 , Suhang Wang1
1
The Pennsylvania State University, 2 Zhejiang University,
{tengxiao,hvz5312,szw494}@psu.edu, chenzhengyu@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) has shown superior performance in representation learning in graph-structured data. Despite their success, most existing GCL
methods rely on prefabricated graph augmentation and homophily assumptions.
Thus, they fail to generalize well to heterophilic graphs where connected nodes
may have different class labels and dissimilar features. In this paper, we study
the problem of conducting contrastive learning on homophilic and heterophilic
graphs. We find that we can achieve promising performance simply by considering
an asymmetric view of the neighboring nodes. The resulting simple algorithm,
Asymmetric Contrastive Learning for Graphs (GraphACL), is easy to implement
and does not rely on graph augmentations and homophily assumptions. We provide theoretical and empirical evidence that GraphACL can capture one-hop local
neighborhood information and two-hop monophily similarity, which are both important for modeling heterophilic graphs. Experimental results show that the simple
GraphACL significantly outperforms state-of-the-art graph contrastive learning and
self-supervised learning methods on homophilic and heterophilic graphs. The code
of GraphACL is available at https://github.com/tengxiao1/GraphACL.

1

Introduction

Contrastive learning has emerged as a promising regime for unsupervised vision representation
learning without using annotated labeled data [1]. Recently, graph contrastive learning (GCL) has also
been introduced to graph-structured data due to the lack of task-specific node labels [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
GCL has achieved competitive (or even better) performance on many downstream tasks on graphs
compared to its counterparts trained with annotated ground-truth labels [7, 8].
Generally, existing GCL methods can be categorized into two categories. The first contrastive
scheme [9, 10, 11, 12] reconstructs the local network structure (i.e., observed edges) to align with
traditional network-embedding objectives [13, 14]. Specifically, this scheme treats one-hop or
random-walk local neighboring nodes of the target node as positive examples and non-neighboring
nodes as negative samples. It then employs contrastive loss functions to minimize the representation
distance of positive pairs and maximize the distance of negative pairs [10]. The key motivation behind
this scheme is the explicit homophily assumption that semantically similar nodes are more likely to
be linked than dissimilar ones. Thus, connected nodes should have similar representations in the
latent space. However, in heterophilic graphs, connected nodes are not necessarily from the same
semantic class [15, 16], and should not be simply pulled together in the latent space. This scheme
empirically faces issues with performance in graphs exhibiting heterophily [17, 18].
The second graph contrastive scheme involves graph augmentations [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Specifically,
it constructs two views through stochastic graph augmentation and then learns representations by
contrasting these views based on the information maximization principle [19]. A positive node
*

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

