Batch Bayesian Optimization for
Replicable Experimental Design

Zhongxiang Dai1 , Quoc Phong Nguyen2 , Sebastian Shenghong Tay1,4 ,
Daisuke Urano5 , Richalynn Leong5 , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1 , Patrick Jaillet2,3
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
2
LIDS and 3 EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
4
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), A*STAR, Singapore
5
Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, Singapore
dzx@nus.edu.sg, qphongmp@gmail.com, sebastian.tay@u.nus.edu,
{daisuke, richalynn}@tll.org.sg, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg, jaillet@mit.edu

Abstract
Many real-world experimental design problems (a) evaluate multiple experimental
conditions in parallel and (b) replicate each condition multiple times due to large
and heteroscedastic observation noise. Given a fixed total budget, this naturally
induces a trade-off between evaluating more unique conditions while replicating
each of them fewer times vs. evaluating fewer unique conditions and replicating
each more times. Moreover, in these problems, practitioners may be risk-averse
and hence prefer an input with both good average performance and small variability. To tackle both challenges, we propose the Batch Thompson Sampling
for Replicable Experimental Design (BTS-RED) framework, which encompasses
three algorithms. Our BTS-RED-Known and BTS-RED-Unknown algorithms, for,
respectively, known and unknown noise variance, choose the number of replications adaptively rather than deterministically such that an input with a larger noise
variance is replicated more times. As a result, despite the noise heteroscedasticity,
both algorithms enjoy a theoretical guarantee and are asymptotically no-regret.
Our Mean-Var-BTS-RED algorithm aims at risk-averse optimization and is also
asymptotically no-regret. We also show the effectiveness of our algorithms in two
practical real-world applications: precision agriculture and AutoML.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO), which is a sequential algorithm for optimizing black-box and expensiveto-evaluate functions [14, 15], has found application in a wide range of experimental design problems [21]. Many such applications which use BO to accelerate the scientific discovery process
[27] fall under the umbrella of AI for science (AI4Science). Many real-world experimental design
problems, such as precision agriculture, share two inherent characteristics: (a) multiple experimental
conditions are usually evaluated in parallel to take full advantage of the available experimental budget;
(b) the evaluation of every experimental condition is usually replicated multiple times [31] because
every experiment may be associated with a large and heteroscedastic (i.e., input-dependent) observation noise, in which case replication usually leads to better performances [2, 33, 43]. Replicating
each evaluated experimental condition is also a natural choice in experimental design problems in
which it incurs considerable setup costs to test every new experimental condition. This naturally
induces an interesting challenge regarding the trade-off between input selection and replication: in
every iteration of BO where we are given a fixed total experimental budget, should we evaluate more
unique experimental conditions and replicate each of them fewer times or evaluate fewer unique
conditions and replicate each more times? Interestingly, this trade-off is also commonly found in
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

