Datasets and Benchmarks for Nanophotonic Structure
and Parametric Design Simulations

Jungtaek Kim
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
jungtaek.kim@pitt.edu

Mingxuan Li
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
mil152@pitt.edu

Oliver Hinder
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
ohinder@pitt.edu

Paul W. Leu
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
pleu@pitt.edu

Abstract
Nanophotonic structures have versatile applications including solar cells, antireflective coatings, electromagnetic interference shielding, optical filters, and light
emitting diodes. To design and understand these nanophotonic structures, electrodynamic simulations are essential. These simulations enable us to model electromagnetic fields over time and calculate optical properties. In this work, we
introduce frameworks and benchmarks to evaluate nanophotonic structures in the
context of parametric structure design problems. The benchmarks are instrumental
in assessing the performance of optimization algorithms and identifying an optimal
structure based on target optical properties. Moreover, we explore the impact of
varying grid sizes in electrodynamic simulations, shedding light on how evaluation
fidelity can be strategically leveraged in enhancing structure designs.

1

Introduction

Nanophotonic structures play a crucial role for a wide range of real-world applications such as solar
cells, anti-reflective coatings, electromagnetic interference shielding, optical filters, and light emitting
diodes.1 In particular, several studies have demonstrated that nanophotonic structures can enhance
target performance for many applications [70, 71, 73, 21, 19, 39]. Electrodynamic simulations, which
are based on Maxwell’s equations, provide accurate predictions of the optical and electromagnetic
properties of these structures [18]. Leveraging the utility of these simulations, we can combine them
with optimization procedures to design and discover new and improved structures.
In this paper, we introduce datasets and benchmarks for nanophotonic structures, focusing on
parametric design simulations in relation to optical properties. These benchmarks allow us to
analyze the performance of optimization algorithms such as derivative-free algorithms [53] and
Bayesian optimization [16], when it comes to identifying optimal photonic structures based on a
target optical property. Our frameworks support two modes for fast prototyping of optimization
methods: discretized search space mode and surrogate model mode. The discretized search space
mode uses stored simulated results over grid query points; the surrogate model mode estimates any
query points within a continuous search space based on training with our datasets. These modes
allow users to quickly test their optimization algorithms without running expensive electrodynamic
simulations. Our system facilitates the use of evaluation fidelity, which is controlled by a simulation
1

Our implementation can be found at https://github.com/jungtaekkim/nanophotonic-structures.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

