SMACv2: An Improved Benchmark for Cooperative
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Benjamin Ellis1∗ Jonathan Cook1 Skander Moalla1,5 Mikayel Samvelyan2,3
Mingfei Sun4 Anuj Mahajan1 Jakob N. Foerster1 Shimon Whiteson1
1

University of Oxford 2 University College London 3 Meta AI 4 University of Manchester
5
EPFL

Abstract
The availability of challenging benchmarks has played a key role in the recent
progress of machine learning. In cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning,
the StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) has become a popular testbed for
the centralised training with decentralised execution paradigm. However, after
years of sustained improvement on SMAC, algorithms now achieve near-perfect
performance. In this work, we conduct new analysis demonstrating that SMAC
lacks the stochasticity and partial observability to require complex closed-loop
policies (i.e., those that condition on the observation). In particular, we show that
an open-loop policy conditioned only on the timestep can achieve non-trivial win
rates for many SMAC scenarios. To address this limitation, we introduce SMACv2,
a new benchmark where scenarios are procedurally generated and require agents to
generalise to previously unseen settings during evaluation.2 We show that these
changes ensure the benchmark requires the use of closed-loop policies. We also
introduce the extended partial observability challenge (EPO), which augments
SMACv2 to ensure meaningful partial observability. We evaluate state-of-the-art
algorithms on SMACv2 and show that it presents significant challenges not present
in the original benchmark. Our analysis illustrates that SMACv2 addresses the
discovered deficiencies of SMAC and can help benchmark the next generation of
MARL methods. Videos of training are available on our website.

1

Introduction

In many real-world cases, control policies for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
can be learned in a setting where the algorithm has access to all agents’ observations, e.g., in a
simulator or laboratory, but must be deployed where such centralisation is not possible. Centralised
training with decentralised execution (CTDE) [10, 25] is a paradigm for tackling these settings and
has been the focus of much recent research [32, 44, 12, 26, 27]. In CTDE, the learning algorithm
sees all observations during training, as well as possibly the Markov state, but must learn policies
that can be executed without such privileged information.
As in other areas of machine learning, benchmarks have played an important role in driving progress
in CTDE. Examples of such benchmarks include the Hanabi Learning Environment [2], Google
football [20], PettingZoo [46], and Multi-Agent Mujoco [31]. Perhaps the most popular one is the
StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) [37], which focuses on decentralised micromanagement
challenges in the game of StarCraft II. Rather than tackling the full game with centralised control [50],
SMAC tasks a group of learning agents, each controlling a single army unit, to defeat the units of the
∗
2

Correspondence to benellis@robots.ox.ac.uk.
Code is available at https://github.com/oxwhirl/smacv2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

