On Convergence of Polynomial Approximations to the
Gaussian Mixture Entropy

Caleb Dahlke
Department of Mathematics
University of Arizona

Jason Pacheco
Department of Computer Science
University of Arizona

Abstract
Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) are fundamental to machine learning due to
their flexibility as approximating densities. However, uncertainty quantification
of GMMs remains a challenge as differential entropy lacks a closed form. This
paper explores polynomial approximations, specifically Taylor and Legendre, to
the GMM entropy from a theoretical and practical perspective. We provide new
analysis of a widely used approach due to Huber et al. (2008) and show that
the series diverges under simple conditions. Motivated by this divergence we
provide a novel Taylor series that is provably convergent to the true entropy of
any GMM. We demonstrate a method for selecting a center such that the series
converges from below, providing a lower bound on GMM entropy. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that orthogonal polynomial series result in more accurate polynomial
approximations. Experimental validation supports our theoretical results while
showing that our method is comparable in computation to Huber et al. We also
show that in application, the use of these polynomial approximations, such as
in Nonparametric Variational Inference, rely on the convergence of the methods
in computing accurate approximations. This work contributes useful analysis
to existing methods while introducing novel approximations supported by firm
theoretical guarantees.

1

Introduction

Entropy is a natural measure of uncertainty and is fundamental to many information-theoretic quantities such as mutual information (MI) and Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence [8]. As a result, entropy
plays a key role in many problems of ML including model interpretation [7], feature selection [6],
and representation learning [27]. It is often used in the data acquisition process as in active learning [25, 26], Bayesian optimal experimental design [17, 5, 3], and Bayesian optimization [13]. Yet,
despite its important role entropy is difficult to calculate in general.
One such case is the Gaussian mixture model (GMM), where entropy lacks a closed form and is the
focus of this paper. GMMs are fundamental to machine learning and statistics due to their property as
universal density approximators [18]. However, the lack of a closed-form entropy requires approximation, often via Monte Carlo expectation. Such stochastic estimates can be undesirable as computation
becomes coupled with sample size and a deterministic approach is often preferred. Simple deterministic bounds can be calculated via Jensen’s inequality or Gaussian moment matching [14]. Such bounds
are often too loose to be useful, leading to other options such as variational approximations [21, 10]
and neural network-based approximation [2]. Yet, these deterministic estimators do not allow a
straightforward tradeoff of computation and accuracy as in the Monte Carlo setting.
Polynomial series approximations are both deterministic and provide a mechanism for computationaccuracy tradeoff by varying the polynomial degree. In this paper we focus on three such polynomial
approximations of the GMM entropy. We begin with the widely used approximation of Huber et
al. (2008). While this approximation yields good empirical accuracy in many settings, a proof of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

