TopoSRL: Topology Preserving Self-Supervised
Simplicial Representation Learning

Hiren Madhu and Sundeep Prabhakar Chepuri
Indian Insitute of Science
hirenmadhu, spchepuri@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce TopoSRL, a novel self-supervised learning (SSL) method
for simplicial complexes to effectively capture higher-order interactions and preserve topology in the learned representations. TopoSRL addresses the limitations
of existing graph-based SSL methods that typically concentrate on pairwise relationships, neglecting long-range dependencies crucial to capturing topological
information. We propose a new simplicial augmentation technique that generates
two views of the simplicial complex that enriches the representations while being
efficient. Next, we propose a new simplicial contrastive loss function that contrasts
the generated simplices to preserve local and global information present in the
simplicial complexes. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superior
performance of TopoSRL compared to state-of-the-art graph SSL techniques and supervised simplicial neural models across various datasets corroborating the efficacy
of TopoSRL in processing simplicial complex data in a self-supervised setting.

1

Introduction

Simplicial complexes are mathematical structures that explicitly capture higher-order relationships
between entities (as nodes) using simplicies of different orders (as edges, triangles, and so on).
There has been a growing interest in developing simplicial representation learning models, such as
simplicial neural networks (SNN) [1–6], as simplicial complexes are generally more expressive than
graphs, which only capture pairwise relations. SNNs incorporate topological information available
in simplicial complexes while learning representations of simplicies of different orders, which are
useful for various downstream tasks such as node, graph, higher-order link, and trajectory prediction
tasks [1, 4–6]. However, a significant challenge in learning representations for simplicial complexes
using existing SNN models is the need for task-specific labels required for training. Acquiring
meaningful labels for real-world, high-dimensional, and complex data is difficult due to intricate
structures, multiple valid labeling schemes, or privacy and ethical concerns.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) schemes learn expressive and powerful representations without
requiring labeled data. Specifically, the main goal in SSL is to model an encoder, which is learned
using an objective function and unlabelled training data. This paper proposes an SSL method
for simplicial complex data that preserves topological and geometric information while learning
representations. Although no existing studies focus on SSL for simplicial complex data, a closely
related field of SSL for graph data has been extensively studied. SSL for simplicial complex data
is an important generalization as every simplicial complex inherently includes an underlying graph,
making SSL on graphs a specialized subset of SSL on simplicial complexes.
The general idea behind SSL on graphs is to augment a graph to create two views of the available graph
and then maximize the mutual information (MI) between the augmented graphs. So, the research
focus thus far has been on designing augmentation techniques and objective functions that maximize
MI. However, existing methods of SSL on graphs require complex augmentation [7], negative
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

