PUG: Photorealistic and Semantically Controllable
Synthetic Data for Representation Learning

Florian Bordes1,2,3
1

FAIR, Meta

Shashank Shekhar1 Mark Ibrahim1 Diane Bouchacourt1
Pascal Vincent1,2,3 Ari S. Morcos1
2
Mila - Quebec AI Institute 3 Université de Montréal, DIRO

Abstract
Synthetic image datasets offer unmatched advantages for designing and evaluating
deep neural networks: they make it possible to (i) render as many data samples
as needed, (ii) precisely control each scene and yield granular ground truth labels
(and captions), (iii) precisely control distribution shifts between training and testing
to isolate variables of interest for sound experimentation. Despite such promise,
the use of synthetic image data is still limited – and often played down – mainly
due to their lack of realism. Most works therefore rely on datasets of real images,
which have often been scraped from public images on the internet, and may have
issues with regards to privacy, bias, and copyright, while offering little control over
how objects precisely appear. In this work, we present a path to democratize the
use of photorealistic synthetic data: we develop a new generation of interactive
environments for representation learning research, that offer both controllability
and realism. We use the Unreal Engine, a powerful game engine well known in
the entertainment industry, to produce PUG (Photorealistic Unreal Graphics)
environments and datasets for representation learning. In this paper, we demonstrate
the potential of PUG to enable more rigorous evaluations of vision models. The
datasets can be downloaded at https://pug.metademolab.com/.

1

Introduction

A grand goal of machine learning is to learn representations of data that are useful across many
tasks. Essential to measuring and making progress towards this goal is the availability of ample
controllable, realistic data for evaluation and training. This is especially true when considering
deep neural network models not only in terms of their raw accuracy, but also their robustness and
fairness—crucial properties for models deployed in real-world applications. However, collecting such
data is challenging, presenting issues with privacy, bias, and copyright. Furthermore, the majority of
available image datasets lack fine-grained labels and are challenging to manipulate beyond coarse
image augmentations (e.g. with a photograph, it is hard to change the viewpoint or the time of day).
Using synthetic image data where we precisely control all the factors affecting the rendered scene
gives easy access to the corresponding rich set of factor labels. This enables evaluating the extent
of a trained deep neural network’s abilities, most importantly its robustness. Is the network robust
to change in pose? Are the predictions similar for different textures? All these questions may be
answered systematically by using synthetic data, enabling highly rigorous evaluations of deep neural
network models. In addition, training could also benefit from controllable factors1 , by increasing
the robustness of models with respect to these factors. They may also be used to monitor training,
e.g. tracking which factors a model focuses on or becomes most invariant to, and in which order, as
training progresses. This potentially enables better understanding of the training and generalization
1

We define factors here as distinctive attributes that describe the data, such as color or pose of an object.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

