On the Convergence of
Black-Box Variational Inference
Kyurae Kim
University of Pennsylvania
kyrkim@seas.upenn.edu

Jisu Oh
North Carolina State University
joh26@ncsu.edu

Yi-An Ma
University of California, San Diego
yianma@ucsd.edu

Kaiwen Wu
University of Pennsylvania
kaiwenwu@seas.upenn.edu

Jacob R. Gardner
University of Pennsylvania
jacobrg@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We provide the first convergence guarantee for black-box variational inference
(BBVI) with the reparameterization gradient. While preliminary investigations
worked on simplified versions of BBVI (e.g., bounded domain, bounded support,
only optimizing for the scale, and such), our setup does not need any such algorithmic modifications. Our results hold for log-smooth posterior densities with and
without strong log-concavity and the location-scale variational family. Notably,
our analysis reveals that certain algorithm design choices commonly employed
in practice, such as nonlinear parameterizations of the scale matrix, can result in
suboptimal convergence rates. Fortunately, running BBVI with proximal stochastic gradient descent fixes these limitations and thus achieves the strongest known
convergence guarantees. We evaluate this theoretical insight by comparing proximal SGD against other standard implementations of BBVI on large-scale Bayesian
inference problems.

1

Introduction

Despite the practical success of black-box variational inference (BBVI; Kucukelbir et al., 2017; Ranganath et al., 2014; Titsias & Lázaro-Gredilla, 2014), also known as stochastic gradient variational
Bayes and Monte Carlo variational inference, whether it converges under appropriate assumptions
on the target problem have been an open problem for a decade. While our understanding of BBVI
has been advancing (Bhatia et al., 2022; Challis & Barber, 2013; Domke, 2019, 2020; Hoffman &
Ma, 2020), a full convergence guarantee that extends to the practical implementations as used in
probabilistic programming languages (PPL) such as Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017), Turing (Ge et al.,
2018), Tensorflow Probability (Dillon et al., 2017), Pyro (Bingham et al., 2019), and PyMC (Patil
et al., 2010) has yet to be demonstrated.
Due to our lack of understanding, a consensus on how we should implement our BBVI algorithms has
yet to be achieved. For example, when the variational family is chosen to be the location-scale family,
the “scale” matrix can be parameterized linearly or nonlinearly, and both parameterizations are used
by default in popular software packages. (See Table 1 in Kim et al. 2023.) Surprisingly, as we
will show, seemingly innocuous design choices like these can substantially impact the convergence
of BBVI. This is critical as BBVI has been shown to be less robust (e.g., sensitive to initial points,
stepsizes, and such) than competing inference methods such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC).
(See Dhaka et al., 2020; Domke, 2020; Welandawe et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2018.) Instead, the
evaluation of BBVI algorithms has been relying on expensive empirical evaluations (Agrawal et al.,
2020; Dhaka et al., 2021; Giordano et al., 2018; Yao et al., 2018).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

