Uncovering the Hidden Dynamics of Video
Self-supervised Learning under Distribution Shifts

Pritam Sarkar1,2 Ahmad Beirami3 Ali Etemad1,3
2
3
Queen’s University
Vector Institute
Google Research
{pritam.sarkar, ali.etemad}@queensu.ca beirami@google.com
1

Abstract
Video self-supervised learning (VSSL) has made significant progress in recent
years. However, the exact behavior and dynamics of these models under different
forms of distribution shift are not yet known. In this paper, we comprehensively
study the behavior of six popular self-supervised methods (v-SimCLR, v-MoCo,
v-BYOL, v-SimSiam, v-DINO, v-MAE) in response to various forms of natural
distribution shift, i.e., (i) context shift, (ii) viewpoint shift, (iii) actor shift, (iv)
source shift, (v) generalizability to unknown classes (zero-shot), and (vi) open-set
recognition. To perform this extensive study, we carefully craft a test bed consisting
of 17 in-distribution and out-of-distribution benchmark pairs using available public
datasets and a series of evaluation protocols to stress-test the different methods
under the intended shifts. Our study uncovers a series of intriguing findings and
interesting behaviors of VSSL methods. For instance, we observe that while video
models generally struggle with context shifts, v-MAE and supervised learning
exhibit more robustness. Moreover, our study shows that v-MAE is a strong
temporal learner, whereas contrastive methods, v-SimCLR and v-MoCo, exhibit
strong performances against viewpoint shifts. When studying the notion of open-set
recognition, we notice a trade-off between closed-set and open-set recognition
performance if the pretrained VSSL encoders are used without finetuning. We hope
that our work will contribute to the development of robust video representation
learning frameworks for various real-world scenarios. The project page and code
are available at: https://pritamqu.github.io/OOD-VSSL.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning has achieved tremendous success in learning strong and meaningful representations in various video domains, such as action recognition [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], action localization [8],
video summarization [9], and video captioning [10, 11, 12]. Considering the diversity and complexity
of the video domain, real-world deployment of video-based intelligent systems requires to understand
the model performance under distribution shifts. Distribution shifts may occur due to differences in
contextual information, viewpoint, geographical location, and the presence of unknown classes with
respect to the training data, among others.
Despite the vast amount of work on VSSL [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 5, 1, 19, 8, 12], a number of
fundamental questions regarding the out-of-distribution behavior and dynamics of VSSL methods
remain unanswered. To date, there have been no comprehensive studies of these aspects, which we
attempt to address in this paper. Specifically, we pose and answer the following questions:
Q1. How do the learned spatial and temporal representations vary based on different VSSL pretraining methodologies? How robust are these representations to different distribution shifts?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

