Optimal Extragradient-Based Algorithms for
Stochastic Variational Inequalities with
Separable Structure
Huizhuo Yuan⇧ Chris Junchi Li† Gauthier Gidel‡
Michael I. Jordan†,⇤ Quanquan Gu⇧ Simon S. Du?
⇧
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
†

{hzyuan, qgu}@cs.ucla.edu

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
{junchili, jordan}@cs.berkeley.edu

‡
⇤

DIRO, Université de Montréal and Mila
gauthier.gidel@umontreal.ca

Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
?
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of solving stochastic monotone variational inequalities
with a separable structure using a stochastic first-order oracle. Building on standard
extragradient for variational inequalities we propose a novel algorithm—stochastic
accelerated gradient-extragradient (AG-EG)—for strongly monotone variational
inequalities (VIs). Our approach combines the strengths of extragradient and
Nesterov acceleration. By showing that its iterates remain in a bounded domain and
applying scheduled restarting, we prove that AG-EG has an optimal convergence
rate for strongly monotone VIs. Furthermore, when specializing to the particular
case of bilinearly coupled strongly-convex-strongly-concave saddle-point problems,
including bilinear games, our algorithm achieves fine-grained convergence rates
that match the respective lower bounds, with the stochasticity being characterized
by an additive statistical error term that is optimal up to a constant prefactor.

1

Introduction

The variational inequality (VI) problem plays a central role in a wide range of optimization problems
with convex structure, including convex minimization, saddle-point problems, and games [Facchinei
and Pang, 2003, Nemirovski, 2004, Nemirovski et al., 2009, Juditsky et al., 2011, Jordan et al., 2023].
A general VI problem aims to find a solution z ⇤ 2 Z that satisfies:
hW(z ⇤ ), z ⇤

zi  0,

8z 2 Z,

(1)

where Z is a finite-dimensional closed and convex feasible set and W(·) is a monotone operator
in the following form:
e ⇠)] + E⇣ [H(z;
e ⇣)] + J 0 (z),
W(z) = rF(z) + H(z) + J 0 (z) ⌘ E⇠ [rF(z;

(2)

where F is continuously differentiable with L-Lipschitz continuous gradient and is µ-strongly
convex, H is an M -Lipschitz monotone operator, J 0 2 @J is the subgradient of a simple and convex
function, ⇠ and ⇣ are drawn from distributions D⇠ and D⇣ , respectively. This formulation captures
a separable structure in which H usually models the competing forces in a system, and J models
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

