MAG-GNN: Reinforcement Learning Boosted Graph
Neural Network
Lecheng Kong1 Jiarui Feng1 Hao Liu1 Dacheng Tao2
Yixin Chen1 Muhan Zhang3
{jerry.kong, feng.jiarui, liuhao, ychen25}@wustl.edu,
dacheng.tao@gmail.com, muhan@pku.edu.cn
1
Washington University in St. Louis 2 JD Explore Academy 3 Peking University

Abstract
While Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) recently became powerful tools in graph
learning tasks, considerable efforts have been spent on improving GNNs’ structural
encoding ability. A particular line of work proposed subgraph GNNs that use
subgraph information to improve GNNs’ expressivity and achieved great success.
However, such effectivity sacrifices the efficiency of GNNs by enumerating all
possible subgraphs. In this paper, we analyze the necessity of complete subgraph
enumeration and show that a model can achieve a comparable level of expressivity
by considering a small subset of the subgraphs. We then formulate the identification of the optimal subset as a combinatorial optimization problem and propose
Magnetic Graph Neural Network (MAG-GNN), a reinforcement learning (RL)
boosted GNN, to solve the problem. Starting with a candidate subgraph set, MAGGNN employs an RL agent to iteratively update the subgraphs to locate the most
expressive set for prediction. This reduces the exponential complexity of subgraph
enumeration to the constant complexity of a subgraph search algorithm while
keeping good expressivity. We conduct extensive experiments on many datasets,
showing that MAG-GNN achieves competitive performance to state-of-the-art
methods and even outperforms many subgraph GNNs. We also demonstrate that
MAG-GNN effectively reduces the running time of subgraph GNNs.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) greatly assist the rapid development of many areas, including drug discovery [2], recommender systems [31], and autonomous driving [6]. The power
of GNNs has primarily been attributed to their Message-Passing Paradigm [12]. Message-Passing
Paradigm simulates a 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) algorithm for graph isomorphism
testing. Such a simulation allows GNN to encode rich structural information. In many fields, structural
information is crucial to determine the properties of a graph.
However, as Xu et al. [32] pointed out, GNN’s structure encoding capability, or its expressivity, is also upper-bounded by the 1-WL test. Specifically, a message-passing neural network
(MPNN) cannot recognize many substructures like cycles and paths and fails to properly learn
and distinguish regular graphs. Meanwhile, these substructures are significant in areas including chemistry and biology. To overcome this limitation, considerable effort was spent on investigating more-expressive GNNs. A famous line of work is subgraph GNNs [33, 34, 37].
Subgraph GNNs extract rooted subgraphs around every node in the graph and apply MPNN
onto the subgraphs to obtain subgraph representations. The subgraph representations are summarized to form the final representation of the graph. Such an approach is theoretically
proved to be more expressive than MPNN and achieved superior empirical results. Later
work found that subgraph GNNs are still bounded by the 3-dimensional WL test (3-WL) [10].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

