Have it your way: Individualized Privacy Assignment
for DP-SGD
Franziska Boenisch∗†
boenisch@cispa.de
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
Adam Dziedzic∗†
dziedzic@cispa.de
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

Christopher Mühl∗
christopher.muehl@fu-berlin.de
Free University Berlin
Roy Rinberg
roy.rinberg@columbia.edu
Columbia University

Nicolas Papernot
nicolas.papernot@utoronto.ca
University of Toronto & Vector Institute

Abstract
When training a machine learning model with differential privacy, one sets a privacy
budget. This uniform budget represents an overall maximal privacy violation that
any user is willing to face by contributing their data to the training set. We argue
that this approach is limited because different users may have different privacy
expectations. Thus, setting a uniform privacy budget across all points may be
overly conservative for some users or, conversely, not sufficiently protective for
others. In this paper, we capture these preferences through individualized privacy
budgets. To demonstrate their practicality, we introduce a variant of Differentially
Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD) which supports such individualized
budgets. DP-SGD is the canonical approach to training models with differential
privacy. We modify its data sampling and gradient noising mechanisms to arrive at
our approach, which we call Individualized DP-SGD (IDP-SGD). Because IDPSGD provides privacy guarantees tailored to the preferences of individual users
and their data points, we empirically find it to improve privacy-utility trade-offs.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models are known to leak information about their training data. Such leakage
can result in attacks that determine whether a specific data point was used to train a given ML model
(membership inference) [36, 43, 8], infer sensitive attributes from the model’s training data [13, 45],
or even (partially) reconstruct that training data [15, 35]. Therefore, the need to provide privacy
guarantees to the individuals who contribute their sensitive data to train ML models is pressing.
Approaches to train ML models with guarantees of differential privacy (DP) [10] have established
themselves as the canonical answer to this need. In the context of ML, differential privacy bounds
how much can be learned about any of the individual data points from the model’s training set. Take
the canonical example of differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD): it updates the
model using noisy averages of clipped per-example gradients. Unlike vanilla SGD, this ensures that
any single training point has a limited influence on model updates (due to the clipping to a pre-defined
maximum clip norm) and that the training is likely to output a similar model should a single point
∗

Equal contribution. † Work was done at the University of Toronto and the Vector Institute.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

