MMGP: a Mesh Morphing Gaussian Process-based
machine learning method for regression of physical
problems under non-parameterized geometrical
variability

Fabien Casenave Brian Staber Xavier Roynard
Safran Tech, Digital Sciences & Technologies
78114 Magny-Les-Hameaux, France
{fabien.casenave, brian.staber, xavier.roynard}@safrangroup.com

Abstract
When learning simulations for modeling physical phenomena in industrial designs,
geometrical variabilities are of prime interest. While classical regression techniques
prove effective for parameterized geometries, practical scenarios often involve the
absence of shape parametrization during the inference stage, leaving us with only
mesh discretizations as available data. Learning simulations from such mesh-based
representations poses significant challenges, with recent advances relying heavily
on deep graph neural networks to overcome the limitations of conventional machine learning approaches. Despite their promising results, graph neural networks
exhibit certain drawbacks, including their dependency on extensive datasets and
limitations in providing built-in predictive uncertainties or handling large meshes.
In this work, we propose a machine learning method that do not rely on graph
neural networks. Complex geometrical shapes and variations with fixed topology
are dealt with using well-known mesh morphing onto a common support, combined with classical dimensionality reduction techniques and Gaussian processes.
The proposed methodology can easily deal with large meshes without the need
for explicit shape parameterization and provides crucial predictive uncertainties,
which are essential for informed decision-making. In the considered numerical
experiments, the proposed method is competitive with respect to existing graph
neural networks, regarding training efficiency and accuracy of the predictions.

1

Introduction

Many problems in science and engineering require solving complex boundary value problems. Most
of the time, we are interested in solving a partial differential equation (PDE) for multiple values of
input parameters such as material properties, boundary conditions, initial conditions, or geometrical
parameters. Traditional numerical methods such as the finite element method, finite volume method,
and finite differences require fine discretization of time and space in order to be accurate. As a result,
these methods are often computationally expensive, especially when the boundary value problem
needs to be repeatedly solved for extensive exploration of the input parameters space. To overcome
this issue, machine and deep learning have been leveraged for various tasks in computational physics,
namely, solving and learning solutions to PDEs [37, 56, 65, 81], accelerating linear solvers [5, 34],
reduced-order modeling [49], domain decomposition [41], closure modeling [52], and topology
optimization [74], to name a few. As reported in the review papers [13, 17, 75], most of the recent
advances have been relying on deep neural networks for their flexibility and expressiveness. In
this work, we focus on learning simulations of physical phenomena, that are discretized on a non37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

