Closing the Computational-Statistical Gap in Best
Arm Identification for Combinatorial Semi-bandits
Po-An Wang
EECS
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
wang9@kth.se

Ruo-Chun Tzeng
EECS
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
rctzeng@kth.se
Alexandre Proutiere
EECS and Digital Futures
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
alepro@kth.se

Chi-Jen Lu
Institute of Information Science
Academia Sinica, Taiwan
cjlu@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
We study the best arm identification problem in combinatorial semi-bandits in the
fixed confidence setting. We present Perturbed Frank-Wolfe Sampling (P-FWS), an
algorithm that (i) runs in polynomial time, (ii) achieves the instance-specific minimal sample complexity in the high confidence regime, and (iii) enjoys polynomial
sample complexity guarantees in the moderate confidence regime. To the best of our
knowledge, even for the vanilla bandit problems, no algorithm was able to achieve
(ii) and (iii) simultaneously. With P-FWS, we close the computational-statistical
gap in best arm identification in combinatorial semi-bandits. The design of P-FWS
starts from the optimization problem that defines the information-theoretical and
instance-specific sample complexity lower bound. P-FWS solves this problem
in an online manner using, in each round, a single iteration of the Frank-Wolfe
algorithm. Structural properties of the problem are leveraged to make the P-FWS
successive updates computationally efficient. In turn, P-FWS only relies on a
simple linear maximization oracle.

1

Introduction

An efficient method to design statistically optimal algorithms solving active learning tasks (e.g.,
regret minimization or pure exploration in bandits and reinforcement learning) consists in the
following two-step procedure. The first step amounts to deriving, through change-of-measure
arguments, tight information-theoretical fundamental limits satisfied by a wide class of learning
algorithms. These limits are often expressed as the solution of an optimization problem, referred in
this paper to as the lower-bound problem. Interestingly, this solution specifies the instance-specific
optimal exploration process: it characterizes the limiting behavior of the adaptive sampling rule
any statistically optimal algorithm should implement. In the second step, the learning algorithm
is designed so that its exploration process approaches the solution of the lower-bound problem.
This design yields statistically optimal algorithms, but typically requires to repeatedly solve the
lower-bound problem. This method has worked remarkably well for simple learning tasks such as
regret minimization or best-arm identification with fixed confidence in classical stochastic bandits
[Lai87, GC11, GK16], but also in bandits whose arm-to-average reward function satisfies simple
structural properties (e.g., Lipschitz, unimodal) [MCP14, WTP21].
The method also provides a natural way of studying the computational-statistical gap [KLLM22] for
active learning tasks. Indeed, if solving the lower-bound problem in polynomial time is possible, one
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

