The Rashomon Importance Distribution: Getting RID
of Unstable, Single Model-based Variable Importance

Jon Donnelly*
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
jon.donnelly@duke.edu
Cynthia Rudin
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
cynthia.rudin@duke.edu

Srikar Katta*
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
srikar.katta@duke.edu
Edward P. Browne
Department of Medicine
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
epbrowne@email.unc.edu

Abstract
Quantifying variable importance is essential for answering high-stakes questions
in fields like genetics, public policy, and medicine. Current methods generally
calculate variable importance for a given model trained on a given dataset. However,
for a given dataset, there may be many models that explain the target outcome
equally well; without accounting for all possible explanations, different researchers
may arrive at many conflicting yet equally valid conclusions given the same data.
Additionally, even when accounting for all possible explanations for a given dataset,
these insights may not generalize because not all good explanations are stable
across reasonable data perturbations. We propose a new variable importance
framework that quantifies the importance of a variable across the set of all good
models and is stable across the data distribution. Our framework is extremely
flexible and can be integrated with most existing model classes and global variable
importance metrics. We demonstrate through experiments that our framework
recovers variable importance rankings for complex simulation setups where other
methods fail. Further, we show that our framework accurately estimates the true
importance of a variable for the underlying data distribution. We provide theoretical
guarantees on the consistency and finite sample error rates for our estimator. Finally,
we demonstrate its utility with a real-world case study exploring which genes are
important for predicting HIV load in persons with HIV, highlighting an important
gene that has not previously been studied in connection with HIV.

1

Introduction

Variable importance analysis enables researchers to gain insight into a domain or a model. Scientists
are often interested in understanding causal relationships between variables, but running randomized
experiments is time-consuming and expensive. Given an observational dataset, we can use global
variable importance measures to check if there is a predictive relationship between two variables. It is
particularly important in high stakes real world domains such as genetics [44, 34], finance [37], and
criminal justice [15, 24] where randomized controlled trials are impractical or unethical. Variable
*Jon Donnelly and Srikar Katta contributed equally to this work.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

