Conformal Meta-learners for Predictive Inference of
Individual Treatment Effects
Ahmed M. Alaa
UC Berkeley and UCSF
amalaa@berkeley.edu

Zaid Ahmad
UC Berkeley
zaidahmad@berkeley.edu

Mark van der Laan
UC Berkeley
laan@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We investigate the problem of machine learning-based (ML) predictive inference on
individual treatment effects (ITEs). Previous work has focused primarily on developing ML-based “meta-learners” that can provide point estimates of the conditional
average treatment effect (CATE)—these are model-agnostic approaches for combining intermediate nuisance estimates to produce estimates of CATE. In this paper,
we develop conformal meta-learners, a general framework for issuing predictive
intervals for ITEs by applying the standard conformal prediction (CP) procedure on
top of CATE meta-learners. We focus on a broad class of meta-learners based on
two-stage pseudo-outcome regression and develop a stochastic ordering framework
to study their validity. We show that inference with conformal meta-learners is
marginally valid if their (pseudo-outcome) conformity scores stochastically dominate “oracle” conformity scores evaluated on the unobserved ITEs. Additionally, we
prove that commonly used CATE meta-learners, such as the doubly-robust learner,
satisfy a model- and distribution-free stochastic (or convex) dominance condition,
making their conformal inferences valid for practically-relevant levels of target coverage. Whereas existing procedures conduct inference on nuisance parameters (i.e.,
potential outcomes) via weighted CP [1], conformal meta-learners enable direct inference on the target parameter (ITE). Numerical experiments show that conformal
meta-learners provide valid intervals with competitive efficiency while retaining
the favorable point estimation properties of CATE meta-learners.
Code: https://github.com/AlaaLab/conformal-metalearners

1

Introduction

Identifying heterogeneity in the effects of interventions across individuals is a central problem in
various fields, including medical, political, and social sciences [2, 3, 4]. In recent years, there has been
growing interest in developing machine learning (ML) models to estimate heterogeneous treatment
effects using observational or experimental data [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. However, most of these models only
provide point estimates of the conditional average treatment effect (CATE), which is a deterministic
function that describes the expected treatment effect based on a given individual’s covariates. In this
paper, we focus on quantifying uncertainty in these estimates, which arises from both errors in the
model and the variation of individual treatment effects (ITEs) for individuals with the same covariates.
We adopt a predictive inference approach to this problem, with the goal of devising valid procedures
to issue predictive intervals that cover ITEs on unseen data with a predetermined probability.
Traditionally, predictive inference on ITEs has been conducted through Bayesian methods such as
BART [8] and Gaussian processes [9]. These methods can provide interval-valued predictions of ITEs
through their induced posterior distributions (e.g., posterior credible intervals). However, Bayesian
methods tend to be model-specific and cannot be straightforwardly generalized to modern ML models,
e.g., transformer-based architectures used to model visual and textual covariate spaces [10]. More
importantly, Bayesian methods generally do not provide guarantees on the frequentist coverage of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

