Rethinking Incentives in Recommender Systems:
Are Monotone Rewards Always Beneficial?

Fan Yao
University of Virginia
fy4bc@virginia.edu
Karthik Abinav Sankararaman
Meta
karthikabinavs@meta.com
Qifan Wang
Meta
wqfcr@meta.com

Chuanhao Li
Yale University
chuanhao.li.cl2637@yale.edu
Yiming Liao
Meta
yimingliao@meta.com

Hongning Wang
University of Virginia
hw5x@virginia.edu

Yan Zhu
Google
yanzhuyz@google.com

Haifeng Xu
University of Chicago
haifengxu@uchicago.edu

Abstract
The past decade has witnessed the flourishing of a new profession as media content
creators, who rely on revenue streams from online content recommendation platforms. The reward mechanism employed by these platforms creates a competitive
environment among creators which affects their production choices and, consequently, content distribution and system welfare. It is thus crucial to design the
platform’s reward mechanism in order to steer the creators’ competition towards a
desirable welfare outcome in the long run. This work makes two major contributions in this regard: first, we uncover a fundamental limit about a class of widely
adopted mechanisms, coined Merit-based Monotone Mechanisms, by showing
that they inevitably lead to a constant fraction loss of the optimal welfare. To circumvent this limitation, we introduce Backward Rewarding Mechanisms (BRMs)
and show that the competition game resultant from BRMs possesses a potential
game structure. BRMs thus naturally induce strategic creators’ collective behaviors
towards optimizing the potential function, which can be designed to match any
given welfare metric. In addition, the class of BRM can be parameterized so that
it allows the platform to directly optimize welfare within the feasible mechanism
space even when the welfare metric is not explicitly defined.

1

Introduction

Online recommendation platforms, such as Instagram and YouTube, have become an integral part of
our daily life [5]. Their impact extends beyond merely aligning users with the most relevant content:
they are also accountable for the online ecosystem it creates and the long-term welfare it promotes,
considering the complex dynamics driven by the potential strategic behaviors of content creators
[17]. Typically, creators’ utilities are directly tied to the visibility of their content or economic
incentives they can gather from the platform, and they constantly pursue to maximize these benefits
[10, 12]. This fosters a competitive environment that may inadvertently undermine the social welfare,
i.e., the total utilities of all users and content creators in the system [9]. For example, consider a
scenario where the user population contains a majority group and many smaller minority groups,
where different groups are interested in distinct topics. The social welfare is maximized when content
distribution covers the variety of topics. However, a possible equilibrium of this competition can lead
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

