Making Scalable Meta Learning Practical

Sang Keun Choe1∗ Sanket Vaibhav Mehta1
Hwijeen Ahn1
Willie Neiswanger2
3,5
1,4
1,5
Pengtao Xie
Emma Strubell
Eric Xing
1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Stanford University

3

UCSD

4

Allen Institute for AI

5

MBZUAI

Abstract
Despite its flexibility to learn diverse inductive biases in machine learning programs,
meta learning (i.e., learning to learn) has long been recognized to suffer from poor
scalability due to its tremendous compute/memory costs, training instability, and
a lack of efficient distributed training support. In this work, we focus on making
scalable meta learning practical by introducing SAMA, which combines advances
in both implicit differentiation algorithms and systems. Specifically, SAMA is
designed to flexibly support a broad range of adaptive optimizers in the base level
of meta learning programs, while reducing computational burden by avoiding
explicit computation of second-order gradient information, and exploiting efficient
distributed training techniques implemented for first-order gradients. Evaluated on
multiple large-scale meta learning benchmarks, SAMA showcases up to 1.7/4.8×
increase in throughput and 2.0/3.8× decrease in memory consumption respectively
on single-/multi-GPU setups compared to other baseline meta learning algorithms.
Furthermore, we show that SAMA-based data optimization leads to consistent
improvements in text classification accuracy with BERT and RoBERTa large
language models, and achieves state-of-the-art results in both small- and large-scale
data pruning on image classification tasks, demonstrating the practical applicability
of scalable meta learning across language and vision domains.

1

Introduction

Meta learning aims to learn the inductive biases (e.g. training data, neural architecture) of a machine
learning program in such a way that a model trained with these inductive biases achieves optimal
performance on user-specified objectives (e.g. fairness, quick generalization). This concept of meta
learning can naturally be formulated as bilevel optimization, where the upper (meta) level problem
encodes inductive biases and objectives, and the lower (base) level optimization problem represents
the main machine learning program of interest, such as image classification or language modeling.
Depending on the design of inductive biases and objectives, meta learning has found many applications
in machine learning, including hyperparameter optimization [16], data optimization [21, 58], neural
architecture search [38, 69], learned optimizers [43, 44], and few-shot learning [14, 51].
Following its versatility, numerous algorithms have been proposed to solve meta learning. Among
them, gradient-based meta learning (GBML) has in particular gained considerable attention, due to
its capability to optimize a wide range of high-dimensional inductive biases in an efficient manner.
For example, MAML [14] finds optimal initialization weights (inductive bias) that achieve quick
generalization to new tasks (objective), and L2RW [54] optimizes training sample weights (inductive
bias) to achieve robustness against label noise (objective). However, the above benefits of GBML
oftentimes get overshadowed by its poor scalability in practice, especially under the recent trend of
large models [5, 33, 50], which arises due to several factors. First, many GBML algorithms [14, 40,
51] require inversion of a large Jacobian matrix, which suffers from both algorithmic instability as well
∗

Correspondence: sangkeuc@andrew.cmu.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

