A Massive Scale Semantic Similarity Dataset of
Historical English
∗

Emily Silcock1 , Abhishek Arora1 , Melissa Dell1,2
1
Harvard University; Cambridge, MA, USA.
2
National Bureau of Economic Research; Cambridge, MA, USA.
∗
Corresponding author: melissadell@fas.harvard.edu.

Abstract
A diversity of tasks use language models trained on semantic similarity data.
While there are a variety of datasets that capture semantic similarity, they are either
constructed from modern web data or are relatively small datasets created in the past
decade by human annotators. This study utilizes a novel source, newly digitized
articles from off-copyright, local U.S. newspapers, to assemble a massive-scale
semantic similarity dataset spanning 70 years from 1920 to 1989 and containing
nearly 400M positive semantic similarity pairs. Historically, around half of articles
in U.S. local newspapers came from newswires like the Associated Press. While
local papers reproduced articles from the newswire, they wrote their own headlines,
which form abstractive summaries of the associated articles. We associate articles
and their headlines by exploiting document layouts and language understanding.
We then use deep neural methods to detect which articles are from the same
underlying source, in the presence of substantial noise and abridgement. The
headlines of reproduced articles form positive semantic similarity pairs. The
resulting publicly available HEADLINES dataset is significantly larger than most
existing semantic similarity datasets and covers a much longer span of time. It will
facilitate the application of contrastively trained semantic similarity models to a
variety of tasks, including the study of semantic change across space and time.

1

Introduction

Transformer language models contrastively trained on large-scale semantic similarity datasets are
integral to a variety of applications in natural language processing (NLP). Contrastive training is
often motivated by the anisotropic geometry of pre-trained transformer models like BERT [5], which
complicates working with their hidden representations. Representations of low frequency words are
pushed outwards on the hypersphere, the sparsity of low frequency words violates convexity, and
the distance between embeddings is correlated with lexical similarity. This leads to poor alignment
between semantically similar texts and poor performance when individual term representations are
pooled to create a representation for longer texts [21]. Contrastive training reduces anisotropy [25].
A variety of semantic similarity datasets have been used for contrastive training [18]. Many of these
datasets are relatively small, and the bulk of the larger datasets are created from recent web texts;
e.g., positive pairs are drawn from the texts in an online comment thread or from questions marked
as duplicates in a forum. To provide a semantic similarity dataset that spans a much longer length
of time and a vast diversity of topics, this study develops HEADLINES (Historical Enormous-Scale
Abstractive DupLIcate News Summaries), a massive dataset containing nearly 400 million high
quality semantic similarity pairs drawn from 70 years of off copyright U.S. newspapers. Historically,
around half of content in the many thousands of local newspapers across the U.S. was taken from
centralized sources such as the Associated Press wire [8]. Local newspapers reprinted wire articles
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

