PTADisc: A Cross-Course Dataset Supporting
Personalized Learning in Cold-Start Scenarios
Liya Hu1 , Zhiang Dong1 , Jingyuan Chen1,2∗ , Guifeng Wang1 , Zhihua Wang2 , Zhou Zhao1 and
Fei Wu1,2∗
1

Zhejiang University
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University
{liyahu, dongza, jingyuanchen, wangguifeng, zhihua.wang, zhaozhou,
wufei}@zju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The focus of our work is on diagnostic tasks in personalized learning, such as cognitive diagnosis and knowledge tracing. The goal of these tasks is to assess students’
latent proficiency on knowledge concepts through analyzing their historical learning records. However, existing research has been limited to single-course scenarios;
cross-course studies have not been explored due to a lack of dataset. We address
this issue by constructing PTADisc , a Diverse, Immense, Student-centered dataset
that emphasizes its sufficient Cross-course information for personalized learning.
PTADisc includes 74 courses, 1, 530, 100 students, 4, 054 concepts, 225, 615 problems, and over 680 million student response logs. Based on PTADisc, we developed
a model-agnostic Cross-Course Learner Modeling Framework (CCLMF) which
utilizes relationships between students’ proficiency across courses to alleviate the
difficulty of diagnosing student knowledge state in cold-start scenarios. CCLMF
uses a meta network to generate personalized mapping functions between courses.
The experimental results on PTADisc verify the effectiveness of CCLMF with an
average improvement of 4.2% on AUC. We also report the performance of baseline
models for cognitive diagnosis and knowledge tracing over PTADisc, demonstrating that our dataset supports a wide scope of research in personalized learning.
Additionally, PTADisc contains valuable programming logs and student-group
information that are worth exploring in the future.

1

Introduction

Personalized learning aims to provide students with customized learning services that align with their
specific goals and abilities, which is facilitated by the vast amount of data accumulated on thriving
online learning platforms. The focus of personalized learning is on diagnosing students’ knowledge
state and involves two key research tasks: (1) Cognitive Diagnosis (CD) [23, 5, 24, 3, 27, 8, 13],
which assesses students’ static latent proficiency on concepts using their learning records, and (2)
Knowledge Tracing (KT) [21, 32, 20, 9, 30, 29, 16, 25, 15], which evaluates students’ dynamic
latent proficiency during various study phases based on their past sequential learning records. Based
on the diagnostic results of students’ knowledge states, several applications such as Computerized
Adaptive Testing [1, 14] and Personalized Educational Planning [11] can be conducted, as illustrated
in Figure 1(a).
To support the above research, several educational datasets are constructed [7, 12, 4, 31, 33, 22, 28].
However, existing datasets still face the following challenges: (1) Insufficient Data Coverage: Many
∗ Corresponding author.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

