Performance-optimized deep neural networks are
evolving into worse models of inferotemporal visual
cortex
Drew Linsley∗1,2 , Iván F. Rodriguez∗1 , Thomas Fel3 , Michael Arcaro4 ,
Saloni Sharma5 , Margaret Livingstone5 , Thomas Serre1,2,3
drew_linsley,ivan_felipe_rodriguez@brown.edu

Abstract
One of the most impactful findings in computational neuroscience over the past
decade is that the object recognition accuracy of deep neural networks (DNNs)
correlates with their ability to predict neural responses to natural images in the
inferotemporal (IT) cortex [1, 2]. This discovery supported the long-held theory
that object recognition is a core objective of the visual cortex, and suggested
that more accurate DNNs would serve as better models of IT neuron responses to
images [3–5]. Since then, deep learning has undergone a revolution of scale: billion
parameter-scale DNNs trained on billions of images are rivaling or outperforming
humans at visual tasks including object recognition. Have today’s DNNs become
more accurate at predicting IT neuron responses to images as they have grown
more accurate at object recognition?
Across three independent experiments, we find this is not the case: DNNs have
become progressively worse models of IT as their accuracy has increased on
ImageNet. To understand why DNNs experience this trade-off and evaluate if
they are still an appropriate paradigm for modeling the visual system, we turn to
recordings of IT that capture spatially resolved maps of neuronal activity elicited
by natural images [6]. These neuronal activity maps reveal that DNNs trained
on ImageNet learn to rely on different visual features than those encoded by
IT and that this problem worsens as their accuracy increases. We successfully
resolved this issue with the neural harmonizer, a plug-and-play training routine
for DNNs that aligns their learned representations with humans [7]. Our results
suggest that harmonized DNNs break the trade-off between ImageNet accuracy
and neural prediction accuracy that assails current DNNs and offer a path to more
accurate models of biological vision. Our work indicates that the standard approach
for modeling IT with task-optimized DNNs needs revision, and other biological
constraints, including human psychophysics data, are needed to accurately reverseengineer the visual cortex.

1

Introduction

The release of AlexNet [8] was significant not only for shifting the paradigm of computer vision
into the era of deep learning, it also heralded a new approach for “systems identification” and
* These authors contributed equally.
1

Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, & Psychological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI
Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, Providence, RI
3
Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute, Toulouse, France
4
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
5
Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

