Particle-based Variational Inference with Generalized
Wasserstein Gradient Flow
Ziheng Cheng∗
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
alex-czh@stu.pku.edu.cn

Shiyue Zhang∗
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
zhangshiyue@stu.pku.edu.cn

Longlin Yu
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
llyu@pku.edu.cn
Cheng Zhang†
School of Mathematical Sciences and Center for Statistical Science
Peking University
chengzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Particle-based variational inference methods (ParVIs) such as Stein variational
gradient descent (SVGD) update the particles based on the kernelized Wasserstein
gradient flow for the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. However, the design of
kernels is often non-trivial and can be restrictive for the flexibility of the method.
Recent works show that functional gradient flow approximations with quadratic
form regularization terms can improve performance. In this paper, we propose a
ParVI framework, called generalized Wasserstein gradient descent (GWG), based
on a generalized Wasserstein gradient flow of the KL divergence, which can be
viewed as a functional gradient method with a broader class of regularizers induced
by convex functions. We show that GWG exhibits strong convergence guarantees.
We also provide an adaptive version that automatically chooses Wasserstein metric
to accelerate convergence. In experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the proposed framework on both simulated and real data problems.

1

Introduction

Bayesian inference is an important method in modern machine learning that provides powerful tools
for modeling complex data and reasoning under uncertainty. The core of Bayesian inference is
to estimate the posterior distribution given the data. As the posterior distribution is intractable in
general, various approximation approaches have been developed, of which variational inference and
Markov Chain Monte Carlo are two typical examples. By reformulating the inference problem into
an optimization problem, variational inference (VI) seeks an approximation within a certain family
of distributions that minimizes the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to the posterior (Jordan et al.,
1999; Wainwright & Jordan, 2008; Blei et al., 2016). Equipped with efficient optimization algorithms,
VI allows fast training and easy scaling to large datasets. However, the construction of approximating
∗
†

Contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

