EgoDistill: Egocentric Head Motion Distillation
for Efficient Video Understanding

Shuhan Tan1 , Tushar Nagarajan2 , Kristen Grauman1,2
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 FAIR, Meta

Abstract
Recent advances in egocentric video understanding models are promising, but
their heavy computational expense is a barrier for many real-world applications.
To address this challenge, we propose EgoDistill, a distillation-based approach
that learns to reconstruct heavy egocentric video clip features by combining the
semantics from a sparse set of video frames with the head motion from lightweight
IMU readings. We further devise a novel self-supervised training strategy for
IMU feature learning. Our method leads to significant improvements in efficiency,
requiring 200× fewer GFLOPs than equivalent video models. We demonstrate
its effectiveness on the Ego4D and EPIC-Kitchens datasets, where our method
outperforms state-of-the-art efficient video understanding methods. Project page:
https://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/egodistill/

1

Introduction

Recent advances in augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR) technology have the potential to change
the way people interact with the digital world, much like the smartphone did in the previous decade. A
fundamental requirement for AR/VR systems is the ability to recognize user behavior from egocentric
video captured from a head-mounted camera. Towards this goal, several egocentric video datasets have
been proposed in recent years, spurring increasing attention of the research community [26, 56, 11].
Current egocentric video understanding models use powerful clip-based video backbones that operate
on video clips of a few seconds at a time [18, 54, 25, 16, 12, 55, 43, 44]. Despite encouraging
performance, these models typically process densely sampled frames with temporally-aware operations, making them computationally heavy. This makes them impractical for AR/VR devices with
constrained resources, or for real-time video applications that require low latency. How to efficiently
perform egocentric video understanding is therefore an important, yet unsolved problem.
To address this issue, we take inspiration from how animals perceive the world with ego-motion.
Neuroscience research has found that during active movement, the animal visual cortex receives and
encodes head motion signals from the motor cortex for visual processing [27, 52, 53], highlighting
its role in the efficient understanding of the animal’s visual stream. Inspired by this phenomenon, we
explore the relationship between human head motion and ego-video for efficient video understanding.
In practice, we consider head motion signals captured by the inertial measurement unit (IMU) of a
head-mounted camera. IMU measures motion from an accelerometer and gyroscope and is widely
available on popular wearable devices. Prior work leverages IMU as an extra modality for human
action recognition [68, 69, 13] (e.g., jumping, walking), or as geometric cues for visual-inertial
odometry [7, 20, 71]. In contrast, we propose to drive efficient video understanding by drawing on
IMU as a substitute for dense video frame observations. The intuition is as follows. A video clip
contains two things: semantic content (appearance of objects, places, people) and dynamics (how the
scene and the camera move). While densely sampled frames are sure to capture both of the above—as
done by current clip models [54, 16, 17]—we hypothesize they are sometimes overkill. For a short
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

