Large Language Model as Attributed Training Data
Generator: A Tale of Diversity and Bias

Yue Yu1∗, Yuchen Zhuang1∗, Jieyu Zhang2∗, Yu Meng3 ,
Alexander Ratner2 , Ranjay Krishna2 , Jiaming Shen4 , Chao Zhang1
1
Georgia Tech 2 University of Washington 3 UIUC 4 Google Research
{yueyu, yczhuang, chaozhang}@gatech.edu, yumeng5@illinois.edu
{jieyuz2, ajratner, ranjay}@cs.washington.edu, jmshen@google.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have been recently leveraged as training data
generators for various natural language processing (NLP) tasks. While previous
research has explored different approaches to training models using generated
data, they generally rely on simple class-conditional prompts, which may limit
the diversity of the generated data and inherit systematic biases of LLM. Thus,
we investigate training data generation with diversely attributed prompts (e.g.,
specifying attributes like length and style), which have the potential to yield diverse
and attributed generated data. Our investigation focuses on datasets with high
cardinality and diverse domains, wherein we demonstrate that attributed prompts
outperform simple class-conditional prompts in terms of the resulting model’s
performance. Additionally, we present a comprehensive empirical study on data
generation encompassing vital aspects like bias, diversity, and efficiency, and
highlight three key observations: firstly, synthetic datasets generated by simple
prompts exhibit significant biases, such as regional bias; secondly, attribute diversity
plays a pivotal role in enhancing model performance; lastly, attributed prompts
achieve the performance of simple class-conditional prompts while utilizing only
5% of the querying cost of ChatGPT associated with the latter2 .

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional performance across a broad range
of NLP tasks [3, 39, 28, 37, 38, 58]. In recent research, LLMs have been proposed as training data
generators, particularly for text classification, aiming to alleviate the need for task-specific data and
annotations [54, 15, 55, 31, 57, 6]. While these efforts have showcased the effectiveness of LLMs as
data generators, the focus has primarily been on advancing the training stage, where the generated
data are utilized to train task-specific models, leaving the upstream data generation process relatively
unexplored. Notably, the prevailing approach employs a simple class-conditional prompt for querying
LLMs during data generation, potentially limiting the diversity of the generated data [6, 51] and
inheriting systematic biases inherent in LLMs [13, 60, 24]. We refer to this simple class-conditional
prompt as SimPrompt, providing an example in Table 1.
In this work, we ground the LLM to ChatGPT [38] for its ability to generate high-quality, human-like
text, and consider four challenging topic classification tasks with high cardinality from various
domains. Our investigation primarily revolves around assessing the bias and diversity present within
the generated training set through the lens of data attributes. In particular, data attributes encompass
multiple attribute dimensions and their corresponding attribute values, where the latter represent
∗
2

These authors contributed equally to this work.
The data and code are available on https://github.com/yueyu1030/AttrPrompt.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

