An Optimization-based Approach To Node Role Discovery in Networks:
Approximating Equitable Partitions

Michael Scholkemper
Department of Computer Science
RWTH Aachen University
scholkemper@cs.rwth-aachen.de

Michael T. Schaub
Department of Computer Science
RWTH Aachen University
schaub@cs.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract
Similar to community detection, partitioning the nodes of a network according to
their structural roles aims to identify fundamental building blocks of a network.
The found partitions can be used, e.g., to simplify descriptions of the network
connectivity, to derive reduced order models for dynamical processes unfolding on
processes, or as ingredients for various graph mining tasks. In this work, we offer a
fresh perspective on the problem of role extraction and its differences to community
detection and present a definition of node roles related to graph-isomorphism tests,
the Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm, and equitable partitions. We study two associated
optimization problems (cost functions) grounded in ideas from graph isomorphism
testing and present theoretical guarantees associated with the solutions to these
problems. Finally, we validate our approach via a novel “role-infused partition
benchmark”, a network model from which we can sample networks in which nodes
are endowed with different roles in a stochastic way.

1

Introduction

Networks are a powerful abstraction for a range of complex systems [33, 45]. To comprehend such
networks we often seek patterns in their connections, e.g., core-periphery structures or densely knit
communities. A complementary notion to community structure is that of a role partition of the nodes.
The concept of node roles, or node equivalences, originates in social network analysis [24]. Node
roles are often related to symmetries or connectivity features that can be used to simplify complex
networks. Contrary to communities, even nodes that are far apart or are part of different connected
components of a network can have the same role [40].
Traditional approaches to defining node roles, put forward in the context of social network analysis [8],
consider exact node equivalences, based on structural symmetries within the graph structure. The
earliest notion is that of structural equivalence [26], which assigns the same role to nodes if they are
adjacent to the same nodes. Another definition is that of automorphic equivalence [14], which states
that nodes are equivalent if they belong to the same automorphism orbits. Closely related is the idea
of regular equivalent nodes [48], defined recursively as nodes that are adjacent to equivalent nodes.
However, large real-world networks often manifest in such a way that these definitions result in a
vast number of different roles. What’s more, the above definitions do not define a similarity metric
between nodes, and it is thus not obvious how to compare two nodes that are deemed not equivalent.
For example, the above definitions all have in common that nodes with different degrees also have
different roles. With the aim of reducing a network’s complexity, this is detrimental.
To resolve this problem in a principled way and to provide an effective partitioning of large graphs
into nodes with similar roles, we present a quantitative definition of node roles in this paper. Our
definition of roles is based on so-called equitable partitions (EPs), which are strongly related to
the notion of regular equivalence [48]. Crucially, this not only allows us to define an equivalence,
but we can also quantify the deviation from an exact equivalence numerically. Further, the notion
of EPs generalizes orbit partitions induced by automorphic equivalence classes in a principled way
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

