HT-Step: Aligning Instructional
Articles with How-To Videos
Triantafyllos Afouras∗ Effrosyni Mavroudi∗
Tushar Nagarajan Huiyu Wang Lorenzo Torresani
FAIR, Meta
{afourast, emavroudi, tusharn, huiyuw, torresani}@meta.com

Abstract

1. In a large mixing bowl, whisk together
the flour, salt, and baking soda. Mixing
your dry ingredients together separately
ensures that …
2. Beat the butter in a separate bowl until
it becomes light and fluffy. You can do
this using a whisk or an electric mixer.
3. Beat the white and brown sugar for
about 2 minutes. You might find it easier
to mix if you add the sugar in a little bit at
a time ….
4. Whisk in the vanilla extract and the
milk. Keep whisking until everything is
evenly combined.
5. Beat in the flour mixture. At this point,
the mixture will start to stick together to
form a ball. If you were using a whisk, …

How-To Video

We introduce HT-Step, a large-scale dataset containing temporal annotations of
instructional article steps in cooking videos. It includes 116k segment-level annotations over 20k narrated videos (approximately 2.1k hours) of the HowTo100M
dataset. Each annotation provides a temporal interval, and a categorical step label from a taxonomy of 4, 958 unique steps automatically mined from wikiHow
articles which include rich descriptions of each step. Our dataset significantly
surpasses existing labeled step datasets in terms of scale, number of tasks, and
richness of natural language step descriptions. Based on these annotations, we
introduce a strongly supervised benchmark for aligning instructional articles with
how-to videos and present a comprehensive evaluation of baseline methods for
this task. By publicly releasing these annotations and defining rigorous evaluation
protocols and metrics, we hope to significantly accelerate research in the field of
procedural activity understanding.

time
66:00

86:00

90:00 104:00

106:00 125:00 130:00 140:00

Non-groundable
steps:
Step 2
Step 4
Is full match? Yes

Is full match? No

Figure 1: HT-Step is a dataset of annotations aimed towards instructional video-article alignment.
Given an untrimmed how-to video and an instructional article containing a list of step descriptions, the
goal is to temporally localize the steps shown in the video and reject the ones not demonstrated. Our
dataset includes over 116k segment-level annotations for this task, as well as labels indicating whether
a temporal segment is a full or a partial match to the step, i.e., whether the segment demonstrates all
substeps and ingredients mentioned in the step headline (shown in bold).
∗

equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

