SNEkhorn: Dimension Reduction with Symmetric
Entropic Affinities

Hugues Van Assel
ENS de Lyon, CNRS
UMPA UMR 5669
hugues.van_assel@ens-lyon.fr

Titouan Vayer
Univ. Lyon, ENS de Lyon, UCBL, CNRS, Inria
LIP UMR 5668
titouan.vayer@inria.fr

Rémi Flamary
École polytechnique, IP Paris, CNRS
CMAP UMR 7641
remi.flamary@polytechnique.edu

Nicolas Courty
Université Bretagne Sud, CNRS
IRISA UMR 6074
nicolas.courty@irisa.fr

Abstract
Many approaches in machine learning rely on a weighted graph to encode the
similarities between samples in a dataset. Entropic affinities (EAs), which are
notably used in the popular Dimensionality Reduction (DR) algorithm t-SNE, are
particular instances of such graphs. To ensure robustness to heterogeneous sampling
densities, EAs assign a kernel bandwidth parameter to every sample in such a way
that the entropy of each row in the affinity matrix is kept constant at a specific
value, whose exponential is known as perplexity. EAs are inherently asymmetric
and row-wise stochastic, but they are used in DR approaches after undergoing
heuristic symmetrization methods that violate both the row-wise constant entropy
and stochasticity properties. In this work, we uncover a novel characterization of
EA as an optimal transport problem, allowing a natural symmetrization that can be
computed efficiently using dual ascent. The corresponding novel affinity matrix
derives advantages from symmetric doubly stochastic normalization in terms of
clustering performance, while also effectively controlling the entropy of each row
thus making it particularly robust to varying noise levels. Following, we present a
new DR algorithm, SNEkhorn, that leverages this new affinity matrix. We show its
clear superiority to existing approaches with several indicators on both synthetic
and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Exploring and analyzing high-dimensional data is a core problem of data science that requires building
low-dimensional and interpretable representations of the data through dimensionality reduction (DR).
Ideally, these representations should preserve the data structure by mimicking, in the reduced
representation space (called latent space), a notion of similarity between samples. We call affinity the
weight matrix of a graph that encodes this similarity. It has positive entries and the higher the weight
in position (i, j), the higher the similarity or proximity between samples i and j. Seminal approaches
relying on affinities include Laplacian eigenmaps [2], spectral clustering [50] and semi-supervised
learning [55]. Numerous methods can be employed to construct such affinities. A common choice is
to use a kernel (e.g., Gaussian) derived from a distance matrix normalized by a bandwidth parameter
that usually has a large influence on the outcome of the algorithm. Indeed, excessively small kernel
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

