SOAR: Improved Indexing for Approximate Nearest
Neighbor Search

Philip Sun, David Simcha, Dave Dopson, Ruiqi Guo, and Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research
{sunphil,dsimcha,ddopson,guorq,sanjivk}@google.com

Abstract
This paper introduces SOAR: Spilling with Orthogonality-Amplified Residuals,
a novel data indexing technique for approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search.
SOAR extends upon previous approaches to ANN search, such as spill trees, that
utilize multiple redundant representations while partitioning the data to reduce the
probability of missing a nearest neighbor during search. Rather than training and
computing these redundant representations independently, however, SOAR uses
an orthogonality-amplified residual loss, which optimizes each representation to
compensate for cases where other representations perform poorly. This drastically
improves the overall index quality, resulting in state-of-the-art ANN benchmark
performance while maintaining fast indexing times and low memory consumption.

1

Introduction

The k-nearest neighbor search problem is defined as follows: we are given an n-item dataset
X ∈ Rn×d composed of d-dimensional vectors, and for a query q ∈ Rd , we would like to return the
k vectors in X closest to q. This problem naturally arises from a number of scenarios that require fast,
online retrieval from vector databases; such applications include recommender systems [7], image
search [14], and question answering [10], among many others.
While nearest neighbor search may be easily implemented with a linear scan over the elements of X ,
many applications of nearest neighbor search utilize large datasets for which a brute-force approach is
computationally intractable. The rapid development of deep learning and embedding techniques has
been an especially strong driver for larger k-nearest neighbor datasets. For instance, multiple recent
large language model (LLM) works incorporate external information by using k-nearest neighbors to
retrieve from longer contexts [17] or large text corpora [5]. While datasets from typical applications
a decade ago (e.g. Netflix) had sizes of around 1 million [15], the standard evaluation datasets from
big-ann-benchmarks [16] all have 1 billion vectors with hundreds of dimensions.
These large datasets, in conjunction with the curse of dimensionality, a phenomenon which often
makes it impossible to find the exact nearest neighbors without resorting to a linear scan, has led to a
focus on approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search, which can trade off a small search accuracy
loss for a significant increase in search throughput.
A number of indexing schemes proposed for ANN search, including spill trees [12], assign datapoints
to multiple portions of the index, such that the overall index provides a replicated, non-disjoint
(“spilled") view of the dataset. These algorithms have used partitioning schemes amenable to random
analysis, so that the replication factor can be provably shown to exponentially reduce the probability of
missing a nearest neighbor. However, partitioning high-dimensional data is difficult, even without the
constraint of doing so with a method amenable to randomized analysis; such constrained partitioning
techniques have led to inferior quality indices that have not yielded good compute-accuracy tradeoffs.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

