Fast Bellman Updates for Wasserstein Distributionally
Robust MDPs
Zhuodong Yu1 Ling Dai1 Shaohang Xu1 Siyang Gao2 Chin Pang Ho1
1
School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
2
Department of Systems Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{zhuodonyu2-c, lingdai5-c, shaohanxu2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk
{siyangao, clint.ho}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Markov decision processes (MDPs) often suffer from the sensitivity issue under
model ambiguity. In recent years, robust MDPs have emerged as an effective
framework to overcome this challenge. Distributionally robust MDPs extend
the robust MDP framework by incorporating distributional information of the
uncertain model parameters to alleviate the conservative nature of robust MDPs.
This paper proposes a computationally efficient solution framework for solving
distributionally robust MDPs with Wasserstein ambiguity sets. By exploiting the
specific problem structure, the proposed framework decomposes the optimization
problems associated with distributionally robust Bellman updates into smaller
subproblems, which can be solved efficiently. The overall complexity of the
proposed algorithm is quasi-linear in both the numbers of states and actions when
the distance metric of the Wasserstein distance is chosen to be L1 , L2 , or L∞ norm,
and so the computational cost of distributional robustness is substantially reduced.
Our numerical experiments demonstrate that the proposed algorithms outperform
other state-of-the-art solution methods.

1

Introduction

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) provide a flexible and powerful modeling framework for sequential decision-making problems under uncertainty (Puterman, 2014; Sutton and Barto, 2018). However,
the standard MDP model assumes that the exact knowledge of the transition kernel is available, which
is not the case for most real-world applications. While these model parameters can be estimated from
data, it is well-known that the optimal policy of MDP is sensitive to estimation errors because of the
dynamic nature of the problem. In particular, small errors in estimating transition kernels could lead
to catastrophic failures in practice (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim and El Ghaoui, 2005; Le Tallec, 2007).
To overcome the aforementioned challenge in model ambiguity, robust MDPs assume that the
transition kernels belong to ambiguity sets (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim and El Ghaoui, 2005; Xu and
Mannor, 2006). Through optimizing the worst-case performance, robust MDPs compute robust
policies to avoid disappointing performance due to the sensitivity issue caused by inaccurate transition
kernels. However, robust MDPs are often too conservative because they always adopt the worst
possible transition kernels without any consideration of their likelihood. To mitigate this undesirable
side effect of robust MDPs, distributionally robust MDPs are proposed to incorporate distributional
information of model ambiguity and maximize the expected reward under the most adversarial
probability distribution (Xu and Mannor, 2010; Yu and Xu, 2015).
In a distributionally robust MDP, we assume that all the plausible distributions of the transition kernel
belong to a prescribed ambiguity set, which could be formalized in different types, such as moment
ambiguity sets (Delage and Ye, 2010) and Wasserstein ambiguity sets (Mohajerin Esfahani and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

