Counterfactual Memorization
in Neural Language Models

Chiyuan Zhang
Google Research
chiyuan@google.com
Matthew Jagielski
Google DeepMind
jagielski@google.com

Daphne Ippolito
Carnegie Mellon University
daphnei@cmu.edu

Katherine Lee
Google DeepMind
katherinelee@google.com

Florian Tramèr
ETH Zürich
florian.tramer@inf.ethz.ch

Nicholas Carlini
Google DeepMind
ncarlini@google.com

Abstract
Modern neural language models that are widely used in various NLP tasks risk
memorizing sensitive information from their training data. Understanding this
memorization is important in real world applications and also from a learningtheoretical perspective. An open question in previous studies of language model
memorization is how to filter out “common” memorization. In fact, most memorization criteria strongly correlate with the number of occurrences in the training
set, capturing memorized familiar phrases, public knowledge, templated texts, or
other repeated data. We formulate a notion of counterfactual memorization which
characterizes how a model’s predictions change if a particular document is omitted during training. We identify and study counterfactually-memorized training
examples in standard text datasets. We estimate the influence of each memorized
training example on the validation set and on generated texts, showing how this
can provide direct evidence of the source of memorization at test time.

1

Introduction

Modern neural language models (LMs) have achieved impressive results in generating high quality
text [e.g. Brown et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2022, Chowdhery et al., 2022, OpenAI, 2023] and have
led to breakthroughs in many downstream natural language processing tasks [Devlin et al., 2019,
Raffel et al., 2020b, Bommasani et al., 2021]. The paradigm of taking a single large-scale pre-trained
model and fine-tuning it for many tasks motivates the study of these models’ ability to generalize by
avoiding memorizing their training data. Moreover, memorization of sensitive user information or
copyrighted materials in the training data [Carlini et al., 2020, Vyas et al., 2023, Lee et al., 2023]
leads to practical concerns in real world applications.
Previous work on memorization in neural language models demonstrated the ability to extract
memorized training data, including sensitive data such as phone numbers and usernames [Carlini
et al., 2020, Ziegler, 2021, Carlini et al., 2019, Henderson et al., 2017, Thakkar et al., 2020, Thomas
et al., 2020]. One issue with these extraction attacks is that they primarily identify “common” and
frequently occurring strings in the training set. For example, as shown in the analysis of Lee et al.
[2021], near-duplicate training examples, which are very common in standard text corpora, account
for a large majority of the memorized content. To filter out such commonly occurring strings from all
memorized texts, previous work applied various heuristic rules to distinguish frequently-occurring
sequences from memorization of isolated pieces of information.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

