SwiFT: Swin 4D fMRI Transformer
Peter Yongho Kim∗
Seoul National University

Junbeom Kwon∗
Seoul National University

Sunghwan Joo
SungKyunKwan University

Sangyoon Bae
Seoul National University

Donggyu Lee
SungKyunKwan University

Yoonho Jung
Seoul National University

Shinjae Yoo
Brookhaven National Lab

Jiook Cha †
Seoul National University

Taesup Moon †
Seoul National University

Abstract
Modeling spatiotemporal brain dynamics from high-dimensional data, such as
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), is a formidable task in neuroscience. Existing approaches for fMRI analysis utilize hand-crafted features, but
the process of feature extraction risks losing essential information in fMRI scans.
To address this challenge, we present SwiFT (Swin 4D fMRI Transformer), a
Swin Transformer architecture that can learn brain dynamics directly from fMRI
volumes in a memory and computation-efficient manner. SwiFT achieves this by
implementing a 4D window multi-head self-attention mechanism and absolute
positional embeddings. We evaluate SwiFT using multiple large-scale resting-state
fMRI datasets, including the Human Connectome Project (HCP), Adolescent Brain
Cognitive Development (ABCD), and UK Biobank (UKB) datasets, to predict sex,
age, and cognitive intelligence. Our experimental outcomes reveal that SwiFT consistently outperforms recent state-of-the-art models. Furthermore, by leveraging its
end-to-end learning capability, we show that contrastive loss-based self-supervised
pre-training of SwiFT can enhance performance on downstream tasks. Additionally, we employ an explainable AI method to identify the brain regions associated
with sex classification. To our knowledge, SwiFT is the first Swin Transformer
architecture to process dimensional spatiotemporal brain functional data in an
end-to-end fashion. Our work holds substantial potential in facilitating scalable
learning of functional brain imaging in neuroscience research by reducing the
hurdles associated with applying Transformer models to high-dimensional fMRI.
Project page: https://github.com/Transconnectome/SwiFT

1

Introduction

The human brain is a dynamic system characterized as an extensive (feedback) network generating
complex spatiotemporal dynamics of its activity. Analyzing such dynamics and linking them to
normative adaptive cognition and behaviors, as well as their maladaptive forms in a disease condition
is of paramount importance in neuroscience and medicine. However, the fields have been hampered
by a lack of predictive power owing to the gap between the complexity of the brain network and the
contrasting simplicity of brain imaging analytics [1]. Hence, developing an accurate predictive model
using high-dimensional brain imaging data and learning rich representations of brain function will
help close this gap and advance toward precision neuroscience.
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Co-corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

