Fast Rank-1 Lattice Targeted Sampling for Black-box
Optimization

Yueming LYU
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR)
Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC)
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
1 Fusionopolis Way, #16-16 Connexis, Singapore 138632
Lyu_Yueming@cfar.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
Black-box optimization has gained great attention for its success in recent applications. However, scaling up to high-dimensional problems with good query
efficiency remains challenging. This paper proposes a novel Rank-1 Lattice Targeted Sampling (RLTS) technique to address this issue. Our RLTS benefits from
random rank-1 lattice Quasi-Monte Carlo, which enables us to perform fast local
exact Gaussian processes (GP) training and inference with O(n log n) complexity
w.r.t. n batch samples. Furthermore, we developed a fast coordinate searching
method with O(n log n) time complexity for fast targeted sampling. The fast
computation enables us to plug our RLTS into the sampling phase of stochastic optimization methods. This improves the query efficiency while scaling up to higher
dimensional problems than Bayesian optimization. Moreover, to construct rank-1
lattices efficiently, we proposed a closed-form construction. Extensive experiments
on challenging benchmark test functions and black-box prompt fine-tuning for
large language models demonstrate the query efficiency of our RLTS technique.

1

Introduction

Black-box optimization has gained great attention for its success in many recent applications, such as
prompt fine-tuning for large language models [Sun et al., 2022b,a], policy search for robot control
and reinforcement learning [Choromanski et al., 2019, Lizotte et al., 2007, Barsce et al., 2017,
Salimans et al., 2017], automatic hyper-parameters tuning in machine learning problems [Snoek
et al., 2012], black-box architecture search in engineering design [Wang and Shan, 2007], drug
discovery [Negoescu et al., 2011] and accelerated simulation for scientific discovery [Maddox et al.,
2021, Hernández-Lobato et al., 2017], etc. Many efforts have been made for black-box optimization
in the literature, including Bayesian optimization (BO) methods [Srinivas et al., 2010, Gardner et al.,
2017, Nayebi et al., 2019], stochastic optimization methods like evolution strategies (ES) [Back et al.,
1991, Hansen, 2006, Wierstra et al., 2014b, Lyu and Tsang, 2021] and genetic algorithms [Srinivas
and Patnaik, 1994, Mirjalili and Mirjalili, 2019].
Bayesian optimization usually builds a global (GP) model as a surrogate and provides queries by
optimizing some acquisition functions [Snoek et al., 2012]. Although BO achieves good query
efficiency for low-dimensional problems, it often fails to handle high-dimensional problems with
large sample budgets [Eriksson et al., 2019]. The computation of GP with a large number of samples
itself is expensive, and the internal optimization of the acquisition functions is challenging. Recently,
Müller et al. [2021], Nguyen et al. [2022] builds a GP model for both the function value and the
gradient and performs local Bayesian optimization. Although these methods improve the scalability
of global BO, they usually cannot scale up to five hundred dimensional complex problems. This may
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

