K-Nearest-Neighbor Local Sampling Based
Conditional Independence Testing

Shuai Li, Yingjie Zhang
School of Statistics
KLATASDS-MOE
East China Normal University

Hongtu Zhu
Departments of Biostatistics,
Statistics, Computer Science, and Genetics
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Christina Dan Wang
Business Division
New York University Shanghai

Hai Shu
Department of Biostatistics
School of Global Public Health
New York University

Ziqi Chen∗, Zhuoran Sun, Yanfeng Yang
School of Statistics
KLATASDS-MOE
East China Normal University

Abstract
Conditional independence (CI) testing is a fundamental task in statistics and
machine learning, but its effectiveness is hindered by the challenges posed by
high-dimensional conditioning variables and limited data samples. This article
introduces a novel testing approach to address these challenges and enhance control of the type I error while achieving high power under alternative hypotheses.
The proposed approach incorporates a computationally efficient classifier-based
conditional mutual information (CMI) estimator, capable of capturing intricate
dependence structures among variables. To approximate a distribution encoding
the null hypothesis, a k-nearest-neighbor local sampling strategy is employed. An
important advantage of this approach is its ability to operate without assumptions
about distribution forms or feature dependencies. Furthermore, it eliminates the
need to derive asymptotic null distributions for the estimated CMI and avoids
dataset splitting, making it particularly suitable for small datasets. The method
presented in this article demonstrates asymptotic control of the type I error and
consistency against all alternative hypotheses. Extensive analyses using both synthetic and real data highlight the computational efficiency of the proposed test.
Moreover, it outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of type I and
II errors, even in scenarios with high-dimensional conditioning sets. Additionally,
the proposed approach exhibits robustness in the presence of heavy-tailed data.

1

Introduction

Testing for conditional independence (CI) is a crucial and challenging task in statistics and machine
learning, with wide-ranging applications in graphical models [26, 17], causal inference [44, 37, 22],
and variable selection [11, 24]. The objective is to determine whether two random variables, X
and Y , are independent given a set of conditioning variables Z, based on observations of the joint
∗

Corresponding author (zqchen@fem.ecnu.edu.cn).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

