Battle of the Backbones: A Large-Scale Comparison of
Pretrained Models across Computer Vision Tasks

Micah Goldblum1 ∗

Hossein Souri2 ∗

Gowthami Somepalli3

Prithvijit Chattopadhyay4

Judy Hoffman4

Rama Chellappa2

Renkun Ni3

Manli Shu3

Viraj Prabhu4

Mark Ibrahim6

Adrien Bardes5,6

Andrew Gordon Wilson1

Tom Goldstein3

Abstract
Neural network based computer vision systems are typically built on a backbone, a
pretrained or randomly initialized feature extractor. Several years ago, the default
option was an ImageNet-trained convolutional neural network. However, the recent past has seen the emergence of countless backbones pretrained using various
algorithms and datasets. While this abundance of choice has led to performance
increases for a range of systems, it is difficult for practitioners to make informed
decisions about which backbone to choose. Battle of the Backbones (BoB) makes
this choice easier by benchmarking a diverse suite of pretrained models, including
vision-language models, those trained via self-supervised learning, and the Stable
Diffusion backbone, across a diverse set of computer vision tasks ranging from classification to object detection to OOD generalization and more. Furthermore, BoB
sheds light on promising directions for the research community to advance computer vision by illuminating strengths and weakness of existing approaches through
a comprehensive analysis conducted on more than 1500 training runs. While vision
transformers (ViTs) and self-supervised learning (SSL) are increasingly popular, we
find that convolutional neural networks pretrained in a supervised fashion on large
training sets still perform best on most tasks among the models we consider. Moreover, in apples-to-apples comparisons on the same architectures and similarly sized
pretraining datasets, we find that SSL backbones are highly competitive, indicating
that future works should perform SSL pretraining with advanced architectures and
larger pretraining datasets. We release the raw results of our experiments along
with code that allows researchers to put their own backbones through the gauntlet
here: https://github.com/hsouri/Battle-of-the-Backbones.

1

Introduction

The dominant paradigm for building machine vision systems involves a feature extractor network,
also known as a backbone, which feeds into a task-specific head. The backbone might output a dense
array of features for object detection and localization, or a single feature vector for classification or
image retrieval. While backbones can be trained from scratch on task-specific data, many off-the-shelf
backbones are pretrained on large benchmark datasets and then fine-tuned for the task at hand. This
transfer learning approach has several advantages. First, it dramatically reduces the applicationspecific data requirements of deep learning and has led to improved performance on a wide range of
∗

Authors contributed equally. Correspondence to goldblum@nyu.edu and hsouri1@jhu.edu. This work
was conducted at New York University1 , Johns Hopkins University2 , University of Maryland3 , Georgia Institute
of Technology4 , Inria5 , and Meta AI Research6 .
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

