Generalizable One-shot 3D Neural Head Avatar
Xueting Li, Shalini De Mello, Sifei Liu, Koki Nagano, Umar Iqbal, Jan Kautz
NVIDIA
https://research.nvidia.com/labs/lpr/one-shot-avatar

Abstract
We present a method that reconstructs and animates a 3D head avatar from a singleview portrait image. Existing methods either involve time-consuming optimization
for a specific person with multiple images, or they struggle to synthesize intricate
appearance details beyond the facial region. To address these limitations, we
propose a framework that not only generalizes to unseen identities based on a
single-view image without requiring person-specific optimization, but also captures
characteristic details within and beyond the face area (e.g. hairstyle, accessories,
etc.). At the core of our method are three branches that produce three tri-planes
representing the coarse 3D geometry, detailed appearance of a source image, as
well as the expression of a target image. By applying volumetric rendering to
the combination of the three tri-planes followed by a super-resolution module,
our method yields a high fidelity image of the desired identity, expression and
pose. Once trained, our model enables efficient 3D head avatar reconstruction and
animation via a single forward pass through a network. Experiments show that the
proposed approach generalizes well to unseen validation datasets, surpassing SOTA
baseline methods by a large margin on head avatar reconstruction and animation.

1

Introduction

Head avatar animation [57; 29; 38] aims to animate a source portrait image with the motion (i.e.,
pose and expression) from a target image. It is a long-standing task in computer vision that has
been widely applied to video conferencing, computer games, Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented
Reality (AR). In real-world applications, synthesizing a realistic portrait image that matches the given
identity and motion raises two major challenges – efficiency and high fidelity. Efficiency requires
the model to generalize to arbitrary unseen identities and motion without any further optimization
during inference. High fidelity demands the model to not only faithfully preserve intricate details in
the input image (e.g. hairstyle, glasses, earrings), but also hallucinate plausibly whenever necessary
(e.g. synthesize the occluded facial region when the input is in profile view or generate teeth when
the mouth transitions from closed to open).
Traditional methods [14; 17; 11] based on 3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) learn networks that
predict shape, expression, pose and texture of an arbitrary source portrait image efficiently. However,
these approaches often fall short in synthesizing realistic details due to limited mesh resolution and
a coarse texture model. Additionally, they exclusively focus on the facial region while neglecting
other personal characteristics such as hairstyle or glasses. Inspired by the remarkable progress
made in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [22; 27; 58], another line of methods [57; 65;
67; 48; 46; 70; 15] represent motion as a warping field that transforms the given source image
to match the desired pose and expression. Yet, without explicit 3D understanding of the given
portrait image, these methods can only rotate the head within limited angles, before exhibiting
warping artifacts, unrealistic distortions and undesired identity changes across different target views.
Recently, neural rendering [39] has demonstrated impressive results in facial avatar reconstruction and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

