Fine-grained Late-interaction Multi-modal Retrieval
for Retrieval Augmented Visual Question Answering

Weizhe Lin, Jinghong Chen∗, Jingbiao Mei, Alexandru Coca, Bill Byrne
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom CB2 1PZ
{wl356, jc2124, jm2245, ac2123, wjb31}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Knowledge-based Visual Question Answering (KB-VQA) requires VQA systems
to utilize knowledge from external knowledge bases to answer visually-grounded
questions. Retrieval-Augmented Visual Question Answering (RA-VQA), a strong
framework to tackle KB-VQA, first retrieves related documents with Dense Passage
Retrieval (DPR) and then uses them to answer questions. This paper proposes
Fine-grained Late-interaction Multi-modal Retrieval (FLMR) which significantly
improves knowledge retrieval in RA-VQA. FLMR addresses two major limitations
in RA-VQA’s retriever: (1) the image representations obtained via image-to-text
transforms can be incomplete and inaccurate and (2) relevance scores between
queries and documents are computed with one-dimensional embeddings, which
can be insensitive to finer-grained relevance. FLMR overcomes these limitations
by obtaining image representations that complement those from the image-totext transforms using a vision model aligned with an existing text-based retriever
through a simple alignment network. FLMR also encodes images and questions
using multi-dimensional embeddings to capture finer-grained relevance between
queries and documents. FLMR significantly improves the original RA-VQA
retriever’s PRRecall@5 by approximately 8%. Finally, we equipped RA-VQA
with two state-of-the-art large multi-modal/language models to achieve ∼ 61%
VQA score in the OK-VQA dataset.

1

Introduction

Knowledge-based Visual Question Answering (KB-VQA) is a challenging problem that lies at the
intersection of Computer Vision, Natural Language Processing, and Information Retrieval. The
objective of VQA is to read an image and answer a question related to the image content. KB-VQA
poses an additional challenge: in order to answer the question correctly, the system needs to draw on
relevant information from an external knowledge source, such as a knowledge graph or a database.
Therefore, tackling KB-VQA tasks crucially depends on the ability to retrieve relevant information
and to ground the answer generation process in the retrieved knowledge.
Retrieval Augmented Visual Question Answering (RA-VQA) is a framework designed to answer
difficult KB-VQA questions [Luo et al., 2021, Gao et al., 2022, Lin and Byrne, 2022], with the most
recent version from Lin and Byrne [2022] achieving performance close to large models (such as
GPT-3 [Brown et al., 2020]) while using much simpler models. RA-VQA first retrieves K documents
relevant to the image and the question from an external knowledge base, and then generates the
answer using a Large Language Model (LLM) grounded in the retrieved passages.
∗

Equally contributed as the first author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

