Stochastic Optimal Control for Collective Variable
Free Sampling of Molecular Transition Paths

Lars Holdijk∗
University of Oxford

Yuanqi Du∗
AMLab
University of Amsterdam

Priyank Jaini
Google DeepMind

Bernd Ensing
AI4Science Lab
Computational Chemistry Group
University of Amsterdam

Ferry Hooft
Computational Chemistry Group
University of Amsterdam
Max Welling
AMLab
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
We consider the problem of sampling transition paths between two given metastable
states of a molecular system, e.g. a folded and unfolded protein or products and
reactants of a chemical reaction. Due to the existence of high energy barriers
separating the states, these transition paths are unlikely to be sampled with standard
Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation. Traditional methods to augment MD with
a bias potential to increase the probability of the transition rely on a dimensionality
reduction step based on Collective Variables (CVs). Unfortunately, selecting
appropriate CVs requires chemical intuition and traditional methods are therefore
not always applicable to larger systems. Additionally, when incorrect CVs are
used, the bias potential might not be minimal and bias the system along dimensions
irrelevant to the transition. Showing a formal relation between the problem of
sampling molecular transition paths, the Schrödinger bridge problem and stochastic
optimal control with neural network policies, we propose a machine learning
method for sampling said transitions. Unlike previous non-machine learning
approaches our method, named PIPS, does not depend on CVs. We show that our
method successful generates low energy transitions for Alanine Dipeptide as well
as the larger Polyproline and Chignolin proteins.

1

Introduction

Molecular Dynamics (MD) is a central tool in the (bio-)chemistry toolbox. By integrating Newton’s
equations of motion on a molecular scale, MD can provide insight into chemical processes and
systems without requiring expensive lab testing [Frenkel and Smit, 2001, Hollingsworth and Dror,
2018]. However, MD is limited when interested in transitions between two metastable configurations
of a system, such as the folding of a protein, general conformational changes, and chemical reactions.
These meta-stable states are separated by regions of high energy which are unlikely to be sampled
within a reasonable timespan. While machine learning based approximations of the interatomic forces
using neural force fields [Unke et al., 2021] have pushed the boundary in terms of system scale, it
does not address the problem of sampling molecular transition paths directly [Fu et al., 2022].
To overcome this issue, prior work in computational and physical chemistry has developed several
methods for the enhanced sampling of molecular transitions such as transition path sampling [Bolhuis
et al., 2002], umbrella sampling[Torrie and Valleau, 1977] and meta-dynamics [Laio and Parrinello,
2002]. Most of these methods speed up the sampling of transition paths by augmenting the MD
simulation with a (learned) bias potential that pushes the system to cross the energy barrier separating
two states. However, due to the large configuration space of molecular trajectories, finding such a
bias potential is in itself a computationally expensive task.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

