Auditing for Human Expertise

Rohan Alur
EECS
MIT
ralur@mit.edu

Loren Laine
School of Medicine
Yale
loren.laine@yale.edu

Darrick K. Li
School of Medicine
Yale
darrick.li@yale.edu

Manish Raghavan
Sloan, EECS
MIT
mragh@mit.edu

Devavrat Shah
EECS, IDSS, LIDS, SDSC
MIT
devavrat@mit.edu

Dennis Shung
School of Medicine
Yale
dennis.shung@yale.edu

Abstract
High-stakes prediction tasks (e.g., patient diagnosis) are often handled by trained
human experts. A common source of concern about automation in these settings
is that experts may exercise intuition that is difficult to model and/or have access
to information (e.g., conversations with a patient) that is simply unavailable to a
would-be algorithm. This raises a natural question whether human experts add
value which could not be captured by an algorithmic predictor.
We develop a statistical framework under which we can pose this question as a
natural hypothesis test. Indeed, as our framework highlights, detecting human
expertise is more subtle than simply comparing the accuracy of expert predictions
to those made by a particular learning algorithm. Instead, we propose a simple
procedure which tests whether expert predictions are statistically independent from
the outcomes of interest after conditioning on the available inputs (‘features’).
A rejection of our test thus suggests that human experts may add value to any
algorithm trained on the available data, and has direct implications for whether
human-AI ‘complementarity’ is achievable in a given prediction task.
We highlight the utility of our procedure using admissions data collected from
the emergency department of a large academic hospital system, where we show
that physicians’ admit/discharge decisions for patients with acute gastrointestinal
bleeding (AGIB) appear to be incorporating information that is not available to a
standard algorithmic screening tool. This is despite the fact that the screening tool
is arguably more accurate than physicians’ discretionary decisions, highlighting
that – even absent normative concerns about accountability or interpretability –
accuracy is insufficient to justify algorithmic automation.

1

Introduction

Progress in machine learning, and in algorithmic decision aids more generally, has raised the prospect
that algorithms may complement or even automate human decision making in a wide variety of
settings. If implemented carefully, these tools have the potential to improve accuracy, fairness,
interpretability and consistency in many prediction and decision tasks. However, a primary challenge
in nearly all such settings is that some of the relevant inputs – ‘features,’ in machine learning parlance –
are difficult or even impossible to encode in a way that an algorithm can easily consume. For example,
doctors use direct conversations with patients to inform their diagnoses, and sports franchises employ
professional scouts to qualitatively assess prospective players. One can think of these experts as
incorporating information which is practically difficult to provide to an algorithm, particularly as
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

