Kernelized Reinforcement Learning with Order
Optimal Regret Bounds

Sattar Vakili
MediaTek Research
Cambridge, UK
sattar.vakili@mtkresearch.com

Julia Olkhovskaya
TU Delft∗
Delft, the Netherlands
julia.olkhovskaya@gmail.com

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown empirical success in various real world
settings with complex models and large state-action spaces. The existing analytical
results, however, typically focus on settings with a small number of state-actions or
simple models such as linearly modeled state-action value functions. To derive RL
policies that efficiently handle large state-action spaces with more general value
functions, some recent works have considered nonlinear function approximation
using kernel ridge regression. We propose π-KRVI, an optimistic modification of
least-squares value iteration, when the state-action value function is represented by
a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). We prove the first order-optimal regret
guarantees under a general setting. Our results show a significant polynomial in
the number of episodes improvement over the state of the art. In particular, with
highly non-smooth kernels (such as Neural Tangent kernel or some Matérn kernels)
the existing results lead to trivial (superlinear in the number of episodes) regret
bounds. We show a sublinear regret bound that is order optimal in the case of
Matérn kernels where a lower bound on regret is known.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) in real world often has to deal with large state action spaces and complex
unknown models. While RL policies using complex function approximations have been empirically
effective in various fields including gaming (Silver et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2018; Vinyals et al., 2019),
autonomous driving (Kahn et al., 2017), microchip design (Mirhoseini et al., 2021), robot control
(Kalashnikov et al., 2018), and algorithm search (Fawzi et al., 2022), little is known about theoretical
performance guarantees in such settings. The analysis of RL algorithms has predominantly focused
on simpler cases suchp
as tabular or linear Markov decision processes (MDPs). In a tabular setting,
a regret bound of Õ( H 3 |S × A|T ) has been shown for optimistic state-action value learning
algorithms (e.g., see, Jin et al., 2018), where H is the length of episodes, T is the number of episodes,
and S and A are finite state and action spaces. This bound does not scale well when the size of
state-action space grows large. Furthermore, when the model (the state-action value function or the
transitions)
admits a d-dimensional linear representation in some state-action features, a regret bound
√
of Õ( H 3 d3 T ) is established (Jin et al., 2020), that scales with the dimension of the linear model
rather than the cardinality of the state-action space.
Several recent studies have explored the utilization of complex models with large state-action spaces.
A very general model entails representing the state-action value function using a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS). This approach allows using kernel ridge regression to obtain confidence
intervals, which facilitate the design and analysis of RL algorithms. The most significant contribution
∗

Work was done when the author was affiliated with Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

