Replicability in Reinforcement Learning∗

Amin Karbasi
Yale University, Google Research
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Grigoris Velegkas
Yale University
grigoris.velegkas@yale.edu

Lin F. Yang
UCLA
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Felix Zhou
Yale University
felix.zhou@yale.edu

Abstract
We initiate the mathematical study of replicability as an algorithmic property in the
context of reinforcement learning (RL). We focus on the fundamental setting of discounted tabular MDPs with access to a generative model. Inspired by Impagliazzo
et al. [2022], we say that an RL algorithm is replicable if, with high probability, it
outputs the exact same policy after two executions on i.i.d. samples drawn from the
generator when its internal randomness is the same. We first provide an efficient
ρ-replicable algorithm
for (ε,
 3
 δ)-optimal policy estimation with sample and time
N ·log(1/δ)
e
complexity O (1−γ)5 ·ε2 ·ρ2 , where N is the number of state-action pairs. Next,
forthe subclassof deterministic algorithms, we provide a lower bound of order
3
Ω (1−γ)N3 ·ε2 ·ρ2 . Then, we study a relaxed version of replicability proposed by
Kalavasis et al. [2023] called TV indistinguishability. We design a computationally efficient TVindistinguishable
algorithm for policy estimation whose sample

N 2 ·log(1/δ)
e
complexity is O (1−γ)5 ·ε2 ·ρ2 . At the cost of exp(N ) running time, we transform
these TV indistinguishable algorithms to ρ-replicable ones without increasing their
sample complexity. Finally, we introduce the notion of approximate-replicability
where we only require that two outputted policies are close under an appropriate
statistical
divergence
(e.g., Renyi) and show an improved sample complexity of


e N ·log(1/δ)
O
.
(1−γ)5 ·ε2 ·ρ2

1

Introduction

When designing a reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm, how can one ensure that when it is executed
twice in the same environment its outcome will be the same? In this work, our goal is to design RL
algorithms with provable replicability guarantees. The lack of replicability in scientific research,
which the community also refers to as the reproducibility crisis, has been a major recent concern.
This can be witnessed by an article that appeared in Nature [Baker, 2016]: Among the 1,500 scientists
who participated in a survey, 70% of them could not replicate other researchers’ findings and more
shockingly, 50% of them could not even reproduce their own results. Unfortunately, due to the
exponential increase in the volume of Machine Learning (ML) papers that are being published each
year, the ML community has also observed an alarming increase in the lack of reproducibility. As a
result, major ML conferences such as NeurIPS and ICLR have established “reproducibility challenges”
in which researchers are encouraged to replicate the findings of their colleagues [Pineau et al., 2019,
2021].
∗

Authors are listed alphabetically.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

