Dynamic Prompt Learning: Addressing
Cross-Attention Leakage for Text-Based Image Editing

Kai Wang1,2 , Fei Yang3∗, Shiqi Yang1,2 , Muhammad Atif Butt1,2 , Joost van de Weijer1,2
1
Computer Vision Center, Barcelona, Spain
2
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
3
College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
{kwang,syang,mabutt,joost}@cvc.uab.es, feiyang@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Large-scale text-to-image generative models have been a ground-breaking development in generative AI, with diffusion models showing their astounding ability to
synthesize convincing images following an input text prompt. The goal of image
editing research is to give users control over the generated images by modifying
the text prompt. Current image editing techniques are susceptible to unintended
modifications of regions outside the targeted area, such as on the background or on
distractor objects which have some semantic or visual relationship with the targeted
object. According to our experimental findings, inaccurate cross-attention maps are
at the root of this problem. Based on this observation, we propose Dynamic Prompt
Learning (DPL) to force cross-attention maps to focus on correct noun words in
the text prompt. By updating the dynamic tokens for nouns in the textual input
with the proposed leakage repairment losses, we achieve fine-grained image editing
over particular objects while preventing undesired changes to other image regions.
Our method DPL, based on the publicly available Stable Diffusion, is extensively
evaluated on a wide range of images, and consistently obtains superior results both
quantitatively (CLIP score, Structure-Dist) and qualitatively (on user-evaluation).
We show improved prompt editing results for Word-Swap, Prompt Refinement, and
Attention Re-weighting, especially for complex multi-object scenes.

1

Introduction

Text-to-Image (T2I) is advancing at a revolutionary pace and has demonstrated an unprecedented
ability to generate diverse and realistic images [27, 33, 34, 35]. The state-of-the-art T2I models are
trained on extremely large language-image datasets, which require huge computational resources.
However, these models do not allow for straightforward text-guided image editing and generally lack
the capability to control specific regions of a given image.
Recent research on text-guided image editing allows users to easily manipulate an image using only
text prompts [5, 9, 14, 15, 24, 42, 43]. In this paper, we focus on prompt based image editing,
where we aim to change the visual appearance of a target object (or objects) in the image. Several
of the existing methods use DDIM inversion [40] to attain the initial latent code of the image and
then apply their proposed editing techniques along the denoising phase [28, 30, 42]. Nevertheless,
current text-guided editing methods are susceptible to unintentional modifications of image areas.
We distinguish between two major failure cases: unintended changes of background regions and
unintended changes of distractor objects (objects that are semantically or visually related to the
target object), as shown in Fig. 1. The functioning of existing editing methods greatly depends on
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

