Exploiting Contextual Objects and Relations for
3D Visual Grounding

Li Yang1∗ , Chunfeng Yuan1†∗ , Ziqi Zhang1 , Zhongang Qi2 , Yan Xu3 , Wei Liu1 , Ying Shan2
Bing Li1 , Weiping Yang4 , Peng Li5,6 , Yan Wang5,6 ,Weiming Hu1,7,8
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), CASIA
2
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG, 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Education Management Information Center, Ministry of Education 5 Alibaba Group
6
Zhejiang Linkheer Science And Technology Co., Ltd.
7
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
8
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University

Abstract
3D visual grounding, the task of identifying visual objects in 3D scenes based on
natural language inputs, plays a critical role in enabling machines to understand and
engage with the real-world environment. However, this task is challenging due to
the necessity to capture 3D contextual information to distinguish target objects from
complex 3D scenes. The absence of annotations for contextual objects and relations
further exacerbates the difficulties. In this paper, we propose a novel model,
CORE-3DVG, to address these challenges by explicitly learning about contextual
objects and relations. Our method accomplishes 3D visual grounding via three
sequential modular networks, including a text-guided object detection network, a
relation matching network, and a target identification network. During training, we
introduce a pseudo-label self-generation strategy and a weakly-supervised method
to facilitate the learning of contextual objects and relations, respectively. The
proposed techniques allow the networks to focus more effectively on referred
objects within 3D scenes by understanding their context better. We validate our
model on the challenging Nr3D, Sr3D, and ScanRefer datasets and demonstrate
state-of-the-art performance. Our code will be public at https://github.com/
yangli18/CORE-3DVG.

1

Introduction

Teaching machines to interpret and interact with the real world through vision and language has
been a long-standing pursuit in artificial intelligence research. An important and fundamental task
towards this goal is visual grounding, which involves detecting the referred visual object based on
natural language input. While previous works have largely focused on visual grounding within 2D
images [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], there has been a growing interest in extending this task to point clouds of 3D
scenes, giving rise to 3D visual grounding [6, 7].
In 3D scenes, objects exhibit diverse spatial distributions, and it is common for objects of the same
category to coexist. To clearly describe the target object, language descriptions often provide the
contextual information, i.e. the contextual objects as well as their relations to the target object within
the environment. For instance, in Figure 1(a), the text describes the target chair by specifying its
relative position to the door and table. The interpretation of such contextual information from textual
descriptions to visual representations is crucial for 3D visual grounding.
∗

Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

