Optimal Transport Model Distributional Robustness

Van-Anh Nguyen1

Trung Le1
Anh Tuan Bui1
Thanh-Toan Do1
1,2
Dinh Phung
1
Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University, Australia
2
VinAI, Vietnam

{van-anh.nguyen, trunglm, tuan.bui, toan.do, dinh.phung}@monash.edu

Abstract
Distributional robustness is a promising framework for training deep learning
models that are less vulnerable to adversarial examples and data distribution shifts.
Previous works have mainly focused on exploiting distributional robustness in
the data space. In this work, we explore an optimal transport-based distributional
robustness framework in model spaces. Specifically, we examine a model distribution within a Wasserstein ball centered on a given model distribution that
maximizes the loss. We have developed theories that enable us to learn the optimal
robust center model distribution. Interestingly, our developed theories allow us to
flexibly incorporate the concept of sharpness awareness into training, whether it’s
a single model, ensemble models, or Bayesian Neural Networks, by considering
specific forms of the center model distribution. These forms include a Dirac delta
distribution over a single model, a uniform distribution over several models, and a
general Bayesian Neural Network. Furthermore, we demonstrate that SharpnessAware Minimization (SAM) is a specific case of our framework when using a
Dirac delta distribution over a single model, while our framework can be seen as a
probabilistic extension of SAM. To validate the effectiveness of our framework in
the aforementioned settings, we conducted extensive experiments, and the results
reveal remarkable improvements compared to the baselines.

1

Introduction

Distributional robustness (DR) is a promising framework for learning and decision-making under
uncertainty, which has gained increasing attention in recent years [4, 15, 16, 6]. The primary
objective of DR is to identify the worst-case data distribution within the vicinity of the ground-truth
data distribution, thereby challenging the model’s robustness to distributional shifts. DR has been
widely applied to various fields, including semi-supervised learning [5, 11, 66], transfer learning and
domain adaptation [39, 16, 69, 50, 51, 38, 52, 57], domain generalization [57, 70], and improving
model robustness [57, 8, 61]. Although the principle of DR can be applied to either data space or
model space, the majority of previous works on DR have primarily concentrated on exploring its
applications in data space.
Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) [18] has emerged as an effective technique for enhancing
the generalization ability of deep learning models. SAM aims to find a perturbed model within
the vicinity of a current model that maximizes the loss over a training set. The success of SAM
and its variants [36, 33, 62] has inspired further investigation into its formulation and behavior, as
evidenced by recent works such as [31, 45, 2]. While [30] empirically studied the difference in
sharpness obtained by SAM [18] and SWA [26], and [46] demonstrated that SAM is an optimal
Bayes relaxation of standard Bayesian inference with a normal posterior, none of the existing works
have explored the connection between SAM and distributional robustness.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

