Reward Scale Robustness for Proximal Policy
Optimization via DreamerV3 Tricks

Ryan Sullivan
rsulli@umd.edu
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA

Akarsh Kumar
akarshkumar0101@gmail.com
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, USA

Shengyi Huang
costa.huang@outlook.com
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA, USA

John P. Dickerson
johnd@umd.edu
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA

Joseph Suarez
jsuarez@mit.edu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, USA

Abstract
Most reinforcement learning methods rely heavily on dense, well-normalized
environment rewards. DreamerV3 recently introduced a model-based method with
a number of tricks that mitigate these limitations, achieving state-of-the-art on a
wide range of benchmarks with a single set of hyperparameters. This result sparked
discussion about the generality of the tricks, since they appear to be applicable to
other reinforcement learning algorithms. Our work applies DreamerV3’s tricks to
PPO and is the first such empirical study outside of the original work. Surprisingly,
we find that the tricks presented do not transfer as general improvements to PPO.
We use a high quality PPO reference implementation and present extensive ablation
studies totaling over 10,000 A100 hours on the Arcade Learning Environment and
the DeepMind Control Suite. Though our experiments demonstrate that these tricks
do not generally outperform PPO, we identify cases where they succeed and offer
insight into the relationship between the implementation tricks. In particular, PPO
with these tricks performs comparably to PPO on Atari games with reward clipping
and significantly outperforms PPO without reward clipping.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown great promise in addressing complex tasks across various domains. However, each new application typically requires environment-specific tuning and significant
engineering effort. The Dreamer 1,2,3 line of work has focused on world-modeling to achieve high
performance across a wide range of tasks. The most recent version, DreamerV3, outperforms the
previous version with a single set of hyperparameters shared across all tasks. DreamerV3 introduces
several stability and performance-enhancing technique to accomplish this, but it also includes several
orthogonal changes such as a larger architecture. Additionally, most of these new techniques are
not inherently tied to the world-modeling formulation and could potentially be applied in other reinforcement learning settings. Table 1 categorizes the tricks according to which part of the DreamerV3
algorithm they apply to. Specifically, the following techniques are directly applicable to model-free
actor-critic methods:
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

