Neural Circuits for Fast Poisson Compressed Sensing
in the Olfactory Bulb

Jacob A. Zavatone-Veth1,2∗, Paul Masset1,3∗, William L. Tong1,4,5 , Joseph D. Zak6 ,
Venkatesh N. Murthy1,3†, Cengiz Pehlevan1,4,5†
1
Center for Brain Science, 2 Department of Physics,
3
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
4
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
5
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence,
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
6
Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
jzavatoneveth@g.harvard.edu, paul_masset@fas.harvard.edu,
vnmurthy@fas.harvard.edu, cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Within a single sniff, the mammalian olfactory system can decode the identity and
concentration of odorants wafted on turbulent plumes of air. Yet, it must do so
given access only to the noisy, dimensionally-reduced representation of the odor
world provided by olfactory receptor neurons. As a result, the olfactory system
must solve a compressed sensing problem, relying on the fact that only a handful
of the millions of possible odorants are present in a given scene. Inspired by this
principle, past works have proposed normative compressed sensing models for
olfactory decoding. However, these models have not captured the unique anatomy
and physiology of the olfactory bulb, nor have they shown that sensing can be
achieved within the 100-millisecond timescale of a single sniff. Here, we propose
a rate-based Poisson compressed sensing circuit model for the olfactory bulb. This
model maps onto the neuron classes of the olfactory bulb, and recapitulates salient
features of their connectivity and physiology. For circuit sizes comparable to the
human olfactory bulb, we show that this model can accurately detect tens of odors
within the timescale of a single sniff. We also show that this model can perform
Bayesian posterior sampling for accurate uncertainty estimation. Fast inference
is possible only if the geometry of the neural code is chosen to match receptor
properties, yielding a distributed neural code that is not axis-aligned to individual
odor identities. Our results illustrate how normative modeling can help us map
function onto specific neural circuits to generate new hypotheses.

1

Introduction

Sensory systems allow organisms to detect physical signals in their environments, enabling them to
maximize fitness by acting adaptively. This experience of the physical environment, also known as the
Umwelt, depends on the sensors and sensory organs of each organism [1, 2]. Throughout evolution,
organisms have developed specialized sensory mechanisms to extract specific information about the
∗
†

JAZ-V and PM contributed equally to this work.
VNM and CP jointly supervised this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

