ViSt3D: Video Stylization with 3D CNN

Ayush Pande
IIT Kanpur
ayushp@cse.iitk.ac.in

Gaurav Sharma
TensorTour & IIT Kanpur
gaurav@tensortour.com

Abstract
Visual stylization has been a very popular research area in recent times. While
image stylization has seen a rapid advancement in the recent past, video stylization,
while being more challenging, is relatively less explored. The immediate method
of stylizing videos by stylizing each frame independently has been tried with
some success. To the best of our knowledge, we present the first approach to
video stylization using 3D CNN directly, building upon insights from 2D image
stylization. Stylizing video is highly challenging, as the appearance and video
motion, which includes both camera and subject motions, are inherently entangled
in the representations learnt by a 3D CNN. Hence, a naive extension of 2D CNN
stylization methods to 3D CNN does not work. To perform stylization with 3D
CNN, we propose to explicitly disentangle motion and appearance, stylize the
appearance part, and then add back the motion component and decode the final
stylized video. In addition, we propose a dataset, curated from existing datasets, to
train video stylization networks. We also provide an independently collected test
set to study the generalization of video stylization methods. We provide results
on this test dataset comparing the proposed method with 2D stylization methods
applied frame by frame. We show successful stylization with 3D CNN for the first
time, and obtain better stylization in terms of texture cf. the existing 2D methods.
Project page: https://ayush202.github.io/projects/ViSt3D.html

1

Introduction

Image stylization is the task of transforming an input content image into a stylized image with the
style taken from another input style image. It has been a very popular research topic as well as a
widely used image editing tool in the recent past. Pictures taken by many users have been transformed
into the styles of Picasso and Monet. While image stylization with 2D CNNs has been hugely popular
[4, 9, 11, 16], stylization of videos has been relatively less explored. Some recent works on image
stylization also show results on video stylization by doing frame by frame image stylization, e.g.
[4, 11, 18], and have achieved some success. 3D CNN architectures designed for video processing,
to the best of our knowledge, have not yet been made amenable for video stylization at all. Since
the 3D convolutions used in the 3D CNNs, inherently combine the spatial and temporal information,
the two factors of variations are deeply entangled in the resulting representations. This makes
video stylization with 3D CNNs extremely challenging as the style is usually for the appearance,
i.e. indicated by a single image, and modifying the video representation to incorporate style in the
content, but not in motion is a very challenging task. Naive extension of 2D stylization, e.g. directly
transferring feature statistics from style to content features using AdaIN [11] operation with 3D
CNNs intermediate features, leads to unusable video output, with intermittent slow motion and jerky
transitions due to the style input being static (see supplementary material for representative results).
We address the challenging task of video stylization using 3D CNNs directly. We propose an
architecture and training method which takes a content video clip and a style image, and produces
an aesthetically pleasing stylized video clip. We do so by disentangling the appearance and motion
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

