DiffComplete: Diffusion-based Generative
3D Shape Completion

Ruihang Chu1
Enze Xie 2
Shentong Mo3
2
4
Zhenguo Li
Matthias Nießner
Chi-Wing Fu1
Jiaya Jia1,5
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
MBZUAI 4 Technical University of Munich 5 SmartMore
https://ruihangchu.com/diffcomplete.html

Abstract
We introduce a new diffusion-based approach for shape completion on 3D range
scans. Compared with prior deterministic and probabilistic methods, we strike a
balance between realism, multi-modality, and high fidelity. We propose DiffComplete by casting shape completion as a generative task conditioned on the incomplete shape. Our key designs are two-fold. First, we devise a hierarchical feature
aggregation mechanism to inject conditional features in a spatially-consistent manner. So, we can capture both local details and broader contexts of the conditional
inputs to control the shape completion. Second, we propose an occupancy-aware
fusion strategy in our model to enable the completion of multiple partial shapes and
introduce higher flexibility on the input conditions. DiffComplete sets a new SOTA
performance (e.g., 40% decrease on l1 error) on two large-scale 3D shape completion benchmarks. Our completed shapes not only have a realistic outlook compared
with the deterministic methods but also exhibit high similarity to the ground truths
compared with the probabilistic alternatives. Further, DiffComplete has strong
generalizability on objects of entirely unseen classes for both synthetic and real
data, eliminating the need for model re-training in various applications.

Input

Output

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Our method is able to (a) produce realistic completed shapes from partial scans, (b)
incorporate multiple incomplete scans (denoted by the plus symbol) to improve the completion
accuracy, and (c) directly generalize to work on real objects of unseen classes without finetuning.

1

Introduction

The advent of affordable range sensors, such as the Microsoft Kinect and Intel RealSense, has
spurred remarkable progress in 3D reconstruction [1], facilitating applications in content creation,
mixed reality, robot navigation, and more. Despite the improved reconstruction quality [2–5], typical
scanning sessions cannot cover every aspect of the scene objects. Hence, the reconstructed 3D models
often have incomplete geometry, thereby limiting their practical usage in downstream applications.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

