RD-Suite: A Benchmark for Ranking Distillation

Zhen Qin, Rolf Jagerman, Rama Pasumarthi, Honglei Zhuang, He Zhang, Aijun Bai,
Kai Hui, Le Yan, Xuanhui Wang∗
Google
Mountain View, CA, US 94043

Abstract
The distillation of ranking models has become an important topic in both academia
and industry. In recent years, several advanced methods have been proposed to
tackle this problem, often leveraging ranking information from teacher rankers that
is absent in traditional classification settings. To date, there is no well-established
consensus on how to evaluate this class of models. Moreover, inconsistent benchmarking on a wide range of tasks and datasets make it difficult to assess or invigorate advances in this field. This paper first examines representative prior arts on
ranking distillation, and raises three questions to be answered around methodology
and reproducibility. To that end, we propose a systematic and unified benchmark,
Ranking Distillation Suite (RD-Suite), which is a suite of tasks with 4 large realworld datasets, encompassing two major modalities (textual and numeric) and
two applications (standard distillation and distillation transfer). RD-Suite consists of benchmark results that challenge some of the common wisdom in the
field, and the release of datasets with teacher scores and evaluation scripts for
future research. RD-Suite paves the way towards better understanding of ranking
distillation, facilities more research in this direction, and presents new challenges.

1

Introduction

Ranking models have become the interface between users and many applications, such as search
engines and recommender systems [43, 11, 17]. In recent years, due to the popularity of large
neural ranking models [22, 18, 45], as well as the interest in model serving in practical scenarios,
such as on mobile devices [37], the intersection of learning to rank (LTR) [19] and knowledge
distillation [10, 12] has drawn much attention in both academia and industry [32, 35, 39, 40, 44].
Examining the evaluation and experimental setup of many of these papers, we found that there is
no unified consensus on what makes an acceptable test bed for benchmarking ranking distillation
methods. There is also a large diversity in the types of tasks and datasets adopted, as well as the
configurations of teacher and student rankers. These make comparison of different methods as well
as an assessment of their relative strengths and weaknesses difficult.
In this paper, we propose a new benchmark, Ranking Distillation Suite (RD-Suite), for the purpose
of benchmarking ranking distillation methods. We design a benchmark suite comprised of two
major modalities in the ranking literature, sensible teacher and student model architectures, and both
standard distillation and a novel distillation transfer setting. The datasets and evaluation scripts are
publicly available2 and the experimental configurations are made clear to encourage fair comparisons
for future research on the important topic.
∗

Correspond to Zhen Qin <zhenqin@google.com>.
https://github.com/tensorflow/ranking/tree/master/tensorflow_ranking/datasets/
rd_suite
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

