BCDiff: Bidirectional Consistent Diffusion for
Instantaneous Trajectory Prediction

Changsheng Li ∗
Beijing Institute of Technology
lcs@bit.edu.cn

Rongqing Li
Beijing Institute of Technology
lirongqing99@gmail.com
Dongchun Ren
ALLRIDE.AI
Dongchun.ren@allride.ai

Guangyi Chen
CMU & MBZUAI
guangyichen1994@gmail.com

Ye Yuan
Beijing Institute of Technology
yuan-ye@bit.edu.cn

Guoren Wang
Beijing Institute of Technology
wanggrbit@126.com

Abstract
The objective of pedestrian trajectory prediction is to estimate the future paths
of pedestrians by leveraging historical observations, which plays a vital role in
ensuring the safety of self-driving vehicles and navigation robots. Previous works
usually rely on a sufficient amount of observation time to accurately predict future
trajectories. However, there are many real-world situations where the model lacks
sufficient time to observe, such as when pedestrians abruptly emerge from blind
spots, resulting in inaccurate predictions and even safety risks. Therefore, it is
necessary to perform trajectory prediction based on instantaneous observations,
which has rarely been studied before. In this paper, we propose a Bi-directional
Consistent Diffusion framework tailored for instantaneous trajectory prediction,
named BCDiff. At its heart, we develop two coupled diffusion models by designing
a mutual guidance mechanism which can bidirectionally and consistently generate
unobserved historical trajectories and future trajectories step-by-step, to utilize the
complementary information between them. Specifically, at each step, the predicted
unobserved historical trajectories and limited observed trajectories guide one diffusion model to generate future trajectories, while the predicted future trajectories
and observed trajectories guide the other diffusion model to predict unobserved
historical trajectories. Given the presence of relatively high noise in the generated
trajectories during the initial steps, we introduce a gating mechanism to learn the
weights between the predicted trajectories and the limited observed trajectories for
automatically balancing their contributions. By means of this iterative and mutually
guided generation process, both the future and unobserved historical trajectories
undergo continuous refinement, ultimately leading to accurate predictions. Essentially, BCDiff is an encoder-free framework that can be compatible with existing
trajectory prediction models in principle. Experiments show that our proposed
BCDiff significantly improves the accuracy of instantaneous trajectory prediction
on the ETH/UCY and Stanford Drone datasets, compared to related approaches.
∗

Changsheng Li (lcs@bit.edu.cn) is the corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

