Toward Understanding Generative Data Augmentation

Chenyu Zheng1,2 , Guoqiang Wu3 , Chongxuan Li1,2∗
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
3
School of Software, Shandong University, Shandong, China
{chenyu.zheng666, guoqiangwu90}@gmail.com; chongxuanli@ruc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Generative data augmentation, which scales datasets by obtaining fake labeled
examples from a trained conditional generative model, boosts classification performance in various learning tasks including (semi-)supervised learning, few-shot
learning, and adversarially robust learning. However, little work has theoretically
investigated the effect of generative data augmentation. To fill this gap, we establish a general stability bound in this not independently and identically distributed
(non-i.i.d.) setting, where the learned distribution is dependent on the original
train set and generally not the same as the true distribution. Our theoretical result
includes the divergence between the learned distribution and the true distribution.
It shows that generative data augmentation can enjoy √
a faster
 learning rate when
the order of divergence term is o(max log(m)βm , 1/ m) , where m is the train
set size and βm is the corresponding stability constant. We further specify the
learning setup to the Gaussian mixture model and generative adversarial nets. We
prove that in both cases, though generative data augmentation does not enjoy a
faster learning rate, it can improve the learning guarantees at a constant level
when the train set is small, which is significant when the awful overfitting occurs.
Simulation results on the Gaussian mixture model and empirical results on generative adversarial nets support our theoretical conclusions. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ML-GSAI/Understanding-GDA.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models [1; 2; 3; 4] have achieved great success in many fields, including computer
vision [5; 6], natural language processing [7; 8; 9], and cross-modal learning [10; 11; 12] in the
recent years. A promising usage built upon them is generative data augmentation (GDA) [13; 14;
15], which scales the train set by producing synthetic examples with labels based on advanced
conditional generative models. Empirically, it has been observed that GDA can improve classification
performance in lots of settings, including supervised learning [16; 17], semi-supervised learning [18;
19; 20], few-shot learning [21], zero-shot learning [22], adversarial robust learning [23; 24], etc.
Although promising algorithms and applications of GDA emerge in different learning setups, our
experiments in Section 4 show that GDA does not always work, such as in the case with a rich train
set or standard augmentation methods (e.g., flip). Besides, the number of augmented data has a
significant impact on the performance while is often tuned manually. These phenomena motivate us to
study the effect of GDA. Unfortunately, little work has investigated this technique from a theoretical
perspective. Therefore, in this paper, we take a first step towards understanding it. Specially, we
consider the supervised classification setting, and try to answer the following questions rigorously:
• Can we establish learning guarantees for GDA and explain when it works precisely?
∗

Correspondence to Chongxuan Li.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

