On Evaluating Adversarial Robustness of
Large Vision-Language Models

Yunqing Zhao∗1 , Tianyu Pang∗†2 , Chao Du†2 , Xiao Yang3 , Chongxuan Li4 ,
Ngai-Man Cheung†1 , Min Lin2
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design
2
Sea AI Lab, Singapore
3
Tsinghua University 4 Renmin University of China
{zhaoyq, tianyupang, duchao, linmin}@sea.com;
yangxiao19@tsinghua.edu.cn; chongxuanli@ruc.edu.cn; ngaiman_cheung@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Large vision-language models (VLMs) such as GPT-4 have achieved unprecedented
performance in response generation, especially with visual inputs, enabling more
creative and adaptable interaction than large language models such as ChatGPT.
Nonetheless, multimodal generation exacerbates safety concerns, since adversaries
may successfully evade the entire system by subtly manipulating the most vulnerable modality (e.g., vision). To this end, we propose evaluating the robustness
of open-source large VLMs in the most realistic and high-risk setting, where adversaries have only black-box system access and seek to deceive the model into
returning the targeted responses. In particular, we first craft targeted adversarial
examples against pretrained models such as CLIP and BLIP, and then transfer these
adversarial examples to other VLMs such as MiniGPT-4, LLaVA, UniDiffuser,
BLIP-2, and Img2Prompt. In addition, we observe that black-box queries on these
VLMs can further improve the effectiveness of targeted evasion, resulting in a surprisingly high success rate for generating targeted responses. Our findings provide
a quantitative understanding regarding the adversarial vulnerability of large VLMs
and call for a more thorough examination of their potential security flaws before
deployment in practice. Our project page: yunqing-me.github.io/AttackVLM/.

1

Introduction

Large vision-language models (VLMs) have enjoyed tremendous success and demonstrated promising
capabilities in text-to-image generation [55, 68, 72], image-grounded text generation (e.g., image
captioning or visual question-answering) [2, 15, 42, 86], and joint generation [5, 32, 98] due to an
increase in the amount of data, computational resources, and number of model parameters. Notably,
after being finetuned with instructions and aligned with human feedback, GPT-4 [58] is capable of
conversing with human users and, in particular, supports visual inputs.
Along the trend of multimodal learning, an increasing number of large VLMs are made publicly
available, enabling the exponential expansion of downstream applications. However, this poses
significant safety challenges. It is widely acknowledged, for instance, that text-to-image models
could be exploited to generate fake content [71, 76] or edit images maliciously [73]. A silver lining is
that adversaries must manipulate textual inputs to achieve their evasion goals, necessitating extensive
search and engineering to determine the adversarial prompts. Moreover, text-to-image models that are
∗
†

Equal contribution. Work done during Yunqing Zhao’s internship at Sea AI Lab.
Correspondence to Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, and Ngai-Man Cheung.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

