Hyper-Skin: A Hyperspectral Dataset for
Reconstructing Facial Skin-Spectra from RGB Images

1

Pai Chet Ng 1 , Zhixiang Chi 1 , Yannick Verdie 2 , Juwei Lu 2 , Konstantinos N. Plataniotis 1
The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Laboratory, Huawei Canada

Abstract
We introduce Hyper-Skin, a hyperspectral dataset covering wide range of wavelengths from visible (VIS) spectrum (400nm - 700nm) to near-infrared (NIR)
spectrum (700nm - 1000nm), uniquely designed to facilitate research on facial
skin-spectra reconstruction. By reconstructing skin spectra from RGB images,
our dataset enables the study of hyperspectral skin analysis, such as melanin
and hemoglobin concentrations, directly on the consumer device. Overcoming limitations of existing datasets, Hyper-Skin consists of diverse facial skin
data collected with a pushbroom hyperspectral camera. With 330 hyperspectral
cubes from 51 subjects, the dataset covers the facial skin from different angles
and facial poses. Each hyperspectral cube has dimensions of 1024×1024×448,
resulting in millions of spectra vectors per image. The dataset, carefully curated in adherence to ethical guidelines, includes paired hyperspectral images
and synthetic RGB images generated using real camera responses. We demonstrate the efficacy of our dataset by showcasing skin spectra reconstruction using
state-of-the-art models on 31 bands of hyperspectral data resampled in the VIS
and NIR spectrum. This Hyper-Skin dataset would be a valuable resource to
NeurIPS community, encouraging the development of novel algorithms for skin
spectral reconstruction while fostering interdisciplinary collaboration in hyperspectral skin analysis related to cosmetology and skin’s well-being. Instructions
to request the data and the related benchmarking codes are publicly available at:
https://github.com/hyperspectral-skin/Hyper-Skin-2023.

1

Introduction

Hyperspectral imaging offers a comprehensive and non-invasive approach for facial skin analysis,
capturing detailed spatio-spectral information across a wide range of wavelengths [1, 2]. This threedimensional hyperspectral cube surpasses the limitations of single-point measurements, providing
a deeper understanding of facial skin characteristics and spatial distribution [3]. Previous studies
have demonstrated the potential of hyperspectral skin analysis in dermatology [4], cosmetics [5],
and skin’s well-being [6], paving the way for advanced analysis and applications in these domains.
This paper introduces "hyper-skin", a hyperspectral skin dataset uniquely designed to facilitate the
development of algorithms targeting on consumer-based cosmetology applications. This unique
dataset is curated with this specific goal in mind, focusing its practical relevance within the consumerbased cosmetology and skin beauty.
Despite the potential of hyperspectral skin analysis on cosmetology and skin beauty, the high cost
and limited accessibility of hyperspectral imaging systems have limited their widespread adoption.
Consumer cameras, particularly those embedded in smartphones, have become an integral part of
daily life and are extensively used for capturing selfies and everyday images. Hence, many works
study the use of RGB images from consumer cameras for skin analysis [7, 8, 9]. While RGB
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

