Training Chain-of-Thought via Latent-Variable
Inference
Du Phan∗ Matthew D. Hoffman∗ David Dohan† Sholto Douglas Tuan Anh Le
Aaron Parisi Pavel Sountsov Charles Sutton Sharad Vikram Rif A. Saurous
Google

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) solve problems more accurately and interpretably
when instructed to work out the answer step by step using a “chain-of-thought”
(CoT) prompt. One can also improve LLMs’ performance on a specific task by
supervised fine-tuning, i.e., by using gradient ascent on some tunable parameters to
maximize the average log-likelihood of correct answers from a labeled training set.
Naively combining CoT with supervised tuning requires supervision not just of the
correct answers, but also of detailed rationales that lead to those answers; these
rationales are expensive to produce by hand. Instead, we propose a fine-tuning
strategy that tries to maximize the marginal log-likelihood of generating a correct
answer using CoT prompting, approximately averaging over all possible rationales.
The core challenge is sampling from the posterior over rationales conditioned
on the correct answer; we address it using a simple Markov-chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm inspired by the self-taught
reasoner (STaR), memoized wake-sleep, Markovian score climbing, and persistent
contrastive divergence. This algorithm also admits a novel control-variate technique
that drives the variance of our gradient estimates to zero as the model improves.
Applying our technique to GSM8K and the tasks in BIG-Bench Hard, we find that
this MCMC-EM fine-tuning technique typically improves the model’s accuracy on
held-out examples more than STaR or prompt-tuning with or without CoT.

1

Introduction

For many mathematical, logical, and common-sense reasoning problems, large language models solve
problems more accurately when instructed to work out the answer step by step in a chain of thought
or a scratchpad (Wei et al., 2022; Nye et al., 2021; Kojima et al., 2022; Rajani et al., 2019; Shwartz
et al., 2020). These methods encourage the model to produce a rationale, that is, text describing a
sequence of reasoning steps that leads to an answer; the motivation is that it seems to be easier for the
model to generate a sequence of correct reasoning steps than to generate the final answer directly.
Because of the striking performance of chain-of-thought methods, many variants have been proposed
(Wang et al., 2022b; Zhou et al., 2022; Creswell et al., 2022; Ye & Durrett, 2023), but there are still
many cases in which the rationales are incorrect.
One way to improve these methods is to fine-tune models to generate better rationales. If goldstandard rationales can be obtained, such as via crowdsourcing (Rajani et al., 2019) or automatically
(Nye et al., 2021), then supervised methods can be applied, but obtaining this data can be difficult.
An appealing alternative is to start from datasets that contain questions and correct answers only,
which are more readily available, and bootstrap rationales during learning. A version of this strategy
∗
Corresponding authors: {mhoffman,phandu}@google.com. The first two authors contributed equally,
and their order was chosen randomly.
†
Current affiliation: OpenAI.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

