LithoBench: Benchmarking AI Computational
Lithography for Semiconductor Manufacturing

Su Zheng1

Haoyu Yang2 Binwu Zhu1 Bei Yu1 Martin D.F. Wong3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
nVIDIA, Austin, USA
3
Hong Kong Baptist University

Abstract
Computational lithography provides algorithmic and mathematical support for
resolution enhancement in optical lithography, which is critical for semiconductor
manufacturing. The time-consuming lithography simulation and mask optimization
processes limit the practical application of inverse lithography technology (ILT),
a promising solution to the challenges of advanced-node lithography. Although
machine learning for ILT has shown promise for reducing the computational burden, this field lacks a dataset that can train the models thoroughly and evaluate
the performance comprehensively. To boost the development of AI-driven computational lithography, we present the LithoBench dataset, a collection of circuit
layout tiles for deep-learning-based lithography simulation and mask optimization.
LithoBench consists of more than 120k tiles that are cropped from real circuit
designs or synthesized according to topologies of widely adopted ILT testcases.
Ground truths are generated by a famous lithography model in academia and an
advanced ILT method. We provide a framework to design and evaluate deep neural
networks (DNNs) with the data. The framework is used to benchmark state-ofthe-art models on lithography simulation and mask optimization. LithoBench is
available at https://github.com/shelljane/lithobench.

1

Introduction

Semiconductor lithography transfers circuit patterns drawn on a mask onto a silicon wafer, which
is essential for the fabrication of integrated circuits (IC). It typically accounts for about 30% of the
cost of IC manufacturing. As transistor sizes continue to shrink, lithography tends to be the technical
limiting factor for further advances [1]. Diffraction or process effects may distort the patterns on the
wafer, leading to performance degradation and even failures. Given the importance, how to ensure
the correctness of semiconductor lithography becomes a critical issue in industry and academia.
Optical proximity correction (OPC) is a technique used to improve the accuracy and quality of
lithography patterns on semiconductor wafers. OPC evoles from rule-based methods [2] to modelbased approaches [3–5], improving the resilience to manufacturing variation. Inverse lithography
technology (ILT) [6–8] is a mathematically rigorous inverse approach that optimizes the mask to
achieve the desired results on the wafer. It has been explored and developed as the next generation of
OPC, promising a solution to challenges of advanced technology such as extreme ultraviolet (EUV).
However, there exist significant challenges that limit the broad application of ILT. A major reason is
that ILT typically consumes a significant amount of runtime, making it challenging to implement ILT
at a production-level scale. Moreover, the patterns generated by ILT algorithms may be too complex
to be produced efficiently. To alleviate the problems above, DNN-based ILT algorithms have been
proposed to reduce the runtime and complexity [9–17]. Compared with traditional methods, the
improvement of DNN-based ILT algorithms has two aspects. Firstly, unlike traditional methods that
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

