Adaptive Online Replanning with Diffusion Models

Siyuan Zhou1 , Yilun Du2 , Shun Zhang3 , Mengdi Xu4 , Yikang Shen3 ,
Wei Xiao2 , Dit-Yan Yeung1 , Chuang Gan3,5
1

2

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
4
Carnegie Mellon University, 5 UMass Amherst

Abstract
Diffusion models have risen as a promising approach to data-driven planning,
and have demonstrated impressive robotic control, reinforcement learning, and
video planning performance. Given an effective planner, an important question to
consider is replanning – when given plans should be regenerated due to both action
execution error and external environment changes. Direct plan execution, without
replanning, is problematic as errors from individual actions rapidly accumulate and
environments are partially observable and stochastic. Simultaneously, replanning at
each timestep incurs a substantial computational cost, and may prevent successful
task execution, as different generated plans prevent consistent progress to any
particular goal. In this paper, we explore how we may effectively replan with
diffusion models. We propose a principled approach to determine when to replan,
based on the diffusion model’s estimated likelihood of existing generated plans.
We further present an approach to replan existing trajectories to ensure that new
plans follow the same goal state as the original trajectory, which may efficiently
bootstrap off previously generated plans. We illustrate how a combination of our
proposed additions significantly improves the performance of diffusion planners
leading to 38% gains over past diffusion planning approaches on Maze2D, and
further enables the handling of stochastic and long-horizon robotic control tasks.
Videos can be found on the anonymous website: https://vis-www.cs.umass.
edu/replandiffuser/.

1

Introduction

Planning is a pivotal component in effective decision-making, facilitating tasks such as collision
avoidance in autonomous vehicles [29], efficient and long-horizon object manipulation [12] and
strategic reasoning for extended periods [32, 25]. Recently, diffusion has risen as a promising approach to data-driven planning [17, 1, 14, 40], enabling impressive advancements in robot control [6]
and the generation of video-level plans [9].
In many planning settings, an important variable to consider is not only how to plan, but also when
it is time to replan. Environments are often stochastic in nature, making previously constructed
plans un-executable given an unexpected environmental change. Moreover, inaccurate execution of
individual actions in an environment will often also cause states to deviate from those in the expected
plan, further necessitating replanning. Finally, environments will often be partially observable, and
the optimal action or sequence of actions may deviate substantially from those originally planned,
especially when new information comes to light.
Previous works in planning with diffusion models have not explored how to tackle these factors,
and typically generate new plans at each iteration. Such a process is computationally expensive as a
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

