Learning a Neuron by a Shallow ReLU Network:
Dynamics and Implicit Bias for Correlated Inputs

Dmitry Chistikov∗
University of Warwick
d.chistikov@warwick.ac.uk

Matthias Englert∗
University of Warwick
m.englert@warwick.ac.uk

Ranko Lazić∗
University of Warwick
r.s.lazic@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
We prove that, for the fundamental regression task of learning a single neuron,
training a one-hidden layer ReLU network of any width by gradient flow from a
small initialisation converges to zero loss and is implicitly biased to minimise the
rank of network parameters. By assuming that the training points are correlated
with the teacher neuron, we complement previous work that considered orthogonal
datasets. Our results are based on a detailed non-asymptotic analysis of the dynamics of each hidden neuron throughout the training. We also show and characterise a
surprising distinction in this setting between interpolator networks of minimal rank
and those of minimal Euclidean norm. Finally we perform a range of numerical
experiments, which corroborate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

One of the grand challenges for machine learning research is to understand how overparameterised
neural networks are able to fit perfectly the training examples and simultaneously to generalise
well to unseen data [Zhang, Bengio, Hardt, Recht, and Vinyals, 2021]. The double-descent phenomenon [Belkin, Hsu, Ma, and Mandal, 2019], where increasing the neural network capacity beyond
the interpolation threshold can eventually reduce the test loss much further than could be achieved
around the underparameterised “sweet spot”, is a mystery from the standpoint of classical machine
learning theory. This has been observed to happen even for training without explicit regularisers.
Implicit bias of gradient-based algorithms. A key hypothesis towards explaining the doubledescent phenomenon is that the gradient-based algorithms that are used for training are implicitly
biased (or implicitly regularised) [Neyshabur, Bhojanapalli, McAllester, and Srebro, 2017] to converge to solutions that in addition to fitting the training examples have certain properties which
cause them to generalise well. It has attracted much attention in recent years from the research
community, which has made substantial progress in uncovering implicit biases of training algorithms
in many important settings [Vardi, 2023]. For example, for classification tasks, and for homogeneous
networks (which is a wide class that includes ReLU networks provided they contain neither biases at
levels deeper than the first nor residual connections), Lyu and Li [2020] and Ji and Telgarsky [2020]
established that gradient flow is biased towards maximising the classification margin in parameter
space, in the sense that once the training loss gets sufficiently small, the direction of the parameters
subsequently converges to a Karush-Kuhn-Tucker point of the margin maximisation problem.
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

