Static and Sequential Malicious Attacks in the Context
of Selective Forgetting

Chenxu Zhao∗
Department of Computer Science
Iowa State University
cxzhao@iastate.edu

Wei Qian∗
Department of Computer Science
Iowa State University
wqi@iastate.edu

Rex Ying
Department of Computer Science
Yale University
rex.ying@yale.edu

Mengdi Huai
Department of Computer Science
Iowa State University
mdhuai@iastate.edu

Abstract
With the growing demand for the right to be forgotten, there is an increasing need
for machine learning models to forget sensitive data and its impact. To address this,
the paradigm of selective forgetting (a.k.a machine unlearning) has been extensively
studied, which aims to remove the impact of requested data from a well-trained
model without retraining from scratch. Despite its significant success, limited
attention has been given to the security vulnerabilities of the unlearning system
concerning malicious data update requests. Motivated by this, in this paper, we
explore the possibility and feasibility of malicious data update requests during the
unlearning process. Specifically, we first propose a new class of malicious selective
forgetting attacks, which involves a static scenario where all the malicious data
update requests are provided by the adversary at once. Additionally, considering
the sequential setting where the data update requests arrive sequentially, we also
design a novel framework for sequential forgetting attacks, which is formulated as a
stochastic optimal control problem. We also propose novel optimization algorithms
that can find the effective malicious data update requests. We perform theoretical
analyses for the proposed selective forgetting attacks, and extensive experimental
results validate the effectiveness of our proposed selective forgetting attacks. The
source code is available in the supplementary material.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms play a crucial role in diverse fields such as biology, speech recognition,
agriculture, and medicine. To build pertinent models, these algorithms are frequently trained using
a range of data sources, including third-party datasets, internal datasets, and customized subsets of
publicly available user data. With recent demands for increased data privacy, the data users could
erase the impact of their sensitive information from the trained models to ensure their privacy. Recent
legislation (e.g., the General Data Protection Regulation from the European Union [60], the California
Consumer Privacy Act [47], and the Canada’s proposed Consumer Privacy Protection Act) requires
the right to be forgotten, and grants users an unconditional right to request that their private data be
removed from everywhere in the system within a reasonable time.
∗

The first two authors contribute equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

