Skill-it! A data-driven skills framework
for understanding and training language models

Mayee F. Chen∗
Stanford University
Nicholas Roberts
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Ce Zhang
Together AI, University of Chicago

Kush Bhatia
Stanford University

Frederic Sala
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Jue Wang
Together AI
Christopher Ré
Stanford University

Abstract
The quality of training data impacts the performance of pre-trained large language
models (LMs). Given a fixed budget of tokens, we study how to best select data
that leads to good downstream model performance across tasks. We develop a new
framework based on a simple hypothesis: just as humans acquire interdependent
skills in a deliberate order, language models also follow a natural order when
learning a set of skills from their training data. If such an order exists, it can be
utilized for improved understanding of LMs and for data-efficient training. Using
this intuition, our framework formalizes the notion of a skill and of an ordered set
of skills in terms of the associated data. First, using both synthetic and real data,
we demonstrate that these ordered skill sets exist, and that their existence enables
more advanced skills to be learned with less data when we train on their prerequisite
skills. Second, using our proposed framework, we introduce an online data sampling
algorithm, S KILL -I T, over mixtures of skills for both continual pre-training and
fine-tuning regimes, where the objective is to efficiently learn multiple skills in
the former and an individual skill in the latter. On the LEGO synthetic in the
continual pre-training setting, S KILL -I T obtains 37.5 points higher accuracy than
random sampling. On the Natural Instructions dataset in the fine-tuning setting,
S KILL -I T reduces the validation loss on the target skill by 13.6% versus training
on data associated with the target skill itself. We apply our skills framework on the
RedPajama dataset to continually pre-train a 3B-parameter LM, achieving higher
accuracy on the LM Evaluation Harness with 1B tokens than the baseline approach
of sampling uniformly over data sources with 3B tokens.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LMs) exhibit remarkable capabilities, including producing creative
content [55], writing source code [9], and chatting with users [8]. A key ingredient in enabling models
to perform such tasks is the data on which the models are trained [18, 20, 59]. A natural way to
unlock particular capabilities is to improve this training data. However, it is unclear how to select
data from a large corpus for these capabilities given a fixed budget of training tokens, as data selection
methods for current state-of-the-art LMs mostly rely on heuristics for filtering and mixing together
different datasets [33, 59]. We lack a formal framework for capturing how data influences the model’s
capabilities and how to utilize this data effectively for improving LM performance.
∗

Correspondence to mfchen@cs.stanford.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

