Adaptive Privacy Composition for Accuracy-first
Mechanisms
Ryan Rogers
LinkedIn

Gennady Samorodnitsky
Cornell University

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University

Aaditya Ramdas
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
In many practical applications of differential privacy, practitioners seek to provide
the best privacy guarantees subject to a target level of accuracy. A recent line of
work by Ligett et al. [2017], Whitehouse et al. [2022] has developed such accuracyfirst mechanisms by leveraging the idea of noise reduction that adds correlated
noise to the sufficient statistic in a private computation and produces a sequence of
increasingly accurate answers. A major advantage of noise reduction mechanisms
is that the analysts only pay the privacy cost of the least noisy or most accurate
answer released. Despite this appealing property in isolation, there has not been
a systematic study on how to use them in conjunction with other differentially
private mechanisms. A fundamental challenge is that the privacy guarantee for
noise reduction mechanisms is (necessarily) formulated as ex-post privacy that
bounds the privacy loss as a function of the released outcome. Furthermore, there
has yet to be any study on how ex-post private mechanisms compose, which allows
us to track the accumulated privacy over several mechanisms. We develop privacy
filters [Rogers et al., 2016, Feldman and Zrnic, 2021, Whitehouse et al., 2023] that
allow an analyst to adaptively switch between differentially private and ex-post
private mechanisms subject to an overall differential privacy guarantee.

1

Introduction

Although differential privacy has been recognized by the research community as the de-facto standard
to ensure the privacy of a sensitive dataset while still allowing useful insights, it has yet to become
widely applied in practice despite its promise to ensure formal privacy guarantees. There are notable
applications of differential privacy, including the U.S. Census [Abowd et al., 2022], yet few would
argue that differential privacy has become quite standard in practice.
One common objection to differential privacy is that it injects noise and can cause spurious results for
data analyses. A recent line of work in differential privacy has focused on developing accuracy-first
mechanisms that aim to ensure a target accuracy guarantee while achieving the best privacy guarantee
[Ligett et al., 2017, Whitehouse et al., 2022]. In particular, these accuracy-first mechanisms do
not ensure a predetermined level of privacy, but instead provide ex-post privacy, which allows the
resulting privacy loss to depend on the outcome of the mechanism. This is in contrast to the prevalent
paradigm of differential privacy that fixes the scale of privacy noise in advance and hopes the result is
accurate. With accuracy-first mechanisms, practitioners instead specify the levels of accuracy that
would ensure useful data analyses and then aim to achieve such utility with the strongest privacy
guarantee.
However, one of the limitations of this line of work is that it is not clear how ex-post privacy
mechanisms compose, so if we combine multiple ex-post privacy mechanisms, what is the overall
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

