Provably Bounding Neural Network Preimages

Suhas Kotha∗
Carnegie Mellon
suhask@andrew.cmu.edu
Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon
Bosch Center for AI
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Christopher Brix∗
RWTH Aachen
brix@cs.rwth-aachen.de

Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham†
Google DeepMind
dvijothamcs@gmail.com

Huan Zhang†
UIUC
huan@huan-zhang.com

Abstract
Most work on the formal verification of neural networks has focused on bounding
the set of outputs that correspond to a given set of inputs (for example, bounded
perturbations of a nominal input). However, many use cases of neural network
verification require solving the inverse problem, or over-approximating the set
of inputs that lead to certain outputs. We present the INVPROP algorithm for
verifying properties over the preimage of a linearly constrained output set, which
can be combined with branch-and-bound to increase precision. Contrary to other
approaches, our efficient algorithm is GPU-accelerated and does not require a linear
programming solver. We demonstrate our algorithm for identifying safe control
regions for a dynamical system via backward reachability analysis, verifying
adversarial robustness, and detecting out-of-distribution inputs to a neural network.
Our results show that in certain settings, we find over-approximations over 2500×
tighter than prior work while being 2.5× faster. By strengthening robustness
verification with output constraints, we consistently verify more properties than
the previous state-of-the-art on multiple benchmarks, including a large model with
167k neurons in VNN-COMP 2023. Our algorithm has been incorporated into the
α,β-CROWN verifier, available at https://abcrown.org.

1

Introduction

Applying neural networks to safety-critical settings often requires reasoning about constraints on
the inputs and outputs of a neural network. For example, for a physical system controlled by a
neural network policy, it is of interest to understand which initial states will lead to an unsafe state
such as colliding with an obstacle. Formal verification of neural networks seeks to provide provable
guarantees demonstrating that networks satisfy formal specifications on their inputs and outputs.
Most work to date has focused on developing algorithms that can bound the outputs of a neural
network given constraints on the inputs, which can be used for applications such as analyzing the
robustness of a neural network to perturbations of a given input [Wong and Kolter, 2018, Dvijotham
et al., 2018, Zhang et al., 2018a, Raghunathan et al., 2018, Gehr et al., 2018].
In this work, we address the inverse problem of over-approximating a neural network’s preimage:
given a set of outputs Sout (described by linear constraints on the network output), we seek to find a
set that provably contains all inputs that lead to such outputs. For example, for our neural network
policy, this would correspond to the states that collide with an obstacle one step in the future. Though
the verification problem is already challenging due to non-convexity and high dimensionality, this
new problem is even more difficult since neural networks are generally not invertible.
* Equal contribution, † Equal advising
Instructions for reproducing our results are available at https://github.com/kothasuhas/verify-input
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

