StressID: a Multimodal Dataset for Stress
Identification
Hava Chaptoukaev1 Valeriya Strizhkova 2 Michele Panariello1 Bianca D’Alpaos1
Aglind Reka2 Valeria Manera3 Susanne Thümmler3
Esma Ismailova3,4 Nicholas Evans1 François Bremond2,3
Massimiliano Todisco1 Maria A. Zuluaga1∗ Laura M. Ferrari2,5∗
1
EURECOM, Sophia Antipolis, France
2
Inria, Valbonne, France
3
CoBTek, Université Cote d’Azur, Nice, France
4
Mines Saint-Etienne, Centre CMP, Gardanne, France
5
The Biorobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pontedera, Italy
{chaptouk,panariel,evans,todisco,zuluaga}@eurecom.fr
{valeriya.strizhkova,francois.bremond,laura.ferrari}@inria.fr

Abstract
StressID is a new dataset specifically designed for stress identification from
unimodal and multimodal data. It contains videos of facial expressions, audio
recordings, and physiological signals. The video and audio recordings are acquired
using an RGB camera with an integrated microphone. The physiological data
is composed of electrocardiography (ECG), electrodermal activity (EDA), and
respiration signals that are recorded and monitored using a wearable device. This
experimental setup ensures a synchronized and high-quality multimodal data collection. Different stress-inducing stimuli, such as emotional video clips, cognitive
tasks including mathematical or comprehension exercises, and public speaking
scenarios, are designed to trigger a diverse range of emotional responses. The
final dataset consists of recordings from 65 participants who performed 11 tasks,
as well as their ratings of perceived relaxation, stress, arousal, and valence levels.
StressID is one of the largest datasets for stress identification that features three
different sources of data and varied classes of stimuli, representing more than
39 hours of annotated data in total. StressID offers baseline models for stress
classification including a cleaning, feature extraction, and classification phase for
each modality. Additionally, we provide multimodal predictive models combining
video, audio, and physiological inputs. The data and the code for the baselines are
available at https://project.inria.fr/stressid/.

1

Introduction

While a healthy amount of stress is necessary for functioning in daily life, it can rapidly begin to
negatively impact health and productivity when it exceeds an individual’s coping level. Negative
stress can be a triggering or aggravating factor for many diseases and pathological conditions [16],
and frequent and intense exposures to stress can cause structural changes in the brain with longterm effects on the nervous system [10]. Monitoring of stress levels could play a major role in the
prevention of stress-related issues, and early stress detection is vital in patients exhibiting emotional
disorders, or in high-risk jobs such as surgeons, pilots or long-distance drivers.
*

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

