DeepfakeBench: A Comprehensive Benchmark of
Deepfake Detection
Zhiyuan Yan1 , Yong Zhang2 , Xinhang Yuan1 , Siwei Lyu3 , Baoyuan Wu1∗
1
School of Data Science,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
University at Buffalo, State University of New York, USA

Abstract
A critical yet frequently overlooked challenge in the field of deepfake detection is
the lack of a standardized, unified, comprehensive benchmark. This issue leads to
unfair performance comparisons and potentially misleading results. Specifically,
there is a lack of uniformity in data processing pipelines, resulting in inconsistent
data inputs for detection models. Additionally, there are noticeable differences in
experimental settings, and evaluation strategies and metrics lack standardization.
To fill this gap, we present the first comprehensive benchmark for deepfake detection, called DeepfakeBench, which offers three key contributions: 1) a unified data
management system to ensure consistent input across all detectors, 2) an integrated
framework for state-of-the-art methods implementation, and 3) standardized evaluation metrics and protocols to promote transparency and reproducibility. Featuring
an extensible, modular-based codebase, DeepfakeBench contains 15 state-of-the-art
detection methods, 9 deepfake datasets, a series of deepfake detection evaluation
protocols and analysis tools, as well as comprehensive evaluations. Moreover, we
provide new insights based on extensive analysis of these evaluations from various
perspectives (e.g., data augmentations, backbones). We hope that our efforts could
facilitate future research and foster innovation in this increasingly critical domain.
All codes, evaluations, and analyses of our benchmark are publicly available at
https://github.com/SCLBD/DeepfakeBench.

1

Introduction

Deepfake, widely recognized for its facial manipulation, has gained prominence as a technology
capable of fabricating videos through the seamless superimposition of images. The surging popularity
of deepfake technology in recent years can be attributed to its diverse applications, extending from
entertainment and marketing to more complex usages. However, the proliferation of deepfake is not
without risks. The same tools that enable creativity and innovation can be manipulated for malicious
intent, undermining privacy, promoting misinformation, or eroding trust in digital media, etc.
Responding to the risks posed by deepfake contents, numerous deepfake detection methods [53,
22, 33, 32, 52, 3] have been developed to distinguish deepfake contents from real contents, which
are generally categorized into three types: naive detector, spatial detector, and frequency detector.
Despite rapid advancements in deepfake detection technologies, a significant challenge remains due
to the lack of a standardized, unified, and comprehensive benchmark for a fair comparison among
different detectors. This issue causes three major obstacles to the development of the deepfake
detection field. First, there is a remarkable inconsistency in the training configurations and evaluation
standards utilized in the field. This discrepancy inevitably leads to divergent outcomes, making a fair
∗

Corresponding author: Baoyuan Wu (wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

