D-Separation for Causal Self-Explanation

Wei Liu1 Jun Wang2∗ Haozhao Wang1∗ Ruixuan Li1∗
Zhiying Deng1 Yuankai Zhang1 Yang Qiu1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
iWudao Tech
1
{idc_lw, hz_wang, rxli, dengzhiyingdd, yuankai_zhang, anders}@hust.edu.cn
2
jwang@iwudao.tech

Abstract
Rationalization is a self-explaining framework for NLP models. Conventional
work typically uses the maximum mutual information (MMI) criterion to find the
rationale that is most indicative of the target label. However, this criterion can be
influenced by spurious features that correlate with the causal rationale or the target
label. Instead of attempting to rectify the issues of the MMI criterion, we propose
a novel criterion to uncover the causal rationale, termed the Minimum Conditional
Dependence (MCD) criterion, which is grounded on our finding that the non-causal
features and the target label are d-separated by the causal rationale. By minimizing
the dependence between the unselected parts of the input and the target label
conditioned on the selected rationale candidate, all the causes of the label are
compelled to be selected. In this study, we employ a simple and practical measure
of dependence, specifically the KL-divergence, to validate our proposed MCD
criterion. Empirically, we demonstrate that MCD improves the F1 score by up to
13.7% compared to previous state-of-the-art MMI-based methods. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/jugechengzi/Rationalization-MCD.

1

Introduction

Predictor
𝑿
𝑿𝒁
Explainer
𝑌෠
With the success of deep
Input text
Prediction
Rationale
learning, there is growing
service is excellent and very
service is excellent and very
[0.1, 0.9]
concern about the interclean . good location being close
clean . good location being close
(service)
to all destinations in town .
to all destinations in town .
pretability of deep learning models, particularly as
they are rapidly being de- Figure 1: The standard rationalization framework RNP. X is the origployed in various critical inal full text. XZ is the selected rationale candidate and Ŷ is the
fields (Lipton, 2018). Ide- predictor’s output.
ally, the explanation for a prediction should be both faithful (reflecting the model’s actual behavior)
and plausible (aligning with human understanding) (Chan et al., 2022).

Post-hoc explanations, which are trained separately from the prediction process, may not faithfully
represent an agent’s decision, despite appearing plausible (Lipton, 2018). Sometimes, faithfulness
should be considered a prerequisite that precedes plausibility in explanations of neural networks,
especially when these networks are employed to assist in critical decision-making processes, as this
factor determines the trustworthiness of the explanations. In contrast to post-hoc methods, ante-hoc
(or self-explaining) techniques typically offer increased transparency (Lipton, 2018) and faithfulness
(Yu et al., 2021), as the prediction is made based on the explanation itself.
∗
Corresponding authors. This paper is a collaboration between Intelligent and Distributed Computing
Laboratory, Huazhong University of Science and Technology and iWudao Tech.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

