Riemannian Projection-free Online Learning

Zihao Hu† , Guanghui Wang† , Jacob Abernethy†,⋆
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology†
Google Research⋆
{zihaohu,gwang369}@gatech.edu, abernethyj@google.com

Abstract
The projection operation is a critical component in a wide range of optimization
algorithms, such as online gradient descent (OGD), for enforcing constraints and
achieving optimal regret bounds. However, it suffers from computational complexity limitations in high-dimensional settings or when dealing with ill-conditioned
constraint sets. Projection-free algorithms address this issue by replacing the
projection oracle with more efficient optimization subroutines. But to date, these
methods have been developed primarily in the Euclidean setting, and while there
has been growing interest in optimization on Riemannian manifolds, there has been
essentially no work in trying to utilize projection-free tools here. An apparent issue
is that non-trivial affine functions are generally non-convex in such domains. In
this paper, we present methods for obtaining sub-linear regret guarantees in online
geodesically convex optimization on curved spaces for two scenarios: when we
have access to (a) a separation oracle or (b) a linear optimization oracle. For
geodesically convex losses, and when a separation oracle is available, our algo1
3
1
rithms achieve O(T /2 ), O(T /4 ) and O(T /2 ) adaptive regret guarantees in the
full information setting, the bandit setting with one-point feedback and the bandit
setting with two-point feedback, respectively. When a linear optimization oracle
3
is available, we obtain regret rates of O(T /4 ) for geodesically convex losses and
2/3
O(T log T ) for strongly geodesically convex losses.

1

Introduction

Online convex optimization (OCO) offers a framework for modeling sequential decision-making
problems (Hazan et al., 2016). The standard setting depicts the learning process as a zero-sum game
between a learner and an adversary. At round t, the learner selects a decision xt from a convex set
K and observes the encountered convex loss function ft . The learner’s goal is to minimize regret,
defined as
T
T
X
X
RegretT :=
ft (xt ) − min
ft (x).
t=1

x∈K

t=1

In Euclidean space, OCO boasts a robust theoretical foundation and numerous real-world applications, such as online load balancing (Molinaro, 2017), optimal control (Li et al., 2019), revenue
maximization (Lin et al., 2019), and portfolio management (Jézéquel et al., 2022). The standard
approach for OCO is online gradient descent (OGD), which performs
xt+1 = ΠK (xt − ηt ∇ft (xt )),
where ΠK represents the orthogonal projection onto K, ensuring the sequence {xt }Tt=1 remains
feasible. However, the projection operation can be computationally expensive in high-dimensional
or complex feasible sets. Projection-free online learning provides a reasonable way to handle this
situation. At the heart of this approach is the understanding that, in many cases, the complexity of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

