Rethinking Tokenizer and Decoder in Masked Graph
Modeling for Molecules

Zhiyuan Liu† Yaorui Shi‡ An Zhang† Enzhi Zhang§
Kenji Kawaguchi† Xiang Wang‡∗ Tat-Seng Chua†
†
National University of Singapore, ‡ University of Science and Technology of China
§
Hokkaido University
{acharkq,shiyaorui,xiangwang1223}@gmail.com, anzhang@u.nus.edu
enzhi.zhang.n6@elms.hokudai.ac.jp, {kenji,chuats}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Masked graph modeling excels in the self-supervised representation learning of
molecular graphs. Scrutinizing previous studies, we can reveal a common scheme
consisting of three key components: (1) graph tokenizer, which breaks a molecular
graph into smaller fragments (i.e., subgraphs) and converts them into tokens; (2)
graph masking, which corrupts the graph with masks; (3) graph autoencoder, which
first applies an encoder on the masked graph to generate the representations, and
then employs a decoder on the representations to recover the tokens of the original
graph. However, the previous MGM studies focus extensively on graph masking
and encoder, while there is limited understanding of tokenizer and decoder. To
bridge the gap, we first summarize popular molecule tokenizers at the granularity
of node, edge, motif, and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), and then examine their
roles as the MGM’s reconstruction targets. Further, we explore the potential of
adopting an expressive decoder in MGM. Our results show that a subgraph-level
tokenizer and a sufficiently expressive decoder with remask decoding have a large
impact on the encoder’s representation learning. Finally, we propose a novel
MGM method SimSGT, featuring a Simple GNN-based Tokenizer (SGT) and an
effective decoding strategy. We empirically validate that our method outperforms
the existing molecule self-supervised learning methods. Our codes and checkpoints
are available at https://github.com/syr-cn/SimSGT.

1

Introduction

Molecular representation learning (MRL) [1, 2, 3] is a critical research area with numerous vital
downstream applications, such as molecular property prediction [4], drug discovery [5, 6], and
retrosynthesis [7, 8]. Given that molecules can be represented as graphs, graph self-supervised
learning (SSL) is a natural fit for this problem. Among the various graph SSL techniques, Masked
Graph Modeling (MGM) has recently garnered significant interest [9, 10, 11].
In this paper, we study MRL through MGM, aiming to pretrain a molecule encoder for subsequent finetuning in downstream applications. After looking at the masked modeling methods in graph [12, 9, 10],
language [13, 14], and computer vision [15, 16], we summarize that MGM relies on three key
components – graph tokenizer, graph masking, and graph autoencoder, as Figure 1 shows:
• Graph tokenizer. Given a graph g, the graph tokenizer employs a graph fragmentation function [1, 17, 18, 2] to break g into smaller subgraphs, such as nodes and motifs. Then, these
∗
Corresponding author. Xiang Wang is also affiliated with Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Institute of
Dataspace, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

