Collaboratively Learning Linear Models with
Structured Missing Data
Chen Cheng⇤
Stanford University
chencheng@stanford.edu

Gary Cheng⇤
Stanford University
chenggar@stanford.edu

John Duchi
Stanford University
jduchi@stanford.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of collaboratively learning least squares estimates for m
agents. Each agent observes a different subset of the features—e.g., containing
data collected from sensors of varying resolution. Our goal is to determine how
to coordinate the agents in order to produce the best estimator for each agent. We
propose a distributed, semi-supervised algorithm C OLLAB, consisting of three
steps: local training, aggregation, and distribution. Our procedure does not require
communicating the labeled data, making it communication efficient and useful in
settings where the labeled data is inaccessible. Despite this handicap, our procedure
is nearly asymptotically, local-minimax optimal—even among estimators allowed
to communicate the labeled data such as imputation methods. We test our method
on US Census data. We also discuss generalizations of our method to non-Gaussian
feature settings, non-linear settings, and Federated Learning.

1

Introduction

Consider a set of agents that collect data to make predictions, where different agents may collect different features—because of different sensor availability or specialization—but wish to leverage shared
structure to achieve better accuracy. Concretely, suppose we have m agents, where each agent i 2 [m]
observes n samples of (xi+ , y) where xi+ 2 Rdi is some subset of x 2 Rd . We set this as a regression
problem where the data (x, y) has the linear relationship y = hx, ✓i + ⇠ for some noise variable ⇠. For
example, these agents could be a network of satellites, each collecting data with a distinct set of sensors
of varying resolution and specialization, with the purpose of estimating quantities like crop-yields [22],
biomass [18], and solar-flare intensity [12]. Or these agents could be a group of seismic sensors, using
acoustic modalities or accelerometers to predict whether an earthquake will occur [2]. Other examples
may include networks of hospitals or phones [13]. In these settings, the agents can share information
to collaboratively train a model; however, they are limited by communication bandwidth constraints,
a situation satellites and seismic sensors often face due to radio frequency spectrum scarcity and interference [6, 20]. Without being too rigorous, we will define a communication efficient algorithm as one
where the per-agent communication cost does not scale with n, d, or m. No dependence on the dataset
size n is suited for applications with significant data volume but limited communication resources.
No dependence on the overall dimension d of the data ensures that agents are not incentivized to turn
away agents with access to a richer set of features that would improve statistical performance but
increase d. Finally, no dependence on m ensures that the algorithm is scalable to large collectives of
agents. Can we construct a statistically optimal and communication efficient procedure to estimate ✓?
We answer in the affirmative and introduce our estimator C OLLAB. C OLLAB consists of three steps:
local training on all agents, aggregation on a coordinating server, and distribution back to all agents.
Our algorithm is communication-efficient: each agent i 2 [m] syncs twice with a coordinating server
⇤

Equal contribution, authors ordered alphabetically by (last name, first name)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

