Model Sparsity Can Simplify Machine Unlearning

Jinghan Jia1,⋆

Jiancheng Liu1,⋆

Yang Liu4,5

Parikshit Ram2

Yuguang Yao1

Pranay Sharma6

Gaowen Liu3

Sijia Liu1,2

1

4

Michigan State University, 2 IBM Research, 3 Cisco Research,
University of California, Santa Cruz, 5 ByteDance Research, 6 Carnegie Mellon University
⋆
Equal contribution

Abstract
In response to recent data regulation requirements, machine unlearning (MU) has
emerged as a critical process to remove the influence of specific examples from a
given model. Although exact unlearning can be achieved through complete model
retraining using the remaining dataset, the associated computational costs have
driven the development of efficient, approximate unlearning techniques. Moving
beyond data-centric MU approaches, our study introduces a novel model-based
perspective: model sparsification via weight pruning, which is capable of reducing
the gap between exact unlearning and approximate unlearning. We show in both
theory and practice that model sparsity can boost the multi-criteria unlearning
performance of an approximate unlearner, closing the approximation gap, while
continuing to be efficient. This leads to a new MU paradigm, termed prune first,
then unlearn, which infuses a sparse model prior into the unlearning process.
Building on this insight, we also develop a sparsity-aware unlearning method that
utilizes sparsity regularization to enhance the training process of approximate
unlearning. Extensive experiments show that our proposals consistently benefit
MU in various unlearning scenarios. A notable highlight is the 77% unlearning
efficacy gain of fine-tuning (one of the simplest unlearning methods) when using
sparsity-aware unlearning. Furthermore, we demonstrate the practical impact of
our proposed MU methods in addressing other machine learning challenges, such
as defending against backdoor attacks and enhancing transfer learning. Codes are
available at https://github.com/OPTML-Group/Unlearn-Sparse.

1

Introduction

Machine unlearning (MU) initiates a reverse learning process to scrub the influence of data points
from a trained machine learning (ML) model. It was introduced to avoid information leakage about
private data upon completion of training [1–3], particularly in compliance with legislation like ‘the
right to be forgotten’ [4] in General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [5]. The direct but optimal
unlearning approach is exact unlearning to retrain ML models from scratch using the remaining
training set, after removing the data points to be scrubbed. Although retraining yields the ground-truth
unlearning strategy, it is the most computationally intensive one. Therefore, the development of
approximate but fast unlearning methods has become a major focus in research [6–10].
Despite the computational benefits of approximate unlearning, it often lacks a strong guarantee on the
effectiveness of unlearning, resulting in a performance gap with exact unlearning [11]. In particular,
we encounter two main challenges. First, the performance of approximate unlearning can heavily rely
on the configuration of algorithmic parameters. For example, the Fisher forgetting method [12] needs
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

