Progressive Ensemble Distillation:
Building Ensembles for Efficient Inference

Don Kurian Dennis
Carnegie Mellon University

Abhishek Shetty
University of California, Berkeley

Kazuhito Koishida
Microsoft

Anish Sevekari
Carnegie Mellon University

Virginia Smith
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We study the problem of progressive ensemble distillation: Given a large, pretrained
teacher model g, we seek to decompose the model into smaller, low-inference cost
student models fi , such that progressively evaluating additional models in this
ensemble leads to improved predictions. The resulting ensemble allows for flexibly
tuning accuracy vs. inference cost at runtime, which is useful for a number of
applications in on-device inference. The method we propose, B - DISTIL, relies
on an algorithmic procedure that uses function composition over intermediate
activations to construct expressive ensembles with similar performance as g, but
with smaller student models. We demonstrate the effectiveness of B - DISTIL by
decomposing pretrained models across standard image, speech, and sensor datasets.
We also provide theoretical guarantees in terms of convergence and generalization.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation aims to transfer the knowledge of a large model into a smaller one [5, 23].
While this technique is commonly used for model compression, one downside is that the procedure is
fairly rigid—resulting in a single compressed model of a fixed size. In this work, we instead consider
the problem of progressive ensemble distillation: approximating a large model via an ensemble of
smaller, low-latency models such that such that progressively evaluating additional models in this
ensemble leads to improved predictions. The resulting decomposition is useful for many applications
in on-device and low-latency inference. For example, components of the ensemble can be selectively
combined to flexibly meet accuracy/latency constraints [31, 44], can enable efficient parallel inference
execution schemes, and can facilitate early-exit [4, 11] or anytime inference [36, 28] applications,
which are scenarios where inference may be interrupted due to variable resource availability.
More specifically, our work
seeks to distill a large pretrained
model, g, onto an ensemble of
‘smaller’ models, such that evaluating the first model produces a
coarse estimate of the prediction
(e.g., covering common cases),
and evaluating additional models
improves on this estimate (see
Figure 1). There are major advantages to such an ensemble for
on-device efficient inference.

Teacher Model

...

Student Models

Progressive
Distillation

+

+

+

+ ...

Figure 1: In progressive ensemble distillation, a large teacher model is
distilled into an ensemble of low inference cost models. The more student
models we evaluate, the closer the ensemble’s decision boundary is to
that of the teacher model. Models in the ensemble are allowed to depend
on previously computed features to reduce overhead and inference cost.

Corresponding author: Don Dennis <dondennis@cmu.edu>.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

