Bottleneck Structure in Learned Features:
Low-Dimension vs Regularity Tradeoff

Arthur Jacot
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY 10012
arthur.jacot@nyu.edu

Abstract
Previous work [Jac23] has shown that DNNs with large depth L and L2 regularization are biased towards learning low-dimensional representations of the
inputs, which can be interpreted as minimizing a notion of rank R(0) (f ) of the
learned function f , conjectured to be the Bottleneck rank. We compute finite depth
corrections to this result, revealing a measure R(1) of regularity which bounds the
pseudo-determinant of the Jacobian |Jf (x)|+ and is subadditive under composition and addition. This formalizes a balance between learning low-dimensional
representations and minimizing complexity/irregularity in the feature maps, allowing the network to learn the ‘right’ inner dimension. Finally, we prove the
conjectured bottleneck structure in the learned features as L → ∞: for large
depths, almost all hidden representations are approximately R(0) (f )-dimensional,
and almost all weight matrices Wℓ have R(0) (f ) singular values close to 1 while
1
the others are O(L− 2 ). Interestingly, the use of large learning rates is required
to guarantee an order O(L) NTK which in turns guarantees infinite depth convergence of the representations of almost all layers.

1

Introduction
2

The representation cost R(f ; L) = minθ:fθ =f ∥θ∥ [DKS21] can be defined for any model and describes the bias in function space resulting from the minimization of the L2 -norm of the parameters.
While it can be computed explicitly for linear networks [DKS21] or shallow nonlinear ones [Bac17],
the deep non-linear case remains ill-understood [JGHG22].
Previous work [Jac23] has shown that the representation cost of DNNs with homogeneous nonlinearity σ converges to a notion of rank over nonlinear functionslimL→∞ R(fL;L) → R(0) (f ). Over a
large set of functions f , the limiting representation cost R(0) (f ) was proven the so-called Bottleneck
(BN) rank RankBN (f ) which is the smallest integer k such that f : Rdin → Rdout can be factored
g

h

f = Rdin −→ Rk −→ Rdout with inner dimension k (it is conjectured to match it everywhere).
This suggests that large depth L2 -regularized DNNs are adapted for learning functions of the form
f ∗ = g ◦ h with small inner dimension.
This can also be interpreted as DNNs learning symmetries, since a function f : Ω → Rdout with
symmetry group G (i.e. f (g ·x) = f (x)) can be defined as mapping the inputs Ω to an embedding of
the modulo space Ω/G and then to the outputs Rdout . Thus a function with a lot of symmetries will
have a small BN-rank, since RankBN (f ) ≤ dim (Ω/G) where dim (Ω/G) is the smallest dimension
Ω/G can be embedded into.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

