Two Sides of The Same Coin:
Bridging Deep Equilibrium Models and Neural ODEs
via Homotopy Continuation

Shutong Ding∗
ShanghaiTech University
dingsht@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Tianyu Cui∗
ShanghaiTech University
cuity2022@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Jingya Wang
ShanghaiTech University
wangjingya@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Ye Shi †
ShanghaiTech University
shiye@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep Equilibrium Models (DEQs) and Neural Ordinary Differential Equations
(Neural ODEs) are two branches of implicit models that have achieved remarkable
success owing to their superior performance and low memory consumption. While
both are implicit models, DEQs and Neural ODEs are derived from different
mathematical formulations. Inspired by homotopy continuation, we establish a
connection between these two models and illustrate that they are actually two sides
of the same coin. Homotopy continuation is a classical method of solving nonlinear
equations based on a corresponding ODE. Given this connection, we proposed a
new implicit model called HomoODE that inherits the property of high accuracy
from DEQs and the property of stability from Neural ODEs. Unlike DEQs, which
explicitly solve an equilibrium-point-finding problem via Newton’s methods in the
forward pass, HomoODE solves the equilibrium-point-finding problem implicitly
using a modified Neural ODE via homotopy continuation. Further, we developed an
acceleration method for HomoODE with a shared learnable initial point. It is worth
noting that our model also provides a better understanding of why Augmented
Neural ODEs work as long as the augmented part is regarded as the equilibrium
point to find. Comprehensive experiments with several image classification tasks
demonstrate that HomoODE surpasses existing implicit models in terms of both
accuracy and memory consumption.

1

Introduction

Recent studies of implicit models have certified that such models can meet or even surpass the performance of traditional deep neural networks. Instead of specifying the explicit computation process
of the output, implicit models define the joint conditions that the layer’s input and output satisfy.
Instances of such models include the Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (Neural ODEs) [10],
which treat ODEs as a learnable component and can be viewed as continuous Residual Networks [25]
(ResNets), the Deep Equilibrium Models (DEQs) [6], which compute the equilibrium point of a
nonlinear transformation corresponding to an infinite-depth weight-tied network; and optimization
layers [4, 45], which leverage the optimization techniques as layers of neural networks.
Although DEQs and Neural ODEs, as popular implicit models in recent years, have garnered much
attention in terms of theoretical analysis and application, an insightful connection between these two
∗

Equal contribution. †Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

