Learning non-Markovian Decision-Making
from State-only Sequences

Aoyang Qin‹,1,2 Feng Gao3 Qing Li2 Song-Chun Zhu1,2,4 Sirui Xie‹,5
1

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
3
Department of Statistics, UCLA 4 School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
5
Department of Computer Science, UCLA
2

Abstract
Conventional imitation learning assumes access to the actions of demonstrators, but
these motor signals are often non-observable in naturalistic settings. Additionally,
sequential decision-making behaviors in these settings can deviate from the assumptions of a standard Markov Decision Process (MDP). To address these challenges,
we explore deep generative modeling of state-only sequences with non-Markov
Decision Process (nMDP), where the policy is an energy-based prior in the latent
space of the state transition generator. We develop maximum likelihood estimation
to learn both the transition and the policy, which involves short-run MCMC sampling from the prior and importance sampling for the posterior. The learned model
enables decision-making as inference: model-free policy execution is equivalent to
prior sampling, model-based planning is posterior sampling initialized from the
policy. We demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed method in a prototypical path
planning task with non-Markovian constraints and show that the learned model
exhibits strong performances in challenging domains from the MuJoCo suite.

1

Introduction

Imitation from others is a prevalent phenomenon in humans and many other species, where individuals
learn by observing and mimicking the actions of others. An intriguing aspect of this process is the
brain’s ability to extract motor signals from sensory input. This remarkable capability is facilitated
by mirror neurons [1, 2], which respond to observations as if the imitator is performing the actions
themselves. In conventional imitation learning [3, 4] and offline reinforcement learning [5], action
labels have served as proxies for mirror neurons. But it is important to recognize that they are
actually productions of human interventions. Given the recent advancements in AI, now is probably
an opportune time to explore imitation learning in a more naturalistic setting.
While the setting of state-only demonstrations is not common, there are certain exceptions. For
example, Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) initially formulated the problem as state visitation
matching [6], where demonstrations consist solely of state sequences. Subsequently, this stateonly setting was rebranded as Imitation Learning from Observations (ILfO), which introduced the
generalized formulation of matching marginal state distributions [7, 8]. These methods typically rely
on the Markov assumption and Temporal Difference (TD) learning techniques [9]. One consequence
of this assumption, previously believed to be advantageous, is that sequences with different state orders
are treated as equivalent. However, the success of general sequence modeling [10] has challenged
‹
indicates equal contribution. Correspondence: Sirui Xie (srxie@ucla.edu). Code and data are available at
https://github.com/qayqaq/LanMDP

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

