Transfer Learning with Affine Model Transformation

Shunya Minami
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
mshunya@ism.ac.jp

Kenji Fukumizu
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
fukumizu@ism.ac.jp

Yoshihiro Hayashi
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
yhayashi@ism.ac.jp

Ryo Yoshida
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
yoshidar@ism.ac.jp

Abstract
Supervised transfer learning has received considerable attention due to its potential
to boost the predictive power of machine learning in scenarios where data are scarce.
Generally, a given set of source models and a dataset from a target domain are used
to adapt the pre-trained models to a target domain by statistically learning domain
shift and domain-specific factors. While such procedurally and intuitively plausible
methods have achieved great success in a wide range of real-world applications, the
lack of a theoretical basis hinders further methodological development. This paper
presents a general class of transfer learning regression called affine model transfer,
following the principle of expected-square loss minimization. It is shown that the
affine model transfer broadly encompasses various existing methods, including
the most common procedure based on neural feature extractors. Furthermore, the
current paper clarifies theoretical properties of the affine model transfer such as
generalization error and excess risk. Through several case studies, we demonstrate
the practical benefits of modeling and estimating inter-domain commonality and
domain-specific factors separately with the affine-type transfer models.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning (TL) is a methodology to improve the predictive performance of machine learning in
a target domain with limited data by reusing knowledge gained from training in related source domains.
Its great potential has been demonstrated in various real-world problems, including computer vision
[1, 2], natural language processing [3, 4], biology [5], and materials science [6, 7, 8]. Notably,
most of the outstanding successes of TL to date have relied on the feature extraction ability of deep
neural networks. For example, a conventional method reuses feature representations encoded in an
intermediate layer of a pre-trained model as an input for the target task or uses samples from the
target domain to fine-tune the parameters of the pre-trained source model [9]. While such methods
are operationally plausible and intuitive, they lack methodological principles and remain theoretically
unexplored in terms of their learning capability for limited data. This study develops a principled
methodology generally applicable to various kinds of TL.
In this study, we focus on supervised TL settings. In particular, we deal with settings where, given
feature representations obtained from training in the source domain, we use samples from the target
domain to model and estimate the domain shift to the target. This procedure is called hypothesis
transfer learning (HTL); several methods have been proposed, such as using a linear transformation
function [10, 11] and considering a general class of continuous transformation functions [12]. If the
transformation function appropriately captures the functional relationship between the source and
target domains, only the domain-specific factors need to be additionally learned, which can be done
efficiently even with a limited sample size. In other words, the performance of HTL depends strongly
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

