OKRidge: Scalable Optimal k-Sparse
Ridge Regression

Jiachang Liu, Sam Rosen, Chudi Zhong, Cynthia Rudin
Duke University
{jiachang.liu, sam.rosen, chudi.zhong}@duke.edu,
cynthia@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
We consider an important problem in scientific discovery, namely identifying sparse
governing equations for nonlinear dynamical systems. This involves solving sparse
ridge regression problems to provable optimality in order to determine which
terms drive the underlying dynamics. We propose a fast algorithm, OKRidge, for
sparse ridge regression, using a novel lower bound calculation involving, first, a
saddle point formulation, and from there, either solving (i) a linear system or (ii)
using an ADMM-based approach, where the proximal operators can be efficiently
evaluated by solving another linear system and an isotonic regression problem. We
also propose a method to warm-start our solver, which leverages a beam search.
Experimentally, our methods attain provable optimality with run times that are
orders of magnitude faster than those of the existing MIP formulations solved by
the commercial solver Gurobi.

1

Introduction

We are interested in identifying sparse and interpretable governing differential equations arising
from nonlinear dynamical systems. These are scientific machine learning problems whose solution
involves sparse linear regression. Specifically, these problems require the exact solution of sparse
regression problems, with the most basic being sparse ridge regression:
min∥y − Xβ∥22 + λ2 ∥β∥22 subject to ∥β∥0 ≤ k,
β

(1)

where k specifies the number of nonzero coefficients for the model. This formulation is general, but
in the case of nonlinear dynamical systems, the outcome y is a derivative (usually time or spatial)
of each dimension x. Here, we assume that the practitioner has included the true variables, along
with many other possibilities, and is looking to determine which terms (which transformations of the
variables) are real and which are not. This problem is NP-hard [49], and is more challenging in the
presence of highly correlated features. Selection of correct features is vital in this context, as many
solutions may give good results on training data, but will quickly deviate from the true dynamics
when extrapolating past the observed data due to the chaotic nature of complex dynamical systems.
Both heuristic and optimal algorithms have been proposed to solve these problems. Heuristic methods
include greedy sequential adding of features [25, 16, 54, 22] or ensemble [31] methods. These
methods are fast, but often get stuck in local minima, and there is no way to assess solution quality
due to the lack of a lower bound on performance. Optimal methods provide an alternative, but are
slow since they must prove optimality. MIOSR [9], a mixed-integer programming (MIP) approach,
has been able to certify optimality of solutions given enough time. Slow solvers cause difficulty in
performing cross-validation on λ2 (the ℓ2 regularization coefficient) and k (sparsity level).
We aim to solve sparse ridge regression to certifiable optimality, but in a fraction of the run time. We
present a fast branch-and-bound (BnB) formulation, OKRidge. A crucial challenge is obtaining a
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

