Revisiting the Minimalist Approach to Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Denis Tarasov Vladislav Kurenkov Alexander Nikulin Sergey Kolesnikov
Tinkoff
{den.tarasov, v.kurenkov, a.p.nikulin, s.s.kolesnikov}@tinkoff.ai

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed significant advancements in offline reinforcement
learning (RL), resulting in the development of numerous algorithms with varying degrees of complexity. While these algorithms have led to noteworthy improvements,
many incorporate seemingly minor design choices that impact their effectiveness
beyond core algorithmic advances. However, the effect of these design choices
on established baselines remains understudied. In this work, we aim to bridge
this gap by conducting a retrospective analysis of recent works in offline RL and
propose ReBRAC, a minimalistic algorithm that integrates such design elements
built on top of the TD3+BC method. We evaluate ReBRAC on 51 datasets with
both proprioceptive and visual state spaces using D4RL and V-D4RL benchmarks,
demonstrating its state-of-the-art performance among ensemble-free methods in
both offline and offline-to-online settings. To further illustrate the efficacy of
these design choices, we perform a large-scale ablation study and hyperparameter
sensitivity analysis on the scale of thousands of experiments.1

1

Introduction

Interest of the reinforcement learning (RL) community in the offline setting has led to a myriad
of new algorithms specifically tailored to learning highly performant policies without the ability
to interact with an environment (Levine et al., 2020; Prudencio et al., 2022). Yet, similar to the
advances in online RL (Engstrom et al., 2020; Henderson et al., 2018), many of those algorithms
come with an added complexity – design and implementation choices beyond core algorithmic
innovations, requiring a delicate effort in reproduction, hyperparameter tuning, and causal attribution
of performance gains.
Indeed, the issue of complexity was already raised in the offline RL community by Fujimoto
& Gu (2021); the authors highlighted veiled design and implementation-level adjustments (e.g.,
different architectures or actor pre-training) and then demonstrated how a simple behavioral cloning
regularization added to the TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018) constitutes a strong baseline in the offline
setting. This minimalistic and uncluttered algorithm, TD3+BC, has become a de-facto standard
baseline to be compared against. Indeed, most new algorithms juxtapose against it and claim
significant gains over (Akimov et al., 2022; An et al., 2021; Nikulin et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2022b; Ghasemipour et al., 2022). However, application of newly emerged design and
implementation choices to this baseline is still missing.
In this work, we build upon Fujimoto & Gu (2021) line of research and ask: what is the extent to which
newly emerged minor design choices can advance the minimalistic offline RL algorithm? The answer
is illustrated in Figure 1: we propose an extension to TD3+BC, ReBRAC (Section 3), that simply
adds on recently appeared design decisions upon it. We test our algorithm on both proprioceptive and
1

Our implementation is available at https://github.com/DT6A/ReBRAC

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

