Estimating Propensity for Causality-based
Recommendation without Exposure Data

Zhongzhou Liu
School of Computing and Information Systems
Singapore Management University
Singapore, 178902
zzliu.2020@phdcs.smu.edu.sg
Yuan Fang∗
School of Computing and Information Systems
Singapore Management University
Singapore, 178902
yfang@smu.edu.sg

Min Wu
Institute for Infocomm Research
A*STAR
Singapore, 138632
wumin@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
Causality-based recommendation systems focus on the causal effects of user-item
interactions resulting from item exposure (i.e., which items are recommended or
exposed to the user), as opposed to conventional correlation-based recommendation. They are gaining popularity due to their multi-sided benefits to users, sellers
and platforms alike. However, existing causality-based recommendation methods
require additional input in the form of exposure data and/or propensity scores (i.e.,
the probability of exposure) for training. Such data, crucial for modeling causality
in recommendation, are often not available in real-world situations due to technical or privacy constraints. In this paper, we bridge the gap by proposing a new
framework, called Propensity Estimation for Causality-based Recommendation
(P ROP C ARE). It can estimate the propensity and exposure from a more practical
setup, where only interaction data are available without any ground truth on exposure or propensity in training and inference. We demonstrate that, by relating
the pairwise characteristics between propensity and item popularity, P ROP C ARE
enables competitive causality-based recommendation given only the conventional
interaction data. We further present a theoretical analysis on the bias of the causal
effect under our model estimation. Finally, we empirically evaluate P ROP C ARE
through both quantitative and qualitative experiments.

1

Introduction

Recommendation systems have been widely deployed in many real-world applications, such as
streaming services [34, 5], online shopping [17] and job searching [19]. The primary aim of
recommendation systems, such as boosting sales and user engagement [10], depends heavily on
user interactions, such as clicking on or purchasing items. Hence, a classical paradigm is to predict
user-item interactions, and accordingly, recommend items with the highest probability of being
interacted (e.g., clicked or purchased) to users [8, 22, 33, 35]. This paradigm ignores the causal
impact behind recommendation [31]: If an item already has a high probability of being interacted by
a user without being recommended, is there really a need to recommend the item to this user?
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

