Inferring the Future by Imagining the Past

Kartik Chandra*
MIT CSAIL
Tzu-Mao Li
UC San Diego

Tony Chen*
MIT Brain and Cognitive Sciences

Jonathan Ragan-Kelley
MIT CSAIL

Joshua Tenenbaum
MIT Brain and Cognitive Sciences

Abstract
A single panel of a comic book can say a lot: it can depict not only where the
characters currently are, but also their motions, their motivations, their emotions,
and what they might do next. More generally, humans routinely infer complex
sequences of past and future events from a static snapshot of a dynamic scene, even
in situations they have never seen before.
In this paper, we model how humans make such rapid and flexible inferences.
Building on a long line of work in cognitive science, we offer a Monte Carlo
algorithm whose inferences correlate well with human intuitions in a wide variety
of domains, while only using a small, cognitively-plausible number of samples.
Our key technical insight is a surprising connection between our inference problem
and Monte Carlo path tracing, which allows us to apply decades of ideas from the
computer graphics community to this seemingly-unrelated theory of mind task.

1

Introduction

Hemingway’s shortest short story simply reads “For sale: baby shoes, never worn.” There is no
action in this sentence—it is just a description of a static scene—but as readers, we nonetheless infer
a complex and tragic backstory from the “snapshot” that Hemingway describes. This remarkable
ability comes naturally to humans: we routinely reconstruct motives from evidence (e.g. at a crime
scene), recognize intentions from unfinished tasks (e.g. grading incomplete homework), and enjoy
artistic depictions of dynamic action in static media (e.g. a Renaissance “tableau” or sculpture).
How do we do it, so quickly and so intuitively? A long line of empirical work in cognitive science has
shown that people, even infants and young children [Southgate and Csibra, 2009, Gergely and Csibra,
2003, Jara-Ettinger et al., 2015, Hamlin et al., 2007], make rapid, flexible, and robust theory-of-mind
judgments “out of the box”: in novel domains they have never seen before, and without extensive pretraining on data. This remarkable ability has motivated decades of work in AI (see Section 4), which
has successfully addressed the problem of inferring an agent’s goal from a trajectory of observed
actions in a few- or even one-shot manner [Baker et al., 2017, 2009]. These methods cast the problem
of action understanding as Bayesian inference: P (goal | actions) ∝ P (actions | goal)P (goal),
where P (actions | goal) is modeled by comparing the observed actions to the optimal actions a
rational agent would take towards that goal.
However, if we only observe a single state snapshot, these methods break down—there are simply
no actions to condition on. Instead, we must jointly infer not only where the agent might be going,
but also where it came from. Recently, Lopez-Brau et al. [2020, 2022] performed this inference
by rejection-sampling possible paths taken by the agent. Their model’s predictions are remarkably
close to human judgements. However, rejection sampling is extremely inefficient—it is slow even on
simple problems, and simply does not scale to more sophisticated problems, suggesting that there is
more to how humans perform such inference.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

