Language Models can Solve Computer Tasks

Geunwoo Kim
University of California, Irvine
kgw@uci.edu

Pierre Baldi
University of California, Irvine
pfbaldi@ics.uci.edu

Stephen McAleer∗
Carnegie Mellon University
smcaleer@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Agents capable of carrying out general tasks on a computer can improve efficiency
and productivity by automating repetitive tasks and assisting in complex problemsolving. Ideally, such agents should be able to solve new computer tasks presented
to them through natural language commands. However, previous approaches to
this problem require large amounts of expert demonstrations and task-specific
reward functions, both of which are impractical for new tasks. In this work, we
show that a pre-trained large language model (LLM) agent can execute computer
tasks guided by natural language using a simple prompting scheme where the
agent Recursively Criticizes and Improves its output (RCI). The RCI approach
significantly outperforms existing LLM methods for automating computer tasks and
surpasses supervised learning (SL) and reinforcement learning (RL) approaches on
the MiniWoB++ benchmark. We compare multiple LLMs and find that RCI with the
InstructGPT-3+RLHF LLM is state-of-the-art on MiniWoB++, using only a handful
of demonstrations per task rather than tens of thousands, and without a task-specific
reward function. Furthermore, we demonstrate RCI prompting’s effectiveness in
enhancing LLMs’ reasoning abilities on a suite of natural language reasoning tasks,
outperforming chain of thought (CoT) prompting with external feedback. We find
that RCI combined with CoT performs better than either separately. Our code can
be found here: https://github.com/posgnu/rci-agent.

1

Introduction

A long-standing goal in artificial intelligence has been to create generally-intelligent agents that can
accomplish cognitive tasks as well as humans. Such agents should be able to solve any computer task
a human can by communicating via natural language. By automating repetitive tasks and providing
assistance in complex problem-solving, generally-intelligent virtual agents may radically increase
productivity.
Recently, large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable in-context learning capabilities
across a variety of domains and tasks [12, 69, 5, 17, 26, 64, 8, 46, 6]. Although LLMs can impressively
manipulate text and can use high-level API tools [59, 48, 41], previous approaches to using LLMs
that directly take keyboard and mouse actions on computers have had difficulty compared to imitation
learning and reinforcement learning approaches [24]. LLMs that take keyboard and mouse actions on
computers face a number of obstacles, such as ensuring that generated actions are task-appropriate
(task grounding), feasible in the agent’s current state (state grounding), and admissible to be executed
(agent grounding).
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

