Adaptive Normalization for Non-stationary Time
Series Forecasting: A Temporal Slice Perspective

Zhiding Liu1,2 , Mingyue Cheng1,2 , Zhi Li3 , Zhenya Huang1,2 , Qi Liu1,2 ,
Yanhu Xie4 , Enhong Chen1,2∗
1
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
3
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
4
The First Affiliated Hospital of University of Science and Technology of China
zhiding@mail.ustc.edu.cn,{mycheng,huangzhy,qiliuql,cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn
zhilizl@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, xyh200701@sina.cn

Abstract
Deep learning models have progressively advanced time series forecasting due to
their powerful capacity in capturing sequence dependence. Nevertheless, it is still
challenging to make accurate predictions due to the existence of non-stationarity
in real-world data, denoting the data distribution rapidly changes over time. To
mitigate such a dilemma, several efforts have been conducted by reducing the
non-stationarity with normalization operation. However, these methods typically
overlook the distribution discrepancy between the input series and the horizon
series, and assume that all time points within the same instance share the same
statistical properties, which is too ideal and may lead to suboptimal relative improvements. To this end, we propose a novel slice-level adaptive normalization,
referred to SAN, which is a novel scheme for empowering time series forecasting
with more flexible normalization and denormalization. SAN includes two crucial
designs. First, SAN tries to eliminate the non-stationarity of time series in units
of a local temporal slice (i.e., sub-series) rather than a global instance. Second,
SAN employs a slight network module to independently model the evolving trends
of statistical properties of raw time series. Consequently, SAN could serve as a
general model-agnostic plugin and better alleviate the impact of the non-stationary
nature of time series data. We instantiate the proposed SAN on four widely used
forecasting models and test their prediction results on benchmark datasets to evaluate its effectiveness. Also, we report some insightful findings to deeply analyze
and understand our proposed SAN. We make our codes publicly available2 .

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting is becoming increasingly prevalent in real-world scenarios. Various applications have been facilitated by the advancement of forecasting, such as energy consumption planning
[33], clinical healthcare analysis [16], financial risk assessment [15] and cloud resource allocation
[2]. Recently, deep learning-based methods have largely advanced forecasting and other tasks due to
their powerful capacity to capture sequence dependence [23, 27, 3, 42].
Nevertheless, it is still challenging to make accurate predictions for time series forecasting due to
the rapid evolution of time series points over time (a.k.a. non-stationarity of time series) [31]. Such
∗
2

Enhong Chen is the corresponding author.
https://github.com/icantnamemyself/SAN

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

