Information Design in Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning

Yue Lin, Wenhao Li, Hongyuan Zha, Baoxiang Wang∗
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
linyue3h1@gmail.com, {liwenhao, zhahy, bxiangwang}@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is inspired by the way human infants and animals
learn from the environment. The setting is somewhat idealized because, in actual
tasks, other agents in the environment have their own goals and behave adaptively
to the ego agent. To thrive in those environments, the agent needs to influence
other agents so their actions become more helpful and less harmful. Research
in computational economics distills two ways to influence others directly: by
providing tangible goods (mechanism design) and by providing information (information design). This work investigates information design problems for a
group of RL agents. The main challenges are two-fold. One is the information
provided will immediately affect the transition of the agent trajectories, which
introduces additional non-stationarity. The other is the information can be ignored, so the sender must provide information that the receiver is willing to respect. We formulate the Markov signaling game, and develop the notions of
signaling gradient and the extended obedience constraints that address these challenges. Our algorithm is efficient on various mixed-motive tasks and provides
further insights into computational economics. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/YueLin301/InformationDesignMARL.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) studies how a world-agnostic agent makes sequential decisions to
maximize utility. It gains increasing popularity and achieves milestone progress in Atari [46, 22],
Go [48], Poker [8, 9, 39], video games [2, 6], and bioinformatics [26], economics [59], etc. The
canonical RL formulation requires the environment to be stationary, meaning that other agents could
not respond to the ego agent’s policy by adapting their own policies [50]. The assumption does not
hold in real applications. Instead, the ego agent, in general, cannot dictate other agents and needs to
influence others so their adaptation becomes more helpful and less harmful.
A substantial subarea of RL, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), investigates the interaction
and influence among multiple RL agents when they are placed in a shared environment. It has
obtained promising results thanks to the generality and diversity of its settings. Examples are pure
cooperative games and pure competitive games. The pure cooperative setting studies agents that work
on a consentaneous goal. In this case, influencing other agents is relatively straightforward. The pure
competitive setting studies zero-sum games. In this case, influencing other agents is less likely to be
practical or even impossible for two-player games. In between these two extreme cases arises the
large, more realistic but less charted area of mixed-motive MARL, where influencing other learning
agents becomes a main challenge [31, 37, 30].
∗

Corresponding to: Baoxiang Wang

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

