Latent Field Discovery In Interacting Dynamical
Systems With Neural Fields

Miltiadis Kofinas
University of Amsterdam
m.kofinas@uva.nl

Erik J. Bekkers
University of Amsterdam
e.j.bekkers@uva.nl

Naveen Shankar Nagaraja
BMW Group
Naveen-Shankar.Nagaraja@bmw.de

Efstratios Gavves
University of Amsterdam
egavves@uva.nl

Abstract
Systems of interacting objects often evolve under the influence of field effects
that govern their dynamics, yet previous works have abstracted away from such
effects, and assume that systems evolve in a vacuum. In this work, we focus
on discovering these fields, and infer them from the observed dynamics alone,
without directly observing them. We theorize the presence of latent force fields,
and propose neural fields to learn them. Since the observed dynamics constitute the
net effect of local object interactions and global field effects, recently popularized
equivariant networks are inapplicable, as they fail to capture global information. To
address this, we propose to disentangle local object interactions –which are SE(n)
equivariant and depend on relative states– from external global field effects –which
depend on absolute states. We model interactions with equivariant graph networks,
and combine them with neural fields in a novel graph network that integrates field
forces. Our experiments show that we can accurately discover the underlying fields
in charged particles settings, traffic scenes, and gravitational n-body problems, and
effectively use them to learn the system and forecast future trajectories.

1

Introduction

Systems of interacting objects are omnipresent
in nature, with examples ranging from the subatomic to the astronomical scale –including colliding particles and n-body systems of celestial
objects– as well as settings that involve human
activities, governed by social dynamics, like traffic scenes. The majority of these systems does
not evolve in a vacuum; instead, systems evolve Figure 1: N-body system with underlying gravitaunder the influences of underlying fields. For tional field. We uncover fields that underlie interexample, electromagnetic fields may govern the acting systems using only the observed trajectories.
dynamics of charged particles, while galaxies
swirl around supermassive black holes that create gravitational fields. In traffic scenes, the road
network and traffic rules govern the actions of traffic scene participants. Despite the ubiquity of fields,
previous works on modelling interacting systems have only focused on the in vitro case of systems
evolving in a vacuum.
Earlier work on learning interacting systems proposed graph networks [3, 23, 40]. Recently, state-ofthe-art methods for interacting systems propose equivariant graph networks [50, 41, 24, 5, 10] to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

