Using Imperfect Surrogates for Downstream Inference:
Design-based Supervised Learning for
Social Science Applications of Large Language Models

Naoki Egami∗1 , Musashi Hinck2 , Brandon M. Stewart∗ 2 , Hanying Wei1
1
Columbia University, 2 Princeton University

Abstract
In computational social science (CSS), researchers analyze documents to explain
social and political phenomena. In most scenarios, CSS researchers first obtain
labels for documents and then explain labels using interpretable regression analyses in the second step. One increasingly common way to annotate documents
cheaply at scale is through large language models (LLMs). However, like other
scalable ways of producing annotations, such surrogate labels are often imperfect
and biased. We present a new algorithm for using imperfect annotation surrogates
for downstream statistical analyses while guaranteeing statistical properties—like
asymptotic unbiasedness and proper uncertainty quantification—which are fundamental to CSS research. We show that direct use of surrogate labels in downstream
statistical analyses leads to substantial bias and invalid confidence intervals, even
with high surrogate accuracy of 80–90%. To address this, we build on debiased
machine learning to propose the design-based supervised learning (DSL) estimator.
DSL employs a doubly-robust procedure to combine surrogate labels with a smaller
number of high-quality, gold-standard labels. Our approach guarantees valid inference for downstream statistical analyses, even when surrogates are arbitrarily
biased and without requiring stringent assumptions, by controlling the probability
of sampling documents for gold-standard labeling. Both our theoretical analysis
and experimental results show that DSL provides valid statistical inference while
achieving root mean squared errors comparable to existing alternatives that focus
only on prediction without inferential guarantees.

1

Introduction

Text as data—the application of natural language processing to study document collections in the
social sciences and humanities—is increasingly popular. Supervised classifiers have long been used
to amortize human effort by scaling a hand-annotated training set to a larger unannotated corpus.
Now large language models (LLMs) are drastically lowering the amount of labeled data necessary
to achieve reasonable performance which in turn sets the stage for an increase in supervised text as
data work. Recent papers have shown that GPT models can (for some tasks) classify documents at
levels comparable to non-expert human annotators with few or even no labeled examples [Brown
et al., 2020, Gilardi et al., 2023, Ziems et al., 2023].
In social science, such text classification tasks are only the first step. Scholars often use labeled
documents in downstream analyses for explanation of corpus level properties [Hopkins and King,
2010, Egami et al., 2022, Feder et al., 2022, Grimmer et al., 2022], for example, using a logistic
regression to model a binary outcome Y ∈ {0, 1} by regressing this outcome on some explanatory
∗

Correspondence to naoki.egami@columbia.edu and bms4@princeton.edu. We provide the supplementary materials in this link (https://naokiegami.com/paper/dsl_supplement.pdf).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

