Contrastive Lift: 3D Object Instance Segmentation by
Slow-Fast Contrastive Fusion
Yash Bhalgat

Iro Laina

João F. Henriques Andrew Zisserman Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
{yashsb,iro,joao,az,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Instance segmentation in 3D is a challenging task due to the lack of large-scale
annotated datasets. In this paper, we show that this task can be addressed effectively
by leveraging instead 2D pre-trained models for instance segmentation. We propose
a novel approach to lift 2D segments to 3D and fuse them by means of a neural field
representation, which encourages multi-view consistency across frames. The core
of our approach is a slow-fast clustering objective function, which is scalable and
well-suited for scenes with a large number of objects. Unlike previous approaches,
our method does not require an upper bound on the number of objects or object
tracking across frames. To demonstrate the scalability of the slow-fast clustering,
we create a new semi-realistic dataset called the Messy Rooms dataset, which
features scenes with up to 500 objects per scene. Our approach outperforms the
state-of-the-art on challenging scenes from the ScanNet, Hypersim, and Replica
datasets, as well as on our newly created Messy Rooms dataset, demonstrating the
effectiveness and scalability of our slow-fast clustering method.

1

Introduction

While the content of images is three-dimensional, image understanding has largely developed
by treating images as two-dimensional patterns. This was primarily due to the lack of effective
machine learning tools that could model content in 3D. However, recent advancements in neural field
methods [5, 40, 42, 49, 67] have provided an effective approach for applying deep learning to 3D
signals. These breakthroughs enable us to revisit image understanding tasks in 3D, accounting for
factors such as multi-view consistency and occlusions.
In this paper, we study the problem of object instance segmentation in 3D. Our goal is to extend
2D instance segmentation to the third dimension, enabling simultaneous 3D reconstruction and
3D instance segmentation. Our approach is to extract information from multiple views of a scene
independently with a pre-trained 2D instance segmentation model and fuse it into a single 3D neural
field. Our main motivation is that, while acquiring densely labelled 3D datasets is challenging,
annotations and pre-trained predictors for 2D data are widely available. Recent approaches have also
capitalized on this idea, demonstrating their potential for 2D-to-3D semantic segmentation [31, 37,
60, 67] and distilling general-purpose 2D features in 3D space [29, 55]. When distilling semantic
labels or features, the information to be fused is inherently consistent across multiple views: semantic
labels are viewpoint invariant, and 2D features across views are typically learned with the same loss
function. Additionally, the number of labels or feature dimensions is predetermined. Thus, 3D fusion
amounts to multi-view aggregation.
When it comes to instance segmentation, however, the number of objects in a 3D scene is not
fixed or known, and can indeed be quite large compared to the number of semantic classes. More
importantly, when objects are detected independently in different views, they are assigned different
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

