MomentDiff: Generative Video Moment Retrieval
from Random to Real
Pandeng Li1∗, Chen-Wei Xie2 , Hongtao Xie1†, Liming Zhao2 ,
Lei Zhang1 , Yun Zheng2 , Deli Zhao2 , Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Alibaba Group
lpd@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {htxie, leizh23, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn
{eniac.xcw, lingchen.zlm, zhengyun.zy}@alibaba-inc.com
zhaodeli@gmail.com

Abstract
Video moment retrieval pursues an efficient and generalized solution to identify
the specific temporal segments within an untrimmed video that correspond to a
given language description. To achieve this goal, we provide a generative diffusionbased framework called MomentDiff, which simulates a typical human retrieval
process from random browsing to gradual localization. Specifically, we first
diffuse the real span to random noise, and learn to denoise the random noise to
the original span with the guidance of similarity between text and video. This
allows the model to learn a mapping from arbitrary random locations to real
moments, enabling the ability to locate segments from random initialization. Once
trained, MomentDiff could sample random temporal segments as initial guesses and
iteratively refine them to generate an accurate temporal boundary. Different from
discriminative works (e.g., based on learnable proposals or queries), MomentDiff
with random initialized spans could resist the temporal location biases from datasets.
To evaluate the influence of the temporal location biases, we propose two “anti-bias”
datasets with location distribution shifts, named Charades-STA-Len and CharadesSTA-Mom. The experimental results demonstrate that our efficient framework
consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods on three public benchmarks, and
exhibits better generalization and robustness on the proposed anti-bias datasets. The
code, model, and anti-bias evaluation datasets are available at https://github.
com/IMCCretrieval/MomentDiff.

1

Introduction

Video understanding [1–9] is a crucial problem in machine learning [10–16], which covers various
video analysis tasks, such as video classification and action detection. But both tasks above are
limited to predicting predefined action categories. A more natural and elaborate video understanding
process is the ability for machines to match human language descriptions to specific activity segments
in a complex video. Hence, a series of studies [17–22] are conducted on Video Moment Retrieval
(VMR), with the aim of identifying the moment boundaries ( i.e., the start and end time) within a
given video that best semantically correspond to the text query.
As shown in Fig. 1(a), early works address the VMR task by designing predefined dense video
proposals ( i.e., sliding windows [23–25], anchors [26] and 2D map [27] ). Then, the prediction
segment is determined based on the maximum similarity score between dense proposals and the
∗
†

Interns at Alibaba Group
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

