Beyond Uniform Sampling: Offline Reinforcement
Learning with Imbalanced Datasets

Zhang-Wei Hong1∗, Aviral Kumar2 , Sathwik Karnik1 , Abhishek Bhandwaldar3 ,
Akash Srivastava3 , Joni Pajarinen4 , Romain Laroche6 , Abhishek Gupta5 , Pulkit Agrawal1

Abstract
Offline policy learning is aimed at learning decision-making policies using existing
datasets of trajectories without collecting additional data. The primary motivation
for using reinforcement learning (RL) instead of supervised learning techniques
such as behavior cloning is to find a policy that achieves a higher average return
than the trajectories constituting the dataset. However, we empirically find that
when a dataset is dominated by suboptimal trajectories, state-of-the-art offline RL
algorithms do not substantially improve over the average return of trajectories in
the dataset. We argue this is due to an assumption made by current offline RL
algorithms of staying close to the trajectories in the dataset. If the dataset primarily
consists of sub-optimal trajectories, this assumption forces the policy to mimic the
suboptimal actions. We overcome this issue by proposing a sampling strategy that
enables the policy to only be constrained to “good data" rather than all actions in the
dataset (i.e., uniform sampling). We present a realization of the sampling strategy
and an algorithm that can be used as a plug-and-play module in standard offline
RL algorithms. Our evaluation demonstrates significant performance gains in 72
imbalanced datasets, D4RL dataset, and across three different offline RL algorithms.
Code is available at https://github.com/Improbable-AI/dw-offline-rl.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) [23, 27] aims to learn a decision-making policy that maximizes
the expected return (i.e., the sum of rewards over time) using a pre-collected dataset of trajectories,
making it appealing for applications where data collection is infeasible or expensive (e.g., recommendation systems [28]). Without loss of generality, it can be assumed that the dataset is generated
from an unknown policy πD (a|s), also known as the behavior policy [24]. The goal in offline RL
is to learn a policy, πθ (a|s) with parameters θ, that exceeds the performance of the behavior policy.
In offline RL, a widely recognized issue is the overestimation of Q-values for out-of-distribution
state-action pairs, leading to suboptimal policies [8, 20, 22]. This stems from incomplete coverage
of the state-action space in the dataset, causing the learning algorithm to consider absent states and
actions during optimization.
Most state-of-the-art offline RL algorithms [7, 9, 20, 22, 25] mitigate the issue of OOD Q-values by
constraining the distribution of actions of the learned policy πθ (a|s), to be close to the distribution of
actions in the dataset. This results in a generic objective with the following form:
max J(πθ ) − αE(s,a)∼D [C(s, a)] ,
πθ

where J(πθ ) denotes the expected return of the policy πθ , D denotes the dataset, C is a regularization
term that penalizes the policy πθ for deviating from the state-action pairs in the dataset, and α is the
∗
Correspondence: zwhong@mit.edu, ImprobableAI Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology1 , RAIL
Lab, UC Berkeley2 , MIT-IBM Lab3 , Aalto University4 , University of Washington5 , and independent researcher6 .

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

