MeCo: Zero-Shot NAS with One Data and Single
Forward Pass via Minimum Eigenvalue of Correlation
Tangyu Jiang†
School of Artificial Intelligence
Beijing Normal University
jty@mail.bnu.edu.cn

Haodi Wang†
School of Artificial Intelligence
Beijing Normal University
whd@mail.bnu.edu.cn

Rongfang Bie∗
School of Artificial Intelligence
Beijing Normal University
rfbie@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is a promising paradigm in automatic architecture engineering. Zero-shot NAS can evaluate the network without training
via some specific metrics called zero-cost proxies. Though effective, the existing
zero-cost proxies either invoke at least one backpropagation or depend highly on
the data and labels. To alleviate the above issues, in this paper, we first reveal how
the Pearson correlation matrix of the feature maps impacts the convergence rate and
the generalization capacity of an over-parameterized neural network. Enlightened
by the theoretical analysis, we propose a novel zero-cost proxy called MeCo, which
requires only one random data for a single forward pass. We further propose an
optimization approach MeCoopt to improve the performance of our method. We
design comprehensive experiments and extensively evaluate MeCo on multiple
popular benchmarks. MeCo achieves the highest correlation with the ground truth
(e.g., 0.89 on NATS-Bench-TSS with CIFAR-10) among all the state-of-the-art
proxies, which is also fully independent of the data and labels. Moreover, we
integrate MeCo with the existing generation method to comprise a complete NAS.
The experimental results illustrate that MeCo-based NAS can select the architecture with the highest accuracy and a low search cost. For instance, the best
network searched by MeCo-based NAS achieves 97.31% on CIFAR-10, which is
0.04% higher than the baselines under the same settings. Our code is available at
https://github.com/HamsterMimi/MeCo.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been ubiquitously adopted in various fields due to their ability
in hierarchical feature extraction [1–5]. It is a common consensus that the architecture of DNN is
essential in model performance. Unfortunately, the manual trial-and-error method is non-scalable and
inefficient, making it infeasible to find the globally optimal structure. Thanks to the development of
the Neural Architecture Search (NAS), it is possible to automatically select the network architecture
with the best performance.
* Corresponding author.
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

