Optimal Exploration for Model-Based RL
in Nonlinear Systems

Andrew Wagenmaker∗
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195

Guanya Shi†
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Kevin Jamieson‡
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195

Abstract
Learning to control unknown nonlinear dynamical systems is a fundamental problem in reinforcement learning and control theory. A commonly applied approach is
to first explore the environment (exploration), learn an accurate model of it (system
identification), and then compute an optimal controller with the minimum cost on
this estimated system (policy optimization). While existing work has shown that it
is possible to learn a uniformly good model of the system [1], in practice, if we
aim to learn a good controller with a low cost on the actual system, certain system
parameters may be significantly more critical than others, and we therefore ought
to focus our exploration on learning such parameters.
In this work, we consider the setting of nonlinear dynamical systems and seek
to formally quantify, in such settings, (a) which parameters are most relevant to
learning a good controller, and (b) how we can best explore so as to minimize
uncertainty in such parameters. Inspired by recent work in linear systems [2], we
show that minimizing the controller loss in nonlinear systems translates to estimating the system parameters in a particular, task-dependent metric. Motivated by this,
we develop an algorithm able to efficiently explore the system to reduce uncertainty
in this metric, and prove a lower bound showing that our approach learns a controller at a near-instance-optimal rate. Our algorithm relies on a general reduction
from policy optimization to optimal experiment design in arbitrary systems, and
may be of independent interest. We conclude with experiments demonstrating the
effectiveness of our method in realistic nonlinear robotic systems1 .

1

Introduction

Controlling nonlinear dynamical systems is a core problem in robotics, cyber-physical systems,
and beyond, and a significant body of work in both the control theory and reinforcement learning
communities has sought to address this challenge [3–5]. In many real-world scenarios [6–9], the
dynamics of the system of interest is unknown, or only a coarse model of them is available, which
∗

ajwagen@cs.washington.edu
guanyas@andrew.cmu.edu
‡
jamieson@cs.washington.edu
1
Code: https://github.com/ajwagen/nonlinear_sysid_for_control
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

