SceneScape: Text-Driven Consistent Scene Generation

Rafail Fridman∗
Weizmann Institute of Science
rafail.fridman@weizmann.ac.il

Amit Abecasis∗
Weizmann Institute of Science
amit.abecasis@weizmann.ac.il

Yoni Kasten
NVIDIA Research
ykasten@nvidia.com

Tali Dekel
Weizmann Institute of Science
tali.dekel@weizmann.ac.il

"POV, cave, pools, water, dark cavern, inside a cave, beautiful scenery, best quality"

(a) Sample frames from our generated video

(b) Our unified representation

Figure 1: (a) Given a text prompt describing a scene, SceneScape generates a long-term video depicting a
walkthrough of the scene, adhering to a given camera trajectory. We achieve this through a test-time optimization
approach that utilizes a pre-trained text-to-image generative model and a depth prediction model, enabling online
3D-consistent perpetual view generation without the need for training data. (b) To synthesize a 3D-consistent
video , we construct a unified 3D mesh concurrently with the video. For visualization purposes, we remove the
side part of the mesh.

Abstract
We present a method for text-driven perpetual view generation – synthesizing
long-term videos of various scenes solely from an input text prompt describing
the scene and camera poses. We introduce a novel framework that generates
such videos in an online fashion by combining the generative power of a pretrained text-to-image model with the geometric priors learned by a pre-trained
monocular depth prediction model. To tackle the pivotal challenge of achieving 3D
consistency, i.e., synthesizing videos that depict geometrically-plausible scenes,
we deploy an online test-time training to encourage the predicted depth map of
the current frame to be geometrically consistent with the synthesized scene. The
depth maps are used to construct a unified mesh representation of the scene, which
is progressively constructed along the video generation process. In contrast to
previous works, which are applicable only to limited domains, our method generates
diverse scenes, such as walkthroughs in spaceships, caves, or ice castles. Project
page: https://scenescape.github.io/

1

Introduction

By observing only a single photo of a scene, we can imagine what it would be like to explore it, move
around, or turn our head and look around – we can envision the 3D world captured in the image and
expand it in our mind. However, achieving this capability computationally – generating a long-term
video that depicts a plausible visual world from an input image – poses several key challenges. One
of the main challenges is ensuring that the synthesized content is consistent with a feasible 3D world.
For example, it must correctly depict parallax effects and occlusion relations of different objects in
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

