A Hierarchical Spatial Transformer for Massive Point
Samples in Continuous Space
Wenchong He
Zhe Jiang⇤
Tingsong Xiao
Zelin Xu
Shigang Chen
Department of Computer & Information Science & Engineering
University of Florida
{whe2, zhe.jiang, xiaotingsong, zelin.xu, sgchen}@ufl.edu
Ronald Fick

Miles Medina
Christine Angelini
Center for Coastal Solutions
University of Florida
{rfick, miles.medina}@ufl.edu, christine.angelini@essie.ufl.edu

Abstract
Transformers are widely used deep learning architectures. Existing transformers
are mostly designed for sequences (texts or time series), images or videos, and
graphs. This paper proposes a novel transformer model for massive (up to a million)
point samples in continuous space. Such data are ubiquitous in environment sciences (e.g., sensor observations), numerical simulations (e.g., particle-laden flow,
astrophysics), and location-based services (e.g., POIs and trajectories). However,
designing a transformer for massive spatial points is non-trivial due to several
challenges, including implicit long-range and multi-scale dependency on irregular
points in continuous space, a non-uniform point distribution, the potential high computational costs of calculating all-pair attention across massive points, and the risks
of over-confident predictions due to varying point density. To address these challenges, we propose a new hierarchical spatial transformer model, which includes
multi-resolution representation learning within a quad-tree hierarchy and efficient
spatial attention via coarse approximation. We also design an uncertainty quantification branch to estimate prediction confidence related to input feature noise and
point sparsity. We provide a theoretical analysis of computational time complexity
and memory costs. Extensive experiments on both real-world and synthetic datasets
show that our method outperforms multiple baselines in prediction accuracy and
our model can scale up to one million points on one NVIDIA A100 GPU. The
code is available at https://github.com/spatialdatasciencegroup/HST.

1

Introduction

Transformers are widely used deep learning architectures. Existing transformers are largely designed
for sequences (texts or time series), images or videos, and graphs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. This paper
proposes a novel transformer model for massive (up to a million) points in continuous space. Given a
set of point samples in continuous space with explanatory features and target response variables, the
problem is to learn the spatial latent representation of point samples and to infer the target variable at
any new point location.
Learning transformers for continuous-space points has broad applications. In environmental sciences,
researchers are interested in fusing remote sensing spectra with in-situ sensor observations at irregular
⇤

Contact author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

