The Utility of “Even if...” Semifactual
Explanation to Optimise Positive Outcomes
Eoin M. Kenny∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, U.S.A.
ekenny@mit.edu

Weipeng Huang∗
Tencent Security Big Data Lab
Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China
fuzzyhuang@tencent.com

Abstract
When users receive either a positive or negative outcome from an automated system,
Explainable AI (XAI) has almost exclusively focused on how to mutate negative
outcomes into positive ones by crossing a decision boundary using counterfactuals
(e.g., “If you earn 2k more, we will accept your loan application”). Here, we
instead focus on positive outcomes, and take the novel step of using XAI to optimise
them (e.g., “Even if you wish to half your down-payment, we will still accept your
loan application”). Explanations such as these that employ “even if...” reasoning,
and do not cross a decision boundary, are known as semifactuals. To instantiate
semifactuals in this context, we introduce the concept of Gain (i.e., how much a user
stands to benefit from the explanation), and consider the first causal formalisation
of semifactuals. Tests on benchmark datasets show our algorithms are better at
maximising gain compared to prior work, and that causality is important in the
process. Most importantly however, a user study supports our main hypothesis
by showing people find semifactual explanations more useful than counterfactuals
when they receive the positive outcome of a loan acceptance.

1

Introduction

Explainable AI (XAI) is broadly categorised into factual [4, 27, 30] and contrastive explanations [29,
38]. Within contrastive XAI, despite being neglected in comparison to counterfactuals, semifactuals
are a major, fundamental part of human explanation, and have long been studied in psychology [9,
35, 49], philosophy [6, 8, 20], and lately computer science [1–3, 29, 34, 52, 62]. They take the form
of “Even if x happened, y would still be the outcome”. Such reasoning has many potential uses as
demonstrated by these prior works, but here we are focused on how semifactuals can help optimise
positive outcomes for users, which (to the best of our knowledge) remains completely unexplored.
Our definition of counterfactuals is in line with Wachter et al. [55], where a test instance classified
as c must be mutated to cross a decision boundary into class c′ . Likewise, as established in the
literature [1, 29], we define a semifactual as an instance classified as c, which must be modified in
such a way as to not cross a decision boundary (and hence remain class c) [29]. In recourse [25, 50],
“negative outcomes” (e.g., a loan rejection) are generally mutated to produce “positive outcomes”
(e.g., a loan acceptance) for users using counterfactuals. In our setting, we are assuming there was
initially a positive outcome, and we are trying to mutate features to produce an even better situation
for users, and in doing so not cross the boundary into the negative outcome (i.e., using semifactuals).
Historically, counterfactuals have had obvious applications in computer science, such as explaining
how to have a bank loan accepted rather than rejected, but applications for semifactuals as less
∗
1

Contributed Equally.
Code available at: https://github.com/EoinKenny/Semifactual_Recourse_Generation

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

