Pointwise uncertainty quantification for sparse
variational Gaussian process regression with a
Brownian motion prior

Luke Travis
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
luke.travis15@imperial.ac.uk

Kolyan Ray
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
kolyan.ray@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
We study pointwise estimation and uncertainty quantification for a sparse variational Gaussian process method with eigenvector inducing variables. For a rescaled
Brownian motion prior, we derive theoretical guarantees and limitations for the
frequentist size and coverage of pointwise credible sets. For sufficiently many
inducing variables, we precisely characterize the asymptotic frequentist coverage,
deducing when credible sets from this variational method are conservative and
when overconfident/misleading. We numerically illustrate the applicability of our
results and discuss connections with other common Gaussian process priors.

1

Introduction

Consider the standard nonparametric regression model, where we observe n training samples Dn =
{(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn )} arising from the model
εi ∼iid N (0, σ 2 ),

yi = f (xi ) + εi ,
2

(1)

d

where σ > 0 and the design points xi ∈ X ⊂ R are either fixed or considered as i.i.d. random
variables. Our goal is to predict outputs y ∗ based on new input features x∗ , while accounting for the
statistical uncertainty arising from the training data. A widely-used Bayesian approach is to endow
f with a Gaussian process (GP) prior [25], which is especially popular due to its ability to provide
uncertainty quantification via posterior credible sets.
While explicit expressions for the posterior distribution are available, a well-known drawback is that
these require O(n3 ) time and O(n2 ) memory complexity, making computation infeasible for large
data sizes n. To avoid this, there has been extensive research on low-rank GP approximations, where
one chooses m ≪ n inducing variables to summarize the posterior, thereby reducing computation to
O(nm2 ) time and O(nm) memory complexity, see the recent review [20].
We consider here the sparse Gaussian process regression (SGPR) approach introduced by Titsias
[31], which is widely used in practice (see [1, 9] for implementations) and has been studied in
many recent works [13, 21, 5, 6, 38, 28, 32, 22, 23]. While the computational dependence on the
number of inducing variables m is relatively well-understood, fewer theoretical results are available
on understanding how m affects the quality of statistical inference. In particular, it is crucial to
understand how large m needs to be to achieve good statistical uncertainty quantification, ideally
close to that of the true computationally expensive posterior. The present work contributes to this
research direction by establishing precise theoretical guarantees for pointwise inference using a
natural choice of SGPR with eigenvector inducing variables.
A main appeal of Bayesian methods is their ability to perform uncertainty quantification (UQ) via
credible sets, often at the 95% level, see Figure 1 for a visualization involving a full GP and two
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

