Train Faster, Perform Better: Modular Adaptive
Training in Over-Parameterized Models

Yubin Shi1
Yixuan Chen1
Mingzhi Dong1,∗ Xiaochen Yang2,∗
3
Dongsheng Li
Yujiang Wang4
Robert Dick5
Qin Lv6
Yingying Zhao1
Fan Yang7
Tun Lu1
Ning Gu1
Li Shang1,∗
1

China and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
School of Mathematics Statistics, University of Glasgow
3
Microsoft Research Asia, Shanghai, China
4
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
5
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan
6
Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado Boulder
7
School of Microelectronics, Fudan University

Abstract
Despite their prevalence in deep-learning communities, over-parameterized models
convey high demands of computational costs for proper training. This work studies
the fine-grained, modular-level learning dynamics of over-parameterized models
to attain a more efficient and fruitful training strategy. Empirical evidence reveals
that when scaling down into network modules, such as heads in self-attention
models, we can observe varying learning patterns implicitly associated with each
module’s trainability. To describe such modular-level learning capabilities, we
introduce a novel concept dubbed modular neural tangent kernel (mNTK), and
we demonstrate that the quality of a module’s learning is tightly associated with
its mNTK’s principal eigenvalue λmax . A large λmax indicates that the module
learns features with better convergence, while those miniature ones may impact
generalization negatively. Inspired by the discovery, we propose a novel training
strategy termed Modular Adaptive Training (MAT) to update those modules with
their λmax exceeding a dynamic threshold selectively, concentrating the model
on learning common features and ignoring those superfluous ones. Unlike most
existing training schemes with a complete BP cycle across all network modules,
MAT can significantly save computations by its partially-updating strategy and
can further improve performance. Experiments show that MAT nearly halves the
computational cost of model training and outperforms the accuracy of baselines.

1

Introduction

The proliferation of large-scale pre-trained models (Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) demonstrates the advantages of over-parameterized models. Those models
can adequately fit the training data with their sizeable parameters far exceeding the data scale (Du
et al., 2018), and such over-parameterizations are known to be essential in model optimization and
generalization and are also crucial to their success in deep learning (Liu et al., 2022). However,
challenges remain. Over-parameterized models are expensive to train; for example, training large
language models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020; Zaheer et al., 2020) may take weeks to
months, even on a large collection of powerful GPUs.
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

