Flocks of Stochastic Parrots: Differentially Private
Prompt Learning for Large Language Models

Haonan Duan∗ †, Adam Dziedzic† , Nicolas Papernot, Franziska Boenisch
University of Toronto and Vector Institute

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are excellent in-context learners. However, the
sensitivity of data contained in prompts raises privacy concerns. Our work first
shows that these concerns are valid: we instantiate a simple but highly effective
membership inference attack against the data used to prompt LLMs. To address
this vulnerability, one could forego prompting and resort to fine-tuning LLMs with
known algorithms for private gradient descent. However, this comes at the expense
of the practicality and efficiency offered by prompting. Therefore, we propose
to privately learn to prompt. We first show that soft prompts can be obtained
privately through gradient descent on downstream data. However, this is not the
case for discrete prompts. Thus, we orchestrate a noisy vote among an ensemble of
LLMs presented with different prompts, i.e., a flock of stochastic parrots. The vote
privately transfers the flock’s knowledge into a single public prompt. We show that
LLMs prompted with our private algorithms closely match the non-private baselines.
For example, using GPT3 as the base model, we achieve a downstream accuracy
of 92.7% on the sst2 dataset with (ε = 0.147, δ = 10−6 )-differential privacy vs.
95.2% for the non-private baseline. Through our experiments, we also show that
our prompt-based approach is easily deployed with existing commercial APIs.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) exhibit strong capabilities for in-context learning [6, 40]. By
prepending the adequate prompt to an LLM’s input, the model can perform a myriad of natural
language downstream tasks without any modifications to its parameters [41]. While the data used to
train an LLM is usually assumed to be public, downstream data used in the prompt is often more
sensitive. This can elicit confidentiality issues, for instance, if prompts contain information that
represents valuable intellectual property [34]. At the same time, it also raises privacy concerns when
the data involves personal information about individuals.
In this paper, our first contribution is to show that these concerns are valid. We are the first to
instantiate a highly effective membership inference attack (MIA) [7, 45] against prompts. Our attack
is able to determine if a given data point was used within the prompt of the LLM. The only existing
solution to mitigate this privacy risk would be to forego prompting and instead fine-tune the LLM with
a privacy-preserving training algorithm [25, 54]. Yet, fine-tuning lacks the efficiency and practicality
of prompting. Indeed, fine-tuning requires significantly more data [42], computational resources [25],
and storage space [26]. Additionally, fine-tuning requires access to the LLM parameters. However,
many of the state-of-the-art LLMs are proprietary models deployed behind an API which only allows
its users to query the LLMs [3, 6, 10, 17, 35].
∗
†

Corresponding and leading author: haonand@cs.toronto.edu
Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

