Learning Linear Causal Representations from
Interventions under General Nonlinear Mixing

Simon Buchholz1∗
Bryon Aragam3
1

Goutham Rajendran2∗
Bernhard Schölkopf1

Elan Rosenfeld2
Pradeep Ravikumar2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
3
University of Chicago, Chicago, USA

Abstract
We study the problem of learning causal representations from unknown, latent
interventions in a general setting, where the latent distribution is Gaussian but the
mixing function is completely general. We prove strong identifiability results given
unknown single-node interventions, i.e., without having access to the intervention
targets. This generalizes prior works which have focused on weaker classes, such
as linear maps or paired counterfactual data. This is also the first instance of
identifiability from non-paired interventions for deep neural network embeddings
and general causal structures. Our proof relies on carefully uncovering the highdimensional geometric structure present in the data distribution after a non-linear
density transformation, which we capture by analyzing quadratic forms of precision
matrices of the latent distributions. Finally, we propose a contrastive algorithm
to identify the latent variables in practice and evaluate its performance on various
tasks.

1

Introduction

Modern generative models such as GPT-4 [59] or DDPMs [26] achieve tremendous performance for a
wide variety of tasks [7]. They do this by effectively learning high-level representations which map to
raw data through complicated non-linear maps, such as transformers [89] or diffusion processes [79].
However, we are unable to reason about the specific representations they learn, in particular they are
not necessarily related to the true underlying data generating process. Besides their susceptibility to
bias [20], they often fail to generalize to out-of-distribution settings [5], rendering them problematic
in safety-critical domains. In order to gain a deeper understanding of what representations deep
generative models learn, one line of work has pursued the goal of causal representation learning
(CRL) [75]. CRL aims to learn high-level representations of data while simultaneously recovering
the rich causal structure embedded in them, allowing us to reason about them and use them for
higher-level cognitive tasks such as systematic generalization and planning. This has been used
effectively in many application domains including genomics [52] and robotics [43, 94].
A crucial primitive in representation learning is the fundamental notion of identifiability [37, 70], i.e.,
the question whether a unique (up to tolerable ambiguities) model can explain the observed data. It is
well known that because of non-identifiability, CRL is impossible in general settings in the absence of
inductive biases or additional information [29, 50]. In this work, we consider additional information
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

