M ED S AT: A Public Health Dataset for England
Featuring Medical Prescriptions and Satellite Imagery

Sanja Šćepanović1,2†∗ Ivica Obadic2,3∗ Sagar Joglekar1,6‡ Laura Giustarini5
Cristiano Nattero5 Daniele Quercia1,4 Xiao Xiang Zhu2,3
1
Nokia Bell Labs 2 Technical University of Munich 3 Munich Center for Machine Learning
4
Centre for Urban Science and Progress, King’s College London 5 WASDI 6 Intercom

Abstract
As extreme weather events become more frequent, understanding their impact
on human health becomes increasingly crucial. However, the utilization of Earth
Observation to effectively analyze the environmental context in relation to health
remains limited. This limitation is primarily due to the lack of fine-grained spatial
and temporal data in public and population health studies, hindering a comprehensive understanding of health outcomes. Additionally, obtaining appropriate
environmental indices across different geographical levels and timeframes poses
a challenge. For the years 2019 (pre-COVID) and 2020 (COVID), we collected
spatio-temporal indicators for all Lower Layer Super Output Areas in England.
These indicators included: i) 111 sociodemographic features linked to health in
existing literature, ii) 43 environmental point features (e.g., greenery and air pollution levels), iii) 4 seasonal composite satellite images each with 11 bands, and
iv) prescription prevalence associated with five medical conditions (depression,
anxiety, diabetes, hypertension, and asthma), opioids and total prescriptions. We
combined these indicators into a single M ED S AT dataset, the availability of which
presents an opportunity for the machine learning community to develop new techniques specific to public health. These techniques would address challenges such as
handling large and complex data volumes, performing effective feature engineering
on environmental and sociodemographic factors, capturing spatial and temporal
dependencies in the models, addressing imbalanced data distributions, developing
novel computer vision methods for health modeling based on satellite imagery,
ensuring model explainability, and achieving generalization beyond the specific
geographical region.

1

Introduction

The impact of environmental factors on human health has gained significant attention in recent
years, particularly in the face of increasing environmental pressures caused by extreme weather
events. Understanding these impacts is crucial for effective public and population health interventions.
However, existing studies often face challenges in obtaining appropriate health and environmental
data.
Fine-grained and comprehensive data on the prevalence of medical conditions is often scarce in public
health studies. Traditional approaches rely on infrequent surveys or cohort studies, such as NHANES
[23], HSE [46], BRFSS [52], The Swiss National Cohort [60], or the UK Biobank [61]. However,
∗

Shared first authorship.
The work was done during the author’s AI4EO Beyond Fellowship at the Technical University of Munich.
‡
The work was done prior to the author’s tenure at Intercom.

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

