Correlation Aware Sparsified Mean Estimation Using
Random Projection

Shuli Jiang
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
shulij@andrew.cmu.edu

Pranay Sharma
ECE
Carnegie Mellon University
pranaysh@andrew.cmu.edu

Gauri Joshi
ECE
Carnegie Mellon University
gaurij@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of communication-efficient distributed vector mean estimation, a commonly used subroutine in distributed optimization and Federated
Learning (FL). Rand-k sparsification is a commonly used technique to reduce
communication cost, where each client sends k < d of its coordinates to the server.
However, Rand-k is agnostic to any correlations, that might exist between clients
in practical scenarios. The recently proposed Rand-k-Spatial estimator leverages
the cross-client correlation information at the server to improve Rand-k’s performance. Yet, the performance of Rand-k-Spatial is suboptimal. We propose the
Rand-Proj-Spatial estimator with a more flexible encoding-decoding procedure,
which generalizes the encoding of Rand-k by projecting the client vectors to a
random k-dimensional subspace. We utilize Subsampled Randomized Hadamard
Transform (SRHT) as the projection matrix and show that Rand-Proj-Spatial with
SRHT outperforms Rand-k-Spatial, using the correlation information more efficiently. Furthermore, we propose an approach to incorporate varying degrees
of correlation and suggest a practical variant of Rand-Proj-Spatial when the correlation information is not available to the server. Experiments on real-world
distributed optimization tasks showcase the superior performance of Rand-ProjSpatial compared to Rand-k-Spatial and other more sophisticated sparsification
techniques.

1

Introduction

In modern machine learning applications, data is naturally distributed across a large number of
edge devices or clients. The underlying learning task in such settings is modeled by distributed
optimization or the recent paradigm of Federated Learning (FL) [1, 2, 3, 4]. A crucial subtask in
distributed learning is for the server to compute the mean of the vectors sent by the clients. In FL, for
example, clients run training steps on their local data and once-in-a-while send their local models (or
local gradients) to the server, which averages them to compute the new global model. However, with
the ever-increasing size of machine learning models [5, 6], and the limited battery life of the edge
clients, communication cost is often the major constraint for the clients. This motivates the problem
of (empirical) distributed mean estimation (DME) under communication constraints, as illustrated
in Figure 1. Each of the n clients holds a vector xi ∈ Rd , on which there are no distributional
bi of its vector
assumptions. Given a communication budget, each client sends a compressed version
Pn x
to the server, which utilizes these to compute an estimate of the mean vector n1 i=1 xi .
Quantization and sparsification are two major techniques for reducing the communication costs
of DME. Quantization [7, 8, 9, 10] involves compressing each coordinate of the client vector to
a given precision and aims to reduce the number of bits to represent each coordinate, achieving a
constant reduction in the communication cost. However, the communication cost still remains Θ(d).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

