Don’t Just Prune by Magnitude! Your Mask Topology
is Another Secret Weapon

Duc Hoang
University of Texas at Austin
hoangduc@utexas.edu

Souvik Kundu
Intel Labs
souvikk.kundu@intel.com

Shiwei Liu
Eindhoven University of Technology
University of Texas at Austin
s.liu3@tue.nl

Zhangyang Wang
Univerity of Texas at Austin
atlaswang@utexas.edu

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in understanding the relationship
between the connectivity of a deep network’s architecture as a graph, and the
network’s performance. A few prior arts connected deep architectures to expander
graphs or Ramanujan graphs, and particularly,[7] demonstrated the use of such
graph connectivity measures with ranking and relative performance of various
obtained sparse sub-networks (i.e. models with prune masks) without the need for
training. However, no prior work explicitly explores the role of parameters in the
graph’s connectivity, making the graph-based understanding of prune masks and the
magnitude/gradient-based pruning practice isolated from one another. This paper
strives to fill in this gap, by analyzing the Weighted Spectral Gap of Ramanujan
structures in sparse neural networks and investigates its correlation with final performance. We specifically examine the evolution of sparse structures under a popular
dynamic sparse-to-sparse network training scheme, and intriguingly find that the
generated random topologies inherently maximize Ramanujan graphs. We also
identify a strong correlation between masks, performance, and the weighted spectral gap. Leveraging this observation, we propose to construct a new “full-spectrum
coordinate” aiming to comprehensively characterize a sparse neural network’s
promise. Concretely, it consists of the classical Ramanujan’s gap (structure), our
proposed weighted spectral gap (parameters), and the constituent nested regular
graphs within. In this new coordinate system, a sparse subnetwork’s ℓ2 -distance
from its original initialization is found to have nearly linear correlated with its performance. Eventually, we apply this unified perspective to develop a new actionable
pruning method, by sampling sparse masks to maximize the ℓ2 -coordinate distance.
Our method can be augmented with the “pruning at initialization" (PaI) method,
and significantly outperforms existing PaI methods. With only a few iterations
of training (e.g 500 iterations), we can get LTH-comparable performance as that
yielded via “pruning after training", significantly saving pre-training costs. Codes
can be found at: https://github.com/VITA-Group/FullSpectrum-PAI.

1

Introduction

Pruning [21] reduces the size of deep neural networks (DNNs) by generating sparse models suitable
for compute and memory-limited applications while still preserving comparable accuracy as their
dense counterparts. Existing research in this area can broadly be divided into three main components.
Firstly, pruning after training (PaT) that involves creating sparse DNNs by leveraging information
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

