Responsible AI (RAI) Games and Ensembles

Yash Gupta
Carnegie Mellon University
yashgup2@cs.cmu.edu

Runtian Zhai
Carnegie Mellon University
rzhai@cs.cmu.edu

Arun Suggala
Google Research
arunss@google.com

Pradeep Ravikumar
Carnegie Mellon University
pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Several recent works have studied the societal effects of AI; these include issues
such as fairness, robustness, and safety. In many of these objectives, a learner seeks
to minimize its worst-case loss over a set of predefined distributions (known as
uncertainty sets), with usual examples being perturbed versions of the empirical
distribution. In other words, aforementioned problems can be written as min-max
problems over these uncertainty sets. In this work, we provide a general framework
for studying these problems, which we refer to as Responsible AI (RAI) games. We
provide two classes of algorithms for solving these games: (a) game-play based
algorithms, and (b) greedy stagewise estimation algorithms. The former class is
motivated by online learning and game theory, whereas the latter class is motivated
by the classical statistical literature on boosting, and regression. We empirically
demonstrate the applicability and competitive performance of our techniques for
solving several RAI problems, particularly around subpopulation shift.

1

Introduction

In recent years, AI is increasingly being used in high-stakes decision-making contexts such as hiring,
criminal justice, and healthcare. Given the impact these decisions can have on people’s lives, it is
important to ensure these AI systems have beneficial social effects. An emerging line of work has
attempted to formalize such desiderata ranging over ethics, fairness, train-time robustness, test-time
or adversarial robustness, and safety, among others. Each of these forms rich sub-fields with disparate
desiderata, which are sometimes collated under the umbrella of “responsible AI”. Many organizations
are increasingly advocating the use of responsible AI models [Microsoft, 2021, Google, 2020].
But how do we do so when the majority of recent work around these problems is fragmented and
usually focuses on optimizing one of these aspects at a time (DRO [Namkoong and Duchi, 2017,
Duchi and Namkoong, 2018], GDRO [Sagawa et al., 2019], CVaR [Zhai et al., 2021a], Distribution
Shift [Hashimoto et al., 2018, Zhai et al., 2021b])? Indeed optimizing for just one of these aspects
has even been shown to exhibit adverse effects on the other aspects [Roh et al., 2020]. To address
this, we study a general framework that is broadly applicable across many of the settings above, and
which we refer to as Responsible AI (RAI) games. Our starting point is the recent understanding of a
unifying theme in many of these disparate problems, that a learner seeks to minimize its worst-case
loss over a set of predefined distributions. For example, in fairness, we seek to perform well on all
sub-groups in the data. In robustness, we aim to design models that are robust to perturbations of the
training data or the test distribution. This allows us to set up a zero-sum game between a learner that
aims to learn a responsible model and an adversary that aims to prevent the learner from doing so. In
The relevant code for this work can be found at https://github.com/yashgupta-7/rai-games
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

