Explaining the Uncertain:
Stochastic Shapley Values for Gaussian Process Models

Siu Lun Chau
CISPA
Helmholtz Center for Information Security
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
siu-lun.chau@cispa.de

Krikamol Muandet∗
CISPA
Helmholtz Center for Information Security
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
muandet@cispa.de

Dino Sejdinovic∗
School of Computer and Mathematical Sciences
University of Adelaide
Adelaide, South Australia, 5005 Australia
dino.sejdinovic@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
We present a novel approach for explaining Gaussian processes (GPs) that can utilize the full analytical covariance structure present in GPs. Our method is based on
the popular solution concept of Shapley values extended to stochastic cooperative
games, resulting in explanations that are random variables. The GP explanations
generated using our approach satisfy similar favorable axioms to standard Shapley values and possess a tractable covariance function across features and data
observations. This covariance allows for quantifying explanation uncertainties
and studying the statistical dependencies between explanations. We further extend
our framework to the problem of predictive explanation, and propose a Shapley
prior over the explanation function to predict Shapley values for new data based
on previously computed ones. Our illustrations demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Shapley values [1], a solution concept derived from cooperative game theory, are an essential tool
in explainable AI that helps understand and interpret the prediction of complex machine learning
models. In particular, SHapley-Additive-exPlanation (SHAP) [2] algorithms have been applied in
various fields, including finance [3], healthcare [4], and robotics [5]. SHAP algorithms compute
Shapley values by formulating cooperative game payoffs based on the function obtained from the
learning algorithm, e.g., a regressor. This function is often treated as fixed, resulting in deterministic
game payoffs. In contrast, we argue that uncertainty in model predictions also plays an equally
important role for trustworthy machine learning models as it enables users to make more informed
decisions [6], assess the model’s confidence [7], and identify areas where more data or improved
features are needed [8]. Since uncertainty in model prediction can propagate to downstream explanation, explainability tools should also help users better understand the model’s confidence or lack
thereof in its predictions, allowing them to calibrate their trust in the explanations. By providing
transparency into both the model’s predictions and uncertainty, AI systems can become more reliable,
interpretable, and trustworthy, facilitating broader adoption across domains where trust is imperative.
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

