Beyond Pretrained Features:
Noisy Image Modeling Provides Adversarial Defense

Zunzhi You1 , Daochang Liu1 , Bohyung Han2 , Chang Xu1
1
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney
2
ECE & IPAI, Seoul National University
zyou5834@uni.sydney.edu.au, daochang.liu@sydney.edu.au,
bhhan@snu.ac.kr, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Recent advancements in masked image modeling (MIM) have made it a prevailing
framework for self-supervised visual representation learning. The MIM pretrained
models, like most deep neural network methods, remain vulnerable to adversarial
attacks, limiting their practical application, and this issue has received little research
attention. In this paper, we investigate how this powerful self-supervised learning
paradigm can provide adversarial robustness to downstream classifiers. During the
exploration, we find that noisy image modeling (NIM), a simple variant of MIM
that adopts denoising as the pre-text task, reconstructs noisy images surprisingly
well despite severe corruption. Motivated by this observation, we propose an
adversarial defense method, referred to as De3 , by exploiting the pretrained decoder
for denoising. Through De3 , NIM is able to enhance adversarial robustness beyond
providing pretrained features. Furthermore, we incorporate a simple modification,
sampling the noise scale hyperparameter from random distributions, and enable the
defense to achieve a better and tunable trade-off between accuracy and robustness.
Experimental results demonstrate that, in terms of adversarial robustness, NIM is
superior to MIM thanks to its effective denoising capability. Moreover, the defense
provided by NIM achieves performance on par with adversarial training while
offering the extra tunability advantage. Source code and models are available at
https://github.com/youzunzhi/NIM-AdvDef.

1

Introduction

The idea of fine-tuning pretrained deep neural networks is essential for the success of machine
learning to date. A deep neural network that has been well-pretrained on a large-scale dataset can
serve as a good initialization for various downstream tasks and improve their performance. Within
this paradigm, self-supervised learning plays a vital role as this approach allows the networks to take
advantage of vast amounts of unlabeled data. With the emergence of powerful, scalable Transformerbased vision models [14, 21], the masked image modeling (MIM) has rapidly developed recently
and become the new dominant paradigm for visual feature pretraining [38, 17, 8, 26], following the
success of masked language modeling [12, 4] in NLP. Conceptually, the idea behind MIM is simple.
During the pretraining phase, unlabeled training images are randomly masked patch-wise and then
fed into an encoder-decoder architecture, where the decoder attempts to recover the original images
from the features embedded by the encoder.
Although pretraining methods like MIM leads to improved standard performance on downstream
visual tasks, the adversarial robustness of the fine-tuned model is not enhanced. The vulnerability to
imperceptible yet maliciously crafted perturbations will significantly limit the real-world deployment
of MIM, especially for safety-critical applications. Although the existing state-of-the-art approach,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

