No-Regret Online Prediction with Strategic Experts

Omid Sadeghi
Maryam Fazel
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
{omids,mfazel@uw.edu}

Abstract
We study a generalization of the online binary prediction with expert advice
framework where at each round, the learner is allowed to pick m ≥ 1 experts
from a pool of K experts and the overall utility is a modular or submodular
function of the chosen experts. We focus on the setting in which experts act
strategically and aim to maximize their influence on the algorithm’s predictions by
potentially misreporting their beliefs about the events. Among others, this setting
finds applications in forecasting competitions where the learner seeks not only
to make predictions by aggregating different forecasters but also to rank them
according to their relative performance. Our goal is to design algorithms that
satisfy the following two requirements: 1) Incentive-compatible: Incentivize the
experts to report their beliefs truthfully, and 2) No-regret: Achieve sublinear regret
with respect to the true beliefs of the best-fixed set of m experts in hindsight. Prior
works have studied this framework when m = 1 and provided incentive-compatible
no-regret algorithms for the problem. We first show that a simple reduction of our
problem to the m = 1 setting is neither efficient nor effective. Then, we provide
algorithms that utilize the specific structure of the utility functions to achieve the
two desired goals.

1

Introduction

Learning from a constant flow of information is one of the most prominent challenges in machine
learning. In particular, online learning requires the learner to iteratively make decisions and at the
time of making each decision, the outcome associated with it is unknown to the learner. The experts
problem is perhaps the most well-known problem in online learning [1, 2, 3, 4]. In this problem,
the learner aims to make predictions about a sequence of T binary events. To do so, the learner has
access to the advice of K experts who each have internal beliefs about the likelihood of each event.
At each round t ∈ [T ], the learner has to choose one among the advice of K experts and upon making
her choice, the t-th binary event is realized and a loss bounded between zero and one is revealed. The
goal of the learner is to have no regret, i.e., to perform as well as the best-fixed expert in hindsight.
In many applications, however, the experts are strategic and wish to be selected by the learner as often
as possible. To this end, they may strategically misreport their beliefs about the events. For instance,
FiveThirtyEight1 aggregates different pollsters according to their past performance to make a single
prediction for elections and sports matches. To do so, FiveThirtyEight maintains publicly available
pollster ratings2 . A low rating can be harmful to the pollster’s credibility and adversely impact their
revenue opportunities in the future. Therefore, instead of maximizing their expected performance by
reporting their predictions truthfully, the pollsters may decide to take risks and report more extreme
beliefs to climb higher on the leaderboard. Therefore, it is important to design algorithms that not
only achieve no-regret but also motivate the experts to report their true beliefs (incentive-compatible).
1
2

https://fivethirtyeight.com/
https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/pollster-ratings/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

