H-InDex: Visual Reinforcement Learning with
Hand-Informed Representations for Dexterous Manipulation

Yanjie Ze12 Yuyao Liu3* Ruizhe Shi3* Jiaxin Qin4
Zhecheng Yuan31 Jiashun Wang5 Huazhe Xu316
1

Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Tsinghua University, IIIS
4
Renmin University of China 5 Carnegie Mellon University 6 Shanghai AI Lab
*
Equal contribution. Order is decided by coin flip.
yanjieze.com/H-InDex

Abstract
Human hands possess remarkable dexterity and have long served as a source of
inspiration for robotic manipulation. In this work, we propose a human HandInformed visual representation learning framework to solve difficult Dexterous
manipulation tasks (H-InDex) with reinforcement learning. Our framework consists of three stages: (i) pre-training representations with 3D human hand pose
estimation, (ii) offline adapting representations with self-supervised keypoint detection, and (iii) reinforcement learning with exponential moving average BatchNorm.
The last two stages only modify 0.36% parameters of the pre-trained representation
in total, ensuring the knowledge from pre-training is maintained to the full extent.
We empirically study 12 challenging dexterous manipulation tasks and find that HInDex largely surpasses strong baseline methods and the recent visual foundation
models for motor control. Code is available at yanjieze.com/H-InDex.

1

Introduction

Humans can adeptly tackle intricate and novel
dexterous manipulation tasks. However, multifingered robotic hands still struggle to achieve
such dexterity efficiently. Recent progress in
representation learning for visuomotor tasks
has proved that pre-trained universal representations may accelerate robot learning manipulation tasks [17, 18, 26, 30]. In light of previous
success, the similar morphology between human
hands and robotic hands begs the question: can
robotic hands leverage representations learned
from human hands for achieving dexterity?

100
75
50
25
0

Normalized Average Score

98.2

81.4

80.1

72.8
35.7

H-InDex (ResNet-50)
RRL (ResNet-50)
R3M (ResNet-50)

VC-1 (ViT-B)
MVP (ViT-S)

* Model params: ResNet-50 (24 M), ViT-B (86 M), ViT-S (22 M)

In this paper, we propose Hand-Informed Figure 1: Normalized average score for our alvisual reinforcement learning framework for gorithm H-InDex and the baselines (VC-1 [17],
Dexterous manipulation (H-InDex) that uses MVP [30], R3M [18], and RRL [26]).
and adapts visual representations from human hands to boost robotic hand dexterity. Our framework
consists of three stages:
• Stage 1: Pre-training representations with 3D human hand pose estimation, where we adopt the
feature encoder from an off-the-shelf 3D hand pose estimator FrankMocap [24].
• Stage 2: Offline adapting representations with self-supervised keypoint detection, where we
freeze the convolutional layers in the pre-trained representation and only finetune the affine
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023), New Orleans.

