Boundary Guided Learning-Free
Semantic Control with Diffusion Models
Ye Zhu1,2 , Yu Wu3 , Zhiwei Deng4 , Olga Russakovsky2 , Yan Yan1
1
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology
2
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
4
Google Research
yezhu@princeton.edu, wuyucs@whu.edu.cn, zhiweideng@google.com,
olgarus@princeton.edu, yyan34@iit.edu

Abstract
Applying pre-trained generative denoising diffusion models (DDMs) for downstream tasks such as image semantic editing usually requires either fine-tuning
DDMs or learning auxiliary editing networks in the existing literature. In this
work, we present our BoundaryDiffusion method for efficient, effective and lightweight semantic control with frozen pre-trained DDMs, without learning any extra
networks. As one of the first learning-free diffusion editing works, we start by
seeking a comprehensive understanding of the intermediate high-dimensional latent
spaces by theoretically and empirically analyzing their probabilistic and geometric
behaviors in the Markov chain. We then propose to further explore the critical
step for editing in the denoising trajectory that characterizes the convergence of a
pre-trained DDM and introduce an automatic search method. Last but not least, in
contrast to the conventional understanding that DDMs have relatively poor semantic
behaviors, we prove that the critical latent space we found already exhibits semantic
subspace boundaries at the generic level in unconditional DDMs, which allows us
to do controllable manipulation by guiding the denoising trajectory towards the targeted boundary via a single-step operation. We conduct extensive experiments on
multiple DPMs architectures (DDPM, iDDPM) and datasets (CelebA, CelebA-HQ,
LSUN-church, LSUN-bedroom, AFHQ-dog) with different resolutions (64, 256),
achieving superior or state-of-the-art performance in various task scenarios (image
semantic editing, text-based editing, unconditional semantic control) to demonstrate
the effectiveness. Project page at https://l-yezhu.github.io/BoundaryDiffusion/ .

1

Introduction

The denoising diffusion models (DDMs) [53] have been successfully applied in various tasks such
as image and video synthesis [21, 41, 22, 48, 14, 23, 52, 20], audio generation [33, 40, 37, 71],
image customization [50, 64], reinforcement learning [26, 11], and recently in scientific applications [63, 34, 58]. Among various applications of DDMs, one popular downstream task is to use
pre-trained unconditional DDMs for image manipulation and editing, by either re-training the diffusion models [31], or learning extra auxiliary neural networks for the editing signals [44, 35]. However,
as these methods require additional learning processes, we argue that they have not yet fully leveraged
the great potential of pre-trained DDMs. In this work, we show that the latent spaces of pre-trained
DDMs 1 , when leveraged properly, can be directly used to perform various manipulation tasks without
1
The latent spaces in our context are different from the concept of LDMs (a.k.a., StableDiffudion [48]).
While the main idea of LDMs is to operate the diffusion denoising process on the latent space of raw data, we
investigate the latent spaces represented by the intermediate diffusion states along the Markov chain.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

