InterCode: Standardizing and Benchmarking
Interactive Coding with Execution Feedback

John Yang Akshara Prabhakar Karthik Narasimhan Shunyu Yao
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
{jy1682, ap5697, karthikn, shunyuy}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Humans write code in a fundamentally interactive manner and rely on constant
execution feedback to correct errors, resolve ambiguities, and decompose tasks.
While LLMs have recently exhibited promising coding capabilities, current coding
benchmarks mostly consider a static instruction-to-code sequence transduction
process, which has the potential for error propagation and a disconnect between
the generated code and its final execution environment. To address this gap,
we introduce InterCode, a lightweight, flexible, and easy-to-use framework of
interactive coding as a standard reinforcement learning (RL) environment, with
code as actions and execution feedback as observations. Our framework is language
and platform agnostic, uses self-contained Docker environments to provide safe and
reproducible execution, and is compatible out-of-the-box with traditional seq2seq
coding methods, while enabling the development of new methods for interactive
code generation. We use InterCode to create three interactive code environments
with Bash, SQL, and Python as action spaces, leveraging data from the static
NL2Bash [29], Spider [51], and MBPP [4] datasets. We demonstrate InterCode’s
viability as a testbed by evaluating multiple state-of-the-art LLMs configured with
different prompting strategies such as ReAct [48] and Plan & Solve [40]. Our
results showcase the benefits of interactive code generation and demonstrate that
InterCode can serve as a challenging benchmark for advancing code understanding
and generation capabilities. InterCode is designed to be easily extensible and can
even be used to create new tasks such as Capture the Flag, a popular coding puzzle
that is inherently multi-step and involves multiple programming languages. *

1

Introduction

The art of computer programming is naturally an interactive process. When a human programmer
writes code, she relies on several iterations of a ‘write-execute-test’ loop in order to iteratively refine
solutions, plan changes, test sub-modules, and solve ambiguities by checking execution behavior.
While this is reminiscent of other human endeavors like writing, code compilation and execution
produce exact results that provide a deterministic form of feedback to make the refinement process
more straightforward. Depending on the observed results, programmers perform various levels of
debugging and rewriting, and continue the process until their code satisfies the requirements.
There has been increasing interest in recent years around the development of models that can
automatically generate code given a specification in natural language [17, 43, 13, 27, 24]. Powered
by large-scale pre-training over thousands of codebases [2, 21, 18], these models have shown solid
performance on static benchmarks like HumanEval [9], APPS [19], MBPP [4], CodeXGLUE [30].
However, generating code in a static, sequence-to-sequence or auto-regressive fashion has several
drawbacks: 1) simple errors (even typos) can propagate and there is no chance for recovery or
* Code and data available at https://intercode-benchmark.github.io/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

