Is Your Code Generated by ChatGPT Really Correct?
Rigorous Evaluation of Large Language Models
for Code Generation
Jiawei Liu ∗

Chunqiu Steven Xia ∗

Yuyao Wang

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Lingming Zhang

Nanjing University

{jiawei6, chunqiu2, lingming}@illinois.edu

yuyao6@outlook.com

Abstract
Program synthesis has been long studied with recent approaches focused on directly
using the power of Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate code. Programming
benchmarks, with curated synthesis problems and test-cases, are used to measure
the performance of various LLMs on code synthesis. However, these test-cases
can be limited in both quantity and quality for fully assessing the functional
correctness of the generated code. Such limitation in the existing benchmarks begs
the following question: In the era of LLMs, is the code generated really correct?
To answer this, we propose EvalPlus – a code synthesis evaluation framework
to rigorously benchmark the functional correctness of LLM-synthesized code.
EvalPlus augments a given evaluation dataset with large amounts of test-cases
newly produced by an automatic test input generator, powered by both LLM- and
mutation-based strategies. While EvalPlus is general, we extend the test-cases of
the popular H UMAN E VAL benchmark by 80× to build H UMAN E VAL+ . Our extensive evaluation across 26 popular LLMs (e.g., GPT-4 and ChatGPT) demonstrates
that H UMAN E VAL+ is able to catch significant amounts of previously undetected
wrong code synthesized by LLMs, reducing the pass@k by up-to 19.3-28.9%. We
also surprisingly found that test insufficiency can lead to mis-ranking. For example,
both WizardCoder-CodeLlama and Phind-CodeLlama now outperform ChatGPT
on H UMAN E VAL+ , while none of them could on H UMAN E VAL. Our work not
only indicates that prior popular code synthesis evaluation results do not accurately
reflect the true performance of LLMs for code synthesis, but also opens up a new
direction to improve such programming benchmarks through automated testing.
We have open-sourced our tools, enhanced datasets as well as all LLM-generated
code at https://github.com/evalplus/evalplus to facilitate and accelerate
future LLM-for-code research.

1

Introduction

Automatically generating programs that accurately correspond to user intents is a long-standing
challenge in computer science known as program synthesis [21]. In the past few decades, classical
program synthesis techniques have been developed, including deductive synthesis [19, 39, 62],
inductive synthesis [20, 58] and neural-guided synthesis [29]. More recently, with the advent of
Large Language Models [61, 6] (LLMs) and the abundance of open codebase, researchers have been
focusing on applying LLMs for direct code generation. LLMs like C ODEX [11] and CodeGen [46]
∗

Equal contribution. Author ordering is decided by Nigiri.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

