On the Role of Noise in the Sample Complexity of
Learning Recurrent Neural Networks: Exponential
Gaps for Long Sequences

Alireza F. Pour
Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
a2fathol@uwaterloo.ca

Hassan Ashtiani
Department of Computing and Software
McMaster University
zokaeiam@mcmaster.ca

Abstract
We consider the class of noisy multi-layered sigmoid recurrent neural networks
with w (unbounded) weights for classification of sequences of length T , where
independent noise distributed according to N (0, σ 2 ) is added to the output of each
neuron in the network. Our main result shows that the sample complexity of PAC
learning this class can be bounded by O(w log(T /σ)). For the non-noisy version
of the same class (i.e., σ = 0), we prove a lower bound of Ω(wT ) for the sample
complexity. Our results indicate an exponential gap in the dependence of sample
complexity on T for noisy versus non-noisy networks. Moreover, given the mild
logarithmic dependence of the upper bound on 1/σ, this gap still holds even for
numerically negligible values of σ.1

1

Introduction

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are effective tools for processing sequential data. They are used
in numerous applications such as speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013), computer vision (Karpathy
and Fei-Fei, 2015), translation (Sutskever et al., 2014), modeling dynamical systems (Hardt et al.,
2018) and time series (Qin et al., 2017). Recurrent models allow us to design classes of predictors
that can be applied to (i.e., take input values from) sequences of arbitrary length. For processing a
sequence of T elements, a predictor f (e.g., a neural network) “consumes” the input elements one by
one, generating an output at each step. This output is then used in the next step (as another input to f
along with the next element in the input sequence). Defining recurrent models formally takes some
effort, and we relegate it to the next sections. In short, the function f is (recursively) applied T times
in order to generate the ultimate outcome.
Let us fix a base class Fw of all multi-layered feed-forward sigmoid neural networks with w weights.
We can create a recurrent version of this class, which we will denote by REC[Fw , T ], for classifying
sequences of length T . One can study the sample complexity of PAC learning REC[Fw , T ] with
respect to different loss functions. Koiran and Sontag (1998) studied the binary-valued version of this
class by applying a threshold function at the end, and proved a lower bound of Ω(wT ) for its VC
dimension.
There has also been efforts for proving upper bounds on the sample complexity of PAC learning
REC[F, T ] for various base classes F and different loss functions. Given the above lower bound, a
gold standard has been achieving a linear dependence on T in the upper bound. Koiran and Sontag
(1998) proved an upper bound of O(w4 T 2 ) on the VC dimension of REC[Fw , T ] discussed above.
More recent papers have considered the more realistic setting of classification with continuous-valued
1

For the full version of this paper see F. Pour and Ashtiani (2023).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

