The Grand Illusion: The Myth of Software Portability
and Implications for ML Progress.
Fraser Mince⇤
Cohere for AI Community
frasermince@gmail.com
Jonas Kgomo
Cohere for AI Community
jonaskgmoo@gmail.com

Dzung Dinh⇤
Cohere for AI Community
dinhd@dickinson.edu

Neil Thompson
MIT
neil t@mit.edu

Sara Hooker
Cohere for AI
sarahooker@cohere.com

Abstract
Pushing the boundaries of machine learning often requires exploring different
hardware and software combinations. However, the freedom to experiment across
different tooling stacks can be at odds with the drive for efficiency, which has
produced increasingly specialized AI hardware and incentivized consolidation
around a narrow set of ML frameworks. Exploratory research can be restricted if
software and hardware are co-evolving, making it even harder to stray away from
mainstream ideas that work well with popular tooling stacks. While this friction
increasingly impacts the rate of innovation in machine learning, to our knowledge
the lack of portability in tooling has not been quantified. In this work, we ask:
How portable are popular ML software frameworks? We conduct a large-scale
study of the portability of mainstream ML frameworks across different hardware
types. Our findings paint an uncomfortable picture – frameworks can lose more
than 40% of their key functions when ported to other hardware. Worse, even when
functions are portable, the slowdown in their performance can be extreme and
render performance untenable. Collectively, our results reveal how costly straying
from a narrow set of hardware-software combinations can be - and suggest that
specialization of hardware impedes innovation in machine learning research.

1

Introduction

The field of machine learning (ML) has made significant strides in recent years, thanks in large
part to advances in hardware and software [Chowdhery et al., 2022, Zhang et al., 2022, Kaplan
et al., 2020]. However, the pursuit of efficiency has led to the creation of increasingly specialized
AI hardware and the consolidation of ML frameworks around a narrow set of tools [Hooker, 2021].
This specialization has limited the ability of researchers to experiment with different hardware and
software combinations, hindering the rate of innovation in the field.
The portability challenge has been amplified by the ever more heterogeneous landscape of hardware
and software [Reddi et al., 2020]. In particular, differences in hardware create a vexing problem
for software: how to allow portability while maximizing performance [Hooker, 2021, Lee et al.,
2011, Barham and Isard, 2019]. Many commercial hardware suppliers purport to support a variety of
popular ML libraries, however qualitative evidence from machine learning researchers suggests that
this is often far from a straightforward process that requires significant changes to the code before it
⇤

These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

