Newton–Cotes Graph Neural Networks:
On the Time Evolution of Dynamic Systems
Lingbing Guo1,2,3∗, Weiqing Wang4∗, Zhuo Chen1,2,3 , Ningyu Zhang1,2 ,
Zequn Sun5 , Yixuan Lai1,2,3 , Qiang Zhang1,3†, and Huajun Chen1,2,3†
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Zhejiang University - Ant Group Joint Laboratory of Knowledge Graph
3
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center
4
Department of Data Science & AI, Monash University
5
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University

Abstract
Reasoning system dynamics is one of the most important analytical approaches
for many scientific studies. With the initial state of a system as input, the recent
graph neural networks (GNNs)-based methods are capable of predicting the future
state distant in time with high accuracy. Although these methods have diverse
designs in modeling the coordinates and interacting forces of the system, we
show that they actually share a common paradigm that learns the integration
of the velocity over the interval between the initial and terminal coordinates.
However, their integrand is constant w.r.t. time. Inspired by this observation,
we propose a new approach to predict the integration based on several velocity
estimations with Newton–Cotes formulas and prove its effectiveness theoretically.
Extensive experiments on several benchmarks empirically demonstrate consistent
and significant improvement compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Reasoning the time evolution of dynamic systems has been a long-term challenge for hundreds of years
[1, 2]. Despite that the advances in computer manufacturing nowadays make it possible to simulate
long trajectories of complicated systems constrained by multiple force laws, the computational cost
still imposes a heavy burden on the scientific communities [3–8].
Recent graph neural networks (GNNs) [9–13]-based methods provide an alternative solution to
predict the future states directly with only the initial state as input [14–20]. Take molecular dynamics
(MD) [4, 21–24] as an example, the atoms in a molecule can be regarded as nodes with different
labels, and thus can be encoded by a GNN. As the input and the target are atomic coordinates,
the learning problem becomes a complicated regression task of predicting the coordinate at each
dimension of each atom. Furthermore, some directional information (e.g., velocities or forces) are also
important features and cannot be directly leveraged especially considering the rotation and translation
of molecules in the system. Therefore, the existing works put great effort into the reservation of
physical symmetries, e.g., transformation equivariance and geometric constraints [18, 19]. The
experimental results on a variety of benchmarks also demonstrate the advantages of their methods.
Without loss of generality, the main target of the existing works is to predict the future coordinate
xT distant to the given initial coordinate x0 , with x0 and the initial velocity v0 as input. Then, the
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Correspondence to: {qiang.zhang.cs, huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn,

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

