Monte Carlo Tree Search with Boltzmann Exploration

Michael Painter, Mohamed Baioumy, Nick Hawes, Bruno Lacerda
Oxford Robotics Institute
University of Oxford
{mpainter, mohamed, nickh, bruno}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) methods, such as Upper Confidence Bound applied to Trees (UCT), are instrumental to automated planning techniques. However,
UCT can be slow to explore an optimal action when it initially appears inferior to
other actions. Maximum ENtropy Tree-Search (MENTS) incorporates the maximum entropy principle into an MCTS approach, utilising Boltzmann policies to
sample actions, naturally encouraging more exploration. In this paper, we highlight
a major limitation of MENTS: optimal actions for the maximum entropy objective
do not necessarily correspond to optimal actions for the original objective. We
introduce two algorithms, Boltzmann Tree Search (BTS) and Decaying ENtropy
Tree-Search (DENTS), that address these limitations and preserve the benefits of
Boltzmann policies, such as allowing actions to be sampled faster by using the
Alias method. Our empirical analysis shows that our algorithms show consistent
high performance across several benchmark domains, including the game of Go.

1

Introduction

Planning under uncertainty is a core problem in Artificial Intelligence, commonly modelled as a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) or variant thereof. MDPs can be solved using dynamic programming
techniques to obtain an optimal policy [3]. However, computing a full optimal policy does not scale
to large state-spaces, necessitating the use of heuristic solvers [18, 4] and online, sampling-based,
planners based on Monte-Carlo Tree-Search (MCTS), such as the Upper Confidence Bound applied
to Trees (UCT) algorithm [22].
The UCT search policy is designed to minimise cumulative regret, so manages a trade-off between
exploration and exploitation. To exploit, UCT often selects the same action on successive trials,
which can result in it getting stuck in local optima. Conversely, Maximum ENtropy Tree Search
(MENTS) places a greater emphasis on exploration by combining MCTS with techniques from
maximum entropy policy optimisation [38, 16, 17]. MENTS jointly maximises cumulative rewards
and policy entropy, where a temperature parameter controls the weight of the entropy objective.
However, MENTS is sensitive to this temperature parameter, and may not converge to the reward
maximising policy or require a prohibitively low temperature to do so.
In this work, we consider scenarios where MCTS methods are used with a simulator to plan how an
agent should act. We introduce two algorithms for this scenario that address the above limitations.
First, we present Boltzmann Tree Search (BTS) which uses a Boltzmann search policy like MENTS,
but optimises for reward maximisation only. Secondly, we introduce Decaying ENtropy Tree Search
(DENTS), which adds entropy backups to BTS, but is still consistent (i.e. it converges to the reward
maximising policy in the limit).
The main contributions of this paper are: (1) Demonstrating that the maximum entropy objective used
in MENTS can be misaligned with reward maximisation, thus preventing it from converging to the
optimal policy; (2) Introducing two new algorithms, BTS and DENTS, which preserve the benefits
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

