Construction of Hierarchical Neural Architecture
Search Spaces based on Context-free Grammars

Simon Schrodi1 Danny Stoll1 Binxin Ru2
Rhea Sanjay Sukthanker1 Thomas Brox1 Frank Hutter1
1

University of Freiburg 2 University of Oxford
{schrodi,stolld,sukthank,brox,fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de robin@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The discovery of neural architectures from simple building blocks is a longstanding goal of Neural Architecture Search (NAS). Hierarchical search spaces
are a promising step towards this goal but lack a unifying search space design
framework and typically only search over some limited aspect of architectures.
In this work, we introduce a unifying search space design framework based on
context-free grammars that can naturally and compactly generate expressive hierarchical search spaces that are 100s of orders of magnitude larger than common spaces from the literature. By enhancing and using their properties, we
effectively enable search over the complete architecture and can foster regularity. Further, we propose an efficient hierarchical kernel design for a Bayesian
Optimization search strategy to efficiently search over such huge spaces. We
demonstrate the versatility of our search space design framework and show that
our search strategy can be superior to existing NAS approaches. Code is available
at https://github.com/automl/hierarchical_nas_construction.

1

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) aims to automatically discover neural architectures with state-ofthe-art performance. While numerous NAS papers have already demonstrated finding state-of-the-art
architectures (prominently, e.g., Tan and Le [1], Liu et al. [2]), relatively little attention has been paid
to understanding the impact of architectural design decisions on performance, such as the repetition
of the same building blocks. Moreover, despite the fact that NAS is a heavily-researched field with
over 1 000 papers in the last two years [3, 4], NAS has primarily been applied to over-engineered,
restrictive search spaces (e.g., cell-based ones) that did not give rise to truly novel architectural
patterns. In fact, Yang et al. [5] showed that in the prominent DARTS search space [6] the manuallydefined macro architecture is more important than the searched cells, while Xie et al. [7] and Ru et al.
[8] achieved competitive performance with randomly wired neural architectures that do not adhere to
common search space limitations.
Hierarchical search spaces are a promising step towards overcoming these limitations, while keeping
the search space of architectures more controllable compared to global, unrestricted search spaces.
However, previous works limited themselves to search only for a hierarchical cell [9], linear macro
topologies [1, 2, 10], or required post-hoc checking and adjustment of architectures [8, 11]. This
limited their applicability in understanding the impact of architectural design choices on performance
as well as search over all (abstraction) levels of neural architectures.
In this work, we propose a functional view of neural architectures and a unifying search space design
framework for the efficient construction of (hierarchical) search spaces based on Context-Free Grammars (CFGs). We compose architectures from simple multivariate functions in a hierarchical manner
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

