Revisit Weakly-Supervised Audio-Visual Video
Parsing from the Language Perspective

Yingying Fan, Yu Wu, Bo Du, Yutian Lin∗
School of Computer Science, Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan University
{fanyingying_cs, wuyucs, dubo, yutian.lin}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
We focus on the weakly-supervised audio-visual video parsing task (AVVP), which
aims to identify and locate all the events in audio and visual modalities. Previous
works only concentrate on video-level overall label denoising across modalities,
but overlook the segment-level label noise, where adjacent video segments (i.e.,
1-second video clips) may contain different events. However, recognizing events in
the segment is challenging because its label could be any combination of events
that occur in the video. To address this issue, we consider tackling AVVP from
the language perspective, since language could freely describe how various events
appear in each segment beyond fixed labels. Specifically, we design language
prompts to describe all cases of event appearance for each video. Then, the
similarity between language prompts and segments is calculated, where the event
of the most similar prompt is regarded as the segment-level label. In addition, to
deal with the mislabeled segments, we propose to perform dynamic re-weighting
on the unreliable segments to adjust their labels. Experiments show that our simple
yet effective approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.
Code and data are available at https://github.com/fyyCS/LSLD.

1

Introduction

Classic audio-visual tasks such as audio-visual event localization and audio-visual representation
learning have been well explored in previous works [1, 2, 3] and have achieved promising performance.
However, most existing research studies on these tasks assume that audio and visual are correlated and
temporally aligned, which is not always the case. For example, a person can hear a dog barking but
not see it in the video. To this end, we focus on the more general audio-visual video parsing (AVVP)
task, which aims to recognize all events in each modality and localize their temporal boundaries.
Since the full annotation process is time-consuming and expensive, Tian et al. [4] address AVVP
in a weakly-supervised manner, which only requires video-level labels, without specifying the
modality and temporal boundaries. They develop a hybrid attention network to leverage unimodal
and cross-modal information and propose a simple Multimodal Multiple Instance Learning (MMIL)
framework to aggregate segment-level predictions into video-level ones. However, weakly-supervised
labels cannot determine which modality the event comes from. Wu et al. [5] then introduce a
video-level label refinement method and adopt contrastive learning for audio and visual temporal
alignment. Furthermore, Chen et al. [6] propose another label denoising method based on alleviating
modality-specific noise through cross-modal loss patterns for both modalities.
However, previous works [5, 6] only considered the noisy label at the overall video instance level,
while ignoring the segment-level label noise. Segment-level label noise indicates the fact that not
every segment of a video contains all the events of the video. For example, a person may be speeching
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

