Switching Temporary Teachers for
Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation

Jaemin Na1 , Jung-Woo Ha2 , Hyung Jin Chang3 , Dongyoon Han2† , Wonjun Hwang1,2†
Ajou University, Korea1 , NAVER AI Lab2 , University of Birmingham, UK3
osial46@ajou.ac.kr, jungwoo.ha@navercorp.com, h.j.chang@bham.ac.uk
dongyoon.han@navercorp.com, wjhwang@ajou.ac.kr

Abstract
The teacher-student framework, prevalent in semi-supervised semantic segmentation, mainly employs the exponential moving average (EMA) to update a single
teacher’s weights based on the student’s. However, EMA updates raise a problem in that the weights of the teacher and student are getting coupled, causing a
potential performance bottleneck. Furthermore, this problem may become more
severe when training with more complicated labels such as segmentation masks
but with few annotated data. This paper introduces Dual Teacher, a simple yet
effective approach that employs dual temporary teachers aiming to alleviate the
coupling problem for the student. The temporary teachers work in shifts and
are progressively improved, so consistently prevent the teacher and student from
becoming excessively close. Specifically, the temporary teachers periodically
take turns generating pseudo-labels to train a student model and maintain the
distinct characteristics of the student model for each epoch. Consequently, Dual
Teacher achieves competitive performance on the PASCAL VOC, Cityscapes, and
ADE20K benchmarks with remarkably shorter training times than state-of-the-art
methods. Moreover, we demonstrate that our approach is model-agnostic and
compatible with both CNN- and Transformer-based models. Code is available at
https://github.com/naver-ai/dual-teacher.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation has progressed along with the advance of deep neural networks as a critical
component of computer vision tasks for visual understanding [8, 9, 55]. However, the prevailing
approaches are primarily based on supervised learning methods and still require laborious and timeconsuming manual annotations at the pixel-level. To alleviate this intrinsic challenge, semi-supervised
semantic segmentation has recently come into the limelight requiring only a small amount of labels.
A crucial challenge in successful semi-supervised learning is how to acquire reliable and consistent
labels from unlabeled data, particularly in more demanding tasks like semi-supervised segmentation.
Pseudo-labeling [22], the most popular approach, assigns the off-the-shelf model’s class predictions
as labels for unlabeled data for training. Another seminal work, a teacher-student framework [36], is
widely adopted as it provides robust results in numerous semi-supervised learning tasks [41, 26, 13].
Despite the tremendous success, it is problematic that the weights of the teacher and student models are
inevitably coupled as the teacher weights are updated using an exponential moving average (EMA) of
the student model weights. This notable issue is called the teacher-student coupling problem [17] and
causes the performance bottleneck for the student model because the EMA teacher exhibits similar
performance and perspective to the student model in traditional teacher-student framework [36].
Furthermore, when the student model produces biased predictions over a few samples, training
†

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

