Scale Alone Does not Improve Mechanistic
Interpretability in Vision Models

Roland S. Zimmermann1∗

Thomas Klein1,2∗

Wieland Brendel1

Abstract
In light of the recent widespread adoption of AI systems, understanding the internal information processing of neural networks has become increasingly critical.
Most recently, machine vision has seen remarkable progress by scaling neural
networks to unprecedented levels in dataset and model size. We here ask whether
this extraordinary increase in scale also positively impacts the field of mechanistic
interpretability. In other words, has our understanding of the inner workings of
scaled neural networks improved as well? We use a psychophysical paradigm to
quantify one form of mechanistic interpretability for a diverse suite of nine models
and find no scaling effect for interpretability — neither for model nor dataset
size. Specifically, none of the investigated state-of-the-art models are easier to
interpret than the GoogLeNet model from almost a decade ago. Latest-generation
vision models appear even less interpretable than older architectures, hinting at a
regression rather than improvement, with modern models sacrificing interpretability for accuracy. These results highlight the need for models explicitly designed
to be mechanistically interpretable and the need for more helpful interpretability
methods to increase our understanding of networks at an atomic level. We release
a dataset containing more than 130′ 000 human responses from our psychophysical
evaluation of 767 units across nine models. This dataset facilitates research on automated instead of human-based interpretability evaluations, which can ultimately
be leveraged to directly optimize the mechanistic interpretability of models.

explanations for networks...

...measure how
helpful they are...

...and build a dataset
of these responses.

B Scaling networks is not

increasing interpretability.

9 Networks at
Different Scales

2 Explanation
Methods

>1’900 Participants

Interpretability


🔍

>130’000 Responses

Model & Dataset Size

C
Aim: Use the dataset to
get automated alignment

A We generate per-unit

Figure 1: Has scaling models in terms of their dataset and model size improved interpretability?
A. We perform a large-scale psychophysics experiment to investigate the interpretability of nine
networks through the two most-used mechanistic interpretability methods. B. We see that scaling has
not led to increased interpretability. Therefore, we argue that one has to explicitly optimize models to
be interpretable. C. We expect our dataset to enable building automated measures for quantifying the
interpretability of models and, thus, bootstrap the development of more interpretable models.
∗

Equal contribution. 1 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen AI Center, Tübingen,
Germany 2 University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: research@rzimmermann.com. Code & Dataset: brendel-group.github.io/imi.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

