Fair, Polylog-Approximate Low-Cost Hierarchical
Clustering
Marina Knittel

Max Springer John Dickerson MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
{mknittel,mss423}@umd.edu
{john,hajiagha}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Research in fair machine learning, and particularly clustering, has been crucial in
recent years given the many ethical controversies that modern intelligent systems
have posed. Ahmadian et al. [2020] established the study of fairness in hierarchical
clustering, a stronger, more structured variant of its well-known flat counterpart,
though their proposed algorithm that optimizes for Dasgupta’s [2016] famous
cost function was highly theoretical. Knittel et al. [2023] then proposed the
first practical fair approximation for cost, however they were unable to break
the polynomial-approximate barrier they posed as a hurdle of interest. We break
this barrier, proposing the first truly polylogarithmic-approximate low-cost fair
hierarchical clustering, thus greatly bridging the gap between the best fair and
vanilla hierarchical clustering approximations.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a pervasive machine learning technique which has filled a vital niche in every day
computer systems. Extending upon this, a hierarchical clustering is a recursively defined clustering
where each cluster is partitioned into two or more clusters, and so on. This adds structure to flat
clustering, giving an algorithm the ability to depict data similarity at different resolutions as well as
an ancestral relationship between data points, as in the phylogenetic tree Kraskov et al. [2003].
On top of computational biology, hierarchical clustering has found various uses across computer
imaging [Chen et al., 2021b, Selvan et al., 2005], computer security [Chen et al., 2020, 2021a], natural
language processing [Ramanath et al., 2013], and much more. Moreover, it can be applied to any
flat clustering problem where the number of desired clusters is not given. Specifically, a hierarchical
clustering can be viewed as a structure of clusterings at different resolutions that all agree with each
other (i.e., two points clustered together in a higher resolution clustering will also be together in a
lower resolution clustering). Generally, hierarchical clustering techniques are quite impactful on
modern technology, and it is important to guarantee they are both effective and unharmful.
Researchers have recognized the harmful biases unchecked machine learning programs pose. A
few examples depicting racial discrimination include allocation of health care [Ledford, 2019],
presentation of ads suggestive of arrest records [Sweeney, 2013], prediction of hiring success [Bogen
and Rieke, 2018], and estimation of recidivism risk [Angwin et al., 2016]. A popular solution that
has been extensively studied in the past decade is fair machine learning. Here, fairness concerns
the mitigation of bias, particularly against protected classes. Most often, fairness is an additional
constraint on the allowed solution space; we optimize for problems in light of this constraint. For
instance, the notion of individual fairness introduced by the foundational work of Dwork et al. [2012]
deems that an output must guarantee that any two individuals who are similar are classified similarly.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

