Trial matching: capturing variability with
data-constrained spiking neural networks
Christos Sourmpis, Carl C.H. Petersen, Wulfram Gerstner, Guillaume Bellec
Brain Mind Institute,
School of Computer and Communication Sciences and School of Life Sciences,
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland,
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Simultaneous behavioral and electrophysiological recordings call for new methods to reveal the interactions between neural activity and behavior. A milestone
would be an interpretable model of the co-variability of spiking activity and behavior across trials. Here, we model a mouse cortical sensory-motor pathway in
a tactile detection task reported by licking with a large recurrent spiking neural
network (RSNN), fitted to the recordings via gradient-based optimization. We focus specifically on the difficulty to match the trial-to-trial variability in the data.
Our solution relies on optimal transport to define a distance between the distributions of generated and recorded trials. The technique is applied to artificial
data and neural recordings covering six cortical areas. We find that the resulting
RSNN can generate realistic cortical activity and predict jaw movements across
the main modes of trial-to-trial variability. Our analysis also identifies an unexpected mode of variability in the data corresponding to task-irrelevant movements
of the mouse.

1

Introduction

Over the past decades, there has been a remarkable advancement in neural recording technology.
Today, we can simultaneously record hundreds, even thousands, of neurons with millisecond time
precision. Coupled with behavior measurements, modern experiments enable us to better understand how brain activity and behavior are intertwined [1]. In these experiments, it is often observed
that even well-trained animals respond to the same stimuli with considerable variability. For example, mice trained on a simple tactile detection task occasionally miss the water reward [2], possibly
because of satiation, lack of attention or neural noise. It is also clear that there is additional uncontrolled variability in the recorded neural activity [3, 4, 5] induced for instance by a wide range of
task-irrelevant movements.
Our goal is to reconstruct a simulation of the sensory-motor circuitry driving the variability of neural
activity and behavior. To understand the generated activity at a circuit level, we develop a generative model which is biologically interpretable: all the spikes are generated by a recurrent spiking
neural network (RSNN) with hard-biological constraints (i.e. the voltage and spiking dynamics are
simulated with millisecond precision, neurons are either inhibitory or excitatory, spike transmission
delay takes 2 4 ms)1 .
First contribution, we make a significant advance in the simulation methods for data-constrained
RSNNs. While most prior works [6, 7, 8] were limited to single recording sessions, our model is
1

Our code is available at github.com/EPFL-LCN/pub-sourmpis2023-neurips (code DOI hosted by zenodo).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

