Digital Typhoon: Long-term Satellite Image Dataset
for the Spatio-Temporal Modeling of Tropical Cyclones

Asanobu Kitamoto1,2

Jared Hwang3,1
Yingtao Tian6

Bastien Vuillod4,1

Lucas Gautier5,1

Tarin Clanuwat6

1

2

National Institute of Informatics, Japan
Typhoon Science and Technology Research Center, Yokohama National University, Japan
3
University of Southern California, USA
4
Grenoble-INP, Ensimag, France
5
Université Clermont Auvergne, ISIMA, France
6
Google DeepMind

Abstract
This paper presents the official release of the Digital Typhoon dataset, the longest
typhoon satellite image dataset for 40+ years aimed at benchmarking machine
learning models for long-term spatio-temporal data. To build the dataset, we developed a workflow to create an infrared typhoon-centered image for cropping
using Lambert azimuthal equal-area projection referring to the best track data.
We also address data quality issues such as inter-satellite calibration to create a
homogeneous dataset. To take advantage of the dataset, we organized machine
learning tasks by the types and targets of inference, with other tasks for meteorological analysis, societal impact, and climate change. The benchmarking
results on the analysis, forecasting, and reanalysis for the intensity suggest that
the dataset is challenging for recent deep learning models, due to many choices
that affect the performance of various models. This dataset reduces the barrier for
machine learning researchers to meet large-scale real-world events called tropical
cyclones and develop machine learning models that may contribute to advancing
scientific knowledge on tropical cyclones as well as solving societal and sustainability issues such as disaster reduction and climate change. The dataset is publicly
available at http://agora.ex.nii.ac.jp/digital-typhoon/dataset/ and
https://github.com/kitamoto-lab/digital-typhoon/.

1

Introduction

Tropical cyclones, also known as typhoons and hurricanes in certain regions, have been the critical
target of research due to their substantial societal impact [11]. To reduce the impact of tropical
cyclones, the meteorological community, along with other earth science communities, has been
developing both a theoretical and an empirical understanding of tropical cyclones through efforts such
as advancing satellite remote sensing and atmospheric simulation models of higher spatial, temporal,
and spectral resolutions for better analysis and forecasting.
Meteorologists have also developed an empirical method, known as the Dvorak technique [10, 54],
to estimate the intensity of a tropical cyclone based on time-series observation data collected from
worldwide ground sensor networks, meteorological satellites, and reconnaissance flights. This
technique consists of a manual procedure to estimate tropical cyclone intensity based on the cloud
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

