InfoCD: A Contrastive Chamfer Distance Loss for
Point Cloud Completion

Fangzhou Lin1,2∗ Yun Yue1∗ Ziming Zhang1† Songlin Hou1,3 Kazunori D Yamada2
Vijaya B Kolachalama4 Venkatesh Saligrama4
1
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, USA 2 Tohoku University, Japan
3
Dell Technologies, USA 4 Boston University, USA
{flin2, yyue, zzhang15, shou}@wpi.edu, yamada@tohoku.ac.jp,
{vkola, srv}@bu.edu

Abstract
A point cloud is a discrete set of data points sampled from a 3D geometric surface. Chamfer distance (CD) is a popular metric and training loss to measure
the distances between point clouds, but also well known to be sensitive to outliers. We propose InfoCD, a novel contrastive Chamfer distance loss, and learn
to spread the matched points to better align the distributions of point clouds.
As such InfoCD leads to an improved surface similarity metric. We show that
minimizing InfoCD is equivalent to maximizing a lower bound of the mutual
information between the underlying geometric surfaces represented by the point
clouds, leading to a regularized CD metric which is robust and computationally
efficient for deep learning. We conduct comprehensive experiments for point cloud
completion using InfoCD and observe significant improvements consistently over
all the popular baseline networks trained with CD-based losses, leading to new
state-of-the-art results on several benchmark datasets. Demo code is available at
https://github.com/Zhang-VISLab/NeurIPS2023-InfoCD.

1

Introduction

Point Cloud Completion. Point clouds, one of the most important data representations that can be
easily acquired, play a key role in modern robotics and automation applications [1–3]. However,
raw data of point clouds captured by existing 3D sensors are usually incomplete and sparse due
to occlusion, limited sensor resolution, and light reflection [4–8], which can negatively impact
the performance of downstream tasks that require high-quality representation, such as point cloud
segmentation and detection. Point cloud completion [9] refers to the task of inferring the complete
shape of an object or scene from incomplete raw point clouds. Recently, many (deep) learning based
approaches have been introduced to point cloud completion ranging from supervised learning, selfsupervised learning to unsupervised learning [10–15]. Among these methods, supervised learning
with a general encoder-decoder structure is the prevailing architectural choice for many researchers,
consistently achieving state-of-the-art results on mainstream benchmarks [16, 17, 8, 1, 18].
Learning with Chamfer Distance (CD). CD is a commonly employed metric in point cloud
completion, for example in studies like [19, 20]. It assesses the dissimilarity in shape between two
sets of point clouds by calculating the average distance from each point in one set to its nearest
neighbor in the other set. Minimizing the Euclidean distances between matched points, as done in
CD, is a known method that is sensitive to outliers, resulting in clumping behavior that involves
∗
†

Co-first authors.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

