Focused Transformer: Contrastive Training for
Context Scaling

Szymon Tworkowski1,3∗

Konrad Staniszewski1,3∗

Henryk Michalewski3,4

Mikołaj Pacek1,3∗

Yuhuai Wu6†

Piotr Miłoś1,2,5

1

2

IDEAS NCBR
Institute of Mathematics, Polish Academy of Sciences
3
University of Warsaw
4
Google DeepMind
5
deepsense.ai
6
xAI

Abstract
Large language models have an exceptional capability to incorporate new information in a contextual manner. However, the full potential of such an approach is
often restrained due to a limitation in the effective context length. One solution
to this issue is to endow an attention layer with access to an additional context,
which comprises of (key, value) pairs. Yet, as the number of documents increases,
the proportion of relevant keys to irrelevant ones decreases, leading the model to
focus more on the irrelevant keys. We identify a significant challenge, dubbed
the distraction issue, where keys linked to different semantic values might overlap, making them hard to distinguish. To tackle this problem, we introduce the
Focused Transformer (F OT), a technique that employs a training process inspired
by contrastive learning. This novel approach enhances the structure of the (key,
value) space, enabling an extension of the context length. Our method allows for
fine-tuning pre-existing, large-scale models to lengthen their effective context. This
is demonstrated by our fine-tuning of 3B and 7B OpenLLaMA checkpoints. The
resulting models, which we name L ONG LL A MA2 , exhibit advancements in tasks
requiring a long context. We further illustrate that our L ONG LL A MA models
adeptly manage a 256k context length for passkey retrieval.

1

Introduction

Language models have served as a catalyst for substantial advancements in several areas, including
natural language processing [Radford et al., 2019, Brown et al., 2020], code generation [Chen et al.,
2021, Li et al., 2022], quantitative reasoning [Lewkowycz et al., 2022] and theorem proving [Polu
and Sutskever, 2020, Jiang et al., 2022, Mikuła et al., 2023]. One of the central challenges with
language models is the effective incorporation of extensive new knowledge. The common practice
of fine-tuning the model is not only resource-intensive and complex to manage, but it also does not
always clearly indicate how to incorporate new knowledge. For example, fine-tuning on a text such as
“Alice in Wonderland” does not equip the model to answer questions about the story itself, but rather
∗

Equal contribution † Work done while at Google Research.

2

We release the checkpoints and source code of L ONG LL A MA

, see also our colabs.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

