Cross-modal Active Complementary Learning
with Self-refining Correspondence

Yang Qin1 , Yuan Sun1 , Dezhong Peng1,3,4 , Joey Tianyi Zhou2 ,
Xi Peng1 , Peng Hu1∗
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
2
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR) and Institute of High
Performance Computing (IHPC), A*STAR, Singapore.
3
Chengdu Ruibei Yingte Information Technology Co., Ltd, Chengdu, China.
4
Sichuan Zhiqian Technology Co., Ltd, Chengdu, China.
{qinyang.gm,joey.tianyi.zhou,pengx.gm,penghu.ml}@gmail.com,
sunyuan_work@163.com, pengdz@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, image-text matching has attracted more and more attention from
academia and industry, which is fundamental to understanding the latent correspondence across visual and textual modalities. However, most existing methods
implicitly assume the training pairs are well-aligned while ignoring the ubiquitous
annotation noise, a.k.a noisy correspondence (NC), thereby inevitably leading to a
performance drop. Although some methods attempt to address such noise, they still
face two challenging problems: excessive memorizing/overfitting and unreliable
correction for NC, especially under high noise. To address the two problems, we
propose a generalized Cross-modal Robust Complementary Learning framework
(CRCL), which benefits from a novel Active Complementary Loss (ACL) and an
efficient Self-refining Correspondence Correction (SCC) to improve the robustness of existing methods. Specifically, ACL exploits active and complementary
learning losses to reduce the risk of providing erroneous supervision, leading to
theoretically and experimentally demonstrated robustness against NC. SCC utilizes
multiple self-refining processes with momentum correction to enlarge the receptive
field for correcting correspondences, thereby alleviating error accumulation and
achieving accurate and stable corrections. We carry out extensive experiments
on three image-text benchmarks, i.e., Flickr30K, MS-COCO, and CC152K, to
verify the superior robustness of our CRCL against synthetic and real-world noisy
correspondences. Code is available at https://github.com/QinYang79/CRCL.

1

Introduction

Image-text matching aims to search the most relevant samples across different modalities, which is
fundamental for most cross-modal tasks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. The core of image-text matching is how to
accurately measure the similarity between distinct modalities, however, which is challenging due to
the visual-textual discrepancy. To tackle the challenge, numerous deep methods are presented to learn
the visual-semantic associations of image-text pairs and achieve remarkable progress, thanks to the
powerful representation ability of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) and some well-designed similarity
inference architectures [7, 8, 4, 9]. They could be roughly divided into two groups, i.e., global-level
methods [7, 9] and local-level methods [8, 4], which aim at learning the image-to-sentence and
region-to-word correlation to infer the cross-modal similarity, respectively. Although these methods
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

