Learning Dictionary for Visual Attention

Yingjie Liu1

Xuan Liu2

Hui Yu2

Xuan Tang1

Xian Wei1 ∗

1

2

East China Normal University
FJIRSM, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Recently, the attention mechanism has shown outstanding competence in capturing
global structure information and long-range relationships within data, thus enhancing the performance of deep vision models on various computer vision tasks. In this
work, we propose a novel alternative dictionary learning-based attention (Dic-Attn)
module, which models this issue as a decomposition and reconstruction problem
with the sparsity prior, inspired by sparse coding in the human visual perception
system. The proposed Dic-Attn module decomposes the input into a dictionary
and corresponding sparse representations, allowing for the disentanglement of
underlying nonlinear structural information in visual data and the reconstruction
of an attention embedding. By applying transformation operations in the spatial
and channel domains, the module dynamically selects the dictionary’s atoms and
sparse representations. Finally, the updated dictionary and sparse representations
capture the global contextual information and reconstruct the attention maps. The
proposed Dic-Attn module is designed with plug-and-play compatibility and facilitates integration into deep attention encoders. Our approach offers an intuitive
and elegant means to exploit the discriminative information from data, promoting
visual attention construction. Extensive experimental results on various computer
vision tasks, e.g., image and point cloud classification, validate that our method
achieves promising performance, and shows a strong competitive comparison with
state-of-the-art attention methods.

1

Introduction

Visual perception plays a critical role in obtaining external information. However, processing massive
visual information in the real world is challenging for both human brains and computers. Modern
psychology and cognitive neuroscience find that the visual attention mechanism is one of the essential
keys to a human’s good cognitive ability [43], enabling selective and sparse activation of neurons in
response to input. In the field of computer vision (CV), various attention methods have also been
developed, with successful applications in lots of Convolutional Neural Networks and Transformers,
revealing great potential in visual tasks [4, 32, 5, 48, 46, 15]. CV attention methods utilize various
calculation functions to generate attention maps, but they can be seen as a general form (refer to
Sec. 3.1) [11, 41, 10]. Researchers have recognized several advantages of the attention mechanism,
e.g., capturing global long-term information and extracting hierarchical data structures [6]. Moreover,
recent research has also highlighted the potential of leveraging sparsity to develop attention algorithms
[31, 62, 23]. However, there are still pending questions regarding the efficiency and effectiveness of
current attention methods when dealing with regular image features and non-Euclidean point cloud
data [57, 35, 9]. Considering the significant memory costs and time complexity [42] associated with
current attention methods, it is crucial to explore possibilities of optimizing their internal operations
or re-evaluating the current form, especially in the view of sparsity.
∗

Corresponding author: xwei@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

