DAMEX: Dataset-aware Mixture-of-Experts for visual
understanding of mixture-of-datasets

Yash Jain1
1

Harkirat Behl2

Zsolt Kira1

Georgia Institute of Technology

2

Vibhav Vineet2

Microsoft Research

Abstract
Construction of a universal detector poses a crucial question: How can we most
effectively train a model on a large mixture of datasets? The answer lies in learning
dataset-specific features and ensembling their knowledge but do all this in a single
model. Previous methods achieve this by having separate detection heads on a
common backbone but that results in a significant increase in parameters. In this
work, we present Mixture-of-Experts as a solution, highlighting that MoEs are
much more than a scalability tool. We propose Dataset-Aware Mixture-of-Experts,
DAMEX where we train the experts to become an ‘expert’ of a dataset by learning
to route each dataset tokens to its mapped expert. Experiments on Universal
Object-Detection Benchmark show that we outperform the existing state-of-the-art
by average +10.2 AP score and improve over our non-MoE baseline by average
+2.0 AP score. We also observe consistent gains while mixing datasets with (1)
limited availability, (2) disparate domains and (3) divergent label sets. Further, we
qualitatively show that DAMEX is robust against expert representation collapse.
Code is available at https://github.com/jinga-lala/DAMEX.

1

Introduction

Human visual perception has naturally evolved to excel at recognizing and localizing objects in a
wide range of real-world scenarios [25, 33]. However, the field of computer vision has traditionally
concentrated on training and evaluating object detection models on specific datasets [42, 3, 43, 7,
20, 28, 34]. These models have shown limited adaptability to new environments [1, 32], leading
to decreased accuracy and practicality in real-world settings [30, 27]. Recognizing the challenges
posed by the single dataset models and the availability of diverse datasets collected over time, unified
models are being developed that merge information from multiple datasets into a single framework
[35, 45, 11, 41, 24, 15].
The process of combining datasets presents several challenges that need to be addressed. Firstly,
these datasets have been collected over time [5] and for different purposes, resulting in variations
across domains. For example, one dataset may contain images from indoor environments [9], while
another may be focused on the medical domain [38]. Secondly, imbalances in training images and
tail distributions may exist across the datasets. This means that certain datasets and classes might
have a substantial number of training examples, while others have only a few training examples.
To illustrate, the popular Universal Object-Detection Benchmark (UODB) dataset for robust object
detection demonstrates this diversity: the Clipart [13] data subset comprises 500 training images,
whereas the COCO dataset [22] includes 35,000 training images. Figure 1 shows such diversities in
the real world data, encompassing various aspects such as domains, the number of training images,
camera views, scale and label set, taken from the multiple data sources. Can a universal object
detection method be designed that effectively addresses the above issues associated with mixing
multiple datasets?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

