Online Pricing for Multi-User Multi-Item Markets

Yigit Efe Erginbas1
1

Thomas Courtade1

Kannan Ramchandran1

University of California, Berkeley

2

Soham Phade2

Wayve Technologies

Abstract
Online pricing has been the focus of extensive research in recent years, particularly
in the context of selling an item to sequentially arriving users. However, what if a
provider wants to maximize revenue by selling multiple items to multiple users in
each round? This presents a complex problem, as the provider must intelligently
offer the items to those users who value them the most without exceeding their
highest acceptable prices. In this study, we tackle this challenge by designing online
algorithms that can efficiently offer and price items while learning user valuations
from accept/reject feedback. We focus on three user valuation models (fixed
valuations, random experiences, and random valuations) and provide algorithms
with nearly-optimal revenue regret guarantees. In particular, for any market setting
with N users, M items, and load L (which roughly corresponds to the maximum
number of simultaneous allocations possible), our algorithms√achieve regret of
order O(N M log log(LT )) under √
fixed valuations model, e
O( N M LT ) under
e N M LT ) under random valuations model in
random experiences model and O(
T rounds.

1

Introduction

The ability to design algorithms that can achieve the optimal sale of goods to multiple users having
time-varying valuations for each of the goods is both timely and relevant, given the explosion in
the use of data in large-scale systems. This problem is commonly encountered in various contexts,
such as in the e-commerce (Amazon, eBay), ride-share (Uber, Lyft), airline, and hotel (Airbnb,
Booking.com) industries. Since the provider’s goal of maximizing revenue can only be achieved
through a delicate balance of considering prior transactions and adjusting offers and prices, it presents
a unique opportunity to advance our understanding of dynamic pricing.
We presently consider the problem of designing algorithms that aim to optimize the sale of multiple
goods to multiple users having time-varying valuations over the course of repeated rounds. At each
round, the provider offers each item to a user at a chosen price, and users decide whether or not to buy,
by comparing the offered price to their private valuation for the good. The provider may decide on
offers and prices based on outcomes of prior transactions, but each individual user accepts or rejects
their offer based only on their valuation for the current round. The provider’s goal is to maximize the
revenue accumulated in multiple rounds by judiciously selecting the offers and associated prices.
The provider, who is endowed with multiple items at each round, repeatedly offers these items
to multiple users at well-chosen prices. In response, the provider obtains feedback regarding the
acceptance or rejection decisions of the users and receives revenue for the accepted items. The
provider’s goal is to maximize the accumulated revenue over time by making offers that respect the
endowment constraints and user demands. In the process of identifying the best way of offering
the items to target users, the provider encounters challenges regarding two separate aspects of the
problem; such challenges are addressed in our work. As depicted in Figure 1, the first challenge is
to learn user preferences from interactive feedback; the second is to find offers and prices that will
result in maximal revenue.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

