On the Convergence of Local Stochastic Compositional Gradient Descent
with Momentum
Hongchang Gao 1 Junyi Li 2 Heng Huang 2

Abstract
Federated Learning has been actively studied due
to its efficiency in numerous real-world applications in the past few years. However, the federated stochastic compositional optimization problem is still underexplored, even though it has
widespread applications in machine learning. In
this paper, we developed a novel local stochastic compositional gradient descent with momentum method, which facilitates Federated Learning
for the stochastic compositional problem. Importantly, we investigated the convergence rate of our
proposed method and proved that it can achieve
the O(1/ϵ4 ) sample complexity, which is better
than existing methods. Meanwhile, our communication complexity O(1/ϵ3 ) can match existing
methods. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work achieving such favorable sample and
communication complexities. Additionally, extensive experimental results demonstrate the superior empirical performance over existing methods,
confirming the efficacy of our method.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning has attracted increasing attention in recent years. It facilitates the distributed data analysis without
sharing the raw data. Thus, it has been applied to various
machine learning tasks. However, most existing works just
focus on the standard stochastic minimization problem, ignoring the stochastic compositional optimization problem.
In fact, numerous machine learning models can be formulated as the stochastic compositional optimization problem,
such as the model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) problem (Finn et al., 2017), the imbalanced image classification
1

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple
University, PA, USA. 2 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence
to: Hongchang Gao <hongchang.gao@temple.edu>, Junyi Li
<junyili.ai@gmail.com>, Heng Huang <heng.huang@pitt.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

problem (Qi et al., 2021). To bridge this gap, in this paper we consider the federated compositional optimization
problem as follows:
K
h

i
1 X
Eζ∼D(k) f (k) Eξ∼D(k) [g (k) (x; ξ)]; ζ .
g
f
x∈Rd K

min

k=1

(1)
Here, f (k) (y) ≜ Eζ∼D(k) [f (k) (y; ζ)] ∈ R is the outer-level
f

′

(k)

function on the k-th device where y ∈ Rd and Df denotes
the data distribution for the outer-level function on the k-th
′
device. g (k) (x) ≜ Eξ∼D(k) [g (k) (x; ξ)] ∈ Rd is the innerg

(k)

level function on the k-th device where x ∈ Rd and Dg
is the data distribution for the inner-level function on the
k-th device. It can be observed that there are two stochastic
functions in this optimization problem, which is different
from the standard Federated Learning model.
Due to the widespread application of the stochastic compositional optimization problem in machine learning, a lot of
efforts (Wang et al., 2017a;b; Zhang & Xiao, 2019a; Yuan
et al., 2019; Yang & Hu, 2020) have been made to develop
efficient optimization algorithms for solving Eq. (1) when
K = 1. Since there are two level stochastic functions in
Eq. (1), the standard stochastic gradient is a biased estimation of the full gradient when the outer-level function is
nonlinear. As a result, stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
converges slowly when optimizing Eq. (1). To address this
issue, (Wang et al., 2017a) developed the stochastic compositional gradient descent (SCGD) method by introducing the
moving average estimation for the inner-level function to
improve the convergence performance, whose sample complexity to achieve the ϵ-accuracy solution is O(1/ϵ8 ) for
nonconvex problems. Afterwards, a series of works, such
as (Zhang & Xiao, 2019a;b; Yuan et al., 2019; Yuan & Hu,
2020; Qi et al., 2020), focus on further improving the sample
complexity of SCGD by incorporating the acceleration or
variance reduction techniques. However, the single-machine
setting is different from Federated Learning so that it is unclear how to apply these methods to Federated Learning
and how they converge. Especially, it is unclear how the
communication period in Federated Learning affects their
convergence rates.
On the other hand, numerous federated optimization meth-

