Guarantees for Epsilon-Greedy Reinforcement Learning
with Function Approximation

Christoph Dann 1 Yishay Mansour 1 2 Mehryar Mohri 1 3 Ayush Sekhari 4 Karthik Sridharan 4

Abstract
Myopic exploration policies such as ε-greedy,
softmax, or Gaussian noise fail to explore efficiently in some reinforcement learning tasks and
yet, they perform well in many others. In fact, in
practice, they are often selected as the top choices,
due to their simplicity. But, for what tasks do such
policies succeed? Can we give theoretical guarantees for their favorable performance? These crucial questions have been scarcely investigated, despite the prominent practical importance of these
policies. This paper presents a theoretical analysis of such policies and provides the first regret
and sample-complexity bounds for reinforcement
learning with myopic exploration. Our results apply to value-function-based algorithms in episodic
MDPs with bounded Bellman Eluder dimension.
We propose a new complexity measure called myopic exploration gap, denoted by α, that captures
a structural property of the MDP, the exploration
policy expl and the given value function class F.
We show that the sample-complexity of myopic
exploration scales quadratically with the inverse
of this quantity, 1/α2 . We further demonstrate
through concrete examples that myopic exploration gap is indeed favorable in several tasks
where myopic exploration succeeds, due to the
corresponding dynamics and reward structure.

1. Introduction
Remarkable empirical and theoretical advances have been
made in scaling up Reinforcement Learning (RL) approaches to complex problems with rich observations. On
the theory side, a suite of algorithmic and analytical tools
have been developed for provably sample-efficient RL in
1

Google Research 2 Tel Aviv University 3 Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences 4 Cornell University. Correspondence to:
Christoph Dann <cdann@cdann.net>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

MDPs with general structural assumptions (Jiang et al.,
2017; Sun et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2020;
Foster et al., 2020; Dann et al., 2021b; Du et al., 2021).
The key innovation in these works is to enable strategic
exploration in combination with general function approximation, leading to strong worst-case guarantees. On the
empirical side, agents with large neural networks have been
trained, for example, to successfully play Atari games (Mnih
et al., 2015), beat world-class champions in Go (Silver et al.,
2017) or control real-world robots (Kalashnikov et al., 2018).
However, perhaps surprisingly, many of these empirically
successful approaches, do not rely on strategic exploration
but instead perform simple myopic exploration. Myopic
approaches simply perturb the actions prescribed by the current estimate of the optimal policy, for example by taking a
uniformly random action with probability ε (called ε-greedy
exploration).
While myopic exploration is known to have exponential
sample complexity in the worst case (Osband et al., 2019),
it still remains a popular choice in practice. The reason for
this is because myopic exploration is easy to implement
and works well in a range of problems, including many
of practical interest (Mnih et al., 2015; Kalashnikov et al.,
2018). On the other hand, it is unknown how to implement
existing strategic exploration approaches computationally
efficiently with general function approximation. They either
require solving intricate non-convex optimization problems
(Jiang et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2021; Du et al., 2021) or
sampling from intricate distributions (Zhang, 2021).
Despite its empirical importance, theoretical analysis of
myopic exploration is still quite rudimentary, and performance guarantees for sample complexity or regret bounds
are largely unavailable. In order to bridge this gap between
theory and practice, in this work we investigate:
In which problems does myopic exploration lead
to sample-efficient learning, and can we provide
a theoretical guarantee for myopic reinforcement
learning algorithms such as ε-greedy?
We address this question by providing a framework for
analyzing value-function based RL with myopic exploration.
Importantly, the algorithm we analyze is easy to implement

