Online Learning and Pricing with Reusable Resources:
Linear Bandits with Sub-Exponential Rewards

Huiwen Jia 1 Cong Shi 1 Siqian Shen 1

Abstract
We consider a price-based revenue management
problem with reusable resources over a finite time
horizon T . The problem finds important applications in car/bicycle rental, ridesharing, cloud
computing, and hospitality management. Customers arrive following a price-dependent Poisson process and each customer requests one unit
of c homogeneous reusable resources. If there is
an available unit, the customer gets served within
a price-dependent exponentially distributed service time; otherwise, she waits in a queue until the next available unit. The decision maker
assumes that the inter-arrival and service intervals have an unknown linear dependence on a
df -dimensional feature vector associated with the
posted price. We propose a rate-optimal online
learning and pricing algorithm, termed Batch Linear Confidence Bound (BLinUCB),
√ and prove
that the cumulative regret is Õ(df T ). In establishing the regret, we bound the transient system
performance upon price changes via a coupling
argument, and also generalize linear bandits to
accommodate sub-exponential rewards.

1. Introduction
Revenue management with reusable resources finds a wide
range of applications in modern economy that heavily involves resource sharing. In these applications, a firm is endowed with a finite capacity of reusable products and each
customer requests a product, uses it for some random time,
and returns it to the firm, at which point the product unit
can be used by other customers (see Levi & Radovanović,
2010; Chen et al., 2017; Rusmevichientong et al., 2020).
For example, firms such as Amazon and Microsoft offer
1

Department of Industrial and Operations Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. Correspondence to: Cong
Shi <shicong@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

cloud computing services and users utilize virtual machines
for a certain duration of time to finish computing tasks (see
Kaewpuang et al., 2013; Püschel et al., 2015). The exact
usage duration of a request in a cloud is not specified a priori and thus the departure of demand is also stochastic. The
firm needs to dynamically decide what price to offer to users
based on the current capacity utilization as well as the received requests (see Doan et al., 2020). More examples can
be found in car/bicycle rental business (Oliveira et al., 2018),
parking facility management (Owen & Simchi-Levi, 2018),
and on-demand service platforms, such as ride-hailing services including Uber and Lyft (Banerjee et al., 2015; Liu &
Li, 2017; Bimpikis et al., 2019). In all the aforementioned
applications, customers’ willingness for using the service
is affected by the price being offered; however, the decision maker may not know the demand distribution and how
demand reacts to price changes (see Xu & Li, 2013). The
problem is even more challenging when the candidate price
set is continuous (i.e., learning an optimal pricing strategy
over a continuous action space).
Brief Problem Statement. We consider the following problem: A service-providing firm is endowed with a pool of c
homogeneous reusable resources and can dynamically post
prices (for this pool) over a finite horizon T . Customers
arrive following a price-dependent Poisson process, and
request one unit from c reusable resources. If there is a
resource unit available for use, the arriving customer gets
the unit and spends a random time that is exponentially
distributed. Upon service completion, this customer pays
the firm the amount of the posted price multiplied by the
actual service time, and the resource unit is freed up to serve
other customers. If all units are occupied upon arrival, the
customer waits in a queue until the next available unit. The
goal is to find the optimal pricing policy that maximizes the
total expected revenue. In this paper, we assume that the
inter-arrival and service intervals have an unknown linear
dependence on a df -dimensional feature vector associated
with the posted price. Thus, we need to learn the underlying linear functions, while maximizing the total expected
revenue on the fly. The performance measure is cumulative
regret, which is the difference between the revenue attained
by a learning algorithm and by a clairvoyant optimal pricing
policy under full distributional information.

