Self-conditioning Pre-Trained Language Models

Xavier Suau 1 Luca Zappella 1 Nicholas Apostoloff 1

Abstract
In this paper we aim to investigate the mechanisms that guide text generation with pre-trained
Transformer-based Language Models (TLMs).
Grounded on the Product of Experts formulation
by Hinton (1999), we describe a generative mechanism that exploits expert units which naturally
exist in TLMs. Such units are responsible for
detecting concepts in the input and conditioning
text generation on such concepts. We describe
how to identify expert units and how to activate
them during inference in order to induce any desired concept in the generated output. We find
that the activation of a surprisingly small amount
of units is sufficient to steer text generation (as
little as 3 units in a model with 345M parameters).
While the objective of this work is to learn more
about how TLMs work, we show that our method
is effective for conditioning without fine-tuning
or using extra parameters, even on fine-grained
homograph concepts. Additionally, we show that
our method can be used to correct gender bias
present in the output of TLMs and achieves gender
parity for all evaluated contexts. We compare our
method with FUDGE (Yang & Klein, 2021) and
PPLM-BoW (Dathathri et al., 2020), and show
that our approach is able to achieve gender parity
at a lower perplexity and better Self-BLEU score.
The proposed method is accessible to a wide audience thanks to its simplicity and minimal compute
needs. The findings in this paper are a step forward in understanding the generative mechanisms
of TLMs.

1. Introduction
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is evolving at a fast
pace. For instance, language models (Bengio et al., 2003)
1
Apple.
Correspondence to:
cuadros@apple.com>.

Xavier Suau <xsuau-

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

based on the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) architecture (TLMs) achieve impressive performance in many tasks,
including text generation (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2020). Despite their success, the mechanisms that govern
and control text generation using TLMs remain unclear.
Additionally, TLMs have two important drawbacks: (1) conditioning these models to constrain the content of their generation requires either expensive re-training (Keskar et al.,
2019) or the use of additional parameters (Dathathri et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Yang & Klein, 2021); (2) TLMs
might inherit and perpetuate biases present in the training
data, which can have a negative social impact (Sheng et al.,
2019; Abid et al., 2021), especially when TLMs are deployed in commercial applications.
This paper investigates the internal mechanisms used by
TLMs to control text generation. Theoretically grounded on
the Product of Experts formulation by Hinton (1999), we
describe a generative mechanism based on the presence of
expert units (neurons) in pre-trained TLMs. In this mechanism, expert units capture the presence of a concept in
the TLM input. At generation time, the TLM relies on the
activation of such expert units to produce text with a specific
concept. In order to exploit the proposed generative mechanism, we first identify expert units based on their ability to
detect a concept in the input with a given average precision.
Our approach finds expert units in a scalable manner for a
variety of concepts. Then, we apply a post-hoc intervention
upon those units which increases the presence of a concept
in the generated text, independently of the concepts present
in the input. We show that intervening on as little as 3 units
can be sufficient to steer the generation towards a desired
concept. Our method does not require fine-tuning or using
additional parameters1 .
Sec. 2 contains a literature review of relevant works. In
Sec. 3 we define the term concept and we describe its formal
representation. In Sec. 4 we explain our algorithm to exploit
the proposed generative mechanism by finding and activating expert units for a specific concept. In Sec. 5.1 we apply
our method to condition TLMs on a variety of concepts
(including fine-grained homographs) and we provide qualitative text generation results. In Sec. 5.2 we analyze the performance of our method for gender bias mitigation. We com1

Code available at https://github.com/apple/ml-selfcond

