To Smooth or Not? When Label Smoothing Meets Noisy Labels

Jiaheng Wei 1 Hangyu Liu 2 Tongliang Liu 3 Gang Niu 4 Masashi Sugiyama 4 5 Yang Liu 1

Abstract
Label smoothing (LS) is an arising learning
paradigm that uses the positively weighted
average of both the hard training labels and
uniformly distributed soft labels. It was shown
that LS serves as a regularizer for training data
with hard labels and therefore improves the
generalization of the model. Later it was reported
LS even helps with improving robustness when
learning with noisy labels. However, we observed
that the advantage of LS vanishes when we
operate in a high label noise regime. Intuitively
speaking, this is due to the increased entropy of
P(noisy label|X) when the noise rate is high, in
which case, further applying LS tends to “oversmooth” the estimated posterior. We proceeded to
discover that several learning-with-noisy-labels
solutions in the literature instead relate more
closely to negative/not label smoothing (NLS),
which acts counter to LS and defines as using
a negative weight to combine the hard and
soft labels! We provide understandings for
the properties of LS and NLS when learning
with noisy labels. Among other established
properties, we theoretically show NLS is considered more beneficial when the label noise rates
are high. We provide extensive experimental
results on multiple benchmarks to support
our findings too. Code is publicly available
at https://github.com/UCSC-REAL/
negative-label-smoothing.

1. Introduction
Label smoothing (LS) (Szegedy et al., 2016) is an arising
learning paradigm that uses positively weighted average of
both the hard training labels and the uniformly distributed
1
University of California, Santa Cruz 2 Brown University 3 TML
Lab, Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney 4 RIKEN AIP
5
University of Tokyo. Correspondence to: Yang Liu <yangliu@ucsc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

soft label:
yLS,r = (1 − r) · y +

r
· 1,
K

(1)

where we denote the one-hot vector form of hard label and
an all one vector as y, 1 respectively. K is the number
of label classes, and r is the smooth rate in the range of
[0, 1]. It was shown that LS serves as a regularizer for the
hard training data and therefore improves generalization of
the model. The regularizer role of LS prevents the model
from fitting overly on the target class. Empirical studies
have demonstrated the effectiveness of LS in improving
the model performance across various benchmarks (Pereyra
et al., 2017) (such as image classification (Szegedy et al.,
2016), machine translation (Vaswani et al., 2017), language
modelling (Chorowski & Jaitly, 2017)), and model calibration (Müller et al., 2019). Later it was reported LS even
helps with improving robustness when learning with noisy
labels (Lukasik et al., 2020). However, we observed that
the advantage of LS vanishes when we operate in a high
label noise regime: in Figure 1, we present a set of experiments on some UCI datasets (Dua & Graff, 2017) with
synthetic noisy labels. We highlight the best two smooth
rates when the classifier is trained under each label noise
rate. Since UCI datasets are of small scales, it is possible
to have tied smooth rates when evaluating the classifier on
the separate clean test data. Indeed, non-negative smooth
rates (circles colored in red) outperform negative ones when
the label noise rates are low. Nonetheless, with the increasing of noise rates, negative smooth rates r < 0 (Eqn. (1),
diamonds colored in green) appear to be more competitive
when learning with noisy labels. Intuitively speaking, this
is due to the increased entropy of P(noisy label|X) when
the noise rate is high, in which case, further applying LS
tends to “oversmooth” the estimated posterior. Motivated
by this observation, we aim to provide a more thorough
understanding of whether should we adopt label smoothing
or not when learning with noisy labels, specifically, how to
make a choice between LS and negative/not label smoothing
(NLS)?
With the presence of label noise, we theoretically demonstrate that there exists a phase transition when finding the
optimal label smoothing rate for r ∈ (−∞, 1]. Particularly,
when the label noise rate is low, LS is able to uncover the
optimal model while NLS is considered more beneficial in

