Generic Coreset for Scalable Learning of Monotonic Kernels: Logistic
Regression, Sigmoid and more

Elad Tolochinsky 1 Ibrahim Jubran 1 Dan Feldman 1

Abstract
Coreset (or core-set) is a small weighted subset
Q of an input set P with respect to a given monotonic function f : R P
→ R that provably approximates its fitting loss p∈P f (p · x) to any given
x ∈ Rd . Using Q we can obtain an approximation of x∗ that minimizes this loss, by running
existing optimization algorithms on Q. In this
work we provide: (i) A lower bound which proves
that there are sets with no coresets smaller than
n = |P | for general monotonic loss functions. (ii)
A proof that, with an additional common regularization term and under a natural assumption
that holds e.g. for logistic regression and the sigmoid activation functions, a small coreset exists
for any input P . (iii) A generic coreset construction algorithm that computes such a small coreset
Q in O(nd + n log n) time, and (iv) Experimental results with open-source code which demonstrate that our coresets are effective and are much
smaller in practice than predicted in theory.

1. Introduction
Traditional algorithms in computer science and machine
learning are usually tailored to handle off-line finite datasets
that are stored in memory. However, many modern systems
do not use this computational model. For example, GPS
data from millions of smartphones, high definition images,
YouTube videos, Twitter tweets, or audio signals from smart
homes arrive in a streaming fashion. The era of Internet of
Things (IoT) provides us with wearable devices and minicomputers that collect data sets that are being gathered by
ubiquitous information-sensing mobile devices and wireless
sensor networks (Hellerstein, 2008; Segaran & Hammerbacher, 2009; Feldman et al., 2013b).
1

Robotics & Big Data Labs, Computer Science Department,
University of Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Elad Tolochinsky
<eladt26@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Challenges. Using such devices and networks pose a series
of challenges:
(i) Limited memory. In such systems, the input is an infinite stream of batches that may grow in practice to petabytes
of raw data, and cannot be stored in memory. Hence, only
one-pass over the data and small memory are allowed.
(ii) Parallel and distributed computations. To leverage
the power of multithreading and multiple processing units
(as in GPUs), we are required to design variants of our algorithms which can run in parallel. Furthermore, if the dataset
is distributed among many machines, e.g. on a “cloud", there
is an additional problem of non-shared memory, which may
be replaced by expensive and slow communication between
the machines. (iii) Larger data. As those devices become
more widespread, the amounts of data gathered and communicated between them becomes even larger. This might pose
a challenge even for the algorithms previously regarded as
efficient.
Weak or no theoretical guarantees. Due to the modern
computation models above, learning trivial properties of the
data may become non trivial, as stated in (Feldman et al.,
2013b). These problems are especially common in machine
learning applications, where the common optimization problems and models may be, already in the off-line settings
NP-hard.
Alternative approach. Instead of designing, from scratch,
a new algorithm to solve the problem at hand, an alternative
approach is to provably summarize the data into a small
representative subset, and to prove that applying existing
algorithms, both heuristics and provable methods, on this
small summarizations, will yield an output which approximates the result of running the same algorithms on the
original (full) data. However, applying those algorithms on
this small subset will be (i) much faster, and (ii) will help
handle the complex data models above.
1.1. Coresets
Coresets, which are usually a small weighted subset of the
input, suggest a natural solution or at least a very generic approach to address the above challenges. Coresets have some
promising theoretical guarantees, while still leveraging the
success of existing heuristics, as explained above.

