Learning from Demonstration: Provably Efficient Adversarial Policy Imitation
with Linear Function Approximation

Zhihan Liu 1 Yufeng Zhang 1 Zuyue Fu 1 Zhuoran Yang 2 Zhaoran Wang 1

Abstract
In generative adversarial imitation learning
(GAIL), the agent aims to learn a policy from
an expert demonstration so that its performance
cannot be discriminated from the expert policy
on a certain predefined reward set. In this paper,
we study GAIL in both online and offline settings
with linear function approximation, where both
the transition and reward function are linear in
the feature maps. Besides the expert demonstration, in the online setting the agent can interact
with the environment, while in the offline setting
the agent only accesses an additional dataset collected by a prior. For online GAIL, we propose
an optimistic generative adversarial policy imitation algorithm
and prove that OGAPI
√ (OGAPI) p
achieves e
O( H 4 d3 K + H 3 d2 K 2 /N1 ) regret.
Here N1 represents the number of trajectories
of the expert demonstration, d is the feature diO(·)
mension, K is the number of episodes, and e
hides logarithmic terms and constants. For offline
GAIL, we propose a pessimistic generative adversarial policy imitation algorithm (PGAPI). We
also obtain the optimality gap of PGAPI, achieving the minimax lower bound in the utilization
of the additional dataset. Assuming sufficient
coverage on the additional
dataset,p
we show that
p
4 d2 /K +
e
O(
PGAPI
achieves
H
H 4 d3 /N2 +
p
3
2
H d /N1 ) optimality gap. Here N2 represents
the number of trajectories of the additional dataset
with sufficient coverage.

1
Northwestern University 2 Yale University. Correspondence to: Zhihan Liu <zhihanliu2027@u.northwestern.edu>,
Yufeng Zhang <yufengzhang2023@u.northwestern.edu>,
Zuyue Fu <zuyue.fu@u.northwestern.edu>,
Zhuoran
Yang <zhuoran.yang@yale.edu>, Zhaoran Wang <zhaoranwang@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In imitation learning (IL, Hussein et al. (2017)) (a.k.a apprenticeship learning), the agent remains unknown of the
reward, but can learn from an expert demonstration so that
the agent learns a policy as good as the expert one. To
solve IL problem, there exist mostly three types of methods:
behavior cloning (BC, Argall et al. (2009)), inverse reinforcement learning (IRL, Abbeel & Ng (2004)), and online
generative adversarial imitation learning (online GAIL). BC
regards IL as a supervised learning problem of predicting actions based on states. While appealingly simple, BC suffers
from compounding error caused by covariate shift (Ross
& Bagnell, 2010). IRL explicitly solves the true reward
function and then accordingly fully solves an RL subproblem at every iteration (Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ng & Russell,
2000). Though it has succeeded in tasks involving continuous spaces (Finn et al.), IRL lacks computational efficiency
and the desired true reward function may not be unique.
To address these issues, online GAIL (Ho & Ermon, 2016)
solves IL through minimax optimization with alternating
updates to learn a policy whose performance cannot be discriminated from the expert policy on a certain predefined
reward set. The alternating updates in online GAIL mirror
the training of generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow
et al., 2014; Arjovsky et al., 2017). Specifically, at every
iteration, online GAIL first minimizes the discrepancy in
expected cumulative reward between the expert policy and
the learned policy and then maximizes such a discrepancy
over a given reward function class in adversary. Online
GAIL achieves tremendous empirical success in various
fields, such as autonomous driving (Kuefler et al., 2017),
human behavior modeling (Merel et al., 2017), natural language processing (Chen et al., 2017), and robotics control
(Tsurumine et al., 2019).
Despite the state-of-art empirical performance of online
GAIL, the agent requires a huge amount of interactions with
the environment during the training. For some practical
problems, it is inconvenient, costly, or risky to get expert
data or labeled data, especially when collecting clinical
data or developing autonomous driving. Meanwhile, it is
available to get other sources of offline data, which may
be originated from historical experiments, non-labeled data,

