SE(3) Equivariant Graph Neural Networks with Complete Local Frames

Weitao Du * † 1 He Zhang * † 2 Yuanqi Du † 3 Qi Meng 4 Wei Chen † 1 Nanning Zheng 2 Bin Shao 4 Tie-Yan Liu 4

Abstract
Group equivariance (e.g. SE(3) equivariance) is a
critical physical symmetry in science, from classical and quantum physics to computational biology. It enables robust and accurate prediction
under arbitrary reference transformations. In light
of this, great efforts have been put on encoding
this symmetry into deep neural networks, which
has been shown to improve the generalization
performance and data efficiency for downstream
tasks. Constructing an equivariant neural network
generally brings high computational costs to ensure expressiveness. Therefore, how to better
trade-off the expressiveness and computational
efficiency plays a core role in the design of the
equivariant deep learning models. In this paper,
we propose a framework to construct SE(3) equivariant graph neural networks that can approximate
the geometric quantities efficiently. Inspired by
differential geometry and physics, we introduce
equivariant local complete frames to graph neural
networks, such that tensor information at given
orders can be projected onto the frames. The local frame is constructed to form an orthonormal
basis that avoids direction degeneration and ensure completeness. Since the frames are built only
by cross product operations, our method is computationally efficient. We evaluate our method
on two tasks: Newton mechanics modeling and
equilibrium molecule conformation generation.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
our model achieves the best or competitive performance in two types of datasets.

*
Equal contribution 1 Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China 3 George Mason University,
USA 4 Microsoft Research, USA. † denotes that the work was
done when the authors were visiting Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Qi Meng <meq@microsoft.com>, Weitao Du
<duweitao@amss.ac.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The success of CNNs (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al.,
2016) and its SO(2) group extension (Cohen & Welling,
2016) are sufficient to justify the benefits of explicitly
translationally equivariant or SE(2) equivariant neural network architectures. On the other hand, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which are superior to modeling the highdimensional structured data with permutation equivariance,
bring a new opportunity to model physical systems (especially the various many-body systems) in an end-to-end
manner. However, since 3D many-body systems follow
other constraints like SE(3) symmetry, pure black-box GNN
models show limitations on generalization in this scenario
and symmetry-preserving GNN models have become a hot
research direction.
The main challenge to be solved for developing general
equivariant GNN models is how to express tensors and conduct nonlinear operations in a reference-free way. To represent and manipulate equivariant tensors of arbitrary orders,
some approaches resort to equivariant function spaces such
as spherical harmonics (Thomas et al., 2018; Fuchs et al.,
2020; Bogatskiy et al., 2020; Fuchs et al., 2021) or lifting the
spatial space to high-dimensional spaces such as Lie group
space (Cohen & Welling, 2016; Cohen et al., 2018; 2019;
Finzi et al., 2020; Hutchinson et al., 2021). Since no restriction on the order of tensors is imposed on these methods,
sufficient expressive power of these models is guaranteed.
Unfortunately, transforming a many-body system into those
high-dimensional spaces or calculating equivariant functions (e.g. irreducible representations and tensor product
decomposition) usually brings excessive computational cost
and optimization difficulty, which is unacceptable in some
real-world scenarios. On the other hand, there are also equivariant neural networks (Schütt et al., 2017; Satorras et al.,
2021b; Köhler et al., 2019) that directly implement equivariant operations in the original space, providing an efficient
way to preserve equivariance without complex equivariant
embeddings. However, most of these models only use radial direction as incomplete frames along with embedding
of scalar features and abandon higher-order tensor inputs.
Thus, they face the direction degeneration problem and are
insufficient for expressing more complex geometric quantities like torsion force (See Section 3). In light of this, how
to better trade-off the expressiveness and computational effi-

