DNS: Determinantal Point Process Based Neural Network Sampler
for Ensemble Reinforcement Learning

Hassam Ullah Sheikh * 1 Kizza Nandyose Frisbee * 2 Mariano Phielipp 1

Abstract
The application of an ensemble of neural networks is becoming an imminent tool for advancing state-of-the-art deep reinforcement learning
algorithms. However, training these large numbers of neural networks in the ensemble has an
exceedingly high computation cost which may become a hindrance in training large-scale systems.
In this paper, we propose DNS: a Determinantal
Point Process based Neural Network Sampler that
specifically uses k-DPP to sample a subset of neural networks for backpropagation at every training step thus significantly reducing the training
time and computation cost. We integrated DNS in
REDQ for continuous control tasks and evaluated
on MuJoCo environments. Our experiments show
that DNS augmented REDQ matches the baseline
REDQ in terms of average cumulative reward and
achieves this using less than 50% computation
when measured in FLOPS. The code is available
at https://github.com/IntelLabs/DNS.

1. Introduction
In the past decade, reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
powered by high-capacity function approximators such as
deep neural networks have been used to master complex
sequential decision problems such as Atari games (Mnih
et al., 2015), boards games like Chess, Go, and Shogi (Silver
et al., 2016; 2017; 2018) and robotic manipulation (Liu
et al., 2021). Despite showing impressive results, deep
reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms have a number of
problems such as sample inefficiency (Łukasz Kaiser et al.,
2020), overestimation bias (van Hasselt, 2010; Hado van
Hasselt et al., 2016; Lan et al., 2020; Anschel et al., 2017;
Fujimoto et al., 2018) and an imbalance between exploration
*

Equal contribution 1 Intel Labs 2 Intel Corporation. Correspondence to: Hassam Sheikh <hassam.sheikh@intel.com, hassamsheikh1@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

and exploitation (Lee et al., 2020; Osband et al., 2016).
Considering the success of ensembles in supervised learning, the use of an ensemble of neural networks is becoming
popular in deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to address the
issues mentioned above. For example, in (Lan et al., 2020;
Anschel et al., 2017; Fujimoto et al., 2018) have used ensemble to address the overestimation bias problem. In (Chen
et al., 2021) proposed REDQ that uses an ensemble with a
high update-to-data ratio to address the sample inefficiency
problem. Similarly (Lee et al., 2020) have used ensemble
for efficient exploration.
Despite ensembles providing elegant theoretical and practical solutions, they introduce new practical problems such as
high computation costs and long training times. The high
computation cost problem is especially evident in an actorcritic setting where DRL algorithms use a large number of
critic networks. One such example is the REDQ algorithm
that uses ten critic networks and updates all of them in every
training step which leads to higher computation cost as well
as longer wall-clock time.
To address this issue, we present DNS: a Determinantal
Point Process-based Neural Network Sampler that specifically uses k-DPP (Kulesza & Taskar, 2011) to sample a subset of neural networks for backpropagation at every training
step. DNS uses Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) (Kornblith et al., 2019) values to form the similarity matrix which
is then used by the k-DPP to sample the subset on neural
networks for backpropagation. The motivation for sampling
a subset of networks came from a hypothesis which we show
in Section 4.1 that the Q-values from the critics converge
prematurely during training thus eliminating the need of
training all the critics at every training step.
Additionally, we show that if the CKA matrix is not positive
semi-definite, the closest positive semi-definite matrix is just
a diagonal perturbation of the CKA matrix and its resulting
kernel matrix is still Hermitian positive semi-definite.
We applied DNS on REDQ, evaluated on MuJoCo environments (Todorov et al., 2012) and, showed that a simple
sampling technique can significantly reduce the training
time and computation cost while maintaining performance
as if training all the networks in the ensemble.

