Tackling Data Heterogeneity: A New Unified Framework for Decentralized SGD
with Sample-induced Topology

Yan Huang 1 Ying Sun 2 Zehan Zhu 1 Changzhi Yan 1 Jinming Xu 1

Abstract
We develop a general framework unifying several
gradient-based stochastic optimization methods
for empirical risk minimization problems both in
centralized and distributed scenarios. The framework hinges on the introduction of an augmented
graph consisting of nodes modeling the samples
and edges modeling both the inter-device communication and intra-device stochastic gradient
computation. By designing properly the topology of the augmented graph, we are able to recover as special cases the renowned Local-SGD
and DSGD algorithms, and provide a unified perspective for variance-reduction (VR) and gradienttracking (GT) methods such as SAGA, LocalSVRG and GT-SAGA. We also provide a unified
convergence analysis for smooth and (strongly)
convex objectives relying on a proper structured
Lyapunov function, and the obtained rate can recover the best known results for many existing
algorithms. The rate results further reveal that
VR and GT methods can effectively eliminate
data heterogeneity within and across devices, respectively, enabling the exact convergence of the
algorithm to the optimal solution. Numerical experiments confirm the findings in this paper.

1. Introduction
With the increasing popularity of large-scale machine
learning, distributed stochastic optimization methods have
sparked considerable interest to improve learning efficiency
in both academia and industry (Lian et al., 2017; Boyd
et al., 2011). In contrast to the typical centralized/parameterserver architecture (Dean et al., 2012; Lian et al., 2015;
1
College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 School of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, The Pennsylvania State University, PA 16802,
USA. Correspondence to: Jinming Xu <jimmyxu@zju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Stich, 2019) where a center node coordinates the entire optimization process, which usually becomes the bottleneck,
distributed structure has its unique advantage in improving
computation and communication efficiency (Nedić et al.,
2018). Besides, since the data is locally maintained by each
node, data privacy can be well preserved for data-sensitive
application domains (Li et al., 2019).
We consider the prototypical empirical risk minimization
problem collaboratively solved by a set of agents over a
communication network. The overall objective of the agents
is to seek an optimal solution x∗ ∈ Rd that solves the
following finite-sum problem:


n
m
1 X
1 X

f (x, ξi,j ), (1)
min f (x) =
fi (x) :=
d
n i=1
m j=1 | {z }
x∈R
fij (x)

where fi : Rd → R is the local private loss function accessible only by the associated node i ∈ N := {1, 2, · · · , n},
and {ξi,j }m
j=1 denote the data samples locally stored at node
i ∈ N and {fij } denote the corresponding loss functions.
Problem (1) has been extensively studied over the last
decade and enormous distributed algorithms, e.g., Nedic and
Ozdaglar (2009); Nedic et al. (2010); Lobel and Ozdaglar
(2011); Yuan et al. (2016); Pu et al. (2020), have been proposed to solve this problem. The readers are referred to the
recent survey paper (Nedić et al., 2018) and the references
therein. Among these algorithms, the distributed gradient
decent (DGD) algorithm (Nedic and Ozdaglar, 2009) is a
simple yet effective method. However, it suffers from steadystate error when employing constant stepsizes due to the
fact that the fixed point of DGD is inherently not consensual
(Yuan et al., 2016). To bridge the gap between centralized
gradient decent and DGD, a gradient-tracking scheme is
introduced to overcome the above issue (Xu et al., 2015;
Di Lorenzo and Scutari, 2016; Nedic et al., 2017; Qu and Li,
2017), which introduces an auxiliary variable to estimate
the full gradient ∇f (the sum of local gradients) leveraging
dynamic average consensus (Zhu and Martı́nez, 2010) so
as to make the fixed point consensual. The introduction of
gradient tracking scheme allow us to effectively account
for the heterogeneity among local data sets (also known as
external variance among data distribution of nodes).

