Thresholded Lasso Bandit
Kaito Ariu 1 2 Kenshi Abe 2 Alexandre Proutière 1

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit the regret minimization
problem in sparse stochastic contextual linear bandits, where feature vectors may be of large dimension d, but where the reward function depends on
a few, say s0  d, of these features only. We
present Thresholded Lasso bandit, an algorithm
that (i) estimates the vector defining the reward
function as well as its sparse support, i.e., significant feature elements, using the Lasso framework
with thresholding, and (ii) selects an arm greedily
according to this estimate projected on its support.
The algorithm does not require prior knowledge
of the sparsity index s0 and can be parameter-free
under some symmetric assumptions. For this simple algorithm, we establish non-asymptotic
regret
√
upper bounds scaling as O(log d+ T ) in general,
and as O(log d + log T ) under the so-called margin condition (a probabilistic condition on the separation of the arm rewards). Thep
regret of previous
algorithms scales as O(log d + T log(dT )) and
O(log T log d) in the two settings, respectively.
Through numerical experiments, we confirm that
our algorithm outperforms existing methods.

1. Introduction
The linear contextual bandit (Abe & Long, 1999; Li et al.,
2010) is a sequential decision-making problem that generalizes the classical stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB)
problem (Lai & Robbins, 1985; Robbins, 1952), where (i)
in each round, the decision-maker is provided with a context in the form of a feature vector for each arm and where
(ii) the expected reward is a linear function of these vectors. More precisely, at the beginning of round t ≥ 1, the
decision-maker receives for each arm k, a feature vector
At,k ∈ Rd . She then selects an arm, say k, and observes
a sample of a random reward with mean hAt,k , θi. The pa1

EECS and Digital Futures, KTH Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm, Sweden 2 Cyberagent, Inc., Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Kaito Ariu <ariu@kth.se>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

rameter vector θ ∈ Rd is fixed but initially unknown. Linear
contextual bandits have been extensively applied in online
services such as online advertisement and recommendation
systems (Li et al., 2010; 2016; Zeng et al., 2016), and constitute arguably the most relevant structured bandit model
in practice.
The major challenge in the design of efficient algorithms for
contextual linear bandits stems from the high dimensionality
of the feature space. For example, for display ad systems as
studied in Chapelle & Li (2011); Weinberger et al. (2009),
the joint information about a user, an ad and its publisher
is encoded in a feature vector of dimension d = 224 . Fortunately, typically only a few features significantly impact
the expected reward. This observation has motivated the
analysis of problems where the unknown parameter vector
θ is sparse (Bastani & Bayati, 2015; Kim & Paik, 2019;
Oh et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2018). In this paper, we also
investigate sparse contextual linear bandits, and assume that
θ only has at most s0  d non-zero components. The set
of these components and its cardinality s0 are unknown to
the decision-maker. Sparse contextual linear bandits have
attracted a lot of attention recently. State-of-the-art algorithms developed to exploit p
the sparse structure achieve
regrets scaling as O(log d + T log(dT )) in general, and
O(log d log T ) under the co-called margin condition (a setting where arms are well separated); refer to Section 2 for
details.
We develop a novel algorithm, referred to as Thresholded
Lasso bandit1 , with improved regret guarantees. Our algorithm first uses the Lasso framework with thresholding
to maintain and update in each round estimates of the parameter vector θ and of its support. It then greedily picks
an arm based on these estimates (the thresholded estimates
of θ). The regret of the algorithm strongly depends on the
accuracy of these estimates. We derive strong guarantees on
this accuracy, which in turn leads to regret guarantees. Our
contributions are as follows.
(i) Thresholded Lasso Estimation Performance. The
performance of the Lasso-based estimation procedure is now
fairly well understood, see e.g., Bühlmann & Van De Geer
1

An implementation of our method is available
at
https://github.com/CyberAgentAILab/
thresholded-lasso-bandit.

