Provable Acceleration of Heavy Ball beyond Quadratics for a Class of
Polyak-Łojasiewicz Functions when the Non-Convexity is Averaged-Out

Jun-Kun Wang 1 Chi-Heng Lin 2 Andre Wibisono 1 Bin Hu 3

Abstract
Heavy Ball (HB) nowadays is one of the most
popular momentum methods in non-convex optimization. It has been widely observed that incorporating the Heavy Ball dynamic in gradientbased methods accelerates the training process
of modern machine learning models. However,
the progress on establishing its theoretical foundation of acceleration is apparently far behind
its empirical success. Existing provable acceleration results are of the quadratic or close-toquadratic functions, as the current techniques of
showing HB’s acceleration are limited to the case
when the Hessian is ﬁxed. In this work, we develop some new techniques that help show acceleration beyond quadratics, which is achieved by
analyzing how the change of the Hessian at two
consecutive time points affects the convergence
speed. Based on our technical results, a class of
Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL) optimization problems
for which provable acceleration can be achieved
via HB is identiﬁed. Moreover, our analysis
demonstrates a beneﬁt of adaptively setting the
momentum parameter.

1. Introduction
Heavy Ball (a.k.a. Polyak’s momentum) (Polyak, 1964)
has become a dominant momentum method in various
machine learning applications, see e.g., (He et al., 2016;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Wilson et al., 2017). Many recently
proposed algorithms incorporate Heavy Ball momentum in
lieu of Nesterov’s momentum (Nesterov, 2013), e.g., Adam
1

Computer Science, Yale University 2 Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology 3 Electrical
and Computer Engineering & Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Correspondence to: Jun-Kun Wang <jun-kun.wang@yale.edu>,
Chi-Heng Lin <clin354@gatech.edu>, Andre Wibisono <andre.wibisono@yale.edu>, Bin Hu <binhu7@illinois.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Algorithm 1 Heavy Ball (Equivalent Version 1)
1: Required: the step size η and the momentum parameter βt ∈
[0, 1]
2: Init: w0 = w−1 ∈ Rd
3: for t = 0 to T do
4:
Given current iterate wt , compute gradient ∇f (wt ).
5:
Update iterate wt+1 = wt − η∇f (wt ) + βt (wt − wt−1 ).
6: end for

(Kingma & Ba, 2015), AMSGrad (Reddi et al., 2018), and a
normalized momentum method (Cutkosky & Mehta, 2021),
to name just a few. Despite its success in practice, theoretical results of acceleration via Heavy Ball are sparse in
the literature. Indeed, the strongly convex quadratic problems seem to be one of very few cases for which an acceleration via HB is shown (e.g., Lessard et al. (2016);
Ghadimi et al. (2015); Loizou & Richtárik (2020); Paquette
& Paquette (2021); Can et al. (2019); Scieur & Pedregosa
(2020); Flammarion & Bach (2015); Diakonikolas & Jordan (2019); Shi et al. (2021); Wang & Abernethy (2018);
Wang et al. (2020); Liu et al. (2020); Xiong et al. (2020);
Jain et al. (2018)). Recently, (Wang et al., 2021b) provably
show that HB converges faster than vanilla gradient descent
(GD) for training an over-parametrized ReLU network and
a deep linear network. They show an accelerated linear
rate that has a square root dependency on the conditional
number of a certain Gram matrix, which improves the linear rate of GD for those problems. They develop a modular analysis of acceleration when the HB dynamic meets
certain conditions. The conditions essentially require that
an underlying Gram matrix or the Hessian does not deviate too much from that at the beginning. Therefore, their
theorem might not be applied to the case when the iterate
does move far away from the initial point. This limitation
to acceleration, to our knowledge, appears in all the related
works of the discrete-time HB. What is lacking in the HB
literature is a provable acceleration when the Hessian can
deviate signiﬁcantly from that at the beginning during the
optimization process.
This work aims at ﬁlling the gap. We develop a technical result that proves acceleration of HB when the Hessian
can change substantially under certain conditions. Specifically, our analysis shows that HB has acceleration com-

