Faster Privacy Accounting via Evolving Discretization

Badih Ghazi 1 Pritish Kamath 1 Ravi Kumar 1 Pasin Manurangsi 1

Abstract
We introduce a new algorithm for numerical composition of privacy random variables, useful for
computing the accurate differential privacy parameters for composition of mechanisms. Our algorithm achieves a running time and memory usage
of polylog(k) for the task of self-composing a
mechanism, from a broad class of mechanisms, k
times; this class, e.g., includes the sub-sampled
Gaussian mechanism, that appears in the analysis of differentially private stochastic gradient descent. By comparison, recent work by Gopi et
√al.
e k)
(2021) has obtained a running time of O(
for the same task. Our approach extends to the
case of composing k different mechanisms in the
same class, improving upon their running time
e 1.5 ) to O(k).
e
and memory usage from O(k

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006b;a) has become the preferred notion of privacy in both academia and
the industry. Fueled by the increased awareness and demand for privacy, several systems that use DP mechanisms
to guard users’ privacy have been deployed in the industry (Erlingsson et al., 2014; Shankland, 2014; Greenberg,
2016; Apple Differential Privacy Team, 2017; Ding et al.,
2017; Kenthapadi & Tran, 2018; Rogers et al., 2021), and
the US Census (Abowd, 2018). Besides the large volume
of data, many of these systems offer real-time private data
analytic and inference capabilities, which entail strict computational efficiency requirements on the underlying DP
operations.
We recall the definition of DP (Dwork et al., 2006b;a):
Definition 1.1 (DP). Let ε > 0 and δ ∈ [0, 1]. A randomized algorithm M : X n → Y is (ε, δ)-DP if, for
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Research, USA. Correspondence
to: Pritish Kamath <pritish@alum.mit.edu>, Pasin Manurangsi
<pasin@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

all x, x′ ∈ X n differing on a single index and all outputs
S ⊆ Y, we have Pr[M(x) ∈ S] ≤ eε · Pr[M(x′ ) ∈ S] + δ.
The DP guarantees of a mechanism are captured by the
privacy parameters ε and δ; the smaller these parameters,
the more private the mechanism. Often a mechanism is
simultaneously DP for multiple privacy parameters; this is
captured by studying the privacy loss of a mechanism M—
the curve δM (·) for which the mechanism is (ε, δM (ε))-DP.
A fundamental mathematical property satisfied by DP is
composition, which prescribes the privacy guarantees of
results from executing multiple DP mechanisms. In basic
composition (Dwork et al., 2006a), a mechanism that returns
the results of executing an (ε1 , δ1 )-DP mechanism and an
(ε2 , δ2 )-DP mechanism is (ε1 + ε2 , δ1 + δ2 )-DP. Unfortunately, this bound becomes weak when composing a large
number of mechanisms. The advanced composition (Dwork
et al., 2010) offers stronger bounds: roughly speaking, composing k mechanisms that are each (ε, δ)-DP yields a mech√
anism whose privacy parameters are of the order of kε
and kδ—clearly more desirable than the basic composition.
In fact, obtaining tight composition bounds has been an
active research topic. Kairouz et al. (2015) showed how
to obtain the exact privacy parameters of self-composition
(mechanism composed with itself), while Murtagh & Vadhan (2016) showed that the corresponding problem for the
more general case is #P-complete.

Privacy Loss Distribution (PLD). Tighter bounds for
privacy parameters that go beyond advanced composition
are possible if the privacy loss of the mechanism is taken
into account. Meiser & Mohammadi (2018); Sommer et al.
(2019) initiated the study of numerical methods for accurately estimating the privacy parameters, using the privacy
loss distribution (PLD) of a mechanism. The PLD is the
probability mass function of the so-called privacy loss random variable (PRV) for discrete mechanisms, and its density
function for continuous mechanisms (see Section 2 for formal definitions). PLDs have two nice properties: (i) tight
privacy parameters can be computed from the PLD of a
mechanism and (ii) the PLD of a composed mechanism is
the convolution of the individual PLDs. Property (ii) makes
PLD amenable to FFT-based methods.

