Resilient and Communication Efficient Learning
for Heterogeneous Federated Systems

Zhuangdi Zhu 1 Junyuan Hong 1 Steve Drew 2 Jiayu Zhou 1

Abstract
The rise of Federated Learning (FL) is bringing
machine learning to edge computing by utilizing data scattered across edge devices. However,
the heterogeneity of edge network topologies and
the uncertainty of wireless transmission are two
major obstructions of FL’s wide application in
edge computing, leading to prohibitive convergence time and high communication cost. In this
work, we propose an FL scheme to address both
challenges simultaneously. Specifically, we enable edge devices to learn self-distilled neural
networks that are readily prunable to arbitrary
sizes, which capture the knowledge of the learning domain in a nested and progressive manner.
Not only does our approach tackle system heterogeneity by serving edge devices with varying
model architectures, but it also alleviates the issue of connection uncertainty by allowing transmitting part of the model parameters under faulty
network connections, without wasting the contributing knowledge of the transmitted parameters. Extensive empirical studies show that under system heterogeneity and network instability,
our approach demonstrates significant resilience
and higher communication efficiency compared
to the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a decentralized machine learning scheme that eliminates private data sharing on participating devices. Recent years witnessed effervescent development of FL in varied domains, including healthcare
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA. 2 Department of
Electrical and Software Engineering, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada.. Correspondence to: Zhuangdi Zhu
<zhuzhuan@msu.edu>, Jiayu Zhou <jiayuz@msu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Rieke et al., 2020), computer vision (Liu et al., 2020),
natural language processing (Hard et al., 2018; McMahan
et al., 2017), and Internet of things (IoT) (Khan et al., 2021;
Du et al., 2020), to name just a few. The rapid adoption
and deployment of edge computing have enabled computing to be even closer to the source of the data and users.
The growing demand for privacy-aware and low-latency
machine learning at the edge makes FL a natural fit.
The diversities among participating devices and their network topologies are phenomenal, which imposed significant challenges of statistical and system heterogeneity to
FL. The statistical heterogeneity in FL has been extensively tackled by techniques such as regularized optimization (Dinh et al., 2020), customized model aggregation
(Wang et al., 2020), and domain-invariant representation
leanring (Zhu et al., 2021; Hong et al., 2021c). In comparison, system heterogeneity, which is induced by significant gaps in memory capacities and transmission bandwidth among edge devices, is under-explored. Moreover,
traditional FL hinges on reliable connections, where model
parameters are transmitted between edge devices and a central server without packet loss. This prerequisite can be
prohibitive for practical edge-based applications, including
autonomous driving and IoT, where devices such as wearable devices and vehicles can frequently opt-in and optout. Under faulty network connections, prior FL solutions
may become fragile when the model parameters fail to be
intactly shared among active users due to transmission interruptions. This connection uncertainty is bidirectional,
which exists either when a participant downloads or uploads parameter updates, leading to nonnegligible information loss of the participating devices. To the best of our
knowledge, few pioneer efforts have been made to address
the transmission uncertainty in FL, leaving most FL learning schemes at potential risk of undermined performance.
Observing the system heterogeneity and connection uncertainty in FL, in this paper, we propose an FL framework that addresses both challenges simultaneously. In our
approach, edge devices learn a prunable neural network
by self-distillation, such that a model can be structurally
pruned to sub-models that contain adequate knowledge of
the learning domain. Towards effective optimization, we

