Rethinking Image-Scaling Attacks:
The Interplay Between Vulnerabilities in Machine Learning Systems

Yue Gao 1 Ilia Shumailov 2 Kassem Fawaz 1

Abstract
As real-world images come in varying sizes, the
machine learning model is part of a larger system
that includes an upstream image scaling algorithm.
In this paper, we investigate the interplay between
vulnerabilities of the image scaling procedure and
machine learning models in the decision-based
black-box setting. We propose a novel sampling
strategy to make a black-box attack exploit vulnerabilities in scaling algorithms, scaling defenses,
and the final machine learning model in an end-toend manner. Based on this scaling-aware attack,
we reveal that most existing scaling defenses are
ineffective under threat from downstream models. Moreover, we empirically observe that standard black-box attacks can significantly improve
their performance by exploiting the vulnerable
scaling procedure. We further demonstrate this
problem on a commercial Image Analysis API
with decision-based black-box attacks.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in machine learning (ML) techniques have
demonstrated human-level performance in many vision
tasks, such as image classification (Russakovsky et al., 2015;
Szegedy et al., 2016; 2017) and object detection (Ren et al.,
2015; Redmon et al., 2016). As real-world images come
in varying sizes, the practical ML system must include an
image scaling algorithm before the downstream ML model.
The scaling algorithm resizes input images to match the
fixed input size of a model, which takes the input and performs vision tasks, such as classification.
The model and scaling algorithm in an ML system have
become attractive targets for attackers. ML models are
vulnerable to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013;
1

University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI, USA 2 Vector
Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada. Correspondence to: Yue Gao
<gy@cs.wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Biggio et al., 2013): an adversary can add imperceptible
perturbations to the input of a model and change its prediction (Madry et al., 2018; Carlini & Wagner, 2017). Recently, scaling algorithms were also found to be vulnerable
to image-scaling attacks (Xiao et al., 2019; Quiring et al.,
2020): an adversary can manipulate a large image such that
it will change into a different image after scaling, thereby
inducing an incorrect prediction in the model. However,
image-scaling attacks are easily blocked by subsequent defenses (Quiring et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2021) and are not
generalizable to other fields. We note that more subtle exploitation should leverage the weakness of the scaling stage
jointly with adversarial examples against the ML model.
In this paper, we investigate the interplay between vulnerabilities of the image scaling procedure and ML models. Our
investigation focuses on the more practical decision-based
black-box setting, where the attacker can only query the
model without a confidence score or knowledge of its internal implementation. We show that the attacker can jointly
attack the scaling procedure and the ML model, posing more
serious threats. From one side, black-box attacks (Brendel
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; Cheng et al., 2019; 2020;
Li et al., 2020a; 2021; Zhang et al., 2021) can leverage the
weakness of the scaling function to improve their performance significantly. On the other side, most image-scaling
defenses (Quiring et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2021) are not
effective in protecting the scaling function from being exploited by adversarial examples, even if they successfully
prevent the image-scaling attack.
As a first step, we generalize the attack setting and re-design
black-box attacks to jointly exploit the scaling function. We
characterize the common approach of existing black-box
attacks and identify noise sampling as a critical step shared
by these attacks. Based on this observation, we propose to
incorporate the weakness of the scaling function through a
novel technique which we call Scaling-aware Noise Sampling (SNS). The overview of SNS is illustrated in Figure 1.
The high-level idea is guiding traditional low-resolution
black-box attacks to search for the adversarial examples
along a direction that best exploits the scaling function. Our
utilization of the noise sampling step makes SNS a plug-andplay technique applicable to different attacks. In particular,

