Scalable Computation of Causal Bounds

Madhumitha Shridharan 1 Garud Iyengar 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of computing bounds
for causal inference problems with unobserved
confounders, where identifiability does not hold.
Existing non-parametric approaches for computing such bounds use linear programming (LP)
formulations that quickly become intractable for
existing solvers because the size of the LP grows
exponentially in the number of edges in the underlying causal graph. We show that this LP can
be significantly pruned by carefully considering
the structure of the causal query, allowing us to
compute bounds for significantly larger causal inference problems as compared to what is possible
using existing techniques. This pruning procedure also allows us to compute the bounds in
closed form for a special class of causal graphs
and queries, which includes a well-studied family of problems where multiple confounded treatments influence a outcome.We also propose a very
efficient greedy heuristic that produces very high
quality bounds, and scales to problems that are
several orders of magnitude larger than those for
which the pruned LP can be solved.

1. Introduction
In most real world applications of causal inference (Imbens & Rubin, 2015; Pearl, 2009) there exist variables that
are critical to the identification of causal effects, but are
either unknown or unmeasured, i.e. there are unobserved
confounders. While it is impossible to precisely identify
causal effects in the presence of unobserved confounders, it
is possible to obtain bounds on the causal query.
There have been multiple such attempts to bound causal
effects for small special graphs. Evans (2012) bound the
1
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence
to: Madhumitha Shridharan <ms6143@columbia.edu>, Garud
Iyengar <garud@ieor.columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

causal effects in the special case where any two observed
variables are neither adjacent in the graph, nor share a latent
parent. Richardson et al. (2014) bound the causal effect
of a treatment on a parameter of interest by invoking additional (untestable) assumptions and assess how inference
about the treatment effect changes as these assumptions are
varied. Kilbertus et al. (2020) and Zhang & Bareinboim
(2021) develop algorithms to compute causal bounds for extensions of the instrumental variable model in a continuous
setting. Geiger & Meek (2013) bound causal effects in a
model under specific parametric assumptions. Finkelstein &
Shpitser (2020) develop a method for obtaining bounds on
causal parameters using rules of probability and restrictions
on counterfactuals implied by causal graphs.
While fewer in number, there have also been attempts to
bound causal effects in large general graphs. Poderini et al.
(2020) propose techniques to compute bounds in special
large graphs with multiple instruments and observed variables. Finkelstein et al. (2021) propose a method for partial
identification in a class of measurement error models, and
Duarte et al. (2021) propose a polynomial programming
based approach to solve general causal inference problems,
but their procedure is computationally intensive for large
graphs.
In this work, we extend the class of large graphs for which
causal effects can be bounded. In particular, we focus on a
class of causal inference problems where causal bounds can
be obtained using linear programming (LP) (Balke & Pearl,
1994; Zhang & Bareinboim, 2017; Pearl, 2009; Sjölander
et al., 2014). Recently, Sachs et al. (2020; 2021) identified
a large problem class for which LPs can be used to compute causal bounds, and have developed an algorithm for
formulating the objective function and the constraints of the
corresponding LP. This problem class is a generalization of
the instrumental variable setting, and is thus widely applicable. However, as we describe later, the size of the LP is
exponential in the number of edges in the causal graph, and
therefore, the straightforward formulation of the LP can be
tractably solved only for very small causal graphs. In this
work, we show how to use the structure of the causal query
and the underlying graph to significantly reduce the size of
the LP, and as a consequence, significantly increase the size
of the graphs for which the LP method remains tractable.
Our main contributions are as follows:

