Safe Learning in Tree-Form Sequential Decision Making:
Handling Hard and Soft Constraints

Martino Bernasconi 1 Federico Cacciamani 1 Matteo Castiglioni 1 Alberto Marchesi 1 Nicola Gatti 1
Francesco Trovò 1

Abstract
We study decision making problems in which an
agent sequentially interacts with a stochastic environment defined by means of a tree structure. The
agent repeatedly faces the environment over time,
and, after each round, it perceives a utility and a
cost, which are both stochastic. The goal of the
agent is to learn an optimal strategy in an online
fashion, while keeping costs below a given safety
threshold at the same time. Our model naturally
fits many real-world scenarios, such as, e.g., opponent exploitation in games and web link selection.
We study the hard-threshold problem of achieving sublinear regret while guaranteeing that the
threshold constraint is satisfied at every iteration
with high probability. First, we show that, in general, any algorithm with such a guarantee incurs in
a linear regret. This motivates the introduction of
a relaxed problem, called the soft-threshold problem, in which we only require that the cumulative
violation of the threshold constraint grows sublinearly, and, thus, we can provide an algorithm with
sublinear regret. Next, in the hard-threshold problem, we show how a sublinear regret algorithm
can be designed under the additional assumption
that there exists a known strategy strictly satisfying the threshold constraint. We also show that
our regret bounds are tight. Finally, we cast the
opponent exploitation problem to our model, and
we experimentally evaluate our algorithms on a
standard testbed of sequential games.

stage process. The agent-environment interaction is sequential, and it can be represented with a tree structure made
by: (i) decision nodes where the agent takes actions; and
(ii) observation nodes in which the agent observes signals
from the environment. This kind of interaction naturally
models the decision-making problem faced by an agent
in extensive-form (i.e., sequential) games, which have recently received a terrific attention from the AI and machine
learning community; see, e.g., the superhuman agents developed for two-player (Brown & Sandholm, 2018) and multiplayer (Brown & Sandholm, 2019) no-limit Texas hold’em
Poker, Go (Silver et al., 2016), and Starcraft II (Vinyals
et al., 2019). Moreover, it also fits many real-world scenarios, such as, e.g., multi-level web link selection, path
routing in telecommunication networks, robot patrolling,
and mission planning in military settings.
In spite of the popularity gained by sequential decision making problems over the last years, most of the works on the
topic focus on the basic (unconstrained) online learning
problem faced by a utility-maximizing agent that repeatedly
plays the decision making process. However, these works
do not account for the case, which is common in safetycritical systems, where agent’s decisions at each round are
subject to safety constraints depending on unknown parameters. For instance, these constraints are crucial for many
cyber-physical systems with humans in the loop, such as,
e.g., autonomous driving, power grids management, and
opponent exploitation in games. While safety constraints
have been widely studied in one-shot decision making problems (see, e.g., (Usmanova et al., 2019)), to the best of our
knowledge our work is the first one addressing online learning with safety constraints in general tree-form sequential
decision making settings.

1. Introduction
Tree-form sequential decision making models situations in
which an agent interacts with an environment in a multi1
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Martino Bernasconi <martino.bernasconideluca@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1.1. Original Contributions
We study stochastic tree-form sequential decision making
processes with costs (compactly referred to as SDMCs). In
an SDMC, at the end of each sequential interaction, the
agent perceives a utility and a cost. In our model, both
utilities and costs are stochastic, as well as how the environment evolves determining signals perceived by the agent

