Mitigating Gender Bias in Face Recognition
Using the von Mises-Fisher Mixture Model

Jean-Rémy Conti * 1 2 Nathan Noiry * 1 Vincent Despiegel 2 Stéphane Gentric 2 Stéphan Clémençon 1

Abstract
In spite of the high performance and reliability
of deep learning algorithms in a wide range of
everyday applications, many investigations tend
to show that a lot of models exhibit biases, discriminating against specific subgroups of the population (e.g. gender, ethnicity). This urges the
practitioner to develop fair systems with a uniform/comparable performance across sensitive
groups. In this work, we investigate the gender
bias of deep Face Recognition networks. In order to measure this bias, we introduce two new
metrics, BFAR and BFRR, that better reflect
the inherent deployment needs of Face Recognition systems. Motivated by geometric considerations, we mitigate gender bias through a new
post-processing methodology which transforms
the deep embeddings of a pre-trained model to
give more representation power to discriminated
subgroups. It consists in training a shallow neural
network by minimizing a Fair von Mises-Fisher
loss whose hyperparameters account for the intraclass variance of each gender. Interestingly, we
empirically observe that these hyperparameters
are correlated with our fairness metrics. In fact,
extensive numerical experiments on a variety of
datasets show that a careful selection significantly
reduces gender bias.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, Face Recognition (FR) systems have
reached extremely high levels of performance, paving the
way to a broader range of applications, where the reliability
levels were previously prohibitive to consider automation.
*
Equal contribution 1 LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris 2 Idemia.
Correspondence to: JeanRémy Conti <jean-remy.conti@telecom-paris.fr>, Nathan Noiry
<nathan.noiry@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

This is mainly due to the adoption of deep learning techniques in computer vision since the famous breakthrough
of (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). The increasing use of deep FR
systems has however raised concerns as any technological
flaw could have a strong societal impact. Besides recent
punctual events1 that received significant media coverage,
the academic community has studied the bias of FR systems
for many years (dating back at least to (Phillips et al., 2003)
who investigated the racial bias of non-deep FR algorithms).
In (Abdurrahim et al., 2018) three sources of biases are
identified: race (understood as biological attributes such as
skin color), age and gender (available gender labels from FR
datasets are males and females). The National Institute of
Standards and Technology (Grother et al., 2019) conducted
a thorough analysis of the performance of several FR algorithms depending on these attributes and revealed high
disparities. For instance, some of the top state-of-the-art
algorithms in absolute performance have more than seven
times more false acceptances for females than for males. In
this paper, we introduce a novel methodology to mitigate
gender bias for FR. Though focusing on a single source of
bias has obvious limitations regarding intersectional effects
(Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018), it is a first step to gain insights into the mechanisms at work, before turning to more
complex situations. Actually, the method promoted in this
paper, much more general than the application considered
here, could possibly alleviate many other types of bias. This
will be the subject of a future work.
The topic corresponding to the study of different types of
bias and to the elaboration of methods to alleviate them is referred to as fairness in machine learning, which has received
increasing attention in recent years, see e.g. (Mehrabi et al.,
2019), (Caton & Haas, 2020), (Du et al., 2020). Roughly
speaking, achieving fairness means learning a decision rule
that does not mistreat some predefined subgroups, while
still exhibiting a good predictive performance on the overall
population: in general, a trade-off has to be found between
fair treatment and pure accuracy2 . In this regard, one needs
1

See for instance the study conducted by the American Civil
Liberties Union.
2
This dichotomy somewhat simplifies the problem since an
increase in accuracy could also lead to a better treatment of each
subgroup of the population.

