On Convergence of Gradient Descent Ascent: A Tight Local Analysis

Haochuan Li 1 Farzan Farnia 2 Subhro Das 3 Ali Jadbabaie 4

Abstract
Gradient Descent Ascent (GDA) methods are the
mainstream algorithms for minimax optimization
in generative adversarial networks (GANs). Convergence properties of GDA have drawn significant interest in the recent literature. Specifically, for minx maxy f (x; y) where f is stronglyconcave in y and possibly nonconvex in x, (Lin
et al., 2020) proved the convergence of GDA with
a stepsize ratio ηy /ηx = Θ(κ2 ) where ηx and ηy
are the stepsizes for x and y and κ is the condition
number for y. While this stepsize ratio suggests
a slow training of the min player, practical GAN
algorithms typically adopt similar stepsizes for
both variables, indicating a wide gap between
theoretical and empirical results. In this paper,
we aim to bridge this gap by analyzing the local
convergence of general nonconvex-nonconcave
minimax problems. We demonstrate that a stepsize ratio of Θ(κ) is necessary and sufficient for
local convergence of GDA to a Stackelberg Equilibrium, where κ is the local condition number
for y. We prove a nearly tight convergence rate
with a matching lower bound. We further extend
the convergence guarantees to stochastic GDA
and extra-gradient methods (EG). Finally, we conduct several numerical experiments to support our
theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
Minimax learning frameworks including generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and adversarial training (Madry et al., 2017) have achieved great
success in various machine learning tasks. According to
these frameworks, the underlying machine learning prob1

Department of EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of CSE, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 MITIBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research 4 Department of CEE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Haochuan
Li <haochuan@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

lem is formulated as a zero-sum game between two min
and max players trying to optimize a learning objective in
the opposite directions. Therefore, minimax learning tasks
are commonly formulated through a minimax optimization
problem of the following form:
min max f (x; y).

x∈X y∈Y

(1)

In the above problem, x and y denote the optimization variables for the minimization and maximization subproblems,
respectively, and f (x; y) represents the minimax learning
objective estimated over observed training data. For example, in GAN settings, x contains the parameters of a generator machine producing real-like samples, and y represents
the parameters of a discriminator machine distinguishing
the generated samples from real training data.
Since the machine players of modern minimax learning
frameworks are typically chosen as deep neural networks,
these frameworks lead to difficult nonconvex-nonconcave
minimax optimization problems where f (x; y) is possibly nonconvex in x and nonconcave in y. In such optimization problems, standard gradient-based algorithms are
not guaranteed to find a locally optimal solution. However, numerous empirical studies on GANs suggest that a
simultaneous-update gradient-based optimization algorithm
such as Gradient Descent Ascent (GDA) can successfully
train a satisfactory generator function. The wide gap between standard convergence guarantees and empirical results in GAN experiments has inspired several recent studies
on the convergence behavior of GDA-type methods in general nonconvex-nonconcave minimax problems.
A recent line of works in the minimax optimization literature focuses on the convergence properties of gradient-based
optimization algorithms in the nonconvex-concave minimax
settings where the objective f (x; y) is further assumed to
be a concave function of y. Regarding this class of minimax optimization problems, a well-known result proved by
(Lin et al., 2020a) demonstrates a convergence guarantee
for the GDA and stochastic GDA (SGDA) algorithms in
the smooth nonconvex-strongly-concave (NC-SC) minimax
settings where f (x; y) is assumed to be L-smooth and µstrongly-concave in y. Under these assumptions, Lin et al.
(2020a) analyze the convergence of two-time-scale GDA
with different stepsizes ηx = Θ( κ21L ) and ηy = Θ( L1)
which achieves a gradient complexity bound of O κ2 /2

