Massively Parallel k-Means Clustering for Perturbation Resilient Instances

Vincent Cohen-Addad * 1 Vahab Mirrokni * 1 Peilin Zhong * 1

Abstract
We consider k-means clustering of n data points
in Euclidean space in the Massively Parallel Computation (MPC) model, a computational model
which is an abstraction of modern massively parallel computing system such as MapReduce. Recent work provides evidence that getting O(1)approximate k-means solution for general input points using o(log n) rounds in the MPC
model may be impossible under certain conditions [Ghaffari, Kuhn & Uitto’2019]. However,
the real-world data points usually have better
structures. One instance of interest is the set of
data points which is perturbation resilient [Bilu
& Linial’2010]. In particular, a point set is αperturbation resilient for k-means if perturbing
pairwise distances by multiplicative factors in
the range [1, α] does not change the optimum
k-means clusters. We bypass the worst case
lower bound by considering the perturbation resilient input points and showing o(log n) rounds
k-means clustering algorithms for these instances
in the MPC model. Specifically, we show a
fully scalable (1 + ε)-approximate k-means clustering algorithm for O(α)-perturbation resilient
instance in the MPC model using O(1) rounds
2
and Oε,d (n1+1/α +o(1) ) total space. If the space
per machine is sufficiently larger than k, i.e., at
least k · nΩ(1) , we also develop an optimal kmeans clustering algorithm for O(α)-perturbation
resilient instance in MPC using O(1) rounds and
2
Od (n1+o(1) · (n1/α + k)) total space.

1. Introduction
Metric clustering is at the heart of data analysis and modern
unsupervised machine learning with many applications for
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research. Correspondence
to: Vincent Cohen-Addad <cohenaddad@google.com>, Vahab Mirrokni <mirrokni@google.com>, Peilin Zhong <peilinz@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

mining massive datasets. As a canonical clustering problem,
k-means clustering is defined as follows: Given a dataset
where each data element is represented by a vector of realvalued features, the goal is to find k representative vectors,
called centers, such that the sum of squared distances from
each input vector to the closest center is minimized. Similarly, in k-median clustering, the goal is to minimize sum
of distances to closest centers. k-means and k-median have
become essential building blocks for unveiling hidden patterns and extracting information in datasets, especially in
the unsupervised clustering contexts where supervised machine learning cannot be applied, or little is known about
the data or when the dataset is massive and the competitive
supervised methods become impractical.
These clustering problems have received a lot of attention
through the years and for almost half a century. Hence,
good progress on our understanding of the complexity of
the problems has been made. We know that the problems are
hard to approximate within a factor better than 1.1 in highdimensional Euclidean spaces and admits approximation
schemes in low-dimension (Arora et al., 1998; Kolliopoulos & Rao, 2007; Cohen-Addad, 2018; Cohen-Addad et al.,
2019a). We further know of constant-factor approximation
algorithms for high-dimensional Euclidean spaces, better
than for general metric spaces (Cohen-Addad et al., 2019b).
Also due to their applications, these problem have been
studied extensively from both theoretical and practical perspectives with many approximation algorithms and heuristics (Lloyd, 1982; Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007; Byrka et al.,
2014; Kanungo et al., 2004; Jain et al., 2003; Li, 2011).
The era of massive datasets has naturally led researchers
to design massively parallel approximation algorithms, and
in particular in the Massively Parallel Computation (MPC)
model. This model has become the main model for analyzing algorithms for large-scale parallel computing (Karloff
et al., 2010; Goodrich et al., 2011; Beame et al., 2013) and
serves as a theoretical abstraction of real-world systems like
MapReduce (Dean & Ghemawat, 2008), Hadoop (White,
2012) and Spark (Zaharia et al., 2010). The goal is to design
distributed algorithms that employ machines with sublinear
space, and also run in a sublinear (and hopefully sublogarithmic) number of rounds of computation. In addition to round
and memory complexity, this model takes into account the
total work (including total communication) as an important

