The Poisson Binomial Mechanism for Unbiased Federated Learning with Secure
Aggregation

Wei-Ning Chen 1 Ayfer Özgür 1 Peter Kairouz 2

Abstract
We introduce the Poisson Binomial mechanism
(PBM), a discrete differential privacy mechanism
for distributed mean estimation (DME) with applications to federated learning and analytics. We
provide a tight analysis of its privacy guarantees, showing that it achieves the same privacyaccuracy trade-offs as the continuous Gaussian
mechanism. Our analysis is based on a novel
bound on the Rényi divergence of two Poisson
binomial distributions that may be of independent
interest.
Unlike previous discrete DP schemes based on additive noise, our mechanism encodes local information into a parameter of the binomial distribution, and hence the output distribution is discrete
with bounded support. Moreover, the support
does not increase as the privacy budget ε → 0
as in the case of additive schemes which require
the addition of more noise to achieve higher privacy; on the contrary, the support becomes smaller
as ε → 0. The bounded support enables us to
combine our mechanism with secure aggregation
(SecAgg), a multi-party cryptographic protocol,
without the need of performing modular clipping
which results in an unbiased estimator of the sum
of the local vectors. This in turn allows us to apply
it in the private FL setting and provide an upper
bound on the convergence rate of the SGD algorithm. Moreover, since the support of the output
distribution becomes smaller as ε → 0, the communication cost of our scheme decreases with the
privacy constraint ε, outperforming all previous
distributed DP schemes based on additive noise in
the high privacy or low communication regimes.
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Wei-Ning Chen
<wnchen@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The standard technique for ensuring differential privacy
(DP) (Dwork et al., 2006b) of learning algorithms is to
add noise either to the output of a function evaluated on
the data (in the centralized setting) or locally to the data
itself (in federated settings (Kairouz et al., 2019; McMahan
et al., 2016)). Two commonly used distributions for noise
are the Gaussian and Laplace distributions. While simple
enough for mathematical reasoning and analysis, the continuous nature of these distributions presents a number of
challenges. First, it is not possible to represent real samples
on finite computers, making these mechanisms prone to numerical errors that can break privacy guarantees (Mironov,
2012). Second, they cannot be used in the federated setting
where it may be desirable to first locally perturb the data
(e.g. the local model update computed by stochastic gradient descent(SGD) iterations) and then use cryptographic
primitives such as secure aggregation (SecAgg) (Bonawitz
et al., 2016b) to allow the server to obtain a summary of the
local data (such as the mean of local model updates) without
having access to individual information. This combination
of local DP and secure aggregation is desirable as it does not
rely on the clients’ full trust in the server, while potentially
achieving the same utility-privacy trade-off as in the centralized case. However, secure aggregation is based on modular
arithmetic which is not compatible with the real output from
a privatization mechanism that relies on perturbing data
with continuous noise. This has led to an increasing recent
interest in mechanisms that perturb the data (or a function of
it) with the addition of discrete noise, such as the binomial
in (Dwork et al., 2006a; Agarwal et al., 2018), the discrete
Gaussian in (Canonne et al., 2020; Kairouz et al., 2021),
and Skellam noise in (Agarwal et al., 2021).
These additive discrete noise mechanisms however have a
few of their own shortcomings. First, when the data itself is
continuous, as in the case of local model updates obtained
from SGD iterations in federated learning, it has to be discretized before the addition of discrete noise. This adds
quantization noise and complicates analysis. Second, these
distributions have discrete yet unbounded support which
means that the privatized data has to go through modular
clipping when combined with secure aggregation protocols

