The Complexity of k-Means Clustering when Little is Known

Robert Ganian * 1 Thekla Hamm * 1 Viktoriia Korchemna * 1 Karolina Okrasa * 2 Kirill Simonov * 1

Abstract
In the area of data analysis and arguably even in
machine learning as a whole, few approaches have
been as impactful as the classical k-means clustering. Here, we study the complexity of k-means
clustering in settings where most of the data is
not known or simply irrelevant. To obtain a more
fine-grained understanding of the tractability of
this clustering problem, we apply the parameterized complexity paradigm and obtain three new
algorithms for k-means clustering of incomplete
data: one for the clustering of bounded-domain
(i.e., integer) data, and two incomparable algorithms that target real-valued data. Our approach
is based on exploiting structural properties of a
graphical encoding of the missing entries, and we
show that tractability can be achieved using significantly less restrictive parameterizations than
in the complementary case of few missing entries.

1. Introduction
k-means clustering is a fundamental task in machine learning and data analysis, one that has been the focus of extensive empirical as well as theoretical research. In general, the
aim in k-means clustering is to partition the rows in an input
matrix A into k clusters and compute one center per cluster so as to minimize the within-cluster sum of squares—or,
when viewed as a decision problem, achieve a within-cluster
sum of squares of at most a specified target value `. Depending on the setting, A could be real-valued (Lloyd, 1982;
Moshkovitz et al., 2020; Fomin et al., 2021) or contain
integers from a bounded domain; for instance, Fomin et
al. (Fomin et al., 2018) studied the case where A was binary,
*

Equal contribution 1 Algorithms and Complexity Group,
TU Wien, Austria 2 Institute of Informatics, University of
Warsaw, Poland. Correspondence to: Robert Ganian <rganian@gmail.com>, Thekla Hamm <thamm@ac.tuwien.ac.at>,
Viktoriia Korchemna <vkorchemna@ac.tuwien.ac.at>, Kirill Simonov <ksimonov@ac.tuwien.ac.at>, Karolina Okrasa
<k.okrasa@mini.pw.edu.pl>.

and Ganian et al. (Ganian et al., 2018) the bounded-domain
case where ` = 0.
It is well known that k-means clustering is NP-complete,
even when restricted to k = 2 clusters (Drineas et al., 2004;
Aloise et al., 2009). On the theoretical side, a prominent
approach used to circumvent such lower bounds is the use
of the parameterized complexity2 paradigm, which provides
a more fine-grained look into the complexity of problems.
Since its inception, parameterized complexity has been successfully applied to a multitude of problems relevant to
machine learning and artificial intelligence such as, e.g.,
Bayesian network learning (Ordyniak & Szeider, 2013;
Grüttemeier et al., 2021; Ganian & Korchemna, 2021), integer linear programming (Ganian & Ordyniak, 2018; 2019;
Dvorák et al., 2021), principal component analysis (Simonov et al., 2019; Dahiya et al., 2021), and of course
clustering (Cohen-Addad et al., 2018; Fomin et al., 2018).
Apart from classical clustering problems, one direction that
has been gaining traction in recent years is the study of
clustering in settings where some of the data is not known
or simply irrelevant—a task that essentially combines data
completion with clustering (Wang et al., 2019). Indeed,
several authors have studied the parameterized complexity
of various clustering problems for data with missing entries (Ganian et al., 2018; Koana et al., 2020; 2021; Eiben
et al., 2021b), and Eiben et al. (Eiben et al., 2021a) obtained a fixed-parameter approximation algorithm specifically for (k-)M EANS C LUSTERING WITH M ISSING E N TRIES (MCME).
While their approaches and techniques differ, all of these
works target the case where nearly all entries are known, i.e.,
where the unknown entries only occur in a precisely defined
“sparse” way. On the other hand, very little is known about
the complexity of MCME when the number of unknown
entries is large; such situations are of practical relevance
in, e.g., recommender systems and predictive analytics. For
example, in the classical Netflix Prize challenge where the
task was to predict user ratings for movies based on previous
ratings, only about 1% of the user-movie pairs were originally supplied with a rating.3 The central mission of this
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

See Preliminaries for a brief introduction.
The dataset is available at https://www.kaggle.com/
netflix-inc/netflix-prize-data.
3

