Metric-Fair Active Learning

Jie Shen 1 Nan Cui 1 Jing Wang 2

Abstract
Active learning has become a prevalent technique
for designing label-efficient algorithms, where the
central principle is to only query and fit “informative” labeled instances. It is, however, known
that an active learning algorithm may incur unfairness due to such instance selection procedure. In
this paper, we henceforth study metric-fair active
learning of homogeneous halfspaces, and show
that under the distribution-dependent PAC learning model, fairness and label efficiency can be
achieved simultaneously. We further propose two
extensions of our main results: 1) we show that
it is possible to make the algorithm robust to the
adversarial noise – one of the most challenging
noise models in learning theory; and 2) it is possible to significantly improve the label complexity
when the underlying halfspace is sparse.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has become the driving force behind modern
artificial intelligence. However, it requires massive amount
of labeled data for model training. Though there is a massive
amount of unlabeled data available in many applications,
the labels are typically precious and expensive to acquire,
especially in the areas of medicine and physiology. In this
regard, active learning was broadly utilized as a paradigm
to learn a good model with significantly fewer labels by designing strategies to adaptively select informative instances
to annotate (Cohn et al., 1994; Dasgupta et al., 2005; Balcan
et al., 2006; Dasgupta, 2009).
On the other hand, recently practitioners from different disciplines highlighted the ethical and legal challenges posed
by machine learning systems which are with potential to dis1

Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of
Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey, USA. 2 Amazon, New
York City, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Jie Shen
<jie.shen@stevens.edu>, Nan Cui <ncui@stevens.edu>, Jing Wang
<jing.julia.wang@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

criminate against specific population groups (Chouldechova
& Roth, 2020). The rising concern is that the designed algorithms achieve appealing prediction accuracy, yet cannot
recognize ethical or moral feelings, and they will likely output a solution that treats vulnerable groups unfairly. For
instance, Apple’s credit card has been investigated by financial regulators after customers discovered that the lending
algorithms were discriminating against women. In this light,
there is a growing interest in incorporating different fairness
criteria into algorithmic design, aiming to guarantee that
similar individuals or groups will be treated equally (Dwork
et al., 2012; Zemel et al., 2013; Hardt et al., 2016; Yona &
Rothblum, 2018; Liu et al., 2018; Dwork & Ilvento, 2019;
Liu et al., 2019; Dwork et al., 2020a;b; Ding et al., 2021).
In this paper, we study the two properties that seemingly
are odd with each other, and propose the first provable active learning algorithm to address the general concern that
the instance selection paradigm in active learning may lead
to unfairness. Our goal is three-fold: 1) designing a computationally efficient algorithm that learns the underlying
hypothesis class under the probably approximately correct
(PAC) model of Valiant (1984); 2) significantly reducing the
label complexity using active learning techniques; and 3)
ensuring fairness on the unseen data, i.e. generalization ability of the fairness guarantee. The first two objectives have
been broadly studied in the literature and were achieved
by many active learning algorithms (Balcan et al., 2007;
Awasthi et al., 2017); hence our main contribution falls into
the design of a new family of active learning algorithms that
additionally satisfy the fairness guarantee.
1.1. Formal setup
We study efficient PAC learning of homogeneous halfspaces
(Valiant, 1984), which is arguably one of the most important
problems in learning theory (Rosenblatt, 1958). Denote by
X := Rd the instance space and by Y := {−1, 1} the label
space. The class of homogeneous halfspaces is given by
H := {x 7→ sign(w · x), w ∈ Rd , kwk2 = 1}. Let D be the
joint distribution on X × Y and denote by DX the marginal
distribution on X . For any hypothesis w ∈ H, we define
 the
error rate as errD (w) := Pr(x,y)∼D sign(w · x) 6= y .
Let EXD be the sample generation oracle such that each
time the learner makes a call, it returns a labeled instance

