Neural Inverse Kinematics
Raphael Bensadoun 1 Shir Gur 1 Nitsan Blau 1 Tom Shenkar 1 Lior Wolf 1

Abstract
Inverse kinematic (IK) methods recover the parameters of the joints, given the desired position
of selected elements in the kinematic chain. While
the problem is well-defined and low-dimensional,
it has to be solved rapidly, accounting for multiple
possible solutions. In this work, we propose a neural IK method that employs the hierarchical structure of the problem to sequentially sample valid
joint angles conditioned on the desired position
and on the preceding joints along the chain. In our
solution, a hypernetwork f recovers the parameters of multiple primary networks g1 , g2 , . . . , gN ,
where N is the number of joints, such that each gi
outputs a distribution of possible joint angles, and
is conditioned on the sampled values obtained
from the previous primary networks gj , j < i.
The hypernetwork can be trained on readily available pairs of matching joint angles and positions,
without observing multiple solutions. At test time,
a high-variance joint distribution is presented, by
sampling sequentially from the primary networks.
We demonstrate the advantage of the proposed
method both in comparison to other IK methods
for isolated instances of IK and with regard to
following the path of the end effector in Cartesian
space.

1. Introduction
Given the joint angles, the position and orientation of the
robot’s end-effector can be readily computed in a process
called forward-kinematics. However, robotic planning and
controls require mapping in the other direction, i.e., from
the end-effector’s Cartesian space coordinates to the joint
positions. This inverse mapping is called Inverse Kinematic
(IK). It is a nonlinear problem that often has multiple solutions (Craig, 2009).

For simple kinematic chains without much ambiguity, one
can obtain analytical solutions for the IK problem. However,
for the chain type that appears in robotic arms and other
complex robots, one has to rely on numerical methods. In
this work, we propose what is, as far as we can ascertain, the
first deep learning solution that allows for multiple solutions.
Given a certain kinematic chain, one can readily obtain a
training set consisting of pairs (x, y) of end-effector positions x and matching joint angles y, by sampling the latter
and computing the former with forward kinematics. This
straightforward way of obtaining the training set does not
reflect the possibility of multiple solutions y, given the coordinates and orientation of x. In our framework, we employ a
variational approach to the problem and sample, at inference
time, from a distribution Px that is conditioned on the vector
of Cartesian-space specifications x.
Due to the structure of the kinematic chain, the IK problem
can be seen as a hierarchical problem. Typically, the angle
of the joint that is attached to the end-effector is uniquely
determined by the location of all previous joints and the
specifications in x. The previous joint may have multiple
solutions given the joint angles that precede it. In general,
as we move along the kinematic chain, from the fixed attachment point to the end effector, the number of possible
configurations decreases. While this is true for any order in
which we sequentially fix one joint, the kinematic chain is
often equipped with a natural order, in which the first joints
typically cause larger motions in Cartesian space.
In our model, this hierarchy is manifested by a sequential
sampling of the joints from the distribution Px . Namely, we
parametrize Px as a sequential process in which the joints
are sampled one by one and the sampling of each joint is
conditioned on the values obtained for the previous joints.

1
Mentee Robotics. Correspondence to: Raphael Bensadoun
<raphael@menteebot.com>, Shir Gur <shir@menteebot.com>.

The IK problem is often characterized by a discontinuous
solution space. While for a given y, we can expect to see
multiple solutions y ′ that are close in the configuration space,
there may be other solutions that obtain the desired position
and orientation in x using a completely different configuration. Our model addresses this by employing Gaussian
Mixture Models (GMMs) during sequential sampling.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

The sequential sampling process, therefore, takes the following form. The distribution of the first joint is given as
a GMM. The parameters of this GMM are computed by a

