Deep Causal Metric Learning

Xiang Deng 1 Zhongfei Zhang 1

Abstract
Deep metric learning aims to learn distance metrics that measure similarities and dissimilarities
between samples. The existing approaches typically focus on designing different hard sample
mining or distance margin strategies and then
minimize a pair/triplet-based or proxy-based loss
over the training data. However, this can lead the
model to recklessly learn all the correlated distances found in training data including the spurious distance (e.g., background differences) that is
not the distance of interest and can harm the generalization of the learned metric. To address this issue, we study metric learning from a causality perspective and accordingly propose deep causal metric learning (DCML) that pursues the true causality of the distance between samples. DCML is
achieved through explicitly learning environmentinvariant attention and task-invariant embedding
based on causal inference. Extensive experiments
on several benchmark datasets demonstrate the
superiority of DCML over the existing methods 1 .

1. Introduction
Deep metric learning (DML) is an effective technique to automatically learn a task-specific distance metric with a deep
neural network (DNN). It has received much attention in recent years due to its wide applications in different domains,
such as image retrieval (Li & Tang, 2015; Wu et al., 2017),
self-supervised learning (He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020),
few-shot learning (Sung et al., 2018; Snell et al., 2017), and
face recognition (Wang et al., 2017a; Liu et al., 2017; Wang
et al., 2018a). The existing approaches (Suh et al., 2019; Sun
et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2018b) mainly focus on designing
different sampling strategies (e.g., hard or informative sample mining) or adopting different kinds of distance margins
1
Department of Computer Science, State University of New
York at Binghamton, NY, US. Correspondence to: Xiang Deng
<xdeng7@binghamton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Code: https://github.com/Xiang-Deng-DL/DCML.

(e.g., an angular or similarity margin). Then a pair/tripletbased or proxy-based loss combining with these strategies
is minimized over the training data (Hadsell et al., 2006;
Weinberger et al., 2006; Sun et al., 2020). However, simply
minimizing the loss over the training data makes the learned
metric model recklessly absorb all the correlated distances
between samples, even the spurious distances caused by
context biases, which hurts the generalization on new (test)
classes or samples. In this paper, different from the existing
literature designing different sampling or margin strategies,
we study DML from a different perspective by exploring
the true causality of the distance between samples.
In DML, the distance between a pair of samples varies with
the tasks (i.e., learning goals). For example, with two images of tigers in forests, one task is to learn the distance
between the tigers in the two images while another task can
be learning the distance between the forests in the two images, which results in different distances. The backgrounds
and foregrounds (i.e., object) can be switched based on
the tasks. However, backgrounds and objects are typically
highly correlated in reality, e.g., tigers usually appear in
forests instead of water while fish does the opposite. The
high correlation between an object and a background makes
DML more likely suffer from background (context) biases
in the training data, since the classes in the training dataset
can be totally different from those in the test dataset in
the DML, which is different from the case in classification
where the training dataset and the test dataset share the same
classes (He et al., 2016; Deng & Zhang, 2021b). An intuitive example is provided in Figure 1 where the task is to
learn the distance metric between animals. In the training
dataset, there are two classes of animals, i.e., tigers and
Alaskan dogs. Since most tigers live in forests and most
Alaskan dogs live in snow, when the model learns the distances between tigers and Alaskan dogs, it also absorbs
the spurious distances between forests and snow due to the
high correlations between tigers and forests, and between
Alaskan dogs and snow. In the test dataset with two new
classes, i.e., wolves and lions, the learned biased metric
mistakenly infers that the wolf in forests (i.e., the query
image) is more similar to the lion in forests instead of the
two wolves in snow due to the biases induced by the context
prior in the training data. Without dealing with the kind of
context biases in the training data, it hurts the generalization

