Learning Infinite-Horizon Average-Reward Markov Decision Processes
with Constraints
Liyu Chen 1 Rahul Jain 1 Haipeng Luo 1

Abstract
We study regret minimization for infinitehorizon average-reward Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) under cost constraints. We start
by designing a policy optimization algorithm
with carefully designed action-value estimator
and bonus term, and show√that for ergodic MDPs,
our algorithm ensures Õ( T ) regret and constant
constraint violation, where T is the total number
of time steps. This strictly improves over the algorithm of (Singh et al., 2020), whose regret and
constraint violation are both Õ(T 2/3 ). Next, we
consider the most general class of weakly communicating MDPs. Through a finite-horizon approximation, we develop another algorithm with
Õ(T 2/3 ) regret and constraint√violation, which
can be further improved to Õ( T ) via a simple
modification, albeit making the algorithm computationally inefficient. As far as we know, these
are the first set of provable algorithms for weakly
communicating MDPs with cost constraints.

1. Introduction
Standard reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms aim at
finding the optimal policy that maximizes the accumulated
reward in a Markov Decision Process (MDP). In many realworld applications, however, the algorithm is also required
to satisfy certain constraints. For example, in autonomous
driving, the vehicle needs to reach the destination with minimum amount of time while obeying the traffic rules. These
constrained versions of RL problems can be formulated by
Constrained Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs) (Altman,
1999), where a learning agent tries to maximize the accumulated reward while ensuring that certain cost constraint
is not violated or at least the violation is small enough.
Learning in a CMDP is a long-standing topic, and there is
1
University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Liyu
Chen <liyuc@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

a surge of interest in it in light of all other theoretical advances in RL. Almost all recent works on CMDP, however,
focus on the simpler finite-horizon setting (Kalagarla et al.,
2021; Efroni et al., 2020; Qiu et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021b)
or the discounted setting (Liang et al., 2017; Tessler et al.,
2018; Chen et al., 2021d; Liu et al., 2021a; Ding et al., 2020;
2021). In contrast, learning CMDP in the infinite-horizon
average-reward setting, where the learner-environment interaction never ends or resets and the goal is to achieve optimal
long-term average reward under constraints, appears to be
much more challenging. For example, (Zheng & Ratliff,
2020) makes the restricted assumptions that the transition
kernel is known and an initial policy that satisfies the constraints and induces an ergodic Markov chain is given, but
still only achieves Õ(T 3/4 ) regret after T steps (with no constraint violation). Another recent work (Singh et al., 2020)
considers the special class of ergodic CMDPs, but only
achieves Õ(T 2/3 ) regret and Õ(T 2/3 ) cost constraint violation. These existing results are far from optimal, exhibiting unique challenges of the constrained infinite-horizon
average-reward setting.
In this work, we manage to overcome some of these challenges and significantly improve our understanding of regret
minimization for infinite-horizon average-reward CMDPs.
Our contributions are as follows:
• Following (Singh et al., 2020), we start by considering
ergodic CMDPs √
in Section 3. We develop an algorithm
that achieves Õ( T ) regret and constant constraint violation, strictly improving (Singh√et al., 2020). The main
technical challenge in getting Õ( T ) regret for the upperconfidence-type algorithm of (Singh et al., 2020) is the
lack of a tighter bound on the span of the estimated bias
function. Instead, we resolve this issue using a policy optimization algorithm with a special action-value estimator
whose span is well controlled. To further control the transition estimation error from the action-value estimator,
we also include a new bonus term in the policy update.
• In Section 4, we drop the ergodic assumption and consider
the most general class of weakly communicating CMDPs.
By reducing the original infinite-horizon problem to a
finite-horizon problem similarly to (Wei et al., 2021),
we show that a simple and efficient linear programming

