Efficient Higher-order Subgraph Attribution via Message Passing

Ping Xiong 1 Thomas Schnake 1 2 Grégoire Montavon 1 2 Klaus-Robert Müller 1 2 3 4 Shinichi Nakajima 1 2 5

Abstract
Explaining graph neural networks (GNNs) has become more and more important recently. Higherorder interpretation schemes, such as GNNLRP (layer-wise relevance propagation for GNN),
emerged as powerful tools for unraveling how
different features interact thereby contributing
to explaining GNNs. GNN-LRP gives a relevance attribution of walks between nodes at each
layer, and the subgraph attribution is expressed
as a sum over exponentially many such walks.
In this work, we demonstrate that such exponential complexity can be avoided. In particular, we
propose novel algorithms that enable to attribute
subgraphs with GNN-LRP in linear-time (w.r.t.
the network depth). Our algorithms are derived
via message passing techniques that make use of
the distributive property, thereby directly computing quantities for higher-order explanations. We
further adapt our efficient algorithms to compute
a generalization of subgraph attributions that also
takes into account the neighboring graph features.
Experimental results show the significant acceleration of the proposed algorithms and demonstrate
the high usefulness and scalability of our novel
generalized subgraph attribution method.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) because of their ability
to incorporate the intrinsic structure of data and their stateof-the-art performance on graph-structured data, e.g., social networks (Chen et al., 2018; Hamilton et al., 2017;
Kipf & Welling, 2017) and molecules (Schütt et al., 2018;
1
Technische Universität Berlin (TU Berlin) 2 BIFOLD – Berlin
Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data 3 Department
of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Korea
4
Max Planck Institut für Informatik, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
5
RIKEN Center for AIP, Japan. Correspondence to: Shinichi
Nakajima <nakajima@tu-berlin.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Visualisation for the joint contribution of atom subsets when predicting the mutagenicity of a molecule. The
gray sub-molecule G is a strong indicator for the mutagenicity of the full molecule. The orange and green bars show
the lower- and higher-order relevance scores for the subset
composed of all atoms which have the denoted atomic number, respectively. The heat maps in the sub-molecules, close
to the orange and green bars, show the relevance scores of
lower- and higher-order attribution methods, respectively.

Domingue et al., 2019). The learning tasks on graphs include node, edge or graph classification, link prediction and
others (Wu et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2020). However, since the
prediction strategy of a GNN is in general not comprehensible for humans, GNN models are still treated as black-boxes,
which prevents applications in some crucial areas where
trustworthiness or safety is required. In the recent literature,
various methods for explaining GNNs have been developed
(Yuan et al., 2020b). Methods like GNNExplainer (Ying
et al., 2019), PGExplainer (Luo et al., 2020) and PGMexplainer (Vu & Thai, 2020) allow importance analysis of
nodes and edges within the input data sample. GNN-LRP
(layer-wise relevance propagation for GNN; Schnake et al.
(2021)) aims at explaining GNNs at the level of walks, which
reflect the practically relevant higher-order interactions of
features. To obtain such walk relevances, higher-order deep
Taylor decomposition is applied to a GNN, from which
we get independent feature components that only depend
on bag-of-edges. These bag-of-edge components are then
recovered by backward massages from one node representation to the next within the GNN interaction layers, and

