Personalized Federated Learning via Variational Bayesian Inference

Xu Zhang * 1 Yinchuan Li * 2 Wenpeng Li 2 Kaiyang Guo 2 Yunfeng Shao 2

Abstract
Federated learning faces huge challenges from
model overfitting due to the lack of data and statistical diversity among clients. To address these
challenges, this paper proposes a novel personalized federated learning method via Bayesian
variational inference named pFedBayes. To alleviate the overfitting, weight uncertainty is introduced to neural networks for clients and the
server. To achieve personalization, each client updates its local distribution parameters by balancing its construction error over private data and its
KL divergence with global distribution from the
server. Theoretical analysis gives an upper bound
of averaged generalization error and illustrates
that the convergence rate of the generalization
error is minimax optimal up to a logarithmic factor. Experiments show that the proposed method
outperforms other advanced personalized methods on personalized models, e.g., pFedBayes respectively outperforms other SOTA algorithms by
1.25%, 0.42% and 11.71% on MNIST, FMNIST
and CIFAR-10 under non-i.i.d. limited data.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is an increasingly popular topic in
deep learning, which can model machine learning for distributed end devices while preserving their privacy (McMahan et al., 2017; Li et al., 2020). With the increasing emphasis on privacy protection, federated learning has been
widely used in finance, medicine, internet of things, internet of vehicles and e-commerce. When data from different
clients are assumed to be independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.), federated learning performs well and has a
strict convergence guarantee. However, there are two main
challenges caused by imperfect data, one is that private data
*
Equal contribution 1 LSEC, Academy of Mathematics and
Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Wenpeng Li <li.wenpeng@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

from different clients are usually non-i.i.d. due to the differences in user preferences, locations, and living habits,
leading to model performance degradation; the other is that
data from clients are usually limited and not enough to train
a large neural network with too many parameters, leading
to model overfitting. A natural question is can we design a
federated learning algorithm to address these two challenges
caused by data together?
To overcome this challenge caused by non-i.i.d. data, personalized federated learning (PFL) (Li et al., 2018; T Dinh
et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2021) is proposed to achieve personalization. Although standard PFL has come a long way
in non-i.i.d. data, model overfitting often occurs when data
from the client is limited. Recently, the Bayesian neural
network (BNN) is introduced into FL to address the model
overfitting by representing all network parameters in the
global model with probability distributions (Chen & Chao,
2021; Thorgeirsson & Gauterin, 2021). Unfortunately, these
algorithms show performance degradation when data from
different clients have statistical diversity. Our goal is to find
a way to address the challenges from non-i.i.d. data and
limited data simultaneously.
In this paper, we find an efficient way to adapt BNN into
PFL and propose a novel PFL model through variational
Bayesian inference. Unlike traditional BNNs, we do not
assume a prior distribution for each parameter on the end
devices; instead, the trained global distribution is used as
the prior distribution. It is well known that the assumed
prior distribution often does not match the true distribution.
Our model can avoid this flaw by using a trained global
distribution. Furthermore, the proposed model can quantify
the uncertainty of the network output by using Bayesian
model averaging, which has practical implications in various
robustness-critical applications such as medical diagnosis,
autonomous driving, and financial transactions (Jospin et al.,
2020).
1.1. Main Contributions
This paper proposes a novel two-level personalized federated learning model named pFedBayes based on variational Bayesian inference. Both local and global neural
networks are formulated as BNN, where all network parameters are treated as random variables. The server seeks to

