The Importance of Non-Markovianity in Maximum State Entropy Exploration

Mirco Mutti * 1 2 Riccardo De Santi * 3 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract
In the maximum state entropy exploration framework, an agent interacts with a reward-free environment to learn a policy that maximizes the
entropy of the expected state visitations it is inducing. Hazan et al. (2019) noted that the class of
Markovian stochastic policies is sufficient for the
maximum state entropy objective, and exploiting
non-Markovianity is generally considered pointless in this setting. In this paper, we argue that
non-Markovianity is instead paramount for maximum state entropy exploration in a finite-sample
regime. Especially, we recast the objective to
target the expected entropy of the induced state
visitations in a single trial. Then, we show that
the class of non-Markovian deterministic policies
is sufficient for the introduced objective, while
Markovian policies suffer non-zero regret in general. However, we prove that the problem of finding an optimal non-Markovian policy is NP-hard.
Despite this negative result, we discuss avenues
to address the problem in a tractable way and how
non-Markovian exploration could benefit the sample efficiency of online reinforcement learning in
future works.

1. Introduction
Several recent works have addressed Maximum State Entropy (MSE) exploration (Hazan et al., 2019; Tarbouriech
& Lazaric, 2019; Lee et al., 2019; Mutti & Restelli, 2020;
Mutti et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2021; Liu &
Abbeel, 2021b;a; Seo et al., 2021; Yarats et al., 2021; Mutti
et al., 2022; Nedergaard & Cook, 2022) as an objective for
unsupevised Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto,
2018). In this line of work, an agent interacts with a rewardfree environment (Jin et al., 2020) in order to maximize an
*
Equal contribution 1 Politecnico di Milano 2 Università
di Bologna 3 ETH Zurich.
Correspondence to: Mirco
Mutti <mirco.mutti@polimi.it>, Riccardo De Santi <rdesanti@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

entropic measure of the state distribution induced by its behavior over the environment, effectively targeting a uniform
exploration of the state space. Previous works motivated this
MSE objective in two main directions. On the one hand, this
learning procedure can be seen as a form of unsupervised
pre-training of the base model (Laskin et al., 2021), which
has been extremely successful in supervised learning (Erhan
et al., 2009; 2010; Brown et al., 2020). In this view, a MSE
policy can serve as an exploratory initialization to standard
learning techniques, such as Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan,
1992) or policy gradient (Peters & Schaal, 2008), and this
has been shown to benefit the sample efficiency of a variety
of RL tasks that could be specified over the pre-training
environment (e.g., Mutti et al., 2021; Liu & Abbeel, 2021b;
Laskin et al., 2021). On the other hand, pursuing a MSE
objective leads to an even coverage of the state space, which
can be instrumental to address the sparse reward discovery problem (Tarbouriech et al., 2021). Especially, even
when the fine-tuning is slow (Campos et al., 2021), the MSE
policy might allow to solve hard-exploration tasks that are
out of reach of RL from scratch (Mutti et al., 2021; Liu
& Abbeel, 2021b). As we find these premises fascinating,
and of general interest to the RL community, we believe
it is worth providing a theoretical reconsideration of the
MSE problem. Specifically, we aim to study the minimal
class of policies that is necessary to optimize a well-posed
MSE objective, and the general complexity of the resulting
learning problem.
All of the existing works pursuing a MSE objective solely
focus on optimizing Markovian exploration strategies, in
which each decision is conditioned on the current state of
the environment rather than the full history of the visited
states. The resulting learning problem is known to be provably efficient in tabular domains (Hazan et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2020). Moreover, this choice is common in RL, as
it is well-known that an optimal deterministic Markovian
strategy maximizes the usual cumulative sum of rewards
objective (Puterman, 2014). Similarly, Hazan et al. (2019,
Lemma 3.3) note that the class of Markovian strategies
is sufficient for the standard MSE objective. A carefully
constructed Markovian strategy is able to induce the same
state distribution of any history-based (non-Markovian) one
by exploiting randomization. Crucially, this result does not
hold only for asymptotic state distributions, but also for state

