Selective Regression Under Fairness Criteria

Abhin Shah * 1 Yuheng Bu * 1 Joshua Ka-Wing Lee 2 Subhro Das 3 Rameswar Panda 3 Prasanna Sattigeri 3
Gregory W. Wornell 1

Abstract
Selective regression allows abstention from
prediction if the confidence to make an accurate
prediction is not sufficient. In general, by
allowing a reject option, one expects the
performance of a regression model to increase at
the cost of reducing coverage (i.e., by predicting
on fewer samples). However, as we show, in some
cases, the performance of a minority subgroup
can decrease while we reduce the coverage, and
thus selective regression can magnify disparities
between different sensitive subgroups. Motivated
by these disparities, we propose new fairness
criteria for selective regression requiring the
performance of every subgroup to improve with a
decrease in coverage. We prove that if a feature
representation satisfies the sufficiency criterion
or is calibrated for mean and variance, then
the proposed fairness criteria is met. Further,
we introduce two approaches to mitigate the
performance disparity across subgroups: (a) by
regularizing an upper bound of conditional mutual
information under a Gaussian assumption and (b)
by regularizing a contrastive loss for conditional
mean and conditional variance prediction. The
effectiveness of these approaches is demonstrated
on synthetic and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
As the adoption of machine learning (ML) based systems
accelerates in a wide range of applications, including
critical workflows such as healthcare management (Bellamy
et al., 2018), employment screening (Selbst et al., 2019),
automated loan processing, there is a renewed focus on the
*

Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
This work was done while J. Lee was at Massachusetts Institute
of Technology; the author is now with Snap 3 MIT-IBM Watson
AI Lab, IBM Research. Correspondence to: Abhin Shah
<abhin@mit.edu>, Yuheng Bu <buyuheng@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022.
Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

trustworthiness of such systems. An important attribute of a
trustworthy ML system is to reliably estimate the uncertainty
in its predictions. For example, consider a loan approval ML
system where the prediction task is to suggest appropriate
loan terms (e.g., loan approval, interest rate). If the model’s
uncertainty in its prediction is high for an applicant, the
prediction can be rejected to avoid potentially costly errors.
The users of the system, i.e., the decision-maker, can
intervene, and take remedial actions such as gathering more
information for applicants with rejected model predictions
or involving a special human credit committee before
arriving at a decision. This paradigm is known as prediction
with reject-option or selective prediction.
By making the tolerance for uncertainty more stringent,
the user expects the error rate of the predictions made by
the system to decrease as the system makes predictions for
fewer samples, i.e., as coverage is reduced. Although the
error may lessen over the entire population, (Jones et al.,
2020) demonstrated that for selective classification, this
may not be true for different sub-populations. In other
words, selective classification could magnify disparities
across different sensitive groups (e.g., race, gender). For
example, in the loan approval ML system, the error rate for
a sensitive group could increase with a decrease in coverage.
To mitigate such disparities, (Lee et al., 2021; Schreuder
& Chzhen, 2021) proposed methods for performing fair
selective classification.
In this work, we demonstrate and investigate the
performance disparities across different subgroups for
selective regression as well as develop novel methods to
mitigate such disparities. Similar to (Lee et al., 2021), we
do not assume access to the identity of sensitive groups
at test time. Compared to selective classification, one
major challenge to tackling the aforementioned disparities in
selective regression is as follows: in selective classification,
generating an uncertainty measure (i.e., the model’s
uncertainty for its prediction) from an existing classifier
is straightforward. For example, one could take the softmax
output of an existing classifier as an uncertainty measure. In
contrast, there is no direct method to extract an uncertainty
measure from an existing regressor designed only to predict
the conditional mean.

