Transfer and Marginalize: Explaining Away Label Noise with Privileged
Information
Mark Collier 1 Rodolphe Jenatton 1 Efi Kokiopoulou 1 Jesse Berent 1

Abstract
Supervised learning datasets often have privileged
information, in the form of features which are
available at training time but are not available at
test time e.g. the ID of the annotator that provided
the label. We argue that privileged information is
useful for explaining away label noise, thereby reducing the harmful impact of noisy labels. We develop a simple and efficient method for supervised
learning with neural networks: it transfers via
weight sharing the knowledge learned with privileged information and approximately marginalizes over privileged information at test time. Our
method, TRAM (TRansfer and Marginalize), has
minimal training time overhead and has the same
test-time cost as not using privileged information.
TRAM performs strongly on CIFAR-10H, ImageNet and Civil Comments benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning problems are typically formalized as
learning a conditional distribution p(y|x), y ∈ Y and x ∈
X from (xi , yi ), i = 1, ..., N pairs. Yet we often have
access to additional features a ∈ A at training time that will
not be available at test time. These features are known as
privileged information (Vapnik & Vashist, 2009), or PI for
short. An example of PI are features describing the human
annotator that provided a given label, such as the annotator
ID, the length of time to provide the label, the experience of
the annotator, etc. Annotators do not always agree on the
correct label for a given x, some annotators may be more
reliable than others and the reliability of annotators may
depend on the location of x in the input domain X (Snow
et al., 2008; Sheng et al., 2008).
The expanded training dataset consists of (xi , ai , yi )
triplets. Given that our test-time predictive distribution can1

Google AI. Correspondence to: Mark Collier <markcollier@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

not be conditioned on a, what use is this PI? As a thought
experiment, suppose there exists a malicious (or lazy) annotator that provides random labels. It is known that random
labels harm the performance of supervised learning models
(Frénay & Verleysen, 2013; Song et al., 2020; Cordeiro &
Carneiro, 2020). If these random labels can be explained
away via access to PI, such as the annotator ID, then this
harm can be prevented. In particular we can use the PI to
explain away noise in the labels which otherwise would be
irreducible aleatoric uncertainty.
More formally, suppose the PI a is predictive of y given
x, in the sense that the conditional mutual information
I(y; a|x) is non-zero. Then, the entropy of y is reduced
if we condition on both x and a rather than x alone, as
summarised in the intuitive Lemma 1.1.
Lemma 1.1. I(y; a|x) > 0 ⇒ H(y|x, a) < H(y|x).
In §2.1, we make the implication of this lemma crisper for
a particular model, proving that under certain conditions,
PI can be leveraged to lower the expected risk for linear
regression problems. Additionally, prior work has proven
that PI can lead to generalization bounds with better sample
complexity (Vapnik & Vashist, 2009; Lambert et al., 2018).
Inspired by prior work and our theoretical analysis of a
simple linear model, we focus on exploiting PI in supervised deep neural networks. The production deployment of
such models often has tight latency and memory constraints.
Hence a number of methods have been developed to utilize
PI with the same test time memory and computation cost
as networks trained without PI (Yang et al., 2017; Lambert
et al., 2018; Lopez-Paz et al., 2015). Yang et al. (2017)
uses PI as a form of input-dependent regularizer. Lambert
et al. (2018) train with heteroscedastic Gaussian dropout,
with the training-time dropout variance a function of the PI.
Lopez-Paz et al. (2015) distill a network trained with PI into
a network without access to a.
Below we develop a method, TRAM, which transfers knowledge via weight sharing from the part of the network trained
using PI to the test time network which does not have access
to PI. At test time, TRAM makes aR simple, efficient approximation to the integral p(y|x) = p(y|x, a)p(a|x)da.
Making predictions without PI is no more costly than that

