A Resilient Distributed Boosting Algorithm

Yuval Filmus * 1 Idan Mehalel * 1 Shay Moran * 2 3

Abstract
Given a learning task where the data is distributed
among several parties, communication is one
of the fundamental resources which the parties
would like to minimize. We present a distributed
boosting algorithm which is resilient to a limited
amount of noise. Our algorithm is similar to classical boosting algorithms, although it is equipped
with a new component, inspired by Impagliazzo’s
hard-core lemma (Impagliazzo, 1995), adding a
robustness quality to the algorithm. We also complement this result by showing that resilience to
any asymptotically larger noise is not achievable
by a communication-efficient algorithm.

Daumé, Phillips, Saha, and Venkatasubramanian, 2012b;
Kane, Livni, Moran, and Yehudayoff, 2019).
In this work we deviate from the realizable setting and allow
a small amount of noise in the input sample. In our setting
there are k players and a center, who are given a domain U
of size |U | = n and a concept class H over U with VC
dimension d ≪ n. For a labelled input sample S distributed
among the players, let OPT := OPT (S) ∈ N denote the
number of examples in S which are misclassified by the
best hypothesis in H. In most parts of the paper, we require
that OPT ∈ polylog n. The goal of the parties is to learn
together a classifier f that has at most OPT errors on S,
while using poly(d, k, log |S|, log n) bits of communication.
Note that log n is the number of bits needed to encode a
single point in U , and thus polylog n means polynomial in
the description length of a single example.1

1. Introduction
Most work in learning theory focuses on designing efficient
learning algorithms which generalize well. New considerations arise when the training data is spread among several
parties: speech recorded on different smartphones, medical data gathered from several clinics, and so on. In such
settings, it is important to minimize not only the computational complexity, but also the communication complexity.
Apart from practical considerations of limited bandwidth,
minimizing the communication complexity also limits the
amount of data being exposed to prying ears. This motivates
designing distributed learning algorithms, which improve
on the naive idea of sending all training data to a single
party.
In the classical PAC model, distributed learning has been
studied mostly in the realizable setting, where it was shown
that distributed implementations of boosting algorithms
can learn any VC class with communication complexity
which is polynomial in the description length (in bits) of a
single example (Balcan, Blum, Fine, and Mansour, 2012;
*
Equal contribution 1 The Henry and Marilyn Taub Faculty of
Computer Science, Technion, Haifa, Israel 2 Faculty of Mathematics, Technion, Haifa, Israel 3 Google Research, Israel. Correspondence to: Idan Mehalel <idanmehalel@cs.technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Main result. Our main result, formally stated in Theorems
2.2 and 2.3 asserts the following: for every VC class, if the
minimal error of an hypothesis satisfies OPT ∈ polylog n,
then a simple robust variant of classical boosting learns
it with poly(d, k, log |S|, log n) communication complexity. Conversely, when OPT ∈
/ polylog n, there exist onedimensional VC classes for which any learning algorithm
has super-polylogarithmic communication complexity.
The novelty of our algorithm lies in a non-standard usage
of boosting that identifies small “hard” sets for which any
hypothesis from the class has large error. This kind of usage resembles (and is inspired by) Impagliazzo’s hard-core
lemma (Impagliazzo, 1995), in particular its proof using the
method of multiplicative weights. Our negative result is a
slight extension of the argument appearing in (Kane, Livni,
Moran, and Yehudayoff, 2019).
We note that our positive result can alternatively be obtained
by a reduction to semi-agnostic learning (Bun, Kamath,
Steinke, and Wu, 2019), that is, agreeing on a classifier
with at most c · OPT errors for some constant c. Semiagnostic learning is possible using poly(d, k, log |S|, log n)
bits of communication by the works of Balcan, Blum,
1
We refer the reader to (Kane, Livni, Moran, and Yehudayoff,
2019; Braverman, Kol, Moran, and Saxena, 2019) for a more thorough discussion regarding the choice of polylog n as a “yardstick”
for communication efficiency.

