A Branch and Bound Framework
for Stronger Adversarial Attacks of ReLU Networks

Huan Zhang * 1 Shiqi Wang * 2 Kaidi Xu 3 Yihan Wang 4 Suman Jana 2 Cho-Jui Hsieh 4 Zico Kolter 1

Abstract
Strong adversarial attacks are important for evaluating the true robustness of deep neural networks.
Most existing attacks search in the input space,
e.g., using gradient descent, and may miss adversarial examples due to non-convexity. In this
work, we systematically search adversarial examples in the activation space of ReLU networks
to tackle hard instances where none of the existing adversarial attacks succeed. Unfortunately,
searching the activation space typically relies on
generic mixed integer programming (MIP) solvers
and is limited to small networks and easy problem
instances. To improve scalability and practicability, we use branch and bound (BaB) with specialized GPU-based bound propagation methods,
and propose a top-down beam-search approach
to quickly identify the subspace that may contain
adversarial examples. Moreover, we build an adversarial candidates pool using cheap attacks to
further assist the search in activation space via
diving techniques and a bottom-up large neighborhood search. Our adversarial attack framework,
BaB-Attack, opens up a new opportunity for designing novel adversarial attacks not limited to
searching the input space, and enables us to borrow techniques from integer programming theory
and neural network verification. In experiments,
we can successfully generate adversarial examples when existing attacks on input space fail.
Compared to off-the-shelf MIP solver based attacks that requires significant computations, we
outperform in both success rates and efficiency.

*
Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University 2 Columbia
University 3 Drexel University 4 UCLA. Correspondence
to: Huan Zhang <huan@huan-zhang.com>, Shiqi Wang
<sw3215@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Adversarial attacks aim to find adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013), which are close to benign inputs
in certain distance metrics yet trigger wrong behavior of neural networks (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Madry et al., 2018;
Athalye et al., 2018; Croce & Hein, 2020b). Adversarial
attacks are important tools to gauge the empirical robustness
of neural networks (NNs). Finding an adversarial example
can be generally formulated as a constrained optimization:
xadv = arg min f (x)

(1)

x∈C

where C is often an `∞ or `2 norm ball around the original
input x0 , and f (x) is an attack success criterion involving a
neural network (such as the margin between the groundtruth
class and another class): f (x) < 0 indicates a successful
attack. A straightforward way of solving Eq. (1) is via firstorder constrained optimization methods, such as projected
gradient descent (PGD) (Madry et al., 2018) and its variants (Croce & Hein, 2020b; Tashiro et al., 2020; Croce &
Hein, 2020a; Xie et al., 2019; Dong et al., 2018; Zheng
et al., 2019). Additionally, some gradient-free attacks were
proposed (Brendel et al., 2018; Cheng et al., 2018; Alzantot
et al., 2019; Andriushchenko et al., 2020), mostly based on
certain heuristic search on the input space x.
Are adversarial attacks a solved problem? Although it
is often easy to attack a model, the attack problem is far
from being completely solved. To precisely characterize the
robustness of a model, we must prove one of the following:
• There exists a x∗ ∈ C such that f (x∗ ) < 0 (attack)
• f (x) ≥ 0 for all x ∈ C (verification)
Unfortunately, even for small models, it can be hard to prove
either one of the two cases, leading to “unknown” robustness for some examples and a large gap between attack
accuracy and verified accuracy. The NN verification community has been working valiantly to close this gap, and
developed several strong verification tools recently (Bak
et al., 2021), allowing a precise characterization of NNs in
mission-critical tasks such as aircraft control (Katz et al.,
2017; 2019) and cyber-physical systems (Tran et al., 2020).
However, even for small models that can be well handled by
NN verifiers, there still exists hard instances which cannot

