Data Scaling Laws in NMT: The Effect of Noise and Architecture

Yamini Bansal 1 Behrooz Ghorbani 2 Ankush Garg 2 Biao Zhang 3 Maxim Krikun 2 Colin Cherry 2
Behnam Neyshabur 2 Orhan Firat 2

Abstract
In this work, we study the effect of varying the
architecture and training data quality on the data
scaling properties of Neural Machine Translation
(NMT). First, we establish that the test loss of
encoder-decoder transformer models scales as a
power law in the number of training samples, with
a dependence on the model size. Then, we systematically vary aspects of the training setup to understand how they impact the data scaling laws. In
particular, we change the following (1) Architecture and task setup: We compare to a transformerLSTM hybrid, and a decoder-only transformer
with a language modeling loss (2) Noise level
in the training distribution: We experiment with
filtering, and adding iid synthetic noise. In all
the above cases, we find that the data scaling exponents are minimally impacted, suggesting that
marginally worse architectures or training data
can be compensated for by adding more data.
Lastly, we find that using back-translated data
instead of parallel data, can significantly degrade
the scaling exponent.

1. Introduction
Scaling up the amount of data used for training has emerged
as a robust way to make progress on various tasks in
deep learning (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Brown et al., 2020;
Kolesnikov et al., 2020; Thoppilan et al., 2022). On the other
hand, research on new architectures and data filtering methods that beat fixed dataset benchmarks continues to grow.
However, it is unclear how many of these improvements in
the architecture & data quality translate to improvements in
the sample efficiency, or the rate with which these models
learn from increasing amounts of data.
1
School of Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard University, MA, USA. Work performed while interning at Google.
2
Google, USA 3 School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh.
Correspondence to: Yamini Bansal <ybansal@g.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Recent work (Hestness et al., 2017; Rosenfeld et al., 2019;
Kaplan et al., 2020) on scaling laws offers a useful tool
to answer this question — they show that the test loss of
a model scales predictably as a power law in the relevant
quantities of interest such as dataset size (D). Thus, the
sample efficiency of a training algorithm over many orders
of magnitudes of data can be captured succinctly with a
scaling law.
We take these findings a step further — we conduct a largescale study in Neural Machine Translation (NMT) to understand how different interventions to the training setup
impact the data scaling laws (See Figure 1 for a summary
of our results). In particular, we take the most common and
effective tools used to improve performance, architecture
and sources/quality of data, and investigate how changing
them affects the data scaling law. In particular, we make the
following contributions:
Our Contributions: We first establish that the test logperplexity of encoder-decoder transformer models trained
on an English → German translation task evolves as a
smooth function of the dataset size, with a dependence on
the model size (Figure 1A). We demonstrate that our scaling
law predicts experimental results over 3 orders of magnitude
of training examples ( (from 500K-512M sentence pairs) 1 .
Then, we systematically vary the following aspects of the
training setup to understand how they impact scaling laws:
Architecture: We compare encoder-decoder transformers of
different shapes, transformer-LSTM hybrids and decoderonly transformers. We also verify our results for a different
language pair (Chinese → English).
Data Source and Filtering: We consider two different data
sources with different data crawling approaches. We also
study the role of data filtering on sample efficiency by examining two different filtering algorithms, Bicleaner (Ramı́rezSánchez et al., 2020) and Contrastive Data Selection (CDS)
(Wang et al., 2018).
Synthetic Noise: We add synthetic iid noise to the source
(input) and the target (output) side separately.
Back-translation: We train with back-translated (BT) (Sennrich et al., 2016) data with varying BT model sizes.
1

Corresponding to 27.6 billion tokens.

