Information Discrepancy in Strategic Learning

Yahav Bechavod 1 Chara Podimata 2 Zhiwei Steven Wu 3 Juba Ziani 4

Abstract
We initiate the study of the effects of nontransparency in decision rules on individuals’ ability to improve in strategic learning settings. Inspired by real-life settings, such as loan approvals
and college admissions, we remove the assumption typically made in the strategic learning literature, that the decision rule is fully known to
individuals, and focus instead on settings where
it is inaccessible. In their lack of knowledge, individuals try to infer this rule by learning from
their peers (e.g., friends and acquaintances who
previously applied for a loan), naturally forming
groups in the population, each with possibly different type and level of information regarding
the decision rule. We show that, in equilibrium,
the principal’s decision rule optimizing welfare
across sub-populations may cause a strong negative externality: the true quality of some of the
groups can actually deteriorate. On the positive
side, we show that, in many natural cases, optimal
improvement can be guaranteed simultaneously
for all sub-populations. We further introduce a
measure we term information overlap proxy, and
demonstrate its usefulness in characterizing the
disparity in improvements across sub-populations.
Finally, we identify a natural condition under
which improvement can be guaranteed for all subpopulations while maintaining high predictive accuracy. We complement our theoretical analysis
with experiments on real-world datasets.

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University. 2 School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University. 3 School of Computer Science,
Carnegie Mellon University. 4 School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology.. Correspondence to: Yahav Bechavod <yahav.bechavod@cs.huji.ac.il>,
Chara Podimata <podimata@g.harvard.edu>, Zhiwei Steven Wu
<zstevenwu@cmu.edu>, Juba Ziani <jziani3@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms are increasingly used to make
consequential decisions across a variety of domains, including loan approvals, college admissions, probation qualifications, and hiring. Given the high stakes of these decisions,
individuals are incentivized to invest effort in changing their
attributes, to obtain more favorable decisions. The evidence
for such strategic adaptation from multiple domains (e.g.,
Björkegren et al. (2020); Dee et al. (2019); Dranove et al.
(2003); Greenstone et al. (2020); Gonzalez-Lira & Mobarak
(2019)) has inspired a growing literature on strategic learning that studies the interaction between learning algorithms
and strategic individuals (“agents”).
Models in the strategic learning literature, however, typically make a full transparency assumption—that is, the
agents fully observe the deployed scoring or decision rule
(Hardt et al., 2016; Dong et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020a;
Bechavod et al., 2021; Shavit et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2019;
Kleinberg & Raghavan, 2020). In the context of credit
scores, for example, this translates to the assumption that
individuals know the deployed credit scoring rule in full
detail. However, in reality, such a full-transparency assumption is often far-fetched, and as many credit scoring rules are
proprietary, banks or financial agencies rarely make their
machine learning model fully transparent to outsiders. Instead, they may only provide some labeled examples (e.g.,
past applicants who were granted loans) or explanations
(e.g., ways to improve one’s credit score).
As the actual scoring rule in effect is not directly observable,
agents naturally attempt to infer it using other sources of
information, which may differ greatly across different individuals. This is the case when the population is naturally
clustered (due to e.g., their demographic, geographic, and
cultural differences) and people have the tendency of observational learning (Bandura, 2008; Apesteguia et al., 2007;
Smith & Sørensen, 2000; Bikhchandani et al., 1998) —that
is, agents learn by observing others within their communities. For example, when applying for a loan at a specific
bank, individuals may learn from the past experiences of
their peers/friends (i.e., their applications and loan decisions) to gauge the decision rule. Hence, individuals from
different peer-networks may form different ideas about the
decision rule, which in turn can lead to disparities in strate-

