Conditional GANs with Auxiliary Discriminative Classifier

Liang Hou 1 2 Qi Cao 1 Huawei Shen 1 2 Siyuan Pan 3 Xiaoshuang Li 3 Xueqi Cheng 4 2

Abstract
Conditional generative models aim to learn the
underlying joint distribution of data and labels
to achieve conditional data generation. Among
them, the auxiliary classifier generative adversarial network (AC-GAN) has been widely used, but
suffers from the problem of low intra-class diversity of the generated samples. The fundamental
reason pointed out in this paper is that the classifier of AC-GAN is generator-agnostic, which
therefore cannot provide informative guidance for
the generator to approach the joint distribution,
resulting in a minimization of the conditional entropy that decreases the intra-class diversity. Motivated by this understanding, we propose a novel
conditional GAN with an auxiliary discriminative classifier (ADC-GAN) to resolve the above
problem. Specifically, the proposed auxiliary discriminative classifier becomes generator-aware
by recognizing the class-labels of the real data
and the generated data discriminatively. Our theoretical analysis reveals that the generator can
faithfully learn the joint distribution even without
the original discriminator, making the proposed
ADC-GAN robust to the value of the coefficient
hyperparameter and the selection of the GAN loss,
and stable during training. Extensive experimental results on synthetic and real-world datasets
demonstrate the superiority of ADC-GAN in conditional generative modeling compared to stateof-the-art classifier-based and projection-based
conditional GANs.

1

Data Intelligence System Research Center, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 4 CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Huawei Shen <shenhuawei@ict.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) have achieved substantial progress in learning high-dimensional, complex data distribution such as
images (Brock et al., 2019; Karras et al., 2019; 2020b;a;
Karras et al.). Standard GANs consist of a generator network, which transfers latent codes sampled from tractable
distributions such as Gaussian in the latent space to data
points in the data space, and a discriminator network, which
attempts to distinguish real data and generated data. The
generator is trained in an adversarial game against the discriminator so that it can learn the data distribution at the
Nash equilibrium. Remarkably, training GANs unconditionally is difficult to achieve equilibrium, making the generator
prone to mode collapse (Salimans et al., 2016; Lin et al.,
2018; Chen et al., 2019). In addition, practitioners are interested in being able to control in advance the content of
the generated samples (Yan et al., 2015; Tan et al., 2020) in
practical applications. A promising solution to these issues
is conditioning the generator, leading to conditional GANs.
Conditional GANs (cGANs) (Mirza & Osindero, 2014) is
a family of variants of GANs that leverages the side information from annotated labels of samples to implement
and train a conditional generator for conditional image generation from class-labels (Odena et al., 2017; Miyato &
Koyama, 2018; Brock et al., 2019). To implement the conditional generator, the common technique nowadays injects
the conditional information via conditional batch normalization (de Vries et al., 2017; Hou et al., 2021b). To train
the conditional generator, a lot of effort put into effectively
injecting the conditional information into the discriminator
or auxiliary classifier that guides the conditional generator (Odena, 2016; Miyato & Koyama, 2018; Zhou et al.,
2018; Kavalerov et al., 2021; Kang & Park, 2020; Zhou
et al., 2020). Among them, the auxiliary classifier generative adversarial network (AC-GAN) (Odena et al., 2017)
has been widely used due to its simplicity and extensibility.
Specifically, AC-GAN utilizes an auxiliary classifier that
first attempts to recognize the labels of data and then teaches
the generator to produce label-consistent (classifiable) data.
However, it has been reported that AC-GAN suffers from the
low intra-class diversity problem in the generated samples,
especially on datasets with a large number of classes (Odena
et al., 2017; Shu et al., 2017; Gong et al., 2019).

