Self-Supervised Learning with Random-Projection Quantizer
for Speech Recognition

Chung-Cheng Chiu * 1 James Qin * 1 Yu Zhang 1 Jiahui Yu 1 Yonghui Wu 1

Abstract
We present a simple and effective self-supervised
learning approach for speech recognition. The
approach learns a model to predict the masked
speech signals, in the form of discrete labels generated with a random-projection quantizer. In
particular the quantizer projects speech inputs
with a randomly initialized matrix, and does a
nearest-neighbor lookup in a randomly-initialized
codebook. Neither the matrix nor the codebook
is updated during self-supervised learning. Since
the random-projection quantizer is not trained and
is separated from the speech recognition model,
the design makes the approach flexible and is compatible with universal speech recognition architecture. On LibriSpeech our approach achieves similar word-error-rates as previous work using selfsupervised learning with non-streaming models,
and provides lower word-error-rates and latency
than wav2vec 2.0 and w2v-BERT with streaming
models. On multilingual tasks the approach also
provides significant improvement over wav2vec
2.0 and w2v-BERT.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning has shown impressive improvement for the quality of the speech recognition models in
recent years (Schneider et al., 2019; Baevski et al., 2020a;
2019; 2020b; Hsu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020; Chung
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021). These learning approach
enable the model to learn from unsupervised data and combine with supervised learning to improve the recognition
accuracy. The capability of learning from unsupervised data
is particularly beneficial when the supervised data is limited
*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Brain Team. Correspondence to: Chung-Cheng Chiu <chungchengc@google.com>,
James
Qin
<jamesqin@google.com>,
Yu
Zhang
<ngyuzh@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

and opens up new opportunities for low resource languages
and domains.
One common design principle of self-supervised learning
for speech recognition centers around learning representations. Inspired by the success of BERT (Devlin et al.,
2018), one research trend in the speech community is to
build BERT-inspired algorithms. One challenge in building BERT-style self-supervised learning for speech is to
bridge the gap between continuous speech signals and the
discrete text tokens, and a solution for addressing this issue is through learning speech representation (Schneider
et al., 2019; Baevski et al., 2020b) or learning quantized
representation (Baevski et al., 2020b;a; 2019; Hsu et al.,
2021; Chung et al., 2021). Many previous works proposed
effective algorithms for learning speech representations, and
the quantized result of those learned representations showed
encouraging correlation with the phoneme of the utterances.
While representation learning is a critical topic for the
speech field, combining it with self-supervised learning
leads to two limitations that can slow the research progress:
(1) Model architecture limitation. The integration of representation learning and self-supervised learning often requires the model to act the role of providing speech representation while still being effective for the downstream tasks.
An effective representation model, however, may not always
be effective for the downstream tasks. For example, a good
representation learning model may require accessing the
future context of the utterance, while downstream tasks may
require a low latency model which prohibits the access of
the future context. (2) Increased complexity. The objectives
of representation learning and self-supervised learning are
not always aligned, and the complexity of designing both algorithms and finding their balance can impede the research
development. This complexity can also motivate the field
toward designing more complicated algorithms instead of
finding a simple and effective alternative.
In this work we propose BERT-based Speech pre-Training
with Random-projection Quantizer (BEST-RQ), a simple
and effective self-supervised learning algorithm for speech
recognition. The algorithm masks speech signals and feeds
them to the encoder part of the speech recognition model,
and the encoder learns to predict the masked region based

