Guided-TTS: A Diffusion Model for Text-to-Speech via Classifier Guidance

Heeseung Kim * 1 Sungwon Kim * 1 Sungroh Yoon 1 2

Abstract
We propose Guided-TTS, a high-quality text-tospeech (TTS) model that does not require any
transcript of target speaker using classifier guidance. Guided-TTS combines an unconditional
diffusion probabilistic model with a separately
trained phoneme classifier for classifier guidance.
Our unconditional diffusion model learns to generate speech without any context from untranscribed
speech data. For TTS synthesis, we guide the
generative process of the diffusion model with a
phoneme classifier trained on a large-scale speech
recognition dataset. We present a norm-based scaling method that reduces the pronunciation errors
of classifier guidance in Guided-TTS. We show
that Guided-TTS achieves a performance comparable to that of the state-of-the-art TTS model,
Grad-TTS, without any transcript for LJSpeech.
We further demonstrate that Guided-TTS performs well on diverse datasets including a longform untranscribed dataset.

1. Introduction
Neural text-to-speech (TTS) models have been achieved to
generate high-quality human-like speech from given text
(van den Oord et al., 2016; Shen et al., 2018). In general,
TTS models are conditional generative models that encode
text into a hidden representation and generate speech from
the encoded representation. Early TTS models are autoregressive generative models that generate high-quality speech
but suffer from a slow synthesis speed due to the sequential sampling procedure (Shen et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019).
Owing to the development of non-autoregressive generative models, recent TTS models can generate high-quality
speech with faster inference speed (Ren et al., 2019; 2021;
Kim et al., 2020; Popov et al., 2021). Recently, high-quality
*
Equal contribution 1 Data Science and AI Lab., Seoul National
University 2 Department of ECE and Interdisciplinary Program in
AI, Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon
<sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

end-to-end TTS models have been proposed that generate
raw waveforms from text at once (Kim et al., 2021; Weiss
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021b).
Despite the high quality and fast inference speed of speech
synthesis, most TTS models can only be trained if the transcribed data of the target speaker are provided. Although
long-form untranscribed data, such as audiobooks or podcasts, is available on various websites, it is challenging to
use these speech data as training datasets for existing TTS
models. To utilize these untranscribed data, long-form untranscribed speech data has to be segmented into sentences,
and each segmented speech should then be accurately transcribed. Since the existing TTS models directly model the
conditional distribution of speech given text, the direct usage
of untranscribed data remains a challenge.
There have also been approaches using untranscribed speech
to adapt the pre-trained multi-speaker TTS model for fewshot TTS synthesis (Jia et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2021). These
adaptive TTS models rely heavily on a pre-trained multispeaker TTS model, which is challenging to train and requires high-quality multi-speaker TTS datasets. Also, due
to the difficulties of generalization, they underperform in
comparison to high-quality single-speaker TTS models such
as Glow-TTS and Grad-TTS (Kim et al., 2020; Popov et al.,
2021) trained on a large amount of transcribed data.
In this work, we propose Guided-TTS, a high-quality TTS
model that learns to generate speech with an unconditional
DDPM and performs text-to-speech synthesis using classifier guidance. By introducing a phoneme classifier trained
on a large-scale speech recognition dataset, Guided-TTS
does not use any transcript of the target speaker for TTS.
Trained on untranscribed data, our unconditional diffusion
probabilistic model learns to generate mel-spectrograms
without context. As the untranscribed data does not have to
be aligned with the text sequence, we simply use random
chunks of untranscribed speech to train our unconditional
generative model. This allows us to build training datasets
without extra effort in modeling the speech of speakers for
which only long-form untranscribed data is available.
To guide the unconditional DDPM for TTS, we train a framewise phoneme classifier on a large-scale speech recognition
dataset, LibriSpeech, and use the gradient of the classifier
during sampling. Although our unconditional generative

