Unsupervised Image Representation Learning with Deep Latent Particles

Tal Daniel 1 Aviv Tamar 1

Abstract
We propose a new representation of visual data
that disentangles object position from appearance.
Our method, termed Deep Latent Particles (DLP),
decomposes the visual input into low-dimensional
latent “particles”, where each particle is described
by its spatial location and features of its surrounding region. To drive learning of such representations, we follow a VAE-based approach and
introduce a prior for particle positions based on
a spatial-softmax architecture, and a modification of the evidence lower bound loss inspired
by the Chamfer distance between particles. We
demonstrate that our DLP representations are useful for downstream tasks such as unsupervised
keypoint (KP) detection, image manipulation, and
video prediction for scenes composed of multiple
dynamic objects. In addition, we show that our
probabilistic interpretation of the problem naturally provides uncertainty estimates for particle
locations, which can be used for model selection,
among other tasks. Videos and code are available: https://taldatech.github.io/
deep-latent-particles-web/.

1. Introduction
The spatial positions of various parts of an image contain
useful information for decision making. Examples include
the positions of objects in video games (Smirnov et al.,
2021), rigid object poses in robotic manipulation (Byravan
& Fox, 2017), and image landmarks for human pose estimation (Jakab et al., 2018a). This observation motivates us to
seek image representations where position is disentangled
from other visual properties of objects in the scene.
In different image types, however, the definition of objects
and their positions may vary (e.g., contrast the position
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion
- Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to:
Tal Daniel <taldanielm@campus.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of facial parts such as eyes and nose with the position of
computer game sprites), leading us to pursue an unsupervised approach, where representations are data-dependent.
In particular, we follow the generative approach – learn to
reconstruct an image from its disentangled latent representation (Burgess et al., 2019).
This problem has recently gained attention in the variational
autoencoding (VAE) literature, motivated by the observation that the typical single-vector representation of the entire
scene has issues in scenes with multiple, varying number
of objects. A common remedy is decomposing the scene
into a pre-determined number of objects (Burgess et al.,
2019; Watters et al., 2019; Kipf et al., 2019), and then learning a separate representation for each object. The main
caveats with these methods are their strong assumptions
on the number of objects, and their complexity, as the object discovery process is usually iterative and initializationdependent (Burgess et al., 2019; Kipf et al., 2019).
An alternative representation is based on object landmarks,
or keypoints, an idea that dates back to classical computer
vision (Lowe, 1999). A keypoint (KP) representation is an
unordered set of geometrical points (i.e., (x, y) locations
in 2D scenes and (x, y, z) in 3D scenes). Several recent
works investigated learning keypoints with deep learning
methods (Jakab et al., 2018a; Thewlis et al., 2017a; Zhang
et al., 2018; Lorenz et al., 2019; Dundar et al., 2021), exploiting the translational-invariance and spatial-locality of
convolutional-based architectures. Predominantly, Jakab
et al. (2018a) apply the spatial-softmax over feature maps
extracted from a convolutional neural network (CNN) to
determine the location of the keypoints. This idea became a
building block in other methods that use KP for downstream
tasks (Kulkarni et al., 2019; Gopalakrishnan et al., 2020;
Boney et al., 2021; He et al., 2021), and has proven to be a
promising alternative to the single-vector representation.
In this work, we propose a new representation method that
draws inspiration from both KP and VAEs. Our idea is to
view the keypoints themselves as the latent space of the VAE.
To sufficiently capture image information, we accompany
each KP with a set of features to describe the content in its
vicinity, and refer to it as a “particle”. Our method, termed
Deep Latent Particles (DLP), inherits favorable traits from
the VAE approach, such as a natural decoding scheme for

