Model Selection in Batch Policy Optimization

Jonathan N. Lee 1 2 George Tucker 2 Ofir Nachum 2 Bo Dai 2

Abstract
We study the problem of model selection in
batch policy optimization: given a fixed, partialfeedback dataset and M model classes, learn a
policy with performance that is competitive with
the policy derived from the best model class. We
formalize the problem in the contextual bandit
setting with linear model classes by identifying
three sources of error that any model selection
algorithm should optimally trade off in order to
be competitive: (1) approximation error, (2) statistical complexity, and (3) coverage. The first
two sources are common in model selection for
supervised learning, where optimally trading off
these two is well-studied. In contrast, the third
source is unique to batch policy optimization and
is due to dataset shift inherent to the setting. We
first show that no batch policy optimization algorithm can achieve a guarantee addressing all three
simultaneously, revealing a stark contrast between
difficulties in batch policy optimization and the
positive results available in supervised learning.
Despite this negative result, we show that relaxing any one of the three error sources enables
the design of algorithms achieving near-oracle inequalities for the remaining two. We conclude
with experiments demonstrating the efficacy of
these algorithms.

1. Introduction
Model selection and hyperparameter tuning are fundamental
tasks in supervised learning and statistical learning theory.
In these settings, given a model class, the standard goal is
to minimize risk, which can always be decomposed as a
sum of approximation error (i.e., bias) and estimation error (i.e., variance) of the model class. A trade-off between
these two often exists: a large model class may require a
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, USA
Google Research, Mountain View, USA. Correspondence to:
Jonathan N. Lee <jnl@stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

lot of data for generalization while a small one may suffer
from large approximation error. At its core, model selection describes the problem of choosing a model class so as
to automatically balance these quantities. A vast literature
exists on algorithms and selection rules – such as hold-out
methods, cross-validation, and structural risk minimization
– that nearly optimally achieve this trade-off in supervised
learning (Massart, 2007; Lugosi & Nobel, 1999; Bartlett
et al., 2002; Bartlett, 2008). That is, one can select a model
class from a collection that nearly matches the performance
of the best model class. The implications in practice have
been equally, if not more, impactful as evidenced by the
widespread use of model validation and selection in machine
learning applications, where methods like cross-validation
on held-out data are standard and essential steps for practitioners.
In recent years, interest has turned to model selection in
online bandits and reinforcement learning (Agarwal et al.,
2017; Foster et al., 2019; Pacchiano et al., 2020; Lee et al.,
2021; Modi et al., 2020; Chatterji et al., 2020; Muthukumar & Krishnamurthy, 2021; Ghosh et al., 2021). However, in contrast to the extensive understanding of model
selection in supervised learning and the growing literature
in online learning, relatively little is known about model
selection in the context of batch (or offline) bandits and reinforcement learning. Batch policy optimization, or offline
policy optimization, is a promising paradigm for learning
decision-making policies by leveraging large datasets of interactions with the environment (Lange et al., 2012; Levine
et al., 2020). The goal is for the learner to find a good policy without interacting with the environment in an online
fashion so as to avoid dangerous or costly deployments of
sub-optimal policies. While a number of works provide
theoretically sample-efficient algorithms for batch policy
optimization (Munos & Szepesvári, 2008; Jin et al., 2019;
Nachum et al., 2019b; Liu et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2021), their
effectiveness in practice has been limited due to the lack of
tools for validation and selection when faced with multiple
options for model classes or hyperparameter settings.
It is clear that a need exists in batch policy optimization for
an analogue to methods like cross-validation in supervised
learning. Traditionally, this need has motivated a large body
of literature dedicated to the problem of batch policy evaluation (e.g., (Precup, 2000; Jiang & Li, 2016; Nachum et al.,

