Mitigating Modality Collapse in Multimodal VAEs
via Impartial Optimization

Adrián Javaloy 1 Maryam Meghdadi 1 Isabel Valera 1 2

Abstract
A number of variational autoencoders (VAEs)
have recently emerged with the aim of modeling multimodal data, e.g., to jointly model images
and their corresponding captions. Still, multimodal VAEs tend to focus solely on a subset of
the modalities, e.g., by fitting the image while
neglecting the caption. We refer to this limitation as modality collapse. In this work, we argue
that this effect is a consequence of conflicting
gradients during multimodal VAE training. We
show how to detect the sub-graphs in the computational graphs where gradients conflict (impartiality blocks), as well as how to leverage existing gradient-conflict solutions from multitask
learning to mitigate modality collapse. That is, to
ensure impartial optimization across modalities.
We apply our training framework to several multimodal VAE models, losses and datasets from the
literature, and empirically show that our framework significantly improves the reconstruction
performance, conditional generation, and coherence of the latent space across modalities.

multimodal data (Shi et al., 2019; Sutter et al., 2021) have
emerged over the years. Interestingly, Nazabal et al. (2020)
hypothesized that modality collapse is a result of the disparities between gradients across modalities during training.
Following this inkling, we study modality collapse as a
result of gradient conflicts in specific blocks of the computational graph, which we here call impartiality blocks (§3). To
address this problem, we propose a multimodal VAE training pipeline, which leverages existing multitask learning
solutions (§3.1) to favor an impartial optimization process
that does not favor a subset of modalities over the rest. We
show the flexibility of our approach by applying our pipeline
to several existing VAE models previously proposed in the
literature to fit multimodal and tabular data (§4). Our empirical results on different datasets, models and training
losses (§5) show that impartial optimization results in a
more accurate fit of the marginal, joint and conditional distributions over all modalities.
Notation. We use the set indexing notation xA , where A
is a set of indexes, e.g., Z1:K denotes a sequence from 1
to K. We denote by 1 a vector full of ones, and by [·] the
concatenation operator. P(D) denotes the power-set of D
elements, and |A| the number of elements of the set A.

1. Introduction

2. Preliminaries

Variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014)
enjoy great success in domains such as images, text, and temporal data (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020; Xu et al., 2017; Mehrasa
et al., 2019). Their application to multimodal data, e.g., to
model images and their captions, remains a challenge, since
models tend to accurately fit only a subset of the modalities, neglecting the rest. We here refer to this problem as
modality collapse.

Multimodal data. In this work, we consider multimodal
data, i.e., data coming from different sources and/or forms.
Specifically, we consider as input data i.i.d.
 samples from

a multimodal random variable (r.v.) X = x1 , x2 , . . . , xD ,
where the d-th modality is fully described by the r.v. xd .
Note that we do not make any assumptions on the modalities,
allowing for xd of different sizes (e.g., images and their
labels) and types (e.g., continuous vs. discrete).

To overcome this issue, a number of tailored VAE models for tabular (Nazabal et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2020) and

We refer to X as heterogeneous when each modality xd
in X is unidimensional and can be of a different statistical type (e.g., normal or categorical). Thus, we consider
heterogeneous data as a special case of multimodal data.
Notice however that in the literature heterogeneous data is
often studied independently (e.g., Nazabal et al. (2020); Ma
et al. (2020)) of multimodal problems, and it is prominent
in applications that deal with real-world tabular data.

1

Department of Computer Science, Saarland University, Germany 2 MPI for Software Systems, Saarland, Germany. Correspondence to: Adrián Javaloy <ajavaloy@cs.uni-saarland.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

