Particle Transformer for Jet Tagging

Huilin Qu 1 Congqiao Li 2 Sitian Qian 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Machine learning has revolutionized how large-scale data
samples are analyzed in particle physics and greatly increased the discovery potential for new fundamental laws
of nature (Radovic et al., 2018). Specifically, deep learning
has transformed how jet tagging, a critical classification
task at high-energy particle colliders such as the CERN
LHC, is performed, leading to a drastic improvement in its
performance (Kogler et al., 2019; Larkoski et al., 2020).
1

2

CERN, Geneva, Switzerland School of Physics, Peking
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Huilin Qu
<huilin.qu@cern.ch>, Congqiao Li <licongqiao@pku.edu.cn>,
Sitian Qian <stqian@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

outgoing particles

ϕ
η

collision point

Δϕ

Jet tagging is a critical yet challenging classification task in particle physics. While deep learning
has transformed jet tagging and significantly
improved performance, the lack of a large-scale
public dataset impedes further enhancement.
In this work, we present J ET C LASS, a new
comprehensive dataset for jet tagging. The
J ET C LASS dataset consists of 100 M jets, about
two orders of magnitude larger than existing
public datasets. A total of 10 types of jets are
simulated, including several types unexplored for
tagging so far. Based on the large dataset, we
propose a new Transformer-based architecture for
jet tagging, called Particle Transformer (ParT).
By incorporating pairwise particle interactions in
the attention mechanism, ParT achieves higher
tagging performance than a plain Transformer
and surpasses the previous state-of-the-art,
ParticleNet, by a large margin. The pre-trained
ParT models, once fine-tuned, also substantially
enhance the performance on two widely adopted
jet tagging benchmarks. The dataset, code and
models are publicly available at https:
//github.com/jet-universe/
particle_transformer.

proton beams

collision event

H

?

W

?

Z

?

t

?

Δη

……

jet reconstruction

jet tagging

Figure 1. Illustration of jet tagging at the CERN LHC. High-energy
proton-proton collisions at the LHC can produce new unstable particles that decay and yield a collimated spray of outgoing particles.
These outgoing particles are measured by complex particle detector systems, and jets can be built (“reconstructed”) from these
measured particles. The goal of jet tagging is to classify the jets
and identify those arising from particles of high interest, e.g., the
Higgs boson, the W or Z boson, or the top quark.

At the CERN LHC, two beams of protons are accelerated to
nearly the speed of light and made to collide at a frequency
of 40 million times per second (40 MHz). Such high-energy
collisions can create new unstable particles, which then decay and produce sprays of outgoing particles. Complex
detector systems, such as the general-purpose ATLAS (ATLAS Collaboration, 2008) and CMS (CMS Collaboration,
2008) detectors with O(100 M) individual sensors of various types, are used to measure the positions, trajectories,
energies, and momenta of the outgoing particles. From these
measurements, an event is reconstructed for each collision.
The primary goal in the analysis of the collision data is to
identify events involving novel physics processes, an example of which is the discovery of the Higgs boson (ATLAS
Collaboration, 2012; CMS Collaboration, 2012).
A crucial step in the data analysis process is jet tagging. A
jet refers to a collimated spray of outgoing particles. Jet
tagging is the process of identifying the type of particle
that initiates a jet. It is essentially a classification task that
aims to distinguish jets arising from particles of interest,
such as the Higgs boson or the top quark, from other less
interesting types of jets. Jet tagging is a challenging task
because the particle initiating a jet can radiate, and the

