Implicit Regularization with Polynomial Growth in Deep Tensor Factorization

Kais Hariz 1 2 Hachem Kadri 1 Stéphane Ayache 1 Maher Moakher 2 Thierry Artières 1 3

Abstract
We study the implicit regularization effects of
deep learning in tensor factorization. While implicit regularization in deep matrix and ‘shallow’
tensor factorization via linear and certain type of
non-linear neural networks promotes low-rank solutions with at most quadratic growth, we show
that its effect in deep tensor factorization grows
polynomially with the depth of the network. This
provides a remarkably faithful description of the
observed experimental behaviour. Using numerical experiments, we demonstrate the benefits of
this implicit regularization in yielding a more accurate estimation and better convergence properties.

1. Introduction
A major challenge in deep learning is to understand the
underlying mechanisms behind the ability of deep neural
networks to generalize. This is of fundamental importance
to reconcile the observation that deep neural networks generalize well even for situations where the number of learnable
parameters is much larger than the number of training data.
Starting with the report by (Neyshabur et al., 2014), a body
of work has emerged exploring the role of implicit regularization in deep learning (Gunasekar et al., 2017; Arora
et al., 2019; Kumar & Poole, 2020; Razin & Cohen, 2020;
Li et al., 2021; Razin et al., 2021; Milanesi et al., 2021;
Zou et al., 2021). Our work contributes to this effort by
providing insight into the behaviour of implicit regularization in deep tensor factorization where we focus on deep
versions of canonical rank and Canonical-Polyadic (CP)
factorizations (Kolda & Bader, 2009).
Attempts of studying implicit regularization in deep learn1

ing have identified matrix completion as a suitable testbed (Arora et al., 2019). Gunasekar et al. (2017) observed
that for matrix factorization when there are no constraints on
the rank, the solution of the optimization problem via gradient descent turns out to be a low-rank matrix. Furthermore,
they conjectured that, with small enough learning rate and
initialization, gradient descent on full-dimensional matrix
factorization converges to the solution with minimal nuclear
norm. Arora et al. (2019) and Razin & Cohen (2020) extended the analysis to deep matrix factorization and showed
in this case that implicit regularization of gradient descent
cannot be formulated as a norm-minimization problem. By
studying the dynamics of gradient descent, they found theoretically and experimentally that it instead promotes sparsity
of the singular values of the learned matrix, indicating that
implicit regularization in deep learning has to be studied
from a dynamical point of view. Moreover, Razin et al.
(2021) studied implicit regularization in ‘shallow’ tensor
decomposition and showed an equivalence between a tensor
completion task and a prediction problem with a nonlinear
neural network, stressing the interest of studying the tensor
completion task.
Our main contributions focus on implicit regularization in
deep Canonical-Polyadic tensor factorization and can be
summarized as follows:
• we prove that the effect of the implicit regularization
in deep tensor CP factorization via gradient descent
grows polynomially with the depth of the factorization (Theorem 3.2),
• we theoretically show under some conditions that this
effect in the overparameterized regime leads to produce
solutions with low tensor rank (Theorem 3.3),
• we perform numerical experiments that support our
theoretical results, illustrating that the implicit regularization could yield more accurate estimations and
better convergence properties (Section 5).

Aix Marseille University, CNRS, LIS, Marseille, France
LAMSIN, National Engineering School of Tunis, University of
Tunis El Manar, Tunis, Tunisia 3 Ecole Centrale de Marseille, Marseille, France. Correspondence to: Kais Hariz <kais.hariz@univamu.fr>, Hachem Kadri <hachem.kadri@univ-amu.fr>.

2. Problem Setup and Background

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

We study implicit regularization in deep tensor factorization,
and so we consider the problem of tensor completion with
overparameterized factorization. By ‘overparameterized’

2

