Learning-based Optimisation of Particle Accelerators Under Partial
Observability Without Real-World Training

Jan Kaiser * 1 Oliver Stein * 1 Annika Eichler 1

Abstract
In recent work, it has been shown that reinforcement learning (RL) is capable of solving a variety
of problems at sometimes super-human performance levels. But despite continued advances in
the field, applying RL to complex real-world control and optimisation problems has proven difficult.
In this contribution, we demonstrate how to successfully apply RL to the optimisation of a highly
complex real-world machine – specifically a linear
particle accelerator – in an only partially observable setting and without requiring training on the
real machine. Our method outperforms conventional optimisation algorithms in both the achieved
result and time taken as well as already achieving
close to human-level performance. We expect that
such automation of machine optimisation will push
the limits of operability, increase machine availability and lead to a paradigm shift in how such
machines are operated, ultimately facilitating advances in a variety of fields, such as science and
medicine among many others.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been shown in various
contributions as a potent method for solving complex tasks
at super-human performance levels that were previously
thought beyond the ability of computers (Silver et al., 2016;
Badia et al., 2020). Furthermore, RL methods promise to
find solutions faster for problems previously solved using
classical optimisation algorithms by moving exploration
from run time to design time. The application of RL to complex real-world tasks has however proven challenging (Irpan,
2018; Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019) for reasons such as the
complexity of real-world tasks and sample efficiency.
* Equal contribution 1 Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY,
Notkestr. 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany. Correspondence to: Jan
Kaiser <jan.kaiser@desy.de>.

Proceedings of the 39t h International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Particle accelerators are an excellent example of a highimpact real-world application where RL can make a meaningful difference. Among the most advanced machines of
our time, particle accelerators find use in many applications
such as fundamental physics research, cancer treatment, the
development of vaccines and drugs as well as the development and production of novel materials enabling for example for carbon-neutral transportation. These applications
place strict requirements on the electron or photon beam delivered by the accelerator. Tuning accelerators to fulfil these
requirements has historically been a challenging and difficult to automate task. As a result, accelerators continue to
be tuned mostly manually by experienced human operators.
Manual tuning is a lengthy process with hundreds of hours a
year spent on tuning and therefore not available for productive operation at some facilities. Furthermore, the quality of
the machine setup after tuning depends significantly on the
operators’ experience, limiting their reproducibility. Effective automation of accelerator tuning and optimisation has
the potential to allow for faster tuning, make results easier
to reproduce and possibly push the limits of accelerator operability. With the help of capable methods such as RL it is
hoped that steps can be taken toward autonomous accelerators (Eichler et al., 2021) where operators no longer adjust
actuators until a machine setup is achieved, but can instead
define a desired setup that is then autonomously configured.
In this work, we demonstrate the application of RL to a realworld optimisation problem from a tuning task performed in
regular operation of a linear particle accelerator. We show
the trained RL agent’s ability to solve the highly non-linear
task under partial observability. Our solution achieves better results than classical optimisation algorithms and close
to those achieved by experienced human operators. The
RL agents manage to achieve these results in just a few
steps, taking less time than human operators to perform the
optimisation despite the RL agents being limited by slow
hardware present on the particular real machine considered
in this contribution. These excellent results are achieved on
the real accelerator, using a 5-dimensional continuous action space, having trained fully in simulation and therefore
without requiring any machine time for training. The transfer from simulation to machine is enabled by the inclusion
of model errors into the simulation for a robust RL agent.

