Human-in-the-loop: Provably Efficient Preference-based Reinforcement
Learning with General Function Approximation

Xiaoyu Chen * 1 Han Zhong * 2 3 Zhuoran Yang 4 Zhaoran Wang 5 Liwei Wang 1 2

Abstract
We study human-in-the-loop reinforcement learning (RL) with trajectory preferences, where instead of receiving a numeric reward at each step,
the RL agent only receives preferences over trajectory pairs from a human overseer. The goal
of the RL agent is to learn the optimal policy
which is most preferred by the human overseer.
Despite the empirical successes, the theoretical
understanding of preference-based RL (PbRL) is
only limited to the tabular case. In this paper,
we propose the first optimistic model-based algorithm for PbRL with general function approximation, which estimates the model using valuetargeted regression and calculates the exploratory
policies by solving an optimistic planning problem. We prove that our algorithm
√ achieves the
regret bound of Õ(poly(dH) K), where d is
the complexity measure of the transition and preference model depending on the Eluder dimension
and log-covering numbers, H is the planning horizon, K is the number of episodes, and Õ(·) omits
logarithmic terms. Our lower bound indicates that
our algorithm is near-optimal when specialized
to the linear setting. Furthermore, we extend the
PbRL problem by formulating a novel problem
called RL with n-wise comparisons, and provide
the first sample-efficient algorithm for this new
setting. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first theoretical result for PbRL with (general)
function approximation.
*
Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking
University 2 Center for Data Science, Peking University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory 4 Department of Statistics and Data
Science, Yale University 5 Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University.
Correspondence to: Xiaoyu Chen <cxy30@pku.edu.cn>,
Han Zhong <hanzhong@stu.pku.edu.cn>, Zhuoran Yang
<zhuoran.yang@yale.edu>,
Zhaoran Wang <zhaoranwang@gmail.com>, Liwei Wang <wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is concerned with sequential
decision-making problems in which the agent interacts with
the environment to maximize its cumulative rewards. This
framework has achieved tremendous successes in various
fields such as Atari games (Mnih et al., 2013), Go (Silver
et al., 2017), and StarCraft (Vinyals et al., 2019). While
these empirical successes are encouraging, one limitation
of the standard RL paradigm is that the learning algorithms
and the policies crucially depend on the prior knowledge
encoded in the definition of the reward function. In many
real-world applications such as autonomous driving, healthcare, and robotics, reward functions might not be readily
available or difficult to design, which leads to well-known
challenges such as reward shaping (Ng et al., 1999) and
reward hacking (Amodei et al., 2016; Berkenkamp et al.,
2021).
If we have enough demonstrations of the desired task, one
possible solution to address the above problems is to extract
a reward function using inverse reinforcement learning (Ng
et al., 2000; Abbeel & Ng, 2004). This reward function
can be further used to train an agent with reinforcement
learning algorithms. More directly, we can use imitation
learning (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Hussein et al., 2017; Osa
et al., 2018) to clone the demonstrated behavior. However,
these approaches are not applicable to situations where the
demonstration data from experts are expensive to obtain, or
behaviors are difficult for humans to demonstrate.
Another popular alternative to handle the lack of reward
functions is called Preference-based Reinforcement Learning (PbRL) (Busa-Fekete et al., 2014; Wirth et al., 2017). In
PbRL, instead of observing the reward information on the
encountered state-action pairs, the agent only receives 1 bit
preference feedback over a trajectory pair from an expert or
a human overseer. Such preference feedback is often more
natural and straightforward to specify in many RL applications, especially those involving human evaluations. This
learning paradigm has been widely applied to multiple areas,
including robot training (Jain et al., 2013; 2015; Christiano
et al., 2017), game playing (Wirth & Fürnkranz, 2012; 2014)
and clinical trials (Zhao et al., 2011).

