Linearity Grafting: Relaxed Neuron Pruning Helps Certifiable Robustness

Tianlong Chen * 1 Huan Zhang * 2 Zhenyu Zhang 1 Shiyu Chang 3
Sijia Liu 4 5 Pin-Yu Chen 5 6 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract
Certifiable robustness is a highly desirable property for adopting deep neural networks (DNNs)
in safety-critical scenarios, but often demands
tedious computations to establish. The main hurdle lies in the massive amount of non-linearity
in large DNNs. To trade off the DNN expressiveness (which calls for more non-linearity) and
robustness certification scalability (which prefers
more linearity), we propose a novel solution to
strategically manipulate neurons, by “grafting”
appropriate levels of linearity. The core of our
proposal is to first linearize insignificant ReLU
neurons, to eliminate the non-linear components
that are both redundant for DNN performance
and harmful to its certification. We then optimize the associated slopes and intercepts of the
replaced linear activations for restoring model performance while maintaining certifiability. Hence,
typical neuron pruning could be viewed as a special case of grafting a linear function of the fixed
zero slopes and intercept, that might overly restrict the network flexibility and sacrifice its performance. Extensive experiments on multiple
datasets and network backbones show that our
linearity grafting can (1) effectively tighten certified bounds; (2) achieve competitive certifiable
robustness without certified robust training (i.e.,
over 30% improvements on CIFAR-10 models);
and (3) scale up complete verification to large adversarially trained models with 17M parameters.
Codes are available at https://github.com/
VITA-Group/Linearity-Grafting.

1
University of Texas at Austin 2 Carnegie Mellon University
University of California, Santa Barbara 4 Michigan State University 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 6 IBM Research. Corresponding to:
Zhangyang Wang <atlaswang@utexas.edu>. * Equal contribution.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Despite the prevailing successes of deep neural networks
(DNNs), they remain vulnerable to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013). Therefore, certifying whether
a DNN is provably robust under all bounded input perturbations are crucial for adopting DNNs in high-stake and
safety-critical applications. To obtain non-trivial certified
robust accuracy, certified adversarial defense (Raghunathan
et al., 2018a; Wong & Kolter, 2018; Mirman et al., 2018;
Gowal et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019b) which minimize a
certifiable loss during training, and robustness verification
methods (Gehr et al., 2018; Dvijotham et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021) which compute tight certified bounds for post-training networks serve as the most
effective two approaches.
However, several pain points persist for these two mechanisms: (i) As DNNs grow larger (e.g., dozens of layers),
(complete) verification can be extremely time-consuming
and computationally expensive due to the massive nonlinearity in activation functions like ReLU. For ReLU networks under input perturbations, the ReLU neurons whose
inputs may cross zero (referred to as “unstable” neurons) are
often the key factor to determine the difficulty of verification. Current solutions like linear relaxations (Zhang et al.,
2018; Singh et al., 2019b), semidefinite relaxations (Raghunathan et al., 2018b) or Branch and Bound (BaB) (Bunel
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2021) suffer from either trivially
loose bounds or exponentially increased complexity for
large-scale networks. (ii) Many certified robust training
methods (Mirman et al., 2018; Gowal et al., 2018; Wong
et al., 2018; Balunovic & Vechev, 2019) tend to reduce nonlinearity ( “unstable” ReLU neurons) to improve certifiable
robustness. For example, many certified defense approaches
tend increase the number of “inactive” neurons (ReLU neurons with negative inputs and zero output) for tightening
bounds (Shi et al., 2021). This often leads to reduced standard accuracy, and in order to stably train a network with
certified defense, a much longer training schedule is often
required: e.g., Xu et al. (2020a) used 2, 000 epochs and
Zhang et al. (2019b) used 3, 200 epochs for training a convolutional neural network on CIFAR-10 to state-of-the-art
certified performance, much longer than conventionally adversarial training (100 ∼ 200 epochs) (Madry et al., 2018).

