A Difference Standardization Method for Mutual Transfer Learning

Haoqing Xu 1 Meng Wang 1 2 Beilun Wang 1 2 *

Abstract
In many real-world applications, mutual transfer learning is the paradigm that each data domain can potentially be a source or target domain. This is quite different from transfer learning tasks where the source and target are known
a priori. However, previous studies about mutual
transfer learning either suffer from high computational complexity or oversimplified hypothesis.
To overcome these challenges, in this paper, we
propose the Difference Standardization method
(DiffS) for mutual transfer learning. Specifically,
we put forward a novel distance metric between
domains, the standardized domain difference, to
obtain fast structure recovery and accurate parameter estimation simultaneously. We validate the
method’s performance using both synthetic and
real-world data. Compared to previous methods,
DiffS demonstrates a speed-up of approximately
3000 times that of similar methods and achieves
the same accurate learnability structure estimation.

1. Introduction
In various real-world applications, it is a common practice
to take advantage of domain-specific knowledge in a source
domain to improve the performance in a target domain,
which is called transfer learning (Zhuang et al., 2020). For
example, human beings could transfer the knowledge about
how to play the violin into playing the piano, or learn to
drive a car using the experience when riding a bicycle. In
transfer learning, the source domains and target domain are
usually specified as a priori.
However, nowadays there are a growing amount of big data
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of Computer
Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China. * Correspondence to: Beilun Wang
<beilun@seu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

applications. Such transferring scenario can not be easily
applied in those data collections. As an example, climate
analysis (Vose et al., 2014) utilizes a collection of data sets
recorded in different time periods, different places or different devices. Due to the variety of the distributions in
these data sets, they are split into different data domains. In
this case, every data domain could possibly be the target domain depending on their inherent characteristics. The source
and target domains are hence not known a priori. Transfer
learning strategy may apply to such a task but it will suffer
from exponential explosion problem since it needs to try
every pair of source and target domains. As a result, mutual
transfer learning was proposed by (Cheng et al., 2020) in
order to efficiently resolve the problem. In mutual transfer
learning, every data domain is considered to be a candidate
source domain or target domain. Since some of the domains
are more related with each other, there exists several domain subgroups. Mutual transfer learning aims to reveal
such subgroup structure, or called the learnability structure,
within the data collection. Although mutual transfer learning precisely define the features in such Big Data tasks, it
also encounters several challenges:
(1) Large-scale setting: In a real-world scenario, data scale
grows exponentially, e.g., the number of domains, sample
size of each domain and feature dimension. In the NOAA’s
nClimDiv Database, there have been more than 500,000
samples recorded monthly ever since 1895 coming from
hundreds of data domains. If we need daily or even hourly
predictions, the scale would be further enlarged by hundreds
of times. The large-scale setting leads to extremely long
time cost or even infeasibility for some methods. (2) Mixedeffects heterogeneity: In mutual transfer learning tasks,
some features may have the same effect on the response
among different domains, which are called the global features. Yet, there may exist some features that behave differently in various domains. These features can be called the
heterogeneous features. Global and heterogeneous features
may simultaneously exist in real-world data. To illustrate,
in user preference modeling (Aaker et al., 2013; Lenk et al.,
1996), the low price may attract every consumer while a
nice appearance of the product may be only appreciated by
part of people.
One approach to addressing these challenges is to integrate
learnability structure recovery into optimization problems.

