Off-Policy Reinforcement Learning with Delayed Rewards

Beining Han 1 Zhizhou Ren 2 3 Zuofan Wu 3 Yuan Zhou 4 Jian Peng 2 3 5

Abstract
We study deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms with delayed rewards. In many real-world
tasks, instant rewards are often not readily accessible or even defined immediately after the
agent performs actions. In this work, we first
formally define the environment with delayed rewards and discuss the challenges raised due to
the non-Markovian nature of such environments.
Then, we introduce a general off-policy RL framework with a new Q-function formulation that can
handle the delayed rewards with theoretical convergence guarantees. For practical tasks with high
dimensional state spaces, we further introduce
the HC-decomposition rule of the Q-function in
our framework which naturally leads to an approximation scheme that helps boost the training
efficiency and stability. We finally conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the superior
performance of our algorithms over the existing
work and their variants.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) aims at maximizing the
cumulative reward of a MDP. To apply RL algorithms, the
reward has to be given at every state-action pair in general
(i.e., r(s, a)). With a good and high quality reward function,
RL can achieve remarkable performance, e.g., AlphaGo
Zero for Go (Silver et al., 2017), DQN(Mnih et al., 2015)
for Atari, SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018b) for robot control
e.t.c. Recently, RL has been applied in many other real
world settings beyond games and locomotion control. This
includes industrial process control (Hein et al., 2017), traffic
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute for Interdisciplinary Information
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Department of
Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, United States 3 Helixon Limited, Beijing, China 4 Yau Mathematical Sciences Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5
Institute for Industry AI Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China. Correspondence to: Jian Peng <jianpeng@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

optimization (Gong et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2018), molecular design (Olivecrona et al., 2017) and resource allocation
(Xu et al., 2018). However, in many of these real-world
scenarios, Markovian and instant per-step rewards are hard
or impossible to obtain or even clearly defined. In practice,
it becomes more reasonable to use a delayed reward of several consecutive steps as feedback. For example, in traffic
congestion reduction (Gong et al., 2019), the amount of decreased congestion for a single traffic light switch is hard to
define in practice while it is more adequate to use the average routing time consumed for the vehicles as the feedback.
The latter is a delayed reward which can only be obtained
after the vehicles have passed the congestion (long after
a single switch). In molecular design, only the molecule
formed after the final operation can provide a meaningful
evaluation for the whole process (Olivecrona et al., 2017).
In locomotion control where the feedback is generated by
the interaction with the large environment, it is usually the
case that the frequency of the rewards generated from the
environment’s sensors is much lower than the frequency of
the robot control, thus the rewards are given only every so
often.
Despite the importance and prevalence of the delayed reward setting, very few previous research in RL has been
focusing on problems with non-Markovian properties and
delayed rewards. Besides, current RL algorithms lack theoretical guarantee under non-Markovian rewards and perform
unsatisfactorily in practice (Gangwani et al., 2020). Thus,
in this paper, our goal is to better understand the properties
of RL with delayed rewards and introduce a new algorithm
that can handle the delayed reward both theoretically and
practically. A key to our approach lies in the definition of
the past-invariant delayed reward MDPs. Based on this definition, theoretical properties and algorithmic implications
are discussed to motivate the design of a new practical algorithm, which explicitly decompose the value function into
components of both historical (H) and current (C) step information. We also propose a number of ways to approximate
such HC decomposition, which can be readily incorporated
into existing off-policy learning algorithms. Experiments
demonstrate that such approximation can improve training
efficiency and robustness when rewards are delayed.
Our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 models the
delayed reward environment as a novel PI-DRMDP problem

