Decision-Focused Learning: Through the Lens of Learning to Rank

Jayanta Mandi 1 Vı́ctor Bucarey 2 Maxime Mulamba 1 Tias Guns 3

Abstract
In the last years, decision-focused learning, also
known as predict-and-optimize, has received increasing attention. In this setting, the predictions
of a machine learning model are used as estimated
cost coefficients in the objective function of a
discrete combinatorial optimization problem for
decision making. Decision-focused learning proposes to train the ML models, often neural network models, by directly optimizing the quality
of decisions made by the optimization solvers.
Based on a recent work that proposed a noise
contrastive estimation loss over a subset of the
solution space, we observe that decision-focused
learning can more generally be seen as a learningto-rank problem, where the goal is to learn an
objective function that ranks the feasible points
correctly. This observation is independent of the
optimization method used and of the form of the
objective function. We develop pointwise, pairwise and listwise ranking loss functions, which
can be differentiated in closed form given a subset of solutions. We empirically investigate the
quality of our generic methods compared to existing decision-focused learning approaches with
competitive results. Furthermore, controlling the
subset of solutions allows controlling the runtime
considerably, with limited effect on regret.

1. Introduction
Many real-world decision making problems rely on the
combination of machine learning (ML) and combinatorial
optimization (CO). In those applications, CO problems are
solved to arrive at a decision by maximizing or minimizing
1
Data Analytics Laboratory, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium 2 Institute of Engineering Sciences, Universidad de O’Higgins, Rancagua, Chile 3 Dept. Computer Science, KU Leuven, Belgium. Correspondence to: Jayanta
Mandi
<jayanta.mandi@vub.be>, Vı́ctor Bucarey <victor.bucarey@uoh.cl>, Tias Guns <tias.guns@kuleuven.be>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

an objective function. However, often some parameters of
the optimization problem, such as costs, prices and profits, are not known but can be estimated from other feature
attributes based on historical data.
A two-stage predict-then-optimize approach is widely used
by practitioners in both the industry and the public sector,
where first an ML model is trained to make point estimates
of the uncertain parameters and then the optimization problem is solved using the predictions. However, this treats
the parameter errors as independent and does not take the
interplay of the parameter errors and their effect on the
combinatorial optimisation problem into account.
Recently decision-focused learning (Wilder et al., 2019;
Pogancic et al., 2020) (also known as predict-andoptimize (Elmachtoub & Grigas, 2021; Mandi et al., 2020))
has received increasing attention. In this setting, during
training, the ML model is trained with a loss function that
first solves the downstream CO problem to observe the joint
error. On the technical level, the challenge of integrating
combinatorial optimization into the training loop of ML
is the non-differentiability of combinatorial problems. To
address this, Mulamba et al. (2021) recently proposed an approach motivated by noise-contrastive estimation (Gutmann
& Hyvärinen, 2010), where they introduce a new family of
surrogate loss functions considering non-optimal feasible
solutions as negative examples. In their work, they propose
a surrogate loss function, which maximizes the divergence
between the objective values of the true optimal and the
negative examples.
We argue that decision-focused learning can be more generally viewed through the lens of learning to rank (LTR)
approach (Burges et al., 2005). In a LTR problem, for each
query there is a list of items and their feature variables given.
The training objective is to learn a ranking function, which
will rank the (top) items correctly for each query.
In the context of CO problems, a partial ordering of the feasible solutions is induced by the objective function. Learning
the orders of the feasible solution with respect to the objective function hence achieves the goal of decision-focused
learning. When compared to the LTR literature, there are
two important differences: 1) part of the structure of the objective function is already given, only some of its parameters
must be estimated; and 2) the set of ‘items’ are all feasible

