Robustness and Accuracy Could Be Reconcilable by (Proper) Definition

Tianyu Pang 1 2 Min Lin 2 Xiao Yang 1 Jun Zhu 1 Shuicheng Yan 2

Abstract
The trade-off between robustness and accuracy
has been widely studied in the adversarial literature. Although still controversial, the prevailing
view is that this trade-off is inherent, either empirically or theoretically. Thus, we dig for the
origin of this trade-off in adversarial training and
find that it may stem from the improperly defined
robust error, which imposes an inductive bias
of local invariance — an overcorrection towards
smoothness. Given this, we advocate employing
local equivariance to describe the ideal behavior
of a robust model, leading to a self-consistent robust error named SCORE. By definition, SCORE
facilitates the reconciliation between robustness
and accuracy, while still handling the worst-case
uncertainty via robust optimization. By simply
substituting KL divergence with variants of distance metrics, SCORE can be efficiently minimized. Empirically, our models achieve top-rank
performance on RobustBench under AutoAttack.
Besides, SCORE provides instructive insights for
explaining the overfitting phenomenon and semantic input gradients observed on robust models.

1. Introduction
The trade-off between adversarial robustness and clean
accuracy has been widely observed (Schmidt et al., 2018;
Su et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020a;b). On
some simple cases, this trade-off is even shown to provably
exist (Tsipras et al., 2019; Nakkiran, 2019; Raghunathan
et al., 2020; Javanmard et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021). With
that, many strategies have been proposed to alleviate this
trade-off via, e.g., early-stopping (Rice et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2020), instance reweighting (Balaji et al., 2019; Zhang
et al., 2021a), and exploiting extra data (Alayrac et al., 2019;
Carmon et al., 2019; Hendrycks et al., 2019), to name a few.
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist
Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint Center for ML, Tsinghua
University. 2 Sea AI Lab, Singapore. Correspondence to: Jun Zhu
<dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Shuicheng Yan <yansc@sea.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Nevertheless, other findings show the opposite. Stutz et al.
(2019) and Yang et al. (2020) argue that robustness and
accuracy can both be achievable through manifold analyses or locally Lipschitz functions. Rozsa et al. (2016) and
Gilmer et al. (2018) also reveal that better generalization
helps robustness on both toy and large-scale datasets.
Given arguments on both sides, it is much debated whether
the robustness-accuracy trade-off is intrinsically there. But
before considering its existence, let us first reach a consensus on how a robust model is supposed to behave — the
definition of robustness. A most popular one is made by
Madry et al. (2018), who define robustness in terms of robust error formulated as a locally maximized loss function.
This definition is widely adopted in adversarial training
(AT) (Shafahi et al., 2019; Wong et al., 2020). Besides,
there are also some other definitions. For example, Szegedy
et al. (2014) define robustness as the minimal perturbation
required to flip the predicted labels, which is applied in
several adversarial attack studies (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al.,
2016; Carlini and Wagner, 2017).
We then try to describe how the robustness-accuracy tradeoff stems from the previously defined robust error. Recall
that in supervised learning, we have a joint data distribution
pd (x, y), and a discriminative model pθ (y|x) for the label y,
which is conditional on the input x. In standard settings, we
obtain an accurate model via minimizing the expected KL
divergence between pd (y|x) and pθ (y|x), i.e., the standard
error RStandard (θ) (see Eq. (1)) w.r.t. the parameters θ. The
optimal solution θ∗ satisfies pθ∗ (y|x) = pd (y|x).
In adversarial settings, Madry et al. (2018) propose to minimize the robust error RMadry (θ) (see Eq. (3)) for training
reliable models. Compared to the standard error, the robust
error contains an inner maximization problem, finding the
point x0 ∈ B(x) that maximizes the KL divergence between
pd (y|x) and pθ (y|x0 ), where B(x) is a set of allowed points
around x. Minimizing the robust error w.r.t. θ imposes an
inductive bias towards local invariance: for ∀x0 ∈ B(x),
pθ (y|x0 ) is encouraged to be equal to pd (y|x). This locallyinvariant bias makes the learned model tend to be oversmoothed, as observed in previous works (Stutz et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2021b). Hence, generally pθ∗ (y|x) 6= pd (y|x)
for the optimal θ∗ of minθ RMadry (θ). In Fig. 1, we observe that pθ∗ (y|x) does not converge to pd (y|x) even on

