VariGrow: Variational Architecture Growing for Task-Agnostic Continual
Learning based on Bayesian Novelty

Randy Ardywibowo 1 Zepeng Huo 1 Zhangyang Wang 2 Bobak Mortazavi 1 Shuai Huang 3 Xiaoning Qian 1

Abstract

Continual Learning (CL) is the problem of sequentially learning predictive models with varying data that may originate from different contexts. Many existing CL methods assume that the
data stream is divided into a sequence of contexts,
termed as tasks, with explicitly given transition
boundaries. Unfortunately, many real-world CL
scenarios have neither explicit task information
nor context boundaries, motivating the study of
task-agnostic CL. This paper proposes a variational architecture growing framework dubbed
VariGrow. By interpreting dynamically growing neural networks as a Bayesian approximation,
and defining flexible implicit variational distributions, VariGrow detects if a new task is arriving
through an energy-based novelty score. If the novelty score is high and the sample is “detected”
as a new task, VariGrow will grow a new expert
module to be responsible for it. Otherwise, the
sample will be assigned to one of the existing experts who is the most “familiar” with it (i.e., one
with the lowest novelty score) to preserve all the
acquired knowledge. We have tested VariGrow
on several CIFAR and ImageNet-based benchmarks for the strictly task-agnostic CL setting
without any task information during training or
testing, which demonstrates its consistently superior or competitive performance. More interesting,
VariGrow achieves comparable performance with
task-aware CL methods.

1
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA
University of Texas, Austin, Texas, USA 3 University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. Correspondence to: Randy
Ardywibowo <randyardywibowo@tamu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In conventional machine learning, data points are assumed
to be identically and independently distributed (iid) and
all available at once. In contrast, the regime of continual
learning (CL) presents the new challenge of incrementally
accumulating knowledge from past experiences, mimicking
human’s ability to learn with non-iid data streams in widely
varying contexts. CL sequentially learns novel concepts
to achieve reliable predictions without catastrophically forgetting previously learned knowledge. It can be applied
to many real-world applications, such as robotics (Thrun
& Mitchell, 1995), computer vision (Li et al., 2017), autonomous driving (Pierre, 2018), and healthcare monitoring (Ardywibowo et al., 2019; 2018; Ardywibowo, 2017;
Jiang et al., 2019). To this end, many CL methods have
been developed in attempting to solve the stability-plasticity
dilemma (Aljundi et al., 2017; 2018; Lopez-Paz & Ranzato,
2017; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Rusu et al., 2016; Shin et al.,
2017; Yoon et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2021b; Liu et al., 2021;
Rajasegaran et al., 2019).
Many existing CL methods assume that the data stream
is explicitly divided into a sequence of transiting contexts,
termed as tasks, with task information given at both training
and testing time. In real-world scenarios, however, there is
no clear transition boundary between different contexts or
tasks, limiting the application of these CL methods in practice (Lee et al., 2020). With this in mind, task-agnostic CL
performs continual learning without requiring task IDs and
their transitions. This new setting is challenging, dubbed as
the single-headed setting, where existing task-agnostic CL
methods have significantly lower performance compared
to their task-aware counterparts (Rao et al., 2019; Aljundi,
2019; Aljundi et al., 2019; Zeno et al., 2018; He & Jaeger,
2018). In this paper, we focus on task-agnostic CL for
classification problems.
Existing CL methods can be broadly categorized into 1)
regularization-based, 2) memory-based, and 3) expansionbased (Parisi et al., 2019). While regularization- and
memory-based methods focus on retaining the knowledge
learned from the old tasks, expansion-based methods lean
towards better absorbing new knowledge and circumvent
the capability saturation (Sodhani et al., 2020). To the best

