NeuralEF: Deconstructing Kernels by Deep Neural Networks

Zhijie Deng 1 2 Jiaxin Shi 3 Jun Zhu 1

Abstract
Learning the principal eigenfunctions of an integral operator defined by a kernel and a data
distribution is at the core of many machine learning problems. Traditional nonparametric solutions based on the Nyström formula suffer from
scalability issues. Recent work has resorted to
a parametric approach, i.e., training neural networks to approximate the eigenfunctions. However, the existing method relies on an expensive orthogonalization step and is difficult to implement. We show that these problems can be
fixed by using a new series of objective functions that generalizes the EigenGame (Gemp
et al., 2020) to function space. We test our
method on a variety of supervised and unsupervised learning problems and show it provides accurate approximations to the eigenfunctions of
polynomial, radial basis, neural network Gaussian process, and neural tangent kernels. Finally, we demonstrate our method can scale up
linearised Laplace approximation of deep neural
networks to modern image classification datasets
through approximating the Gauss-Newton matrix.
Code is available at https://github.com/
thudzj/neuraleigenfunction.

x′

x′

x

DNN

kernel
x

x

x′

DNN

x

x′

DNN

κ(x, x′) ≈ μ ̂1 ψ̂1(x) ψ̂1(x′) + μ ̂2 ψ̂2(x) ψ̂2(x′) + . . . + μ ̂k ψ̂k(x) ψ̂k(x′)

Figure 1: NeuralEF embeds the structures inside a kernel into
￼

1. Introduction
Kernel methods (Muller et al., 2001; Schölkopf et al., 2002)
are among the most important and fundamental tools in
machine learning (ML) for processing nonlinear data. Like
most nonparametric methods, kernel methods have limited
applicability in large-scale scenarios, and kernel approximation methods like Random Fourier features (RFFs) (Rahimi
& Recht, 2007) and Nyström method (Nyström, 1930) are
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, TsinghuaBosch Joint Center for ML, Tsinghua University; Peng Cheng
Laboratory 2 Qingyuan Research, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Microsoft Research New England. Correspondence to: Jun Zhu
<dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

￼

an ensemble of NNs under the principle of eigendecomposition.
NeuralEF defines a new axis system for data, and is capable of
recovering the kernel according to Mercer’s theorem.
￼

￼

￼

frequently introduced as a remedy.
Even so, kernel methods still lag behind in handling complex
high-dimensional data as classic local kernels suffer from
the curse of dimensionality (Bengio et al., 2005). New
developments such as neural network Gaussian process (NNGP) kernels (Lee et al., 2017) and neural tangent kernels
(NTKs) (Jacot et al., 2018) mitigate this issue by leveraging
the inductive bias of neural networks (NNs). Yet, these
modern kernels are expensive to evaluate and have poor
compatibility with standard kernel approximation methods—
an accurate approximation with RFFs requires many NN
forward passes to construct an adequate number of features,
while Nyström method involves costly kernel evaluation in
the test phase.
We present a new kernel approximation method for addressing these challenges. It relies on deconstructing a kernel
as a spectral series and approximating the eigenfunctions
with neural networks. Because such a method can identify
the principal components, we need much less NN forward
passes than RFFs to accurately approximate NN-GP kernels
and NTKs. Moreover, it gives rise to an unsupervised representation learning paradigm, where the pairwise similarity
captured by kernels is embedded into NNs. The learned
neural eigenfunctions can serve as plug-and-play feature
extractors and be finetuned for downstream applications.
Training neural networks to approximate eigenfunctions is a
difficult task due to the orthonormality constraints. Spectral
Inference Networks (SpIN) (Pfau et al., 2018) made the
first attempt by formulating this as an optimization problem.
Nevertheless, SpIN’s objective function only allows recover-

