Preconditioning for Scalable Gaussian Process Hyperparameter Optimization

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) are a theoretically well-founded
and powerful probabilistic model (Rasmussen & Williams,
2006). However, conditioning a GP on data is often computationally prohibitive for large datasets. This problem is amplified when optimizing kernel hyperparameters. Gradientbased optimization requires repeated evaluation of the logmarginal likelihood L and its derivatives. These computations both have cubic complexity in the size n of the data.
1
University of Tübingen 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 3 Columbia University 4 University
of Pennsylvania.
Correspondence to: Jonathan Wenger
<jonathan.wenger@uni-tuebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

∂L/∂o
∂L/∂l

Gaussian process hyperparameter optimization requires linear solves with, and log-determinants
of, large kernel matrices. Iterative numerical techniques are becoming popular to scale to larger
datasets, relying on the conjugate gradient method
(CG) for the linear solves and stochastic trace
estimation for the log-determinant. This work
introduces new algorithmic and theoretical insights for preconditioning these computations.
While preconditioning is well understood in the
context of CG, we demonstrate that it can also
accelerate convergence and reduce variance of
the estimates for the log-determinant and its
derivative. We prove general probabilistic error
bounds for the preconditioned computation of the
log-determinant, log-marginal likelihood and its
derivatives. Additionally, we derive specific rates
for a range of kernel-preconditioner combinations,
showing that up to exponential convergence can
be achieved. Our theoretical results enable provably efficient optimization of kernel hyperparameters, which we validate empirically on large-scale
benchmark problems. There our approach accelerates training by up to an order of magnitude.

Prec. Qual.
0
100
200
400

∂L/∂σ

Abstract

−L

Jonathan Wenger 1 2 3 Geoff Pleiss 3 Philipp Hennig 1 2 John P. Cunningham 3 Jacob R. Gardner 4

Figure 1: Preconditioning reduces not only bias but also
variance in stochastic approximations to the log-marginal
likelihood L and its derivatives. GP hyperparameter optimization for large datasets requires cheap estimates of L
and its gradient. Preconditioning makes these more precise
and less noisy as is shown here for increasing preconditioner
quality on the “Elevators” dataset using a Matérn( 32 ) kernel.

GP Inference via Matrix-Vector Multiplication Recently, Krylov methods (Golub & van Loan, 2013), based
on iterative matrix-vector multiplication with the kernel
matrix, have become popular for GP inference (Murray,
2009; Cutajar et al., 2016; Ubaru et al., 2017; Dong et al.,
2017; Gardner et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019). Methods primarily relying on matrix-vector products are advantageous.
They can leverage structure in the kernel matrix (Nocedal &
Wright, 2006), and importantly, they make effective use of
modern hardware and parallelization (Gardner et al., 2018;
Wang et al., 2019; Charlier et al., 2021). When optimizing
GP hyperparameters one needs to repeatedly solve linear
systems with, and compute log-determinants of, the kernel
matrix. Both can be done using Krylov methods. The linear
systems are solved via the conjugate gradient method (CG)
(Hestenes & Stiefel, 1952), which reduces the cost of kernel
matrix solves from O(n3 ) to O(n2 m) for m iterations. The
log-determinant can be approximated via stochastic trace estimation (STE) (Hutchinson, 1989) combined with another
Krylov method, the Lanczos algorithm (Lanczos, 1950) (see
(Ubaru et al., 2017)). Its derivative may also be estimated
via STE combined with CG (Gardner et al., 2018).

