Non-Vacuous Generalisation Bounds for Shallow Neural Networks
Felix Biggs 1 Benjamin Guedj 1

Abstract
We focus on a specific class of shallow neural
networks with a single hidden layer, namely those
with L2 -normalised data and either a sigmoidshaped Gaussian error function (“erf”) activation
or a Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU) activation. For these networks, we derive new generalisation bounds through the PAC-Bayesian theory;
unlike most existing such bounds they apply to
neural networks with deterministic rather than randomised parameters. Our bounds are empirically
non-vacuous when the network is trained with
vanilla stochastic gradient descent on MNIST,
Fashion-MNIST, and binary classification versions of the above.

1. Introduction
The study of generalisation properties of deep neural networks is arguably one of the topics gaining most traction in deep learning theory (see, e.g., the recent surveys
Kawaguchi et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2020b). In particular, a
characterisation of out-of-sample generalisation is essential
to understand where trained neural networks are likely to
succeed or to fail, as evidenced by the recent NeurIPS 2020
competition ”Predicting Generalization in Deep Learning”
(Jiang et al., 2020a). One stream of this joint effort, which
the present paper contributes to, is dedicated to the study
of shallow neural networks, potentially paving the way to
insights on deeper architectures.
Despite numerous efforts in the past few years, non-vacuous
generalisation bounds for deterministic neural networks
with many more parameters than data remain generally elusive. Those few non-vacuous bounds that exist primarily
report bounds for networks with randomised parameters, for
example Gaussian weights, which are re-drawn for every
1

Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Department of Computer
Science, University College London and Inria London, UK. Correspondence to: Felix Biggs <contact@felixbiggs.com>, Benjamin
Guedj <b.guedj@ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

prediction (a non-exhaustive list of references would begin
with Dziugaite & Roy, 2017; 2018; Neyshabur et al., 2017;
2018; Hellström & Durisi, 2021), or for compressed versions of the trained networks (Zhou et al., 2019). While
these undoubtedly advanced knowledge on generalisation in
deep learning theory, this is far from contemporary practice
which generally focuses on deterministic networks obtained
directly through stochastic gradient descent (SGD), as we
do.
The PAC-Bayesian theory (we refer to the recent Guedj,
2019 and Alquier, 2021 for a gentle introduction) is thus
far the only framework within which non-vacuous bounds
have been provided for networks trained on common classification tasks. Given its focus on randomised or “Gibbs”
predictors, the aforementioned lack of results for deterministic networks is unsurprising. However, the framework
is not limited to such results: one area within PAC-Bayes
where deterministic predictors are often considered lies in
a range of results for the “majority vote”, or the expected
overall prediction of randomised predictors, which is itself
deterministic.
Computing the average output of deep neural networks with
randomised parameters is generally intractable: therefore
most such works have focused on cases where the average
output is simple to compute, as for example when considering linear predictors. Here, building on ideas from Biggs
& Guedj (2022), we show that provided our predictor structure factorises in a particular way, more complex majority
votes can be constructed. In particular, we give formulations for randomised predictors whose majority vote can
be expressed as a deterministic single-hidden-layer neural
network. Through this, we obtain classification bounds for
these deterministic predictors that are non-vacuous on the
celebrated baselines MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), FashionMNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), and binarised versions of the
above. We believe these are the first such results.
Our work fundamentally relates to the question: what kind
of properties or structures in a trained network indicate
likely generalisation to unseen data? It has been shown by
Zhang et al. (2017) that neural networks trained by SGD
can perfectly overfit large datasets with randomised labels,
which would indicate a lack of capacity control, while simultaneously generalising well in a variety of scenarios. Thus,
clearly any certification of generalisation must involve ex-

