Disentangling Sources of Risk for
Distributional Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Kyunghwan Son 1 Junsu Kim 1 Sungsoo Ahn 2 Roben Delos Reyes 1 Yung Yi 1 Jinwoo Shin 1

Abstract
In cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning,
the outcomes of agent-wise policies are highly
stochastic due to the two sources of risk: (a)
random actions taken by teammates and (b) random transition and rewards. Although the two
sources have very distinct characteristics, existing frameworks are insufficient to control the risksensitivity of agent-wise policies in a disentangled
manner. To this end, we propose Disentangled
RIsk-sensitive Multi-Agent reinforcement learning (DRIMA) to separately access the risk sources.
For example, our framework allows an agent to
be optimistic with respect to teammates (who can
prosocially adapt) but more risk-neutral with respect to the environment (which does not adapt).
Our experiments demonstrate that DRIMA significantly outperforms prior state-of-the-art methods
across various scenarios in the StarCraft Multiagent Challenge environment. Notably, DRIMA
shows robust performance where prior methods
learn only a highly suboptimal policy, regardless
of reward shaping, exploration scheduling, and
noisy (random or adversarial) agents.

1. Introduction
In cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL),
the paradigm of centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) has shown great success in recent years
(Sunehag et al., 2018; Rashid et al., 2018; Son et al., 2019;
Rashid et al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2020b). Under such a
paradigm, researchers execute agent-wise policies without
inter-agent communication, i.e., use decentralized execution,
while they train the agents with access to the full information, i.e., apply centralized training.
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH). Correspondence to: Kyunghwan Son <kevinson9473@kaist.ac.kr>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Table 1: Payoff matrix of the two-step game. {e1 , e2 } denotes a reward set in which one element of this set is uniformly sampled as a reward. The payoffs of the first and the
second step are designed to assess whether an algorithm is
able to handle cooperative and environmental uncertainty,
respectively.
A

B

C

A

B

C

A 7 -12 -12
B -12 0 0
C -12 0 0

A {−10, 10} {−11, 9} {−11, 9}
B {−11, 9} {−8, −6} {−11, 9}
C {−11, 9} {−11, 9} {−26, 12}

(a) Payoff in the first step.

(b) Payoff in the second step.

However, despite the progress on value-based CTDE, agents
still often fail to cooperate due to environment randomness, limited observation of agents, and time-varying policies of other agents, especially in highly stochastic environments. For such environments in single-agent settings, risk-sensitive reinforcement learning (RL) (Chow &
Ghavamzadeh, 2014) has shown remarkable results by using
policies that consider risk rather than simple expectations
for return distribution caused by state transitions, rewards,
and actions. Here, risk refers to the uncertainty over possible
outcomes, and risk-sensitive policies act with a risk measure, such as variance or conditional value at risk (CVaR)
(Chow & Ghavamzadeh, 2014). The main goal of this paper is to apply this risk-sensitive technique to value-based
CTDE to learn more robust policies against various factors
of uncertainty.
In this regard, our motivating observation is that in MARL,
the returns are affected by two types of uncertainty: (a)
cooperative uncertainty and (b) environmental uncertainty.
Here, the cooperative uncertainty stems from how the agents
cannot communicate with each other. Furthermore, environmental uncertainty is caused by stochastic transition and the
rewarding mechanism of the environment. See Figure 1 for
an illustration of such uncertainties.
The existing distributional reinforcement learning frameworks are, however, unable to disentangle such sources of
risk. This is important since the cooperative risk-seeking
yet environmental risk-neutral policies are likely to be of
favorable choices in many practical scenarios (i.e., surviving

