What Dense Graph Do You Need for Self-Attention?

Yuxing Wang 1 2 Chu-Tak Lee 1 Qipeng Guo 1 Zhangyue Yin 1 Yunhua Zhou 1
Xuanjing Huang 1 2 Xipeng Qiu 1 3

Abstract
Transformers have made progress in miscellaneous tasks, but suffer from quadratic computational and memory complexities. Recent works
propose sparse Transformers with attention on
sparse graphs to reduce complexity and remain
strong performance. While effective, the crucial
parts of how dense a graph needs to be to perform well are not fully explored. In this paper, we
propose Normalized Information Payload (NIP),
a graph scoring function measuring information
transfer on graph, which provides an analysis tool
for trade-offs between performance and complexity. Guided by this theoretical analysis, we present
Hypercube Transformer, a sparse Transformer
that models token interactions in a hypercube
and shows comparable or even better results with
vanilla Transformer while yielding O(N log N )
complexity with sequence length N . Experiments
on tasks requiring various sequence lengths lay
validation for our graph function well1 .

1. Introduction
In recent years, self-attention and its implementation Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have achieved great success in a wide variety of Natural Language Processing
(NLP) (Devlin et al., 2019; Vaswani et al., 2017; Miller,
2019; Sun et al., 2019) and Computer Vision (CV) (Yuan
et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) tasks.
The key innovation of self-attention mechanism is to allow
each token to interact with others directly, and thus avoid
the long-term dependency problem. However, this results in
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University 2 Institute
of Modern Languages and Linguistics, Fudan University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory.
Correspondence to:
Yuxin
Wang <wangyuxin21@m.fudan.edu.cn>,
Xipeng Qiu
<xpqiu@fudan.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/yxzwang/NormalizedInformation-Payload.

Figure 1. Attention map and its corresponding graph.

the quadratic computational and memory complexity with
the sequence length. To improve model efficiency, many
lightweight Transformers are proposed (Tay et al., 2020b;
Lin et al., 2021). Among them, sparse Transformers (Zaheer
et al., 2021; Beltagy et al., 2020; Child et al., 2019; Guo
et al., 2019) utilize sparse attention in the self-attention
mechanism including global attention, window attention or
rule-based sparse attention.
Previous works view sparse attention as self-attention on
sparse graphs. Figure 1 shows typical sparse attention map
and its corresponding graph. Vanilla self-attention can be
regarded as a complete graph. Although these Sparse Transformers have made progress, there still remains some questions: which property is important for those graphs serving
as ground for self-attention? How dense do we need the
graph to be in order to reduce complexity and at the same
time remain performance? While some (Zaheer et al., 2021;
Chen et al., 2021) showed theoretical analysis for existing
sparse self-attention, they do not provide a general analysis
tool for comparing different sparse patterns.
To investigate further into differences between sparse patterns, we need theoretical analysis based on sparse graphs.
In this paper, we propose Normalized Information Payload
(NIP), a graph scoring function to measure information
transfer on a given graph. Our function can also be applied
to analyze previous sparse patterns and provide insights for
their empirical results. Guided with our proposed function,
we further present Hypercube Transformer which adapts
hypercube into self-attention and achieves great balance between performance and computation costs. Experiments in
long-context sequence modeling and large-corpus pretrain-

