Position Prediction as an Effective Pretraining Strategy

Shuangfei Zhai 1 Navdeep Jaitly 1 Jason Ramapuram 1 Dan Busbridge 1 Tatiana Likhomanenko 1
Joseph Yitan Cheng 1 Walter Talbott 1 Chen Huang 1 Hanlin Goh 1 Joshua Susskind 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have gained
increasing popularity in a wide range of applications, including Natural Language Processing
(NLP), Computer Vision and Speech Recognition,
because of their powerful representational capacity. However, harnessing this representational capacity effectively requires a large amount of data,
strong regularization, or both, to mitigate overfitting. Recently, the power of the Transformer
has been unlocked by self-supervised pretraining
strategies based on masked autoencoders which
rely on reconstructing masked inputs, directly, or
contrastively from unmasked content. This pretraining strategy which has been used in BERT
models in NLP (Devlin et al., 2019), Wav2Vec
models in Speech (Baevski et al., 2020) and, recently, in MAE models in Vision (Bao et al., 2021;
He et al., 2021), forces the model to learn about relationships between the content in different parts
of the input using autoencoding related objectives.
In this paper, we propose a novel, but surprisingly
simple alternative to content reconstruction – that
of predicting locations from content, without providing positional information for it. Doing so
requires the Transformer to understand the positional relationships between different parts of
the input, from their content alone. This amounts
to an efficient implementation where the pretext
task is a classification problem among all possible
positions for each input token. We experiment
on both Vision and Speech benchmarks, where
our approach brings improvements over strong supervised training baselines and is comparable to
modern unsupervised/self-supervised pretraining
methods. Our method also enables Transformers
trained without position embeddings to outperform ones trained with full position information.
1
Apple Inc.
Correspondence to:
<szhai@apple.com>.

Shuangfei Zhai

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become a unified
architecture in NLP, Computer Vision and Speech. Their
high capacity and lack of domain specific inductive biases
means Transformers require large amounts of training data
to achieve good generalization. One effective remedy, first
developed in the NLP community, is unsupervised pretraining. For example, BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) trains a Transformer with unlabeled text by solving masked token prediction. This greatly benefits downstream applications, and has
become the standard approach for various NLP tasks.
Recently, there have been a few attempts to apply the BERT
pretraining idea to Computer Vision, with Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) being the backbone
architecture. In particular, BEiT (Bao et al., 2021) converts
image patches to discrete tokens with a separately trained
VQVAE (van den Oord et al., 2017). This makes it possible to use the same cross entropy loss for masked image
patch prediction as for token prediction in BERT. MAE (He
et al., 2021) further simplifies the recipe of BEiT by directly
predicting the masked patches with a regression loss in the
pixel space.
In this paper, we propose a simple and effective approach
for Transformer pretraining that removes the need for reconstructing dense patch values. Our idea is inspired by
the observation that Transformers are relatively insensitive
to the order of input tokens. In (Naseer et al., 2021), it is
shown that pretrained ViTs demonstrate strong robustness to
image patch shuffling perturbation at test time. (Sinha et al.,
2021) shows that training the BERT model with randomly
shuffled word order gives surprisingly competitive performance. (Chen et al., 2021) also suggests that a ViT without
positional embeddings shows only a small degradation in
the linear probing task for self-supervised learning. This
evidence suggests that much of the power of Transformers
results from the ability to reason about the co-occurrence of
the set of unordered input tokens. We thus ask the question:
How much can unsupervised pretraining learn using only
contents for prediction? This motivates us to formulate a
novel pretraining strategy, explained as follows.
In the pretraining phase, the model (e.g., a ViT) receives a
set of tokens (e.g., image patches) but not their positions,

