DeepSpeed-MoE: Advancing Mixture-of-Experts Inference and Training to
Power Next-Generation AI Scale
Samyam Rajbhandari 1 Conglong Li 1 Zhewei Yao 1 Minjia Zhang 1 Reza Yazdani Aminabadi 1
Ammar Ahmad Awan 1 Jeff Rasley 1 Yuxiong He 1

Abstract
As the training of giant dense models hits the
boundary on the availability and capability of
the hardware resources today, Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) models have become one of the most
promising model architectures due to their significant training cost reduction compared to qualityequivalent dense models. Their training cost saving is demonstrated from encoder-decoder models
(prior works) to a 5x saving for auto-aggressive
language models (this work). However, due to the
much larger model size and unique architecture,
how to provide fast MoE model inference remains
challenging and unsolved, limiting their practical
usage. To tackle this, we present DeepSpeedMoE, an end-to-end MoE training and inference
solution, including novel MoE architecture designs and model compression techniques that reduce MoE model size by up to 3.7x, and a highly
optimized inference system that provides 7.3x
better latency and cost compared to existing MoE
inference solutions. DeepSpeed-MoE offers an
unprecedented scale and efficiency to serve massive MoE models with up to 4.5x faster and 9x
cheaper inference compared to quality-equivalent
dense models. We hope our innovations and systems help open a promising path to new directions
in the large model landscape, a shift from dense
to sparse MoE models, where training and deploying higher-quality models with fewer resources
becomes more widely possible.

1. Introduction
In the last three years, the largest trained model has increased in size by over 1000x, from a few hundred million
1

Microsoft.
Correspondence to:
handari
<samyamr@microsoft.com>,
<yuxhe@microsoft.com>.

Samyam RajbYuxiong
He

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

parameters to half a trillion parameters (Megatron-Turing
NLG 530B (Smith et al., 2022)). Improvements in model
quality with size suggest that this trend will continue, with
larger model sizes bringing better model quality.
However, sustaining the growth in model size is getting
more and more difficult due to the increasing compute requirements. For example, the largest single dense model in
existence as of Dec 2021, the Megatron-Turing NLG 530B
model, took around 3 months to train on over 2000 A100
GPUs on the NVIDIA Selene Supercomputer, consuming
over 3 million GPU hours (Microsoft & Nvidia, 2021). Another 3 to 5 times of increase in dense model size would be
infeasible within a reasonable timeframe. Given the exorbitant compute resources required to train the state-of-art
models, a natural question to ask is: “Is it possible to make
non-trivial improvement to model quality without increasing the compute cost?” Or equivalently, “Is it possible to
produce model with similar quality using 3 to 5 times less
resources?”
There have been numerous efforts to reduce the compute
requirements to train large models without sacrificing model
quality. To this end, architectures based on Mixture-ofExperts (MoE) (Shazeer et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al., 2020;
Fedus et al., 2021a) have paved a promising path, enabling
sub-linear compute requirements with respect to the model
parameters and allowing for improved model quality without
increasing training cost. However, MoE based models have
their own set of challenges that limit their use in a wide
range of real world scenarios:
• Limited Scope The scope of MoE based models in the
NLP area is primarily limited to encoder-decoder models
and sequence-to-sequence tasks, with limited work done
in exploring its application in other domains. Application
of MoE to auto-regressive natural language generation
(NLG) like GPT-3 and MT-NLG 530B, where the compute cost of training state-of-art language models can
be orders of magnitude higher than for encoder-decoder
models, is less explored.
• Massive Memory Requirements While MoE models
require less compute to achieve the same model qualAuthor contributions listed at Appendix A.

