On Last-Iterate Convergence Beyond Zero-Sum Games

Ioannis Anagnostides 1 Ioannis Panageas 2 Gabriele Farina 1 Tuomas Sandholm 1 3 4 5

Abstract
Most existing results about last-iterate convergence of learning dynamics are limited to twoplayer zero-sum games, and only apply under
rigid assumptions about what dynamics the players follow. In this paper we provide new results
and techniques that apply to broader families of
games and learning dynamics. First, we show that
in a class of games that includes constant-sum
polymatrix and strategically zero-sum games, the
trajectories of dynamics such as optimistic mirror
descent (OMD) exhibit a boundedness property,
which holds even when players employ different algorithms and prediction mechanisms.
This
√
property enables us to obtain O(1/ T ) rates and
optimal O(1) regret bounds. Our analysis also reveals a surprising property: OMD either reaches
arbitrarily close to a Nash equilibrium or it outperforms the robust price of anarchy in efficiency.
Moreover, for potential games we establish convergence to an ϵ-equilibrium after O(1/ϵ2 ) iterations for mirror descent under a broad class of regularizers, as well as optimal O(1) regret bounds
for OMD variants. Our framework also extends
to near-potential games, and unifies known analyses for distributed learning in Fisher’s market
model. Finally, we analyze the convergence, efficiency, and robustness of optimistic gradient
descent (OGD) in general-sum continuous games.

1. Introduction
No-regret learning and game theory share an intricately connected history tracing back to Blackwell’s seminal approachability theorem (Blackwell, 1956; Abernethy et al., 2011),
leading to fundamental connections between no-regret learning and game-theoretic equilibrium concepts. For example,
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of California Irvine
Strategy Robot, Inc. 4 Optimized Markets, Inc. 5 Strategic Machine, Inc. Correspondence to: Ioannis Anagnostides <ianagnos@cs.cmu.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

it is folklore that if both players in a zero-sum game employ
a no-regret algorithm, the time average of their strategies
will eventually converge to a Nash equilibrium (NE). However, typical guarantees within the no-regret framework
provide no insights about the final state of the system. This
begs the question: Will the agents eventually play according to an equilibrium strategy? In general, the answer to
this question is no: Broad families of regret minimization
algorithms such as mirror descent (MD) are known to exhibit recurrent or even chaotic behavior (Sato et al., 2002;
Sandholm, 2010; Mertikopoulos et al., 2018).
In an attempt to stabilize the chaotic behavior of traditional
no-regret learning algorithms and ameliorate the notoriously
tedious training process of generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), Daskalakis et al. (2018)
discovered that optimistic gradient descent (OGD) (Popov,
1980) guarantees last-iterate convergence in unconstrained
bilinear “games”.1 Thereafter, their result has been extended
along several lines (e.g., (Daskalakis & Panageas, 2019;
Mertikopoulos et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2021b; Golowich
et al., 2020a; Azizian et al., 2021)). Last-iterate convergence
is also central in economics (Milgrom & Roberts, 1990),
and goes back to the fundamental question of what it really
means to “learn in a game”. Indeed, it is unclear how a
time average guarantee is meaningful from an economic
standpoint. Nevertheless, the known guarantees only apply
for restricted classes of games such as two-player zero-sum
games. As a result, it is natural to ask whether last-iterate
convergence could be a universal phenomenon in games.
Unfortunately, this cannot be the case: if every player employs a no-regret algorithm and the individual strategies
converge, this would necessarily mean that the limit point is
a Nash equilibrium.2 But this is precluded by fundamental
impossibility results (Hart & Mas-Colell, 2003; Rubinstein,
2016; Chen et al., 2009; Babichenko, 2014; Daskalakis et al.,
2009), at least in a polynomial number of iterations. This
observation offers an additional crucial motivation for convergence since Nash equilibria can be exponentially more efficient compared to correlated equilibria (Blum et al., 2008).
1

We call them “games” with an abuse of terminology. They
are not games in the game-theoretic sense.
2
To see this, observe that the average product distribution of
play—which is a coarse correlated equilibrium—will converge to
a product distribution, and hence, a Nash equilibrium.

