Additive Gaussian Processes Revisited
Xiaoyu Lu 1 Alexis Boukouvalas 1 James Hensman 1

Abstract
Gaussian Process (GP) models are a class of flexible non-parametric models that have rich representational power. By using a Gaussian process with additive structure, complex responses
can be modelled whilst retaining interpretability. Previous work showed that additive Gaussian
process models require high-dimensional interaction terms. We propose the orthogonal additive
kernel (OAK), which imposes an orthogonality
constraint on the additive functions, enabling an
identifiable, low-dimensional representation of
the functional relationship. We connect the OAK
kernel to functional ANOVA decomposition, and
show improved convergence rates for sparse computation methods. With only a small number of
additive low-dimensional terms, we demonstrate
the OAK model achieves similar or better predictive performance compared to black-box models,
while retaining interpretability.

1. Introduction
Gaussian Processes (GPs) can be used to construct additive models by using the property that a sum of two GPs
results in a new GP with a kernel function defined as the
sum of the original ones. Using an additive structure in a
Gaussian process model is enticing from an explainability
standpoint, since one can use the linear properties of the GP
to perform inference over the added components, which can
yield insights into the data. For datasets with more than one
input dimension, it is straight-forward to build GP models
as a sum of one-dimensional functions, or known pairs (or
triplets, etc.) of interacting inputs. In the statistics literature,
Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) (Hastie & Tibshirani,
2017; Wood, 2017), are often built using sums of splines
over either each input independently or over carefully selected sets of inputs.
1
Amazon, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Xiaoyu Lu <luxiaoyu@amazon.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

From the standpoint of explainable and interpretable machine learning, additive Gaussian processes such as those
considered within Kaufman & Sain (2010); Duvenaud et al.
(2011); Timonen et al. (2021) offer the promise of automatically discovering relevant features and combinations of
features, through learning of a kernel with parameterized
additive structure. In particular, Duvenaud et al. (2011)
proposed a kernel which allows additive interactions of all
orders, ranging from first order terms to the interactions between all the features. An efficient computation scheme was
proposed for avoiding the exponentially large sum required
over combinations.
In this work, we build on and challenge the findings of
Duvenaud et al. (2011), where the experimental results suggest that high order terms are required to model some of
the regression and classification datasets. We show that
the dimensionality of the models constructed is considerably higher than necessary: for example, their model of the
8-dimensional pumadyn dataset requires an 8-dimensional
interaction whereas our proposed model requires only 2dimensional interactions (see Figure 1). A full comparison
on all the datasets used in Duvenaud et al. (2011) is provided
in Section 5.1: in all cases, we find that a small number of
low-dimensional terms are needed to achieve similar or better performance. We posit that the high dimensional nature
of their models are due to two issues: an identifiability issue
with the summed components; and the way that the contribution of a component to the overall model is measured.
We solve the identifiability issue by borrowing an idea from
Durrande et al. (2012), where the components of the additive
model are orthogonalized. We call the resulting kernel orthogonal additive kernel (OAK), which can produce highly
parsimonious models of the datasets studied in Duvenaud
et al. (2011), as well as more recent larger datasets. Plumlee
& Joseph (2018) tackles a slightly different identifibality
issue by proposing a GP whose stochastic part is orthogonal to the mean part. We measure the contribution of
any component to the overall model using a Sobol index
(Sobol, 1993; Owen, 2014) which is shown to be analytic
for the OAK model. We see in Section 5.1 that the pumadyn
dataset can be modelled using a sum of only three components – one two-dimensional interaction function and two
one-dimensional functions. These parsimonious models are
highly explainable since each effect of a component can be

