Finite-Sum Coupled Compositional Stochastic Optimization: Theory and
Applications

Bokun Wang 1 Tianbao Yang 1

Abstract
This paper studies stochastic optimization for a
sum of compositional functions, where the innerlevel function of each summand is coupled with
the corresponding summation index. We refer
to this family of problems as finite-sum coupled compositional optimization (FCCO). It has
broad applications in machine learning for optimizing non-convex or convex compositional measures/objectives such as average precision (AP),
p-norm push, listwise ranking losses, neighborhood component analysis (NCA), deep survival
analysis, deep latent variable models, etc., which
deserves finer analysis. Yet, existing algorithms
and analyses are restricted in one or other aspects. The contribution of this paper is to provide
a comprehensive convergence analysis of a simple
stochastic algorithm for both non-convex and convex objectives. Our key result is the improved oracle complexity with the parallel speed-up by
using the moving-average based estimator with
mini-batching. Our theoretical analysis also exhibits new insights for improving the practical
implementation by sampling the batches of equal
size for the outer and inner levels. Numerical experiments on AP maximization, NCA and p-norm
push corroborate some aspects of the theory.

1. Introduction
A fundamental problem in machine learning (ML) that has
been studied extensively is the empirical risk minimization
(ERM), whose objective is a sum of individual losses on
1
Department of Computer Science, The University
of Iowa, IA, USA. Correspondence to: Bokun Wang
<bokunw.wang@gmail.com>, Tianbao Yang <tianbaoyang@uiowa.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

training examples, i.e.,
min F (w),

w∈Ω

F (w) :=

1 X
`(w; zi ),
n
zi ∈D

where w and Ω denotes the model parameter and its domain
(Ω ⊆ Rd ), D denotes the training set of n examples, and zi
denotes an individual data. However, ERM may hide the
complexity of individual loss and gradient computation in
many interesting measures/objectives. Instead, in this paper
we study a new family of problems that aims to optimize
the following compositional objective:
min F (w),

w∈Ω

F (w) :=

1 X
fi (g(w; zi , Si )),
n

(1)

zi ∈D

where g : Ω 7→ R 1 , fi : R 7→ R, and Si denotes another
(finite or infinite 2 ) set of examples that could be either dependent or independent of zi . We give an example for each
case: 1) In the bipartite ranking problem, D represents the
positive data while S = Si represents the negative data; 2)
In the robust learning problem (e.g. the invariant logistic
regression in Hu et al. 2020), D represents the training data
set while Si denotes the set of perturbed observations for
data zi ∈ D, where Si depends on zi . We are particularly
interested in the case that set Si is infinite or contains a large
number of items, and assume that an unbiased stochastic
estimators of g and ∇g can be computed via sampling from
Si . We refer to (1) as finite-sum coupled compositional
optimization (FCCO) and its objective as finite-sum coupled compositional risk (FCCR), where for each data zi
the risk fi (g(w; zi , Si )) is of a compositional form such
that g couples each zi and items in Si . It is notable that fi
could be stochastic or has a finite-sum structure that depends
on a large set of items. For simplicity of presentation and
discussion, we focus on the case that fi is a simple deterministic function whose value and gradient can be easily
computed, which covers many interesting objectives of interest. The algorithms and analysis can be extended to the case
R refers to the d0 -dimensional codomain of g (d0 ≥ 1).
If
P Si is a finite set, we define g(w; zi , Si ) =
1
ξij ∈Si g(w; zi , ξij ); If Si is an infinite set, we define
|Si |
g(w; zi , Si ) = E [g(w; zi , ξi ) | zi ], where ξi ∈ Si .
1

2

