Comprehensive Analysis of Negative Sampling
in Knowledge Graph Representation Learning

Hidetaka Kamigaito 1 Katsuhiko Hayashi 2

Abstract
Negative sampling (NS) loss plays an important role in learning knowledge graph embedding (KGE) to handle a huge number of entities.
However, the performance of KGE degrades without hyperparameters such as the margin term and
number of negative samples in NS loss being appropriately selected. Currently, empirical hyperparameter tuning addresses this problem at the
cost of computational time. To solve this problem,
we theoretically analyzed NS loss to assist hyperparameter tuning and understand the better use of
the NS loss in KGE learning. Our theoretical analysis showed that scoring methods with restricted
value ranges, such as TransE and RotatE, require
appropriate adjustment of the margin term or the
number of negative samples different from those
without restricted value ranges, such as RESCAL,
ComplEx, and DistMult. We also propose subsampling methods specialized for the NS loss in
KGE studied from a theoretical aspect. Our empirical analysis on the FB15k-237, WN18RR, and
YAGO3-10 datasets showed that the results of actually trained models agree with our theoretical
findings.

1. Introduction
Knowledge graph completion (KGC) has attracted increasing attention as a research topic for automatically inferring
new links in a KG that are likely but not yet known to be
true. KG embedding (KGE) methods have been actively
pursued as a scalable approach to KGC (Bordes et al., 2013;
Yang et al., 2015; Trouillon et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2019).
Since a KG contains a huge number of entities, negative
sampling (NS) loss (Mikolov et al., 2013b) is widely used
1

Nara Institute of Science and Technology (NAIST), Nara,
Japan 2 Hokkaido University, Hokkaido, Japan. Correspondence
to: Hidetaka Kamigaito <kamigaito.h@is.naist.jp>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

in KGE training from the viewpoint of computational efficiency. However, NS loss was originally proposed for
word-representation learning (Mikolov et al., 2013b), and
there are several issues that need to be considered when
using NS loss for training KGE models.
While the original NS loss was designed to be used with
scoring methods on the basis of the inner product, which
have no limit on the value range, many KGE models such as
TransE (Bordes et al., 2013) and RotatE (Sun et al., 2019)
use score functions with value ranges limited by the p-norm
distance. To apply NS loss to distance-based KGE models, a
margin term has been introduced as a heuristic means of adjusting the value ranges of the score functions (Bordes et al.,
2013; Sun et al., 2019). This margin term is not present
in the original NS loss, and there has been no discussion
of how it affects the KGE model training. In certain KGE
studies (Trouillon et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2019), the NS
loss is normalized by the number of negative samples. This
normalization term also does not exist in the original NS
loss, and the validity of the term has not yet been verified.
In KG representation learning, self-adversarial NS
(SANS) (Sun et al., 2019) is often used to reduce the effect
of negative samples that do not carry meaningful information to the learning process. To generate negative samples, SANS uses probability distributions calculated from
the current embedding model instead of using the uniform
noise distribution. However, the normalization term of the
probability distribution is computationally expensive and is
approximated in practice by randomly sampled examples.
Though certain characteristics of SANS have been investigated (Ruffinelli et al., 2020; Kamigaito & Hayashi, 2021),
more detailed analysis is needed because the previous studies did not take into account the effect of the approximation
of the normalization term.
Due to the difference from the original NS loss previously
described, we have to consider various combinations of
score functions, loss functions, and hyperparameters in
KGE training. It is known that KGE performance can be
significantly improved by selecting the appropriate combinations (Ruffinelli et al., 2020; Ali et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2022), but it is unclear what combinations are theoretically
appropriate. Therefore, the current state-of-the-art method

