Function-space Inference with Sparse Implicit Processes

Simón Rodrı́guez Santana 1 Bryan Zaldivar 2 Daniel Hernández-Lobato 3

Abstract
Implicit Processes (IPs) represent a flexible framework that can be used to describe a wide variety
of models, from Bayesian neural networks, neural
samplers and data generators to many others. IPs
also allow for approximate inference in functionspace. This change of formulation solves intrinsic
degenerate problems of parameter-space approximate inference concerning the high number of
parameters and their strong dependencies in large
models. For this, previous works in the literature
have attempted to employ IPs both to set up the
prior and to approximate the resulting posterior.
However, this has proven to be a challenging task.
Existing methods that can tune the prior IP result in a Gaussian predictive distribution, which
fails to capture important data patterns. By contrast, methods producing flexible predictive distributions by using another IP to approximate the
posterior process cannot tune the prior IP to the
observed data. We propose here the first method
that can accomplish both goals. For this, we rely
on an inducing-point representation of the prior
IP, as often done in the context of sparse Gaussian
processes. The result is a scalable method for
approximate inference with IPs that can tune the
prior IP parameters to the data, and that provides
accurate non-Gaussian predictive distributions.

1. Introduction
Approximate inference has recently attracted an enormous
interest from the neural networks (NNs) community due to
the high performance and popularity of these models (Gal &
Ghahramani, 2016; Sun et al., 2019). Specifically, approximate inference is seen as a fast and approachable way for
1

Institute of Mathematical Sciences (ICMAT-CSIC), Madrid,
Spain. 2 Institute of Corpuscular Physics, University of Valencia and CSIC, Spain. 3 Escuela Politécnica Superior, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Spain.. Correspondence to: Simón
Rodrı́guez Santana <simon.rodriguez@icmat.es>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

obtaining more complete information about the confidence
on the predictions made by NNs (Blundell et al., 2015b;
Gal, 2016). The resulting methods are more informative,
which can be useful in real-world scenarios. This is specially important in sensitive tasks that may require taking
decisions based on the obtained predictions and their respective uncertainties, e.g., improving the safety of autonomous
vehicles (McAllister et al., 2017). Employing the Bayesian
framework, in which one uses probability distributions to
assign degrees of belief on the weight values of these models, can be successful in this task (Blundell et al., 2015a;
Graves, 2011). However, most of these techniques come
with intrinsic difficulties such as the choice of a meaningful
prior distribution or the intractability of some of the expressions needed, which must be approximated. Moreover, the
increasing complexity of models can also lead to difficulties,
since performing inference in the space of parameters becomes more challenging in larger models. In such a case, the
parameter space presents numerous symmetries and strong
dependencies, which makes approximating the target parameter posterior distribution a complicated task. This makes
the models harder to train, requiring more data to do so, and
compromises the prediction performance (Sun et al., 2019).
There has been an increasing interest recently in implicit
stochastic processes (IPs) as a way to express prior distributions on the function space to face the problems described
(Ma et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2019). Although it requires a
slightly more complex formulation, doing approximate inference in the function space presents a way to simplify the
problems that arise in the aforementioned parameter-space.
Nevertheless, recent work has only been able to show partial
success in this matter: the proposed methods so far have
only been able to update the prior model parameters according to the data by sacrificing the flexibility of the predictive
distribution, which is fixed to be Gaussian. Alternatively,
they can only generate a more complex and flexible predictive distribution at the expense of not being capable of
adjusting the prior parameters. Thus, a general method that
can do both things is missing in the literature. Namely, (i)
Update the prior to learn important features of the data. (ii)
Provide non-Gaussian and flexible predictive distributions.
Our contribution is a new method for approximate inference
using IPs called Sparse Implicit Process (SIP). SIP fulfills
both objectives (i) and (ii). We have evaluated SIP in the

