Flow-based Recurrent Belief State Learning for POMDPs

Xiaoyu Chen 1 Yao Mu 2 Ping Luo 2 Shengbo Eben Li 3 Jianyu Chen 1 4

Abstract
Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP) provides a principled and generic
framework to model real world sequential decision making processes but yet remains unsolved,
especially for high dimensional continuous space
and unknown models. The main challenge lies in
how to accurately obtain the belief state, which is
the probability distribution over the unobservable
environment states given historical information.
Accurately calculating this belief state is a precondition for obtaining an optimal policy of POMDPs.
Recent advances in deep learning techniques show
great potential to learn good belief states. However, existing methods can only learn approximated distribution with limited flexibility. In this
paper, we introduce the FlOw-based Recurrent
BElief State model (FORBES), which incorporates normalizing flows into the variational inference to learn general continuous belief states
for POMDPs. Furthermore, we show that the
learned belief states can be plugged into downstream RL algorithms to improve performance.
In experiments, we show that our methods successfully capture the complex belief states that
enable multi-modal predictions as well as high
quality reconstructions, and results on challenging
visual-motor control tasks show that our method
achieves superior performance and sample efficiency.

1. Introduction
Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP)
(Åström, 1965) provides a principled and generic framework
to model real world sequential decision making processes.
1

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua
University 2 Department of Computer Science, The University of
Hong Kong 3 School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua University 4 Shanghai Qizhi Institute. Correspondence to: Jianyu Chen
<jianyuchen@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Unlike Markov Decision Process (MDP), the observations
of a POMDP are generally non-Markovian. Therefore, to
make optimal decisions, the agent needs to consider all
historical information, which is usually intractable. One
effective solution is to obtain the belief state. The belief
state is defined as the probability distribution of the unobservable environment state conditioned on the past observations and actions (Kaelbling et al., 1998). Such belief
state accurately summarizes the history. Traditional methods of calculating belief states (Smallwood & Sondik, 1973;
Sondik, 1971; Kaelbling et al., 1998) assume finite discrete
space with a known model. In many real world problems,
however, the underlying model remains unknown, and the
state space is large and even continuous. To track belief
states in POMDPS with continuous state and action spaces,
another line of works (Thrun, 1999; Silver & Veness, 2010)
uses Monte Carlo algorithms like particle filters to estimate
belief states. Nishiyama et al. (2012) proposes to solve the
POMDP based on models defined in appropriate reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHSs). However, this requires
access to samples from hidden states during training.
With the recent advances of deep learning technologies,
recent works mainly focus on POMDPs with unknown models and continuous state spaces. To capture belief states, a
branch of works including Hausknecht & Stone (2015); Gregor et al. (2019b) uses vector-based representations, namely
scalars, to represent belief states. However, vector-based belief states may fall short in making predictions for multiple
future trajectories (as discussed in Appendix D). Another
line of works proposes to learn belief states by approximating belief state distributions. The current state-of-the-art
performance on many visual-motor control tasks is also
achieved in this manner by sequentially maximizing the observation probability at each timestep using the variational
inference (Hafner et al., 2019a; Zhu et al., 2020; Okada et al.,
2020; Ma et al., 2020a; Mu et al., 2021). They approximate
the belief states with distributions like diagonal Gaussians
(Krishnan et al., 2015; Han et al., 2019; Gregor et al., 2019a;
Hafner et al., 2019b;a; Lee et al., 2020), Gaussian mixture
(Tschiatschek et al., 2018), categorical distribution (Hafner
et al., 2021), or particle filters (Ma et al., 2020b; Igl et al.,
2018). However, they still cannot capture general belief
states due to the intractability of complex distributions in
high-dimensional continuous space. They either suffer from

