Variational Wasserstein gradient flow

Jiaojiao Fan 1 Qinsheng Zhang 1 Amirhossein Taghvaei 2 Yongxin Chen 1

Abstract
Wasserstein gradient flow has emerged as a
promising approach to solve optimization problems over the space of probability distributions.
A recent trend is to use the well-known JKO
scheme in combination with input convex neural
networks to numerically implement the proximal
step. The most challenging step, in this setup, is
to evaluate functions involving density explicitly,
such as entropy, in terms of samples. This paper builds on the recent works with a slight but
crucial difference: we propose to utilize a variational formulation of the objective function formulated as maximization over a parametric class of
functions. Theoretically, the proposed variational
formulation allows the construction of gradient
flows directly for empirical distributions with a
well-defined and meaningful objective function.
Computationally, this approach replaces the computationally expensive step in existing methods, to
handle objective functions involving density, with
inner loop updates that only require a small batch
of samples and scale well with the dimension.
The performance and scalability of the proposed
method are illustrated with the aid of several numerical experiments involving high-dimensional
synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

The Wasserstein gradient flow models the gradient dynamics on the space of probability densities with respect to
the Wasserstein metric. It was first discovered by Jordan,
Kinderlehrer, and Otto (JKO) in their seminal work (Jordan et al., 1998). They pointed out that the Fokker-Planck
equation is in fact the Wasserstein gradient flow of the free
energy, bringing tremendous physical insights to this type
of partial differential equations (PDEs). Since then, the
1

Georgia Institute of Technology 2 University of Washington, Seattle. Correspondence to: Jiaojiao Fan <jiaojiaofan@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Wasserstein gradient flow has played an important role in
optimal transport (Santambrogio, 2017; Carlier et al., 2017),
PDEs (Otto, 2001), physics (Carrillo et al., 2021; Adams
et al., 2011), machine learning (Bunne et al., 2021; Lin
et al., 2021; Alvarez-Melis et al., 2021; Frogner & Poggio, 2020), sampling (Bernton, 2018; Cheng & Bartlett,
2018; Wibisono, 2018) and many other areas (Ambrosio
et al., 2008). Despite the abundant theoretical results on the
Wasserstein gradient flow established over the past decades
(Ambrosio et al., 2008; Santambrogio, 2017), the computation of it remains a challenge. Most existing methods
are either based on a finite difference method applied to
the underlying PDEs or based on a finite dimensional optimization; both require discretization of the underlying space
(Peyré, 2015; Benamou et al., 2016; Carlier et al., 2017;
Li et al., 2020; Carrillo et al., 2021). The computational
complexity of these methods scales exponentially with the
problem dimension, making them unsuitable for the cases
with probability densities over high dimensional space.
This shortcoming motivated recent line of interesting
works to develop scalable algorithms utilizing neural networks (Mokrov et al., 2021; Alvarez-Melis et al., 2021; Yang
et al., 2020; Bunne et al., 2021; Bonet et al., 2021). A central
theme, in most of these works, is the application of the JKO
scheme in combination with input convex neural networks
(ICNN) (Amos et al., 2017). The JKO scheme, which is
essentially a backward Euler method, is used to discretize
the continuous flow in time. At each time-step, one needs
to find a probability distribution that minimizes a weighted
sum of squared Wasserstein distance, with respect to the
distribution at the previous time-step, and the objective function. The probability distribution is then parametrized as
push-forward of the optimal transport map from the previous probability distribution. The optimal transport map is
represented with gradient of an ICNN utilizing the knowledge that optimal transport maps are gradient of convex
functions when the transportation cost is quadratic. The
problem is finally cast as stochastic optimization problem
which only requires samples from the distribution.
Our paper builds on these recent works but with a crucial
difference. We propose to use a variational form of the objective function, leveraging f -divergences, which has been
employed in multiple machine learning applications, such
as generative models (Nowozin et al., 2016), and Bayesian

