Adversarially Trained Actor Critic for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Ching-An Cheng * 1 Tengyang Xie * 2 Nan Jiang 2 Alekh Agarwal 3

Abstract
We propose Adversarially Trained Actor Critic
(ATAC), a new model-free algorithm for offline reinforcement learning (RL) under insufficient data
coverage, based on the concept of relative pessimism. ATAC is designed as a two-player Stackelberg game: A policy actor competes against an
adversarially trained value critic, who finds dataconsistent scenarios where the actor is inferior
to the data-collection behavior policy. We prove
that, when the actor attains no regret in the twoplayer game, running ATAC produces a policy
that provably 1) outperforms the behavior policy
over a wide range of hyperparameters that control
the degree of pessimism, and 2) competes with
the best policy covered by data with appropriately
chosen hyperparameters. Compared with existing
works, notably our framework offers both theoretical guarantees for general function approximation and a deep RL implementation scalable
to complex environments and large datasets. In
the D4RL benchmark, ATAC consistently outperforms state-of-the-art offline RL algorithms on a
range of continuous control tasks.

1. Introduction
Online reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully
applied in many simulation domains (Mnih et al., 2015;
Silver et al., 2016), demonstrating the promise of solving
sequential decision making problems by direct exploratory
interactions. However, collecting diverse interaction data
is prohibitively expensive or infeasible in many real-world
applications such as robotics, healthcare, and conversational
agents. Due to these problems’ risk-sensitive nature, data
can only be collected by behavior policies that satisfy certain
baseline performance or safety requirements.
*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 3 Google Research. Correspondence to:
Ching-An Cheng <chinganc@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

The restriction on real-world data collection calls for offline RL algorithms that can reliably learn with historical
experiences that potentially have limited coverage over the
state-action space. Ideally, an offline RL algorithm should
1) always improve upon the behavior policies that collected
the data, and 2) learn from large datasets to outperform any
other policy whose state-action distribution is well covered
by the data. The first condition is known as safe policy
improvement (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Laroche et al., 2019),
and the second is a form of learning consistency, that the
algorithm makes the best use of the available data.
In particular, it is desirable that the algorithm can maintain safe policy improvement across large and anchored
hyperparameter choices, a property we call robust policy
improvement. Since offline hyperparameter selection is a
difficult open question (Paine et al., 2020; Zhang & Jiang,
2021), robust policy improvement ensures the learned policy is always no worse than the baseline behavior policies
and therefore can be reliably deployed in risk-sensitive decision making applications. For example, in healthcare,
it is only ethical to deploy new treatment policies when
we confidently know they are no worse than existing ones.
In addition, robust policy improvement makes tuning hyperparameters using additional online interactions possible.
While online interactions are expensive, they are not completely prohibited in many application scenarios, especially
when the tested policies are no worse than the behavior
policy that collected the data in the first place. Therefore,
if the algorithm has robust policy improvement, then its
performance can potentially be more directly tuned.
However, few existing works possess all the desiderata
above. Regarding consistency guarantees, deep offline RL
algorithms (e.g. Kumar et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al., 2021)
show strong empirical performance, but are analyzed theoretically in highly simplified tabular cases. Theoretical
works (Liu et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021;
Uehara et al., 2021) provide systematic analyses of learning
correctness and consistency, but most of them have little
empirical evaluation (Liu et al., 2020) or consider only the
linear case (Jin et al., 2021; Zanette et al., 2021).
Turning to the robust policy improvement property, this is
relatively rare in state-of-the-art offline RL literature. Behavior regularization approaches (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar

