Minimax M-estimation under Adversarial Corruption

Sujay Bhatt, Guanhua Fang, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{sujaybhatt.hr, fanggh2018, pingli98}@gmail.com

Abstract
1

We present a new finite-sample analysis of
Catoni’s M-estimator under adversarial contamination, where an adversary is allowed to corrupt
a fraction of the samples arbitrarily. We make
minimal assumptions on the distribution of the
uncorrupted random variables, namely, we only
assume the existence of a known upper bound on
the (1 + ε)th central moment. We provide a lower
bound on the minimax error rate for the mean
estimation problem under adversarial corruption
under this weak assumption, and establish that the
proposed M-estimator achieves this lower bound
(up to multiplicative constants). When variance is
infinite, the tolerance to contamination of any estimator reduces as ε ↓ 0. We establish a tight upper
bound that characterizes this bargain. To illustrate
the usefulness of the derived robust M-estimator
in an online setting, we present a bandit algorithm
for the partially identifiable best arm identification
problem that improves upon the sample complexity of the state of the art algorithms.

Gennady Samorodnitsky
School of ORIE
Cornell University
220 Frank T Rhodes Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
gs18@cornell.edu

heavy-tails, modern machine learning also has to deal with
malicious noise (Auer and Cesa-Bianchi, 1998; Diakonikolas et al., 2018). Here an adversary can arbitrarily corrupt a
fraction of the data to disrupt inference. These challenges
motivate the study of robust mean estimation in this paper,
with a focus on providing estimators that can tolerate large
amount of adversarial corruption, possibly in the presence
of heavy-tailed data.
Standard mean estimation based on mean squared error is
insufficient to deal with such diverse data (Catoni, 2012);
and mean estimation based on deviations, namely, that of
estimation of confidence intervals offers a much better alternative (Catoni, 2012; Brownlees et al., 2015). Here the
fundamental problem is of designing an estimator µ
bn =
µ
bn ({Xi }ni=1 ) that for a given confidence δ ∈ (0, 1) has the
smallest possible ϱ = ϱ(n, δ) such that
n
o
P µ
bn − µ > ϱ ≤ δ.
In next two subsections, we briefly review the standard
results (and key challenges) for robust mean estimation
under finite and infinite variance settings, separately.

1. Introduction

1.1. Finite Variance, ε = 1

Univariate mean estimation plays an important role in many
statistical learning problems, ranging from classification and
regression (James et al., 2013) to online learning (Lattimore
and Szepesvári, 2020; Agarwal et al., 2019). A fundamental
challenge in machine learning, using diverse data drawn
from heterogeneous sources, is that outliers and adversarial
contamination is unavoidable. For example, the presence
of outliers is the primary source of invalid inferences in
fMRI (Eklund et al., 2016). In addition to dealing with

In the case of finite variance, the classical empirical mean
is a poor estimator of mean due to the presence of outliers (Catoni, 2012; Devroye et al., 2016; Oliveira and Orenstein, 2019). In fact, it was shown in Catoni (2012) that, if
υ is the variance of the observations, then the best possible
error ϱ(n, δ) for empirical mean of {Xi }ni=1 is of the order
of √υδn , which is far from the best possible, as informed by
the central limit theorem (Lugosi and Mendelson, 2019a).
Devroye et al. (2016) exhibit several sub-Gaussian estimators2 of the mean such as median-of-means, trimmed mean,

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
The work of Gennady Samorodnitsky was conducted as a
consulting researcher at Baidu Research – Bellevue, WA 98004.

2
An estimator µ
bn is L-sub-Gaussian for a constant L > 0 if
for random variables with variance υ and (any) sample size n, with
probability at least 1 − δ,
p
L υ log(2/δ)
√
µ
bn − µ ≤
.
n

