Efficient Representation Learning via Adaptive Context Pooling

Chen Huang 1 Walter Talbott 1 Navdeep Jaitly 1 Josh Susskind 1

Abstract
Query

Self-attention mechanisms model long-range context by using pairwise attention between all input
tokens. In doing so, they assume a fixed attention granularity defined by the individual tokens
(e.g., text characters or image pixels), which may
not be optimal for modeling complex dependencies at higher levels. In this paper, we propose
ContextPool to address this problem by adapting
the attention granularity for each token. Inspired
by the success of ConvNets that are combined
with pooling to capture long-range dependencies,
we learn to pool neighboring features for each
token before computing attention in a given attention layer. The pooling weights and support size
are adaptively determined, allowing the pooled
features to encode meaningful context with varying scale. We show that ContextPool makes attention models more expressive, achieving strong
performance often with fewer layers and thus significantly reduced cost. Experiments validate that
our ContextPool module, when plugged into transformer models, matches or surpasses state-of-theart performance using less compute on several
language and image benchmarks, outperforms recent works with learned context sizes or sparse
attention patterns, and is also applicable to ConvNets for efficient feature learning.

Query
Memory

Input sequence as memory
(a) standard self-attention

(b) local attention span
Query
Full attention

Query

Area memory
…

Memory

Average pooling
Original memory

(d) area attention

(c) sparse attention
Query

Full attention
Pooled memory
…

ContextPool
Original memory

(e) CP-attention (ours)

Figure 1. Comparing transformers with (a) standard selfattention (Vaswani et al., 2017), (b-c) efficient attention mechanisms with localized (Yang et al., 2018) or other sparsity patterns (Li et al., 2019a) that lose the full-attention capacity, and (d)
area attention (Li et al., 2019b) that maintains an extra memory
formed by average pooling with a predefined set of pool sizes. (e)
Our ContextPool learns to pool with adaptive weighting and support size for each token in-place, before computing full attention.

important in both language and vision tasks.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have achieved great
success in the domains of natural language processing
(NLP) (Devlin et al., 2019) and computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). These models benefit from the selfattention mechanism, which computes correlations between
all pairs of tokens in an input sequence. Self-attention enables transformers to capture long-range context, which is
1
Apple Inc., Cupertino, United States. Correspondence to:
Chen Huang <chen-huang@apple.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

However, each attention layer uses pairwise relationships between individual tokens (e.g., text characters and image pixels), which implies a fixed granularity for attention. This ignores the context around each token, which can vary substantially in scale in the vision and language domains, e.g., from
characters to words and from phrases to sentence. Therefore,
self-attention with fixed granularity can be fundamentally
limited for modeling complex distribution of contextual dependencies, and several layers of self-attention might be
needed to make up for this fixed granularity.
Recent vision transformers such as Swin transformer (Liu
et al., 2021) and PVT (Wang et al., 2021) adopt a hierarchical architecture to compute self-attention at various
scales. However, such attention scale or granularity is pre-

