Language Models as Zero-Shot Planners:
Extracting Actionable Knowledge for Embodied Agents

Wenlong Huang 1 Pieter Abbeel 1 Deepak Pathak * 2 Igor Mordatch * 3


Abstract

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have made impressive advances in language generation and understanding in recent
years (Devlin et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019; Raffel et al.,
2019; Brown et al., 2020). See (Bommasani et al., 2021) for
a recent summary of their capabilities and impacts. Being
trained on large corpora of human-produced language, these
models are thought to contain a lot of information about
*

Equal Advising 1 University of California, Berkeley 2 Carnegie
Mellon University 3 Google. Correspondence to: Wenlong Huang
<wenlong.huang@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

&RUUHFWQHVV

Can world knowledge learned by large language
models (LLMs) be used to act in interactive environments? In this paper, we investigate the possibility of grounding high-level tasks, expressed
in natural language (e.g. “make breakfast”), to a
chosen set of actionable steps (e.g. “open fridge”).
While prior work focused on learning from explicit step-by-step examples of how to act, we
surprisingly find that if pre-trained LMs are large
enough and prompted appropriately, they can effectively decompose high-level tasks into midlevel plans without any further training. However,
the plans produced naively by LLMs often cannot
map precisely to admissible actions. We propose
a procedure that conditions on existing demonstrations and semantically translates the plans to
admissible actions. Our evaluation in the recent
VirtualHome environment shows that the resulting
method substantially improves executability over
the LLM baseline. The conducted human evaluation reveals a trade-off between executability and
correctness but shows a promising sign towards
extracting actionable knowledge from language
models.

+XPDQ ([HFXWDELOLW\



Translated
GPT-3 175B (Ours)

GPT-3 175B
Codex 12B



GPT-3 13B

Translated
Codex 12B
(Ours)



GPT-2 1.5B



GPT-2 0.1B












([HFXWDELOLW\



Figure 1. Executability (x-axis) and semantic correctness (y-axis)
of generated action plans. Large models can produce plans indistinguishable from those by humans, but frequently are not executable
in the environment. Using our techniques, executability is significantly improved, albeit at the cost of correctness. Website: https:
//huangwl18.github.io/language-planner/.

the world (Roberts et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; BIG-bench
collaboration, 2021) - albeit in linguistic form.
We ask whether we can use such knowledge contained in
LLMs not just for linguistic tasks, but to make goal-driven
decisions that can be enacted in interactive, embodied environments. But we are not simply interested in whether we
can train models on a dataset of demonstrations collected
for some specific environment – we are instead interested
in whether LLMs already contain information necessary to
accomplish goals without any additional training.
More specifically, we explore whether world knowledge
about how to perform high-level tasks (e.g. “make breakfast”) can be expanded to a series of unambiguous actions
(e.g. “open fridge”, “grab milk”, “close fridge”) chosen
from a pre-defined set, assuming low-level controller is
given. Notably, we require the series of actions to include all
necessary steps for completing the high-level task, including the common-sense actions which are often not explicitly
mentioned by humans (e.g. “open fridge”). We thus focus
on this mid-level grounding challenge and investigate if raw
knowledge of LLMs can achieve this without requiring any
finetuning on the downstream task data.

