Fast Relative Entropy Coding with A* coding

Gergely Flamich∗ 1 Stratis Markou∗ 1 José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 1 2 3

Abstract
Relative entropy coding (REC) algorithms encode
a sample from a target distribution Q using a
proposal distribution P , such that the expected
codelength is O(DKL [Q∥P ]). REC can be seamlessly integrated with existing learned compression models since, unlike entropy coding, it does
not assume discrete Q or P , and does not require
quantisation. However, general REC algorithms
require an intractable Ω(eDKL [Q∥P ] ) runtime. We
introduce AS* and AD* coding, two REC algorithms based on A* sampling. We prove that,
for continuous distributions over R, if the density ratio is unimodal, AS* has O(D∞ [Q∥P ]) expected runtime, where D∞ [Q∥P ] is the Rényi ∞divergence. We provide experimental evidence
that AD* also has O(D∞ [Q∥P ]) expected runtime. We prove that AS* and AD* achieve an
expected codelength of O(DKL [Q∥P ]). Further,
we introduce DAD*, an approximate algorithm
based on AD* which retains its favourable runtime and has bias similar to that of alternative
methods. Focusing on VAEs, we propose the
IsoKL VAE (IKVAE), which can be used with
DAD* to further improve compression efficiency.
We evaluate A* coding with (IK)VAEs on MNIST,
showing that it can losslessly compress images
near the theoretically optimal limit.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been significant progress in compression using machine learning, an approach known as
learned compression. Most of the prominent learned compression methods, including the state-of-the-art in both lossless (Townsend et al., 2019; Hoogeboom et al., 2019; Zhang
∗

Equal contribution. 1 Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2 Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK 3 Alan Turing Institute, London, UK. Correspondence to: Gergely Flamich <gf332@cam.ac.uk>, Stratis Markou
<em626@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright
2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2021) and lossy compression (Ballé et al., 2017),
perform non-linear transform coding (Ballé et al., 2020).
In transform coding, a datum is first mapped to a latent representation and encoded with entropy coding. Entropy coding
assumes that the latent representation and the coding distribution are discrete, which requires a non-differentiable quantization step. Since gradient-based optimization requires
derivatives, most state-of-the-art methods use a continuous
approximation to quantization during training and switch to
hard quantization only during compression time (Ballé et al.,
2017). This mismatch has been argued to be harmful towards the compression efficiency of these methods (Havasi
et al., 2018; Flamich et al., 2020; Theis & Agustsson, 2021).
Relative entropy coding (REC; Flamich et al., 2020) is a
recently proposed alternative, which does not require quantization and avoids this mismatch. A REC algorithm uses
samples from a proposal distribution P to produce a random
code representing a sample from a target distribution Q,
with expected length of approximately DKL [Q∥P ]2 , where
the subscript specifies that the KL is measured in bits rather
than nats. General-purpose REC algorithms place no restrictions on Q and P beyond that DKL [Q∥P ]2 be finite, so they
can be applied even when Q and P are continuous. Thus
REC can be naturally applied to perform compression with
generative models trained via gradient descent, for applications including but not limited to: (1) data compression with
variational autoencoders (VAE; Kingma & Welling, 2014),
where Q corresponds to a variational posterior over latent
variables and P to a prior over these latent variables; (2)
model compression (Havasi et al., 2018), where Q corresponds to an approximate posterior over parameters (Blundell et al., 2015), and P to a prior over those parameters.
However, REC algorithms that makeno further assumptions
on Q or P require Ω 2DKL [Q∥P ]2 steps to terminate in
expectation (Agustsson & Theis, 2020), which is a severe
limitation in practice. Thus, in order to make progress, it
is necessary to impose additional assumptions on Q and
P . Universal quantisation (Ziv, 1985) can be regarded as a
REC algorithm that achieves O(DKL [Q∥P ]2 ) runtime and
has been demonstrated to work well with the state-of-theart VAE-based learned compression methods (Agustsson &
Theis, 2020). However, it places heavy limitations on Q and
P , which might be overly restrictive in many cases.

