Flowformer: Linearizing Transformers with Conservation Flows

Haixu Wu 1 Jialong Wu 1 Jiehui Xu 1 Jianmin Wang 1 Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract
Transformers based on the attention mechanism
have achieved impressive success in various areas.
However, the attention mechanism has a quadratic
complexity, significantly impeding Transformers
from dealing with numerous tokens and scaling up
to bigger models. Previous methods mainly utilize
the similarity decomposition and the associativity
of matrix multiplication to devise linear-time attention mechanisms. They avoid degeneration of
attention to a trivial distribution by reintroducing
inductive biases such as the locality, thereby at the
expense of model generality and expressiveness.
In this paper, we linearize Transformers free from
specific inductive biases based on the flow network theory. We cast attention as the information
flow aggregated from the sources (values) to the
sinks (results) through the learned flow capacities
(attentions). Within this framework, we apply the
property of flow conservation into attention and
propose the Flow-Attention mechanism of linear
complexity. By respectively conserving the incoming flow of sinks for source competition and
the outgoing flow of sources for sink allocation,
Flow-Attention inherently generates informative
attentions without using specific inductive biases.
Empowered by the Flow-Attention, Flowformer
yields strong performance in linear time for wide
areas, including long sequence, time series, vision,
natural language, and reinforcement learning. The
code and settings are available at this repository:
https://github.com/thuml/Flowformer.

1. Introduction
Recently, Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have shown
immense capability in sequential modeling and been widely
used in various areas, such as natural language processing
1

School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University. Haixu Wu
<whx20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>. Correspondence to: Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020),
computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021),
time series analysis (Zhou et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021) and
reinforcement learning (Chen et al., 2021b; Janner et al.,
2021). Based on attention mechanisms, Transformers can
learn the relation between each pair of tokens in a sequence.
However, suffering from the quadratic complexity of pairwise relation modeling, it is computationally prohibitive for
Transformers to deal with long sequences and scale up to
bigger models. To tackle this essential obstacle for foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021), efficient and linear
Transformers have been explored. One category of methods
attempts to utilize the sparsity to reduce the model captured relations (Child et al., 2019; Vyas et al., 2020; Zaheer
et al., 2020). By substituting the dense matrix to a sparse
version, these models can obtain a lower complexity but inevitably sacrifice some valuable information, leading to the
trade-off dilemma between efficiency and performance. Another mainstream category tries to abandon the computationconsuming query-key multiplication in the attention mechanism. The typical method is to substitute or approximate
the softmax-based similarity in Transformers. For example,
Linear Transformer (Katharopoulos et al., 2020) introduces
the decomposition method for similarity calculation and
further bypasses the query-key multiplication through the
associativity of matrix multiplication. However, without
using the softmax function, these methods cannot guarantee
the distinguishability of attention. This may result in nearuniform attention of each token to all other tokens, namely
the degenerated attention, which damages the effectiveness
of the attention mechanism. Although some works try to
incorporate the concentration property to avoid the trivial
attention (Luo et al., 2021; Zhen et al., 2022), they have to
reintroduce specific inductive biases to Transformers, such
as the locality in sequence, sacrificing the model generality.
Thus, how to simultaneously obtain the non-trivial attention
and maintain the generality as the canonical attention is the
key challenge in the advance of linearizing Transformers.
Previous works demonstrate that the softmax function is
essential to avoid the trivial attention (Choromanski et al.,
2021; Peng et al., 2021). It is well-known that the softmax
function is originally proposed as a differentiable generalization of the “winner-take-all” picking maximum operation
(Bridle, 1989). Thus, the softmax function can introduce

