Adversarial Attack and Defense for Non-Parametric Two-Sample Tests

Xilie Xu * 1 Jingfeng Zhang * 2 Feng Liu 3 Masashi Sugiyama 2 4 Mohan Kankanhalli 1

Abstract
Non-parametric two-sample tests (TSTs) that
judge whether two sets of samples are drawn from
the same distribution, have been widely used in
the analysis of critical data. People tend to employ
TSTs as trusted basic tools and rarely have any
doubt about their reliability. This paper systematically uncovers the failure mode of non-parametric
TSTs through adversarial attacks and then proposes corresponding defense strategies. First, we
theoretically show that an adversary can upperbound the distributional shift which guarantees
the attack’s invisibility. Furthermore, we theoretically find that the adversary can also degrade
the lower bound of a TST’s test power, which
enables us to iteratively minimize the test criterion in order to search for adversarial pairs. To
enable TST-agnostic attacks, we propose an ensemble attack (EA) framework that jointly minimizes the different types of test criteria. Second, to robustify TSTs, we propose a max-min
optimization that iteratively generates adversarial pairs to train the deep kernels. Extensive
experiments on both simulated and real-world
datasets validate the adversarial vulnerabilities
of non-parametric TSTs and the effectiveness of
our proposed defense. Source code is available at
https://github.com/GodXuxilie/Robust-TST.git.

1. Introduction
Non-parametric two-sample tests (TSTs) that judge whether
two sets of samples drawn from the same distribution have
been widely used to analyze critical data in physics (Baldi
et al., 2014), neurophysiology (Rasch et al., 2008), biol*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computing, National University of Singapore 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence
Project (AIP) 3 School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne 4 Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
The University of Tokyo. Correspondence to: Jingfeng Zhang
<jingfeng.zhang@riken.jp>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ogy (Borgwardt et al., 2006), etc. Compared with traditional
methods (such as the t-test), non-parametric TSTs can relax
the strong parametric assumption about the distributions being studied and are effective in complex domains (Gretton
et al., 2009; 2012; Chwialkowski et al., 2015; Jitkrittum
et al., 2016; Sutherland et al., 2017; Lopez-Paz & Oquab,
2016; Cheng & Cloninger, 2019; Liu et al., 2020a; 2021).
Notably, the use of deep kernels (Liu et al., 2020a) flexibly empowers the non-parametric TSTs to learn even more
complex distributions.
However, the adversarial robustness of non-parametric TSTs
is rarely studied, despite its extensive studies for deep neural networks (DNNs). Studies of DNNs’ adversarial robustness (Madry et al., 2018) have enabled significant advances in defending against adversarial attacks (Szegedy
et al., 2014), which can help enhance the security in various
domains such as computer vision (Xie et al., 2017; Mahmood et al., 2021), natural language processing (Zhu et al.,
2020; Yoo & Qi, 2021), recommendation system (Peng &
Mine, 2020), etc. We therefore undertake this pioneer study
on adversarial robustness of non-parametric TSTs, which
uncovers the failure mode of non-parametric TSTs through
adversarial attacks and facilitate an effective strategy for
making TSTs reliable in critical applications (Baldi et al.,
2014; Rasch et al., 2008; Borgwardt et al., 2006).
First, we theoretically show the adversary could upperbound the distributional shift and degrade the lower bound
of a TST’s test power (details in Section 3.1). Given a
m
benign pair (SP , SQ ), in which SP = {xi }m
and
i=1 ∼ P
SQ = {yj }nj=1 ∼ Qn , an `∞ -bounded adversary could generate the adversarial pair (SP , S̃Q ). We will show in Proposition 1 that the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al., 2012) between the benign and adversarial pairs is
upper-bounded, which guarantees imperceptible adversarial
perturbations (Szegedy et al., 2014). Furthermore, we will
show in Theorem 2 that the adversary can degrade the lower
bound of a TST’s test power, which implies that a TST could
wrongly determine P = Q with a larger probability under
adversarial attacks when P 6= Q holds.
Then, we realize effective adversarial attacks against nonparametric TSTs (details in Section 3.2). We formulate
an attack as a constraint optimization problem that minimizes a TST’s test criterion (Liu et al., 2020a) within the

