DRAGONN: Distributed Randomized Approximate Gradients of Neural
Networks
Zhuang Wang * 1 Zhaozhuo Xu * 1 Xinyu Crystal Wu 1 Anshumali Shrivastava 1 2 T. S. Eugene Ng 1

Abstract
Data-parallel distributed training (DDT) has become the de-facto standard for accelerating the
training of most deep learning tasks on massively
parallel hardware. In the DDT paradigm, the
communication overhead of gradient synchronization is the major efficiency bottleneck. A widely
adopted approach to tackle this issue is gradient sparsification (GS). However, the current GS
methods introduce significant new overhead in
compressing the gradients, outweighing the communication overhead and becoming the new efficiency bottleneck. In this paper, we propose
DRAGONN, a randomized hashing algorithm for
GS in DDT. DRAGONN can significantly reduce
the compression time by up to 70% compared to
state-of-the-art GS approaches, and achieve up to
3.52× speedup in total training throughput.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the popularity of Deep Learning (DL) in both research and industrial communities. Deep
Neural Networks (DNN) trained on massive amount of
data have experienced significant success in computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Tolstikhin et al., 2021), language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al.,
2019), recommendation systems (Naumov et al., 2019) and
geophysics (Desai et al., 2021).
The Need for Data-parallel Distributed Training: Recently, multilayer perceptron (MLP) models have demonstrated improvement over state-of-the-art (SOTA) DL benchmarks (Tolstikhin et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021). However,
these MLP models introduce million-scale weight tensors.
As a result, large batch training over these giant weight
*
Equal contribution 1 Computer Science Department, Rice
University, Houston, TX, USA 2 ThirdAI Corp, Houston, TX,
USA. Correspondence to: Anshumali Shrivastava <anshumali@rice.edu>, T. S. Eugene Ng <eugeneng@cs.rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tensors is infeasible due to the limited memory resources
of Graphic Processing Unit (GPU) (Owens et al., 2008).
To overcome this obstacle, data-parallel distributed training (DDT) becomes a widely adopted paradigm. In this
paradigm, the data loader partitions the dataset according
to the number of workers. Next, each worker only trains on
its own partition. Then, the model gradients generated from
each worker are synchronized. Finally, the weights at each
worker is updated by the synchronized gradients. This data
parallelism can scale the training of neural network over
large numbers of GPUs with reduced total training time.
Communication Bottleneck in Gradient Synchronization: The innovations of hardware accelerators (Luo et al.,
2018; NVIDIA, 2021) and domain-specific software optimization (Chen et al., 2018; Zheng et al., 2020; Chetlur
et al., 2014) have dramatically reduced the iteration time
of DNN training jobs. This trend results in more frequent
gradient synchronization in DDT. However, it is difficult for
the cloud network bandwidth to keep up with the pace of the
computation-related improvement (Sapio et al., 2019; Bai
et al., 2021). Moreover, the number of GPUs for DNN training keeps increasing due to the ever-growing training dataset,
which further worsens the communication time (Jiang et al.,
2020; Thakur et al., 2005). The communication overhead in
DDT has become a well-known performance bottleneck as
each GPU needs to transmit the full gradients for synchronization (Fei et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2019; Aji & Heafield,
2017; Lin et al., 2017).
Gradient Sparsification for Efficient Communication:
Gradient sparsification (GS) (Strom, 2015; Aji & Heafield,
2017; Shi et al., 2021; Stich et al., 2018; Barnes et al., 2020)
has great potential to alleviate the communication bottleneck. GS approaches only select a subset of the original
gradients for synchronization. There exists two well-known
GS paradigms, namely exact TopK (Aji & Heafield, 2017)
and approximate TopK, such as deep gradient compression
(DGC) (Lin et al., 2017) and MSTopk (Shi et al., 2021). The
exact TopK method selects the exact top-k gradients while
approximate TopK selects the gradients with values greater
than an estimated threshold. Both approaches can save up
to 99.9% of the gradient exchange in DDT while preserving
the iteration-wise performance towards convergence. Approximate TopK can achieve higher practical training speed

