Local Linear Convergence of Douglas-Rachford for Linear Programming:
a Probabilistic Analysis

Oisı́n Faust 1 2 Hamza Fawzi 1 2

Abstract

dual linear program is

Douglas-Rachford splitting/ADMM (henceforth
DRS) is a very popular algorithm for solving convex optimisation problems to low or moderate
accuracy, and in particular for solving large-scale
linear programs. Despite recent progress, obtaining highly accurate solutions to linear programs
with DRS remains elusive. In this paper we analyze the local linear convergence rate r of the
DRS method for random linear programs, and
give explicit and tight bounds on r. We show that
1 − r2 is typically of the order of m−1 (n − m)−1 ,
where n is the number of variables and m is the
number of constraints. This provides a quantitative explanation for the very slow convergence
of DRS/ADMM on random LPs. The proof of
our result relies on an established characterisation
of the linear rate of convergence as the cosine
of the Friedrichs angle between two subspaces
associated to the problem. We also show that
the cosecant of this angle can be interpreted as a
condition number for the LP.

maximise

s.t.

Ax = Ax̄

s := c − A⊤ y ∈ Rn+

(2)

Douglas-Rachford splitting (Lions & Mercier, 1979) is a
fundamental algorithm for convex optimisation (and more
generally, for finding the zeros of monotone operators). For
convex optimisation problems, Douglas-Rachford splitting
(DRS) is known to be equivalent to the equally well-known
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) applied to the dual problem (Gabay, 1983; Eckstein & Bertsekas, 1992). One area where DRS/ADMM has found much
success is in solving large-scale conic programs – see e.g.
(O’Donoghue et al., 2016). A direct application of DRS for
solving (1) is listed in Algorithm 1. (See Appendix A.1 for
the derivation of this algorithm.)

A linear program (LP) is an optimisation problem which
can be expressed in the following standard form1
⟨c, x⟩

s.t.

y ∈ Rm .

1. Introduction

minimise

⟨Ax̄, y⟩

Algorithm 1 Douglas-Rachford for (1)
Input: Initial point z 0 ∈ Rn
k←0
repeat
sk ← ΠRn+ (z k ) − z k

xk ← (z k + 2sk ) − A⊤ (AA⊤ )−1 A z k + 2sk − x̄
z k+1 ← xk − sk
k ←k+1
until convergence, or other termination criterion satisfied

(1)

x ∈ Rn+ .
n

The data for this LP consist of vectors x̄, c ∈ R , and a
matrix A ∈ Rm×n with full row rank m, 1 ≤ m < n. The
1
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 Cantab
Capital Institute for the Mathematics of Information, University
of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Oisı́n Faust <opbf2@maths.cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Our representation of the affine constraints as Ax = Ax̄
instead of the traditional Ax = b encodes the implicit assumption
that the corresponding affine space is nonempty.

Like most other first-order methods (and as opposed to, say,
interior point methods), DRS is known to have an initial
phase of “fast” convergence towards an approximate solution, followed by a phase of slow convergence towards the
exact solution. For this reason, splitting algorithms have
typically only been used to obtain solutions of low to moderate accuracy. However, there has been recent interest in
using splitting methods to solve large-scale linear programs
to high accuracy, see e.g., (Applegate et al., 2021; Lu &
Yang, 2021). For linear programs it has been known (Boley,
2013) that the “slow” phase of convergence of DRS/ADMM
is in fact linear convergence (i.e. the error decreases geometrically). The catch is that the rate of ultimate linear
convergence may be very close to 1. This is illustrated in

