On the Effects of Artificial Data Modification
Antonia Marcu 1 Adam Prügel-Bennett 1

Abstract
Data distortion is commonly applied in vision
models during both training (e.g methods like
MixUp and CutMix) and evaluation (e.g. shapetexture bias and robustness). This data modification can introduce artificial information. It is
often assumed that the resulting artefacts are detrimental to training, whilst being negligible when
analysing models. We investigate these assumptions and conclude that in some cases they are
unfounded and lead to incorrect results. Specifically, we show current shape bias identification
methods and occlusion robustness measures are
biased and propose a fairer alternative for the latter. Subsequently, through a series of experiments
we seek to correct and strengthen the community’s
perception of how augmenting affects learning of
vision models. Based on our empirical results
we argue that the impact of the artefacts must be
understood and exploited rather than eliminated.

1. Motivation
Augmentation is commonplace when training models. It is
a form of data modification where samples are artificially
distorted to create larger training sets. Apart from augmentative purposes, data modification is also used for a wide
range of model analysis methods. Most recently, distortionbased approaches have been adopted when trying to answer
key machine learning questions. To this end, MixUp-like
distortions (Zhang et al., 2018) were proposed for empirically predicting generalisation (Schiff et al., 2021; Natekar
& Sharma, 2020; Lassance et al., 2020). Thus, data modification is becoming increasingly popular, but little attention
is paid to the secondary effects of this practice. As we will
demonstrate, our current understanding of the effects of
data modification lies on fundamentally flawed assumptions.
This impacts not only our perception of what features are
1

Vision, Learning and Control research group, University of Southampton. Correspondence to: Antonia Marcu
<am1g15@soton.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

important to our models, but also the correctness of the
distortion-based approaches we propose as a field.
In this paper we study the assumptions and implications that
arise through artificially distorted data. From the model analysis perspective, we take occlusion robustness and shape
bias identification methods as examples of where modified data is used. On the training side, we focus on some
instances of Mixed Sample Data Augmentation (MSDA),
where two images are combined to obtain a new training
sample. Visual illustrations of each can be found in Figure 1.
We explore some of the side-effects of data modification and
demonstrate that this practice has resulted in the creation of
biased model interpretation tools and poorly informed theories. More specifically, we study a number of assumptions
which we show are erroneous and which lie at the heart of
the methods we briefly introduce below. Contesting these
assumptions has broader implications on the community’s
perception of what aspects of the data are important and how
distortions can be further used to understand generalisation.
Shape-texture bias: Deep models are known to be sensitive
to distribution shifts (Alaiz-Rodrı́guez & Japkowicz, 2008;
Cieslak & Chawla, 2009; Engstrom et al., 2019) and interventions that are imperceptible to humans (Szegedy et al.,
2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014). It has been argued that this
is intimately linked to networks tending to use texture rather
than shape information (Brendel & Bethge, 2019; Geirhos
et al., 2019). Recently, input distortions have become a
popular way of assessing a model’s texture bias. To this end,
images are divided into a grid and the resulting patches are
randomly shuffled such that information is preserved locally,
while the global shape is altered (Shi et al., 2020; Mummadi
et al., 2021; Luo et al., 2019; Zhang & Zhu, 2019). It is
implicitly assumed that patch-shuffling does not introduce
misleading shape or texture that could affect model evaluation. As such, if a model’s accuracy drops when evaluated
on patch-shuffled images, this degradation in performance is
entirely attributed to the model’s bias for shape information.
Thus, any side-effects of the data manipulation process are
considered negligible.
Occlusion robustness: Commonly, occlusion robustness
is concerned with the amount of information that can be
hidden from a model without affecting its ability to classify
(Tang et al., 2018; Rajaei et al., 2019). A widely adopted
proxy for measuring occlusion robustness is through the raw

