Sequential Covariate Shift Detection Using Classifier Two-Sample Tests

Sooyong Jang 1 Sangdon Park 1 2 Insup Lee 1 Osbert Bastani 1

Abstract
A standard assumption in supervised learning is
that the training data and test data are from the
same distribution. However, this assumption often fails to hold in practice, which can cause the
learned model to perform poorly. We consider
the problem of detecting covariate shift, where
the covariate distribution shifts but the conditional
distribution of labels given covariates remains the
same. This problem can naturally be solved using
a two-sample test—i.e., test whether the current
test distribution of covariates equals the training
distribution of covariates. Our algorithm builds on
classifier tests, which train a discriminator to distinguish train and test covariates, and then use the
accuracy of this discriminator as a test statistic. A
key challenge is that classifier tests assume given a
fixed set of test covariates. In practice, test covariates often arrive sequentially over time—e.g., a
self-driving car observes a stream of images while
driving. Furthermore, covariate shift can occur
multiple times—i.e., shift and then shift back later
or gradually shift over time. To address these challenges, our algorithm trains the discriminator online. Additionally, it evaluates test accuracy using
each new covariate before taking a gradient step;
this strategy avoids constructing a held-out test set,
which can improve sample efficiency. We prove
that this optimization preserves the correctness—
i.e., our algorithm achieves a desired bound on
the false positive rate. In our experiments, we
show that our algorithm efficiently detects covariate shifts on multiple datasets—ImageNet, IWildCam, and Py150.

1
PRECISE Center, University of Pennsylvania, USA.
School of Cybersecurity and Privacy, Georgia Institute of
Technology, USA. Correspondence to: Sooyong Jang <sooyong@seas.upenn.edu>.
2

th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
A key challenge facing deep neural networks is their sensitivity to changes in the data distribution. In particular,
supervised learning traditionally assumes that the training
and test data are from the same distribution (Vapnik, 1998),
but this assumption often fails in practice. For example,
an autonomous car using perception to identify obstacles
needs to be robust to shifts such as changes in the weather
and lighting conditions. We focus on covariate shift (Shimodaira, 2000), where there is a shift in the covariate distribution p(x), and the conditional label distribution p(y | x)
remains unchanged. Covariate shift can reduce model performance (Sugiyama & Müller, 2005), invalidate uncertainty
estimates (Ovadia et al., 2019; Park et al., 2020), and affect
model selection (Sugiyama et al., 2007).
One strategy is to devise an algorithm to detect covariate
shift; if detected, the algorithm can alert the user that predictions may be unreliable. Covariate shift detection can
be formulated as two-sample hypothesis test (Gretton et al.,
2012a; Rabanser et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020), where the
goal is to determine whether two sets of examples are from
the same distribution. To test for covariate shift, we choose
the first sample to be the data used to train the model and
the second sample to be recent test data given as input to
the model. Then, the detector returns “covariate shift” if
the hypothesis test indicates that the two samples are from
different distributions and “no shift” otherwise.
We propose a detection algorithm based on classifier
tests (Lopez-Paz & Oquab, 2017; Cheng & Cloninger, 2019;
Kim et al., 2021), which use the accuracy of a classifier
trained to distinguish the two samples as the test statistic. In
particular, if the two samples are from the same distribution,
then the accuracy should be 1/2; otherwise, it should be
> 1/2. Since the test statistic follows a binomial distribution, we use the Clopper-Pearson interval (Clopper & Pearson, 1934) (an exact confidence interval for the unknown
success probability of the Binomial distribution) to derive
the cutoff. In contrast, prior work relies on asymptotics to
derive the cutoff, which results in approximations.
A key challenge is that the test examples are typically obtained over time—e.g., an autonomous robot continuously
perceives its environment, and we want to detect if its distribution of observations shifts at any time. There are two

