Efficient Approximate Inference for Stationary Kernel on Frequency Domain

Yohan Jung 1 Kyungwoo Song 2 Jinkyoo Park 1

Abstract
Based on the Fourier duality between a stationary kernel and its spectral density, modeling the
spectral density using a Gaussian mixture density
enables one to construct a flexible kernel, known
as a Spectral Mixture kernel, that can model any
stationary kernel. However, despite its expressive
power, training this kernel is typically difficult
because scalability and overfitting issues often
arise due to a large number of training parameters.
To resolve these issues, we propose an approximate inference method for estimating the Spectral
mixture kernel hyperparameters. Specifically, we
approximate this kernel by using the finite random
spectral points based on Random Fourier Feature
and optimize the parameters for the distribution of
spectral points by sampling-based variational inference. To improve this inference procedure, we
analyze the training loss and propose two special
methods: a sampling method of spectral points to
reduce the error of the approximate kernel in training, and an approximate natural gradient to accelerate the convergence of parameter inference.

1. Introduction
In constructing a Gaussian process (GP) model, selecting a
proper kernel function is vital because the selected kernel
determines the overall structure of the target function by
specifying the covariance of GP, a prior for the target function. In general, under the assumption that the covariance of
two target function values is related to the distance between
two inputs, a stationary kernel whose output is a function
of the difference between two inputs, is commonly used.
One of the main characteristics of the stationary kernel is
that it has Fourier duality with its spectral density. That is,
1

Department of Industrial & Systems Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon , South Korea 2 Department of Artificial Intelligence, University of Seoul,
Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Yohan Jung <becre1776@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

stationary kernel k(x1 − x2 ) for inputs x1 and x2 can be
expressed by an inverse Fourier transform of its spectral
density p(s) as
Z
T
k(x1 − x2 ) = ei2πs (x1 −x2 ) p(s)ds.
(1)
For example, the RBF kernel, which is defined as k(x1 −
2

x2 ) = exp(− 12 ∥ 2π(x1l−x2 ) ∥ ), is obtained when specifying
p(s) = N (s; 0, l−2 I) with RBF hyperparameter l in Eq. (1).
Based on the Fourier duality, selecting a specific kernel
is equivalent to modeling the form of p(s). If the model
assumption for the spectral density is not flexible enough
to express the spectral density of the true kernel, the GP
model with the induced kernel may not explain the dataset
well. Thus, a flexible model for p(s) is necessary in order
to find a stationary kernel that can describe the dataset well.
As an attempt to construct a flexible kernel, Wilson &
Adams (2013) represent p(s) as a Gaussian mixture denPQ
D
2
sity
and
q=1 wq N (s; µq , diag(σq )), where µq ∈ R
2
D×D
diag(σq ) ∈ R
are the mean and the diagonal covariance matrix, respectively. The Gaussian mixture density
can represent any p(s) flexibly based on the universal approximation theorem (Kostantinos, 2000) and thus, it can
induce the flexible kernel (SM kernel) by Eq. (1). In fact,
Wilson & Adams (2013); Wilson et al. (2014) demonstrate
that the SM kernel can find the suitable stationary kernel
that captures the covariance structure of the given datasets.
SM kernel has been employed in many applications: for
example, prediction on the time-series datasets (Ploysuwan,
2014; Kupilik & Witmer, 2018; Chen et al., 2021), analysis the brain states (Ulrich et al., 2014; 2015), Bayesian
optimization (Wu et al., 2017; Raj et al., 2020).
However, the improved expressive power also incurs two
challenges at the cost of kernel flexibility: high computational cost and overfitting issue. Specifically, given N data
points, training the SM kernel requires O((Q + 2QD)N 2 )
computations per iteration in addition to O(N 3 ) computations for the inversion of N × N kernel matrix (Rasmussen,
2004). When N is large, training the SM kernel is generally difficult due to high computational cost. In addition,
training the SM kernel by conventional approach, i.e. the
maximization of the marginal likelihood, may induce overfitting because of its many parameters (Q + 2QD) (Warnes
& Ripley, 1987; Simpson et al., 2021b).

