HyperImpute:
Generalized Iterative Imputation with Automatic Model Selection

Daniel Jarrett * 1 Bogdan Cebere * 1 Tennison Liu 1 Alicia Curth 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2

Abstract
Consider the problem of imputing missing values
in a dataset. On the one hand, conventional approaches using iterative imputation benefit from the
simplicity and customizability of learning conditional distributions directly, but suffer from the
practical requirement for appropriate model specification of each and every variable. On the other
hand, recent methods using deep generative modeling benefit from the capacity and efficiency of
learning with neural network function approximators, but are often difficult to optimize and rely on
stronger data assumptions. In this work, we study
an approach that marries the advantages of both:
We propose HyperImpute, a generalized iterative
imputation framework for adaptively and automatically configuring column-wise models and their
hyperparameters. Practically, we provide a concrete implementation with out-of-the-box learners, optimizers, simulators, and extensible interfaces. Empirically, we investigate this framework
via comprehensive experiments and sensitivities
on a variety of public datasets, and demonstrate its
ability to generate accurate imputations relative
to a strong suite of benchmarks. Contrary to recent work, we believe our findings constitute a strong defense of the iterative imputation paradigm.
https://github.com/vanderschaarlab/hyperimpute.

1. Introduction
Missing data is a ubiquitous problem in real-life data collection. For instance, certain characteristics of a patient
may not have been recorded properly during their visit, but
we may nevertheless be interested in knowing the values
those variables most likely took on [1–4]. Here, we consider
precisely this problem of imputing the missing values in a
*

Equal contribution. 1 Department of Applied Mathematics & Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, UK. 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, USA.
Correspondence to: Bogdan Cebere <bcc38@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

dataset. Specifically, consider the general case where different records in a dataset may contain missing values for different variables, so no columns are assumed to be complete.
Most popular approaches fall into two main categories. On
the one hand, conventional approaches using iterative imputation operate by estimating the conditional distributions of
each feature on the basis of all the others, and missing values
are imputed using such univariate models in a round-robin
fashion until convergence [5–10]. In theory, this approach
affords great customizability in creating multivariate models:
by simply specifying univariate models, one can easily and
implicitly work with joint models outside any known parametric multivariate density [10–12]. In practice, however,
this strategy often suffers from the requirement that models
for every single variable be properly specified. In particular,
for each column with missing values, one needs to choose
the functional form for the model, select the set of regressors
as input, include any interaction terms of interest, add appropriate regularization, or handle derived variables separately
to prevent collinearity in the common case of linear models;
this is time-consuming and dependent on human expertise.
On the other hand, recent methods using deep generative
models operate by estimating a joint model of all features
together, from which missing values can be queried [13–22].
In theory, these approaches more readily take advantage of
the capacity and efficiency of learning using deep function
approximators and the ability to capture correlations among
covariates by amortizing the parameters [19,23]. In practice,
however, this strategy comes at the price of much more challenging optimization—GAN-based imputers [16–18,24] are
often prone to the usual difficulties in adversarial training
[25, 26], and VAE-based imputers [19, 20] are subject to the
usual limitations of training latent-variable models through
variational bounds [27, 28]; empirically, these methods may
often be outperformed by iterative imputation [29, 30]. Further, most of such techniques—with the notable exception
to [22]—either separately require fully-observed datasets
during training [13–15], or operate on the strong assumption
that missingness patterns are entirely independent of both
observed and unobserved data [16–21], which is not realistic.
Three Desiderata Can we do better? In light of the preceding discussion, we argue that a good baseline solution to
the imputation problem should satisfy the following criteria:

