Contextual Bandits with Large Action Spaces: Made Practical

Yinglun Zhu 1 Dylan Foster 2 John Langford 2 Paul Mineiro 2

Abstract
A central problem in sequential decision making
is to develop algorithms that are practical and
computationally efficient, yet support the use of
flexible, general-purpose models. Focusing on
the contextual bandit problem, recent progress
provides provably efficient algorithms with strong
empirical performance when the number of possible alternatives (“actions”) is small, but guarantees for decision making in large, continuous
action spaces have remained elusive, leading to a
significant gap between theory and practice. We
present the first efficient, general-purpose algorithm for contextual bandits with continuous, linearly structured action spaces. Our algorithm
makes use of computational oracles for (i) supervised learning, and (ii) optimization over the
action space, and achieves sample complexity,
runtime, and memory independent of the size of
the action space. In addition, it is simple and practical. We perform a large-scale empirical evaluation, and show that our approach typically enjoys
superior performance and efficiency compared to
standard baselines.

1. Introduction
We consider the design of practical, theoretically motivated
algorithms for sequential decision making with contextual
information, better known as the contextual bandit problem. Here, a learning agent repeatedly receives a context
(e.g., a user’s profile), selects an action (e.g., a news article
to display), and receives a reward (e.g., whether the article was clicked). Contextual bandits are a useful model
for decision making in unknown environments in which
both exploration and generalization are required, but pose
significant algorithm design challenges beyond classical
supervised learning. Recent years have seen development
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Microsoft Research NYC.
Correspondence to: Yinglun Zhu <yinglun@cs.wisc.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

on two fronts: On the theoretical side, extensive research
into finite-action contextual bandits has resulted in practical, provably efficient algorithms capable of supporting
flexible, general-purpose models (Langford & Zhang, 2007;
Agarwal et al., 2014; Foster & Rakhlin, 2020; Simchi-Levi
& Xu, 2021; Foster & Krishnamurthy, 2021). Empirically,
contextual bandits have been widely deployed in practice
for online personalization and recommendation tasks (Li
et al., 2010; Agarwal et al., 2016; Tewari & Murphy, 2017;
Cai et al., 2021), leveraging the availability of high-quality
action slates (e.g., subsets of candidate articles selected by
an editor).
Both developments above critically rely on the existence of
a small number of possible decisions or alternatives. However, many applications demand the ability to make contextual decisions in large, potentially continuous spaces,
where actions might correspond to images in a database or
high-dimensional embeddings of rich documents such as
webpages. Contextual bandits in large (e.g., million-action)
settings remains a major challenge—both statistically and
computationally—and constitutes a substantial gap between
theory and practice. In particular:
• Existing general-purpose algorithms (Langford &
Zhang, 2007; Agarwal et al., 2014; Foster & Rakhlin,
2020; Simchi-Levi & Xu, 2021; Foster & Krishnamurthy, 2021) allow for the use of flexible models
(e.g., neural networks, forests, or kernels) to facilitate
generalization across contexts, but have sample complexity and computational requirements linear in the
number of actions. These approaches can degrade in
performance under benign operations such as duplicating actions.
• While certain recent approaches extend the generalpurpose methods above to accommodate large action
spaces, they either require sample complexity exponential in action dimension (Krishnamurthy et al., 2020),
or require additional distributional assumptions (Sen
et al., 2021).
• Various results efficiently handle large or continuous
action spaces (Dani et al., 2008; Jun et al., 2017; Yang
et al., 2021) with specific types of function approximation, but do not accommodate general-purpose models.

