Metric-Fair Classifier Derandomization
Jimmy Wu Yatong Chen 1 Yang Liu 1

Abstract
We study the problem of classifier derandomization in machine learning: given a stochastic binary
classifier f : X → [0, 1], sample a deterministic
classifier fˆ : X → {0, 1} that approximates the
output of f in aggregate over any data distribution. Recent work revealed how to efficiently
derandomize a stochastic classifier with strong
output approximation guarantees, but at the cost
of individual fairness — that is, if f treated similar inputs similarly, fˆ did not. In this paper, we
initiate a systematic study of classifier derandomization with metric fairness guarantees. We show
that the prior derandomization approach is almost
maximally metric-unfair, and that a simple “random threshold” derandomization achieves optimal fairness preservation but with weaker output
approximation. We then devise a derandomization procedure that provides an appealing tradeoff
between these two: if f is α-metric fair according to a metric d with a locality-sensitive hash
(LSH) family, then our derandomized fˆ is, with
high probability, O(α)-metric fair and a close approximation of f . We also prove generic results
applicable to all (fair and unfair) classifier derandomization procedures, including a bias-variance
decomposition and reductions between various
notions of metric fairness.

1. Introduction
We study the general problem of derandomizing stochastic
classification models. Consider a typical binary classification setting defined by a feature space X ⊆ Rn and labels
{0, 1}; we wish to devise a procedure that, given a stochastic
or randomized classifier f : X → [0, 1], efficiently samples
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz, USA. Correspondence
to: Jimmy Wu <jimmywu126@gmail.com>, Yatong Chen
<ychen592@ucsc.edu>, Yang Liu (corresponding author) <yangliu@ucsc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

a deterministic classifier fˆ : X → {0, 1} from some family
of functions F, such that fˆ preserves various qualities of f .
Stochastic classifiers arise naturally in both theory and practice. For example, they are frequently the solutions to constrained optimization problems encoding complex evaluation metrics (Narasimhan, 2018), group fairness (GrgićHlača et al., 2017; Agarwal et al., 2018), individual fairness
(Dwork et al., 2012; Rothblum & Yona, 2018; Kim et al.,
2018; Sharifi-Malvajerdi et al., 2019), and robustness to
adversarial attacks (Pinot et al., 2019; Cohen et al., 2019;
Pinot et al., 2020; Braverman & Garg, 2020). Stochastic
classifiers are also the natural result of taking an ensemble
of individual classifiers (Dietterich, 2000; Grgić-Hlača et al.,
2017).
However, they may be undesirable for numerous reasons: a
stochastic classifier is not robust to repeated attacks, since
even one that is instance-wise 99% accurate will likely err
after a few hundred attempts; by the same token, they violate
intuitive notions of fairness since even the same individual
may be treated differently over multiple classifications. For
these reasons, Cotter, Gupta, and Narasimhan (Cotter et al.,
2019) recently presented a procedure for derandomizing
a stochastic classifier while approximately preserving the
outputs of f with high probability. However, the authors
observe that their construction results in similar individuals typically being given very different predictions — in
other words, it does not satisfy individual fairness — and
ask whether it is possible to obtain a family of deterministic classifiers that preserves both aggregate outputs and
individual fairness.
Another motivation for studying individually fair decision
making comes from the game-theoretic setting of strategic classification, wherein decision subjects may modify
their features to obtain a desired outcome from the classifier
(Hardt et al., 2016; Cai et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2018; Dong
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020). A metric-fair stochastic
classifier — and by extension, a metric-fair derandomization procedure — offers significant protection against such
manipulations. See Appendix B for more on this topic.
1.1. Our Contributions
In this paper, we initiate a systematic study of classifier
derandomization with individual fairness preservation. In

