Consistent Polyhedral Surrogates for Top-k Classification and Variants

Jessie Finocchiaro 1 Rafael Frongillo 1 Emma Goodwill 1 Anish Thilagar 1

Abstract
Top-k classification is a generalization of multiclass classification used widely in information retrieval, image classification, and other extreme classification settings. Several hinge-like
(piecewise-linear) surrogates have been proposed
for the problem, yet all are either non-convex or inconsistent. For the proposed hinge-like surrogates
that are convex (i.e., polyhedral), we apply the
recent embedding framework of Finocchiaro et al.
(2019; 2022) to determine the prediction problem
for which the surrogate is consistent. These problems can all be interpreted as variants of top-k
classification, which may be better aligned with
some applications. We leverage this analysis to
derive constraints on the conditional label distributions under which these proposed surrogates
become consistent for top-k. It has been further
suggested that every convex hinge-like surrogate
must be inconsistent for top-k. Yet, we use the
same embedding framework to give the first consistent polyhedral surrogate for this problem.

1. Introduction
Top-k classification is commonly used in image recognition (Akata et al., 2013; Karpathy et al., 2014; Russakovsky
et al., 2015) and action analysis (Furnari et al., 2018), search
querying (Ailon and Mohri, 2008; Reddi et al., 2019), and
recommender systems more broadly (Adomavicius and
Zhang, 2016; Billsus et al., 1998; Deshpande and Karypis,
2004). For example, in information retrieval, a page of k
results may be displayed out of n  k total webpages available, with success indicated by a user clicking one of these
k. This scenario can be captured by the top-k loss: given
a set S of labels, |S| = k, and the true label y, assign loss
1 if y 6∈ S, and 0 otherwise. As top-k loss is discrete, it
is typically computationally hard to optimize. Therefore,
top-k learning algorithms typically employ a surrogate loss.
1
University of Colorado Boulder Department of Computer
Science, Boulder, CO, USA. Correspondence to: Jessie Finocchiaro <Jessica.Finocchiaro@colorado.edu>, Anish Thilagar
<anish@colorado.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Common desiderata for surrogate losses are that they be
convex, and thus easier to optimize, and that they be statistically consistent, meaning they solve the original problem
(here: top-k) when given enough data. Another consideration is whether the surrogate is smooth (e.g. differentiable)
or piecewise-linear (“hinge-like”). This consideration is
related to whether the surrogate will implicitly learn the
underlying conditional label distribution, which generally
is a harder learning problem than the original; for example, the entire label distribution contains more information
than the set of k most likely labels. Typically, smooth surrogates, such as cross-entropy, implicitly learn the entire
label distribution.1 Conventional wisdom has been that
piecewise-linear surrogates are more “efficient” in the sense
that they learn only what is relevant for the original problem. Moreover, piecewise-linear and convex surrogates give
rise to linear surrogate regret bounds, whereas most smooth
surrogates do not (Frongillo and Waggoner, 2021).
Combining the above desiderata, we would like a surrogate which is both polyhedral (convex and piecewise-linear)
and consistent for top-k classification. Unfortunately, while
many piecewise-linear surrogates have been proposed for
top-k, they are all either non-convex or inconsistent (Lapin
et al., 2015; 2016; 2018; Reddi et al., 2019; Yang and
Koyejo, 2020). Moreover, the results and writing of both
Lapin et al. (2016, pg.6) and Yang and Koyejo (2020, pg.1)
suggest that perhaps no such surrogate exists for top-k.
We resolve this open question by presenting the first consistent polyhedral surrogate for top-k classification (§ 4).
Our proof uses embedding framework of Finocchiaro et al.
(2019; 2022). We also use the embedding framework to
analyze three previous polyhedral surrogates in the literature which are inconsistent for top-k (§ 3). For each we
show (a) what discrete prediction problem the surrogate is
actually solving, in all cases a natural variant of top-k, and
(b) a constraint on the conditional label distributions such
that the surrogate becomes consistent for top-k. Finally, we
evaluate the performance of our surrogate compared to these
1
Concretely, consider any surrogate whose Bayes risk is strictly
concave, which is the case for most smooth surrogates. For each
surrogate prediction u, it can minimize expected loss for at most
one conditional label distribution p; otherwise the Bayes risk would
be flat on the line segment between two such distributions. Thus,
one can infer p from the u returned by the model.

