Learning to Cut by Looking Ahead:
Cutting Plane Selection via Imitation Learning

Max B. Paulus 1 Giulia Zarpellon 2 Andreas Krause 1 Laurent Charlin 3 4 Chris J. Maddison 5
where A ∈ Rm×n , b ∈ Rm , c, x ∈ Rn , and I ⊆ {1, . . . , n}
defines which variables are required to be integral. MILPs
are in general N P-hard, but modern solvers effectively
tackle them by means of a collection of both exact and
heuristic techniques. In particular, the MILP algorithmic
framework relies on repeatedly solving (and improving) relaxed versions of the original problem that are computationally tractable. When integrality requirements xj ∈ Z ∀j ∈ I
are dropped, one obtains the continuous relaxation of (1)

Abstract
Cutting planes are essential for solving mixedinteger linear problems (MILPs), because they facilitate bound improvements on the optimal solution value. For selecting cuts, modern solvers rely
on manually designed heuristics that are tuned
to gauge the potential effectiveness of cuts. We
show that a greedy selection rule explicitly looking ahead to select cuts that yield the best bound
improvement delivers strong decisions for cut
selection—but is too expensive to be deployed
in practice. In response, we propose a new neural architecture (NeuralCut) for imitation learning
on the lookahead expert. Our model outperforms
standard baselines for cut selection on several
synthetic MILP benchmarks. Experiments with a
B&C solver for neural network verification further
validate our approach, and exhibit the potential of
learning methods in this setting.

z ∗ = min{cT x : Ax ≤ b, x ∈ Rn },

(2)

which is a linear problem (LP). Clearly, z ∗ ≤ z OPT , and
tightening the relaxation leads to better bounds on the optimal value of (1), which can be used, e.g., to improve the
efficiency of a Branch-and-Bound (B&B) tree search procedure (Land & Doig, 1960)—the typical framework used to
solve MILPs.

1. Introduction
Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problems are
optimization problems in which some decision variables
represent indivisible choices and are thus required to assume
integer values. MILP models are used in many industrial
contexts (e.g., logistics, production planning), and can also
be solved to verify robustness of neural networks (NN)
(Cheng et al., 2017; Tjeng et al., 2018). We write a MILP
as

Tightening a MILP continuous relaxation can be done by introducing cutting planes (Gomory, 1960) in the formulation.
Given an optimal solution x∗ for the LP relaxation (2), a cut
C is a linear inequality π T x ≤ π0 that separates x∗ from
the convex hull of integer feasible solutions of (1). Formally,
(π, π0 ) ∈ Rn+1 is such that π T x∗ > π0 and π T x ≤ π0 is
valid for the feasible solutions of (1).

1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Zürich,
Switzerland 2 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada 3 Department
of Decision Sciences, HEC Montréal, Montréal, Canada
4
Mila, Montréal, Canada 5 Department of Computer Science and Department of Statistical Sciences, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
Correspondence to: Max
Paulus <max.paulus@inf.ethz.ch>, Giulia Zarpellon <gzarpellon@cs.toronto.edu>.

Cutting planes are an essential component of the MILP resolution process, with many families of both general-purpose
and class specific cuts theoretically studied and implemented
in modern solvers (Dey & Molinaro, 2018). Still, their
practical management is governed by manually-designed
heuristic rules that decide, e.g., how many cuts should be
added to the formulation from a pool of candidates, which
types should be preferred, how many times the separation
procedure should be repeated, and also which cuts should
be removed in later optimization stages. In particular, the
process of selecting cutting planes from a pool relies on
simple formulas that are tuned to gauge the potential effectiveness of cuts in solving MILPs, for example by measuring
the extent by which a cut is violated by x∗ or its nonzero
support.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

A natural way of assessing the impact of a cut is to quantify
its resulting bound improvement. With this motivation, we
design a greedy lookahead selection rule, explicitly trying

z OPT = min{cT x : Ax ≤ b, xj ∈ Z ∀j ∈ I},

(1)

