Representation Topology Divergence: a Method for Comparing Neural
Network Representations

Serguei Barannikov 1 2 Ilya Trofimov 1 Nikita Balabin 1 Evgeny Burnaev 1 3

Abstract
Comparison of data representations is a complex
multi-aspect problem that has no complete solution yet. We propose a method for comparing
two data representations. We introduce the Representation Topology Divergence (RTD) which
measures the dissimilarity in multi-scale topology
between two point clouds of equal size with a oneto-one correspondence between points. The data
point clouds are allowed to lie in different ambient
spaces. The RTD is one of the few practical methods based on Topological Data Analysis (TDA)
applicable to real machine learning datasets. Experiments show the proposed RTD agrees with the
intuitive assessment of data representation similarity and is sensitive to its topological structure.
We apply RTD to gain insights into neural network representations in computer vision and NLP
domains for various problems: training dynamics
analysis, data distribution shift, transfer learning,
ensemble learning.

1. Introduction
Representations of objects are the essential component
learnt by deep neural networks. In opposite to the distance in
the original space, the similarity of representations is proved
to be semantically meaningful. Despite the significant practical success of deep neural networks, many aspects of their
behavior are poorly understood. Only a few methods study
neural representations without relying on their quality on
a specific downstream task. In this work, we focus on the
comparison of representations from neural networks.
Comparison of representations is an ill-posed problem without a “ground truth” answer. Early studies were based on
variants of Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA): SVCCA,
1

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia 2 CNRS, Université Paris Cité, France 3 Artificial Intelligence
Research Institute (AIRI), Moscow, Russia Correspondence to:
Serguei Barannikov <S.Barannikov@skoltech.ru>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Raghu et al., 2017), PWCCA (Morcos et al., 2018). However, CCA-like measures define similarity too loosely since
they are invariant under any invertible linear transformation.
The Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA), (Kornblith et al.,
2019) is the statistical test to measure the independence
of two sets of variables. (Kornblith et al., 2019) proved
CKA to be more consistent with the intuitive similarity of
representations. Particularly, neural networks learn similar
representations from different seeds as evaluated by CKA.
Another line of work is concerned with the alignment between groups of neurons (Li et al., 2015), (Wang et al.,
2018). The similarity of representations is also a topic of
study in neuroscience (Edelman, 1998; Kriegeskorte et al.,
2008; Connolly et al., 2012).
Representational similarity metrics like CKA and CCA were
used to gain insights on representations obtained in metalearning (Raghu et al., 2020), to compare representations
from different layers of language models (Voita et al., 2019),
and to study the effect of fine-tuning (Wu et al., 2020).
Finally, (Nguyen et al., 2021) used CKA to study the phenomenon of a “block structure” emerging in wide and deep
networks in computer vision and compare their representations.
In this paper, we take a topological perspective on the
comparison of neural network representations. We propose the Representation Topology Divergence (RTD) score,
which measures dissimilarity between two point clouds
of equal size with a one-to-one correspondence between
points. Point clouds are allowed to lie in different ambient
spaces. Existing geometrical and topological methods are
dedicated to other problems: they are either too general
and do not incorporate the one-to-one correspondence requirement (Khrulkov & Oseledets, 2018), (Tsitsulin et al.,
2020), or they restrict point clouds to lie in the same ambient space (Kynkäänniemi et al., 2019), (Barannikov et al.,
2021). Most of these methods are applied to the evaluation
of GANs. Recently, (Moor et al., 2020) proposed a loss
term to compare the topology of data in original and latent
spaces and applied the term as a part of the Topological
Autoencoder.
In this work, we make the following contributions:

