Generative Flow Networks for Discrete Probabilistic Modeling

Dinghuai Zhang 1 Nikolay Malkin 1 Zhen Liu 1 Alexandra Volokhova 1 Aaron Courville 1 Yoshua Bengio 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Probabilistic modeling in discrete spaces, especially those
with compositional structure, is important due to the universality of applications of discrete data structures, such as
in natural language processing (Tai et al., 2015) or in symbolic reasoning (Besold et al., 2017). However, distributions
in high-dimensional discrete spaces are generally hard to
model, as they may feature rapid combinatorial growth of
modes. These modes can be well separated from each other,
which poses a challenge for Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) methods (Salakhutdinov, 2009). Mixing between
modes is generally slow without a priori knowledge of the
specific latent structure of the distribution.
Furthermore, generative modeling methods such as energybased models (EBMs; LeCun et al., 2006) also suffer from
1
Mila - Quebec AI Institute and Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Correspondence to: Dinghuai Zhang
<dinghuai.zhang@mila.quebec>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

C

S

CM

PB · · ·

···

M

We present energy-based generative flow networks (EB-GFN), a novel probabilistic modeling algorithm for high-dimensional discrete data.
Building upon the theory of generative flow networks (GFlowNets; Bengio et al., 2021b), we
model the generation process by a stochastic
data construction policy and thus amortize expensive MCMC exploration into a fixed number of actions sampled from a GFlowNet. We
show how GFlowNets can approximately perform large-block Gibbs sampling to mix between
modes. We propose a framework to jointly train
a GFlowNet with an energy function, so that
the GFlowNet learns to sample from the energy distribution, while the energy learns with
an approximate MLE objective with negative
samples from the GFlowNet. We demonstrate
EB-GFN’s effectiveness on various probabilistic modeling tasks. Code is publicly available
at github.com/zdhNarsil/EB GFN.

PF
···

···

X

Figure 1. The EB-GFN framework for learning an energy function on a discrete space X , in this case the set of all binary
images, to maximize likelihood of a dataset (e.g., MNIST). An
energy landscape with well-separated modes is difficult to explore
with local search methods. A GFlowNet, parametrized with a pair
of stochastic policies PF (painting) and PB (erasure), exploits a
broader state space S with partial choices, thus aiding the exploration of X that is necessary for updating the energy function with
contrastive-divergence-like objectives. The trained GFlowNet is
also a generative model on its own; see Figs. 2 and 6.

these mixing issues when generating negative samples with
MCMC (Tieleman & Hinton, 2009). The incapability of
MCMC to capture the energy landscape results in the spurious mode problem (Desjardins et al., 2010; Bengio et al.,
2013), in which new modes that do not occur in the true
data distribution appear in the learned energy distribution.
In this paper, we propose to take advantage of generative
flow networks, or GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021a;b), instead of MCMC methods in order to simultaneously learn a
sampler and train an energy function from data. GFlowNets
are generative models for compositional objects, i.e., they
learn a stochastic policy that iteratively constructs the sampled object through a sequence of simpler steps. In past
work, GFlowNets were trained to query a given energy
function, rather than from a dataset (like typical generative
models). We propose to adapt the GFlowNet methodology
to the problem of learning from data, and jointly train the
GFlowNet sampler and the energy function.
Because a GFlowNet can learn from the low-energy configurations it has already encountered, it has a chance to
guess and sample yet-unvisited modes if there are learnable
regularities in the underlying data distribution. The compositional generative structure of GFlowNet further enhances
its ability to discover regularities and thus jump between

