RECAPP: Crafting a More Efficient Catalyst for Convex Optimization

Yair Carmon 1 Arun Jambulapati 2 Yujia Jin 2 Aaron Sidford 2

Abstract
The accelerated proximal point algorithm (APPA),
also known as “Catalyst”, is a well-established reduction from convex optimization to approximate
proximal point computation (i.e., regularized minimization). This reduction is conceptually elegant
and yields strong convergence rate guarantees.
However, these rates feature an extraneous logarithmic term arising from the need to compute
each proximal point to high accuracy. In this
work, we propose a novel Relaxed Error Criterion
for Accelerated Proximal Point (RECAPP) that
eliminates the need for high accuracy subproblem
solutions. We apply RECAPP to two canonical
problems: finite-sum and max-structured minimization. For finite-sum problems, we match the
best known complexity, previously obtained by
carefully-designed problem-specific algorithms.
For minimizing maxy f (x, y) where f is convex
in x and strongly-concave in y, we improve on
the best known (Catalyst-based) bound by a logarithmic factor.

1

Introduction

A fundamental approach to optimization algorithm design is
to break down the problem of minimizing F : X → R into
a sequence of easier optimization problems, whose solution
converges to x? ∈ arg minx∈X F (x). A canonical “easier”
problem is proximal point computation, i.e., computing



λ 0
2
proxF,λ (x) = arg min F (x ) + kx − xk .
2
x0 ∈X
0

Here λ > 0 is a regularization parameter which balances
between how close computing proxF,λ is to minimizing F ,
and how easy it is to compute—as λ decreases proxF,λ (x)
tends to the true minimizer but becomes harder to compute.
1
Tel Aviv University 2 Stanford University. Correspondence to:
Yujia Jin <yujiajin@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

The classical proximal point method (Rockafellar, 1976;
Parikh & Boyd, 2014) simply iterates xt+1 = proxF,λ (xt ),
and (for convex F ) minimizes F with rate F (xT ) −
2
F (x? ) = O λR
for R := kx0 − x? k. This rate can be
T
improved, at essentially no additional cost, by carefully combining proximal steps, i.e. proxF,λ (xt ), with gradient steps
using ∇F (proxF,λ (xt )) = λ(xt − proxF,λ (xt )) (Güler,
1992). This accelerated method converges with rate
2
O λR
T 2 , a quadratic improvement over proximal point.
To turn this conceptual acceleration scheme into a practical algorithm, one must prescribe the accuracy to which
each proximal point needs to be computed. Güler (1992);
Salzo & Villa (2012) provided such conditions, which were
later refined in independently-proposed accelerated approximate proximal point algorithm (APPA) (Frostig et al.,
2015) and Catalyst (Lin et al., 2015; 2017). Furthermore,
APPA/Catalyst obtained global convergence guarantees for
concrete problems by using linearly convergent algorithms
to compute the proximal points to their required accuracy.
The APPA/Catalyst framework has since been used to accelerate full-batch gradient descent, coordinate methods,
finite-sum variance reduction (Frostig et al., 2015; Lin et al.,
2017), eigenvalue problems (Garber et al., 2016), min-max
problems (Yang et al., 2020), and more.
However, the simplicity and generality of APPA/Catalyst
seems to come at a practical and theoretical cost: satisfying
existing proximal point accuracy conditions requires solving subproblems to fairly high accuracy. In practice, this
means expending computation in subproblem solutions that
could otherwise be used for more outer iterations. In theory,
APPA/Catalyst complexity bounds feature a logarithmic
term that appears unnecessary. For example,
Pn in the finite
sum problem of minimizing F (x) = n1 i=1 fi (x) where
each fi is convex and L-smooth, APPA/Catalyst combined
with SVRG (Johnson & Zhang,
and λ = L/n finds
 2013)

p
2
an -optimal point of F in O (n + nLR2 /) log LR

computations of ∇fi , a nearly optimal rate (Woodworth &
Srebro, 2016). A line of work devoted to designing accelerated method tailored to finite sum problems (Shalev-Shwartz
& Zhang, 2014; Allen-Zhu, 2016; Lan et al., 2019) attains
progressively better practical performance
and theoretical


p
guarantees, culminating in an O n log log n + nLR2 /
complexity bound (Song et al., 2020).

