Adversarial Masking for Self-Supervised Learning

Yuge Shi 1 N. Siddharth 2 Philip H.S. Torr 1 Adam R. Kosiorek 3

Abstract
We propose ADIOS, a masked image modeling
(MIM) framework for self-supervised learning,
which simultaneously learns a masking function
and an image encoder using an adversarial objective. The image encoder is trained to minimise
the distance between representations of the original and that of a masked image. The masking
function, conversely, aims at maximising this distance. ADIOS consistently improves on state-ofthe-art self-supervised learning (SSL) methods on
a variety of tasks and datasets—including classification on ImageNet100 and STL10, transfer
learning on CIFAR10/100, Flowers102 and iNaturalist, as well as robustness evaluated on the
backgrounds challenge (Xiao et al., 2021)—while
generating semantically meaningful masks. Unlike modern MIM models such as MAE, BEiT and
iBOT, ADIOS does not rely on the image-patch
tokenisation construction of Vision Transformers,
and can be implemented with convolutional backbones. We further demonstrate that the masks
learned by ADIOS are more effective in improving representation learning of SSL methods than
masking schemes used in popular MIM models.

1. Introduction
The goal of Masked image modeling (MIM) is to learn
image representations, in a self-supervised fashion, by occluding parts of the input images. MIM is inspired by
significant advances in natural language modelling such as
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), where the model is trained to
fill-in words randomly removed from a sentence (Fig. 1,
top row). Recent work, including MAE (He et al., 2021)
and BEiT (Bao et al., 2021), show that these gains are at
least partially transferable to vision. The task of a MIM
1
University of Oxford 2 The University of Edinburgh
& The Alan Turing Institute 3 DeepMind.
Correspondence to: Yuge Shi <yshi@robots.ox.ac.uk>, Adam Kosiorek
<adamrk@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Self-supervised language, and vision, models learn representations by imputing data removed by masking. BERT: random
word masks; Context encoder: random, fix-shaped mask; BEiT:
random ‘blockwise’ masking; MAE: randomly mask out 75% of
the image; ADIOS: multiple masks (N=3) generated by an adversarially trained masking model, post-processed with fully connected conditional random fields (Krähenbühl & Koltun, 2011).

model is therefore similar to BERT, e.g., given an image
of a bird in Fig. 1, it needs to reason about what the bird
might be sitting on or what colour the bird’s belly is given
the visible context (bottom row). However, while missing
words describe whole semantic entities (e.g. “head”), the
masks used for context encoder (Pathak et al. (2016), which
pioneered MIM), BEiT and MAE typically have no such
constraint (Fig. 1 bottom, left to right). Imputation under
such schemes is conceptually simpler, as random masking
only partially obscures meaningful visual entities, which allows easier inference of missing values by leveraging strong
correlations at the local-pixel level1 .
To narrow the gap between pixel masking and word masking, we posit that one needs to occlude whole entities in
the image. This encourages the model to perform imputation by complex semantic reasoning using the unmasked
context (e.g. given a bird with a yellow body, it is likely
to have a yellow head) rather than leveraging simple local correlations, which can benefit representation learning.
Interestingly, He et al. (2021) are motivated by similar hypothesis and propose to occlude a large fraction (up to 75%)
of the image, removing complete entities by a higher chance,
which they find is essential for good performance. Here, we
suggest that it is actually what is masked, not so much how
much is masked, that is crucial for effective self-supervised
1

Akin to randomly masking letters in a sentence for NLP.

