Learning Markov Games with Adversarial Opponents:
Efficient Algorithms and Fundamental Limits

Qinghua Liu * 1 Yuanhao Wang * 1 Chi Jin 1

Abstract
An ideal strategy in zero-sum games should not
only grant the player an average reward no less
than the value of Nash equilibrium, but also exploit the (adaptive) opponents when they are suboptimal. While most existing works in Markov
games focus exclusively on the former objective,
it remains open whether we can achieve both objectives simultaneously. To address this problem,
this work studies no-regret learning in Markov
games with adversarial opponents when competing against the best fixed policy in hindsight.
Along this direction, we present a new complete
set of positive and negative results: When the policies of the opponents are revealed at the end of
each episode,
√ we propose new efficient algorithms
achieving K-regret bounds when either (1) the
baseline policy class is small or (2) the opponent’s
policy class is small. This is complemented with
an exponential lower bound when neither conditions are true. When the policies of the opponents
are not revealed, we prove a statistical hardness result even in the most favorable scenario when both
above conditions are true. Our hardness result is
much stronger than the existing hardness results
which either only involve computational hardness,
or require further restrictions on the algorithms.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) studies how
multiple players sequentially interact with each other and
the environment to maximize the cumulative rewards. Recent years have witnessed inspiring breakthroughs in the
application of multi-agent reinforcement learning to various
challenging AI tasks, including, but not limited to, GO (Silver et al., 2016; 2017), Poker (Brown & Sandholm, 2019),
*
Equal contribution 1 Princeton University, New Jersey, USA.
Correspondence to: Qinghua Liu <qinghual@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

real-time strategy games (e.g., StarCraft and Dota) (Vinyals
et al., 2019; OpenAI, 2018), autonomous driving (ShalevShwartz et al., 2016), decentralized controls or multi-agent
robotics systems (Brambilla et al., 2013), as well as complex
social scenarios such as hide-and-seek (Baker et al., 2020).
Despite its great empirical success, MARL still suffers from
limited theoretical understanding with many fundamental
questions left open. Among them, one central and challenging question is how to exploit the (adaptive) suboptimal
opponents while staying invulnerable to the optimal opponents. Achieving this objective requires a solution concept
beyond Nash equilibria. As a motivating example, we consider the game of rock-paper-scissors with a suboptimal
opponent who plays rock in the first K/2 games and then
switches to paper in the next K/2 games. A strategic player
in this case should be able to learn from the behavior of
the opponent and exploit it to get a return of Ω(K). In contrast, playing a Nash equilibrium (which plays all actions
uniformly) only yields an average return of zero.
In classical normal-form games (which can be viewed as
special cases of MARL without transition and states), the
question of exploiting adaptive opponents has been extensively studied under the framework of no-regret learning,
where the agent is required to compete against the best
fixed policy in hindsight even when facing adversarial opponents (see e.g., Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006). On the
other hand, addressing general MARL brings a number of
new challenges such as unknown environment dynamics
and sequential correlations between the player and the opponents. Consequently, all existing results (e.g., Brafman
& Tennenholtz, 2002; Wei et al., 2017; Tian et al., 2021;
Jin et al., 2021) have only focused on competing against
Nash equilibria when facing adversarial opponents. This
motivates us to ask the following question for MARL:
Can we compete against the best fixed policy in
hindsight and achieve no-regret learning in MARL?
In this paper, we consider two-player zero-sum Markov
games (Shapley, 1953; Littman, 1994) as a model for
MARL, and address the above question by providing a complete set of positive and negative results as follows. We
refer to general policies as policies which can depend on

