An Intriguing Property of Geophysics Inversion

Yinan Feng 1 Yinpeng Chen 2 Shihang Feng 1 Peng Jin 3 1 Zicheng Liu 2 Youzuo Lin 1

Abstract

Experiments show that this interesting property
holds for two geophysics inversion problems over
four different datasets. Compared to much deeper
InversionNet (Wu & Lin, 2019), our method
achieves comparable accuracy, but consumes significantly fewer parameters.
1
Earth and Environmental Sciences Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory,USA 2 Microsoft Research, USA 3 College of
Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University, USA. Correspondence to: Youzuo Lin <ylin@lanl.gov>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

𝑢 𝑥, 𝑡

𝑼
Geophysical
properties

𝒀

x

𝑦 𝑥, 𝑧

x

𝒀 ≈ 𝐴𝑼
t

…

In this paper, we show that such a mapping can be
well modeled by a very shallow (but not wide) network with only five layers. This is achieved based
on our new finding of an intriguing property: a
near-linear relationship between the input and
output, after applying integral transform in high
dimensional space. In particular, when dealing
with the inversion from seismic data to subsurface
velocity governed by a wave equation, the integral
results of velocity with Gaussian kernels are linearly correlated to the integral of seismic data with
sine kernels. Furthermore, this property can be
easily turned into a light-weight encoder-decoder
network for inversion. The encoder contains the
integration of seismic data and the linear transformation without need for fine-tuning. The decoder
only consists of a single transformer block to reverse the integral of velocity.

Geophysical
Measurements

z

…

Inversion techniques are widely used to reconstruct subsurface physical properties (e.g., velocity, conductivity) from surface-based geophysical
measurements (e.g., seismic, electric/magnetic
(EM) data). The problems are governed by partial differential equations (PDEs) like the wave
or Maxwell’s equations. Solving geophysical inversion problems is challenging due to the illposedness and high computational cost. To alleviate those issues, recent studies leverage deep
neural networks to learn the inversion mappings
from measurements to the property directly.

1. Introduction

𝑈𝑛 = ∬ 𝑢 𝑥, 𝑡 Φ𝑛 𝑥, 𝑡 𝑑𝑡𝑑𝑥

𝑌𝑚 = ∬ 𝑦 𝑥, 𝑧 Ψ𝑚 𝑥, 𝑧 𝑑𝑥𝑑𝑧

Figure 1. Illustration of the near-linear relation property between
geophysical measurements and properties after applying integral
transform. {Φn } and {Ψm } are two families of kernels for integral
transforms (e.g., sine and Gaussian). Here, the full waveform
inversion from seismic data to velocity map is used as an example.

Geophysics inversion techniques are commonly used to characterize site geology, stratigraphy, and rock quality. These
techniques uncover subsurface layering and rock geomechanical properties (such as velocity, conductivity), which
are crucial in subsurface applications such as subsurface energy exploration, carbon capture and sequestration, groundwater contamination and remediation, and earthquake early
warning systems. Technically, these subsurface geophysical properties can be inferred from geophysical measurements (such as seismic, electromagnetic (EM)) acquired
on the surface. Some underlying partial differential equations (PDEs) between measurements and geophysical property exist, where inversion gets its name. For example,
velocity is reconstructed from seismic data based on full
waveform inversion (FWI) of a wave equation, while conductivity is recovered from EM measurements based on EM
inversion of Maxwell’s equations.
However, these inversion problems can be rather challenging to solve, as they are ill-posed. Recent works study them
from two perspectives: physics-driven and data-driven. The
former approaches search for the optimal geophysical property (e.g., velocity) from an initial guess, such that the generated geophysical simulations based on the forward modeling
of the governing equation are closed to the real measurements (Virieux & Operto, 2009; Feng & Schuster, 2019;
Feng et al., 2021). These methods are computationally expensive as they require iterative optimization per sample.

