Deciphering Lasso-based Classification Through a Large Dimensional Analysis
of the Iterative Soft-Thresholding Algorithm

Malik Tiomoko 1 Ekkehard Schnoor 2 Mohamed El Amine Seddik 3 Igor Colin 1 Aladin Virmaux 1

Abstract
This paper proposes a theoretical analysis of a
Lasso-based classification algorithm. Leveraging
on a realistic regime where the dimension of the
data p and their number n are of the same order
of magnitude, the theoretical classification error
is derived as a function of the data statistics. As a
result, insights into the functioning of the Lasso in
classification and its differences with competing
algorithms are highlighted. Our work is based
on an original novel analysis of the iterative softthresholding algorithm (ISTA), which may be of
independent interest beyond the particular problem studied here and may be adapted to similar iterative schemes. A theoretical optimization of the
model’s hyperparameters is also provided, which
allows for the data- and time-consuming crossvalidation to be avoided. Finally, several applications on synthetic and real data are provided to
validate the theoretical study and justify its impact
in the design and understanding of algorithms of
practical interest.

On the theoretical analysis of the Lasso. Although the
Lasso is a classical and widespread tool, its precise performance, strengths and limitations for classification tasks are
subject to surprisingly few theoretical studies. In particular,
the choice of the hyperparameter (i.e., the regularization
parameter) has, for the time being, remained restricted to
a cross validation which may be time and data consuming.
Furthermore, the difficulty of predicting in advance the performance obtained by the classification algorithm and the
lack of statistical interpretation make it data-dependent. In
this article, we address these issues from a theoretical perspective through a novel analysis of ISTA, which may be
extended to similar iterative algorithms. Specifically, based
on a mixture of concentrated random vector assumption on
the data, among which we find images generated by Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs), and considering a statistical
learning regime where the dimension of the data evolves
linearly with the number of samples, this paper derives the
exact theoretical classification error as a function of the
underlying model parameters and the data statistics. Even
though the theoretical analysis is performed in an asymptotic
setting, we confirm our findings on both real and synthetic
datasets of finite sample and feature size, thereby allowing
their application also to situations of practical interest.

1. Introduction
The Lasso. The Lasso (Least Absolute Shrinkage and
Selection Operator, (Tibshirani, 1996)) is one of the most
well-known tools in statistics and signal processing. By employing `1 -regularization, it imposes sparsity on the solution
sought by selecting only a limited number of features of
interest for the task at hand. Furthermore, the Lasso and its
various related variants are of interest for machine learning,
particularly in the field of classification when only a few
features are relevant for predicting the class memberships.
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Paris, France 2 Chair for Mathematics of Information Processing, RWTH Aachen University, Germany 3 Mathematical and Algorithmic Sciences Laboratory, Huawei Technologies France. Correspondence to: Malik Tiomoko <malik.tiomoko@huawei.com>, Ekkehard Schnoor
<schnoor@mathc.rwth-aachen.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

State of the art. Although widely used in practice, the
theoretical study of Lasso has been subject to very few
studies on the exact performance characterization in large
dimensions. Much of the literature has focused on the related problem of Compressive Sensing, where one aims to
reconstruct sparse vectors from only few linear measurements (Candès & Tao, 2005; Candès et al., 2006), typically
providing non-asymptotic bounds (e.g. on the necessary
number of measurements). Our study complements this
theory by providing not bounds but exact performances.
Regarding the exact performance, large areas of literature
have focused on risk analysis in the large random matrices
regime (where the dimension p and the number of data n
are of the same order of magnitude): Approximate Message
Passing (Bayati & Montanari, 2011) and analysis based
on the Convex Gaussian Minmax Theorem (Thrampoulidis
et al., 2015). These two approaches, although very robust
and theoretically stable, are restricted to regression cases

