Does the Data Induce Capacity Control in Deep Learning?

Rubing Yang 1 Jialin Mao 1 Pratik Chaudhari 2

Abstract
We show that the input correlation matrix of typical classification datasets has an eigenspectrum
where, after a sharp initial drop, a large number of
small eigenvalues are distributed uniformly over
an exponentially large range. This structure is
mirrored in a network trained on this data: we
show that the Hessian and the Fisher Information
Matrix (FIM) have eigenvalues that are spread
uniformly over exponentially large ranges. We
call such eigenspectra “sloppy” because sets of
weights corresponding to small eigenvalues can
be changed by large magnitudes without affecting
the loss. Networks trained on atypical datasets
with non-sloppy inputs do not share these traits
and deep networks trained on such datasets generalize poorly. Inspired by this, we study the hypothesis that sloppiness of inputs aids generalization
in deep networks. We show that if the Hessian is
sloppy, we can compute non-vacuous PAC-Bayes
generalization bounds analytically. By exploiting
our empirical observation that training predominantly takes place in the non-sloppy subspace of
the FIM, we develop data-distribution dependent
PAC-Bayes priors that lead to accurate generalization bounds using numerical optimization.

1. Introduction
In Fig. 1 (top), for a wide residual network (with 10 layers)
on CIFAR-10, we calculated the eigenspectrum of the input
correlation matrix (n−1 XX > where each column of X is
one input image) and compared it to the eigenspectra of the
Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) and the Hessian. We find
that this decay pattern for the input correlation matrix is
mirrored in that of the FIM and the Hessian. There are very
few (less than 5% of the input dimensionality) large eigen1

Applied Mathematics and Computational Science, University of Pennsylvania 2 Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Rubing Yang <rubingy@sas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

values (stiff) after which there is a sharp drop and a long
tail of small eigenvalues (we call them sloppy as defined in
Def. 8). Other quantities, e.g., correlations of activations of
different layers, Jacobians of different logits with respect
to the weights, and gradients of the loss with respect to
activations of different layers, have a similar decay pattern.
Eigenvalues span exponentially large ranges—about 7 orders of magnitude in this experiment. Sloppy eigenvalues
are distributed uniformly across such exponentially large
ranges.
Eigenspectra of many typical datasets and networks are
similar. In Fig. 1 bottom, we created synthetic inputs with
varying slopes for the decay of sloppy eigenvalues. We
labeled such inputs using a teacher network with randomly
generated, but fixed, weights and trained different student
networks on such datasets. Each student was trained to have
zero training error, i.e., it interpolated its training dataset
perfectly. We find in Fig. 1 (left) that, again, the decay
pattern of the inputs is mirrored in the FIM/Hessian of the
students—sloppier the inputs, sloppier the FIM and the
Hessian. Sloppier the input correlations, better the generalization error of the student (Fig. 1 bottom right).
The Hessian governs the local geometry of the loss function
in the weight space; small eigenvalues correspond to directions along which the loss is insensitive to changes in the
weights. The FIM governs the local geometry in the prediction space; if we think of a network as a parameterized
distribution pw (y | x), eigenvectors corresponding to small
eigenvalues of the FIM correspond to sets of weights which
can be changed significantly without affecting the distribution pw (y | x) much. A sloppy eigenspectrum for these
matrices indicates that the trained network is in some sense,
“simple”: few sets of weights dominate its predictions while
there exists a large set of sets that improve the predictions
marginally. Both these matrices play a role in determining
the generalization error of a neural network.
This paper investigates how sloppiness of the inputs causes
the sloppiness of the FIM and the Hessian and how such
sloppiness aids generalization.
1.1. Contributions
(1) We show that for typical datasets and deep networks,
eigenspectra of correlation matrices of the inputs, ac-

