Easy Variational Inference for Categorical Models via an Independent Binary Approximation

Michael T. Wojnowicz 1 2 Shuchin Aeron 1 3 Eric L. Miller 1 3 Michael C. Hughes 1 4

Abstract
We pursue tractable Bayesian analysis of generalized linear models (GLMs) for categorical
data. GLMs have been difficult to scale to
more than a few dozen categories due to nonconjugacy or strong posterior dependencies when
using conjugate auxiliary variable methods. We
define a new class of GLMs for categorical
data called categorical-from-binary (CB) models. Each CB model has a likelihood that is
bounded by the product of binary likelihoods,
suggesting a natural posterior approximation.
This approximation makes inference straightforward and fast; using well-known auxiliary variables for probit or logistic regression, the product of binary models admits conjugate closedform variational inference that is embarrassingly
parallel across categories and invariant to category ordering. Moreover, an independent binary model simultaneously approximates multiple CB models. Bayesian model averaging over
these can improve the quality of the approximation for any given dataset. We show that our
approach scales to thousands of categories, outperforming posterior estimation competitors like
Automatic Differentiation Variational Inference
(ADVI) and No U-Turn Sampling (NUTS) in the
time required to achieve fixed prediction quality.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of modeling categorical data informed by covariates using the machinery of generalized
linear models (GLMs). Because our intended big data applications may involve rare events or little data for some
quantities of interest, we take a Bayesian approach in order
to estimate distributions over unknown parameters given
available data, and then average over these distributions
1

Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA 2 Data Intensive Studies Center 3 Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering 4 Dept.
of Computer Science. Email: <michael.wojnowicz@tufts.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022.
Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

when making predictions. While many generalized linear
models for categorical data have been proposed, Bayesian
analysis of these models remains difficult with substantial
active research due to the need for methods that are simultaneously accurate, tractable, and scalable.
The most common modeling choice for categorical data is
multi-class logistic regression, which uses a softmax (a.k.a.
multi-logit) function to produce category probabilities. The
softmax likelihood is not conjugate to any standard prior
over weight parameters (such as Gaussian), so estimating posteriors over weights requires expensive sampling
methods (Hoffman et al., 2014) or non-conjugate variational optimization methods (Wang & Blei, 2013; Braun &
McAuliffe, 2010; Kucukelbir et al., 2017). Recent auxiliary
variable methods (Polson et al., 2013) have yielded conjugate conditionals amenable to Gibbs sampling, but closedform variational updates for multiple categories require
stick-breaking (Linderman et al., 2015). Stick-breaking imposes an asymmetric order over categories, yet in many
cases it is unnatural to view category selection as a sequential process. In practice, this asymmetry complicates prior
specification and inference quality (Zhang & Zhou, 2017).
An alternative model is multi-class probit regression,
whose link function is the cumulative distribution function of the Normal distribution. The probit admits conjugate inference under a well-known auxiliary variable representation (Albert & Chib, 1993; Held & Holmes, 2006).
However, multi-class probit models encode strong posterior dependence among entries of the auxiliary parameter vectors. This dependence requires one-entry-at-a-time
sampling instead of joint sampling (Johndrow et al., 2013),
yielding poor mixing performance as the number of categories grows. Furthermore, implementations often require
picking a “base category”; this choice can impact the practical results of inference (Burgette et al., 2021). Finally, the
multinomial probit lacks closed-form category probabilities (Johndrow et al., 2013), which has prevented adoption
within more complicated models (Holsclaw et al., 2017).
Motivated by difficulties that arise from these previous efforts (summarized in Table 1), we present a new class of
categorical models – categorical-from-binary (CB) models1 – whose defining feature is that each one’s likelihood
1

Code: github.com/tufts-ml/categorical-from-binary

