Plug-In Inversion: Model-Agnostic Inversion for Vision with Data
Augmentations

Amin Ghiasi * 1 Hamid Kazemi * 1 Steven Reich * 1 Chen Zhu 1 Micah Goldblum 2 Tom Goldstein 1

Abstract
Existing techniques for model inversion typically
rely on hard-to-tune regularizers, such as total
variation or feature regularization, which must
be individually calibrated for each network in order to produce adequate images. In this work,
we introduce Plug-In Inversion, which relies on
a simple set of augmentations and does not require excessive hyper-parameter tuning. Under
our proposed augmentation-based scheme, the
same set of augmentation hyper-parameters can
be used for inverting a wide range of image classification models, regardless of input dimensions
or the architecture. We illustrate the practicality
of our approach by inverting Vision Transformers (ViTs) and Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs)
trained on the ImageNet dataset, tasks which to
the best of our knowledge have not been successfully accomplished by any previous works.

1. Introduction
Model inversion is an important tool for visualizing and
interpreting behaviors inside neural architectures, understanding what models have learned, and explaining model
behaviors. In general, model inversion seeks inputs that either activate a feature in the network (feature visualization)
or yield a high output response for a particular class (class
inversion) (Olah et al., 2017). Model inversion and visualization has been a cornerstone of conceptual studies that reveal how networks decompose images into semantic information (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014; Dosovitskiy & Brox, 2016).
Over time, inversion methods have shifted from solving
conceptual problems to solving practical ones. Saliency
maps, for example, are image-specific model visualizations
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA 2 New York University Center for Data Science, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Amin Ghiasi <ghiasi@umd.edu>, Hamid Kazemi
<kazemira@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

that reveal the inputs that most strong influence a model’s
decisions (Simonyan et al., 2014).
Recent advances in network architecture pose major challenges for existing model inversion schemes. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have long been the de-facto
approach for computer vision tasks, and are the focus of
nearly all research in the model inversion field. Recently,
other architectures have emerged that achieve results competitive with CNNs. These include Vision Transformers
(ViTs; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), which are based on selfattention layers, and MLP-Mixer (Tolstikhin et al., 2021)
and ResMLP (Touvron et al., 2021a), which are based on
Multi Layer Perceptron layers. Unfortunately, most existing model inversion methods either cannot be applied to
these architectures, or are known to fail. For example, the
feature regularizer used in DeepInversion (Yin et al., 2020)
cannot be applied to ViTs or MLP-based models because
they do not include Batch Normalization layers (Ioffe &
Szegedy, 2015).
In this work, we focus on class inversion, the goal of which
is to find interpretable images that maximize the score
a classification model assigns to a chosen label without
knowledge about the model’s training data. Class inversion has been used for a variety of tasks including model
interpretation (Mordvintsev et al., 2015), image synthesis
(Santurkar et al., 2019; Kaur et al., 2019), and data-free
knowledge transfer (Yin et al., 2020). However, current inversion methods have several key drawbacks. The quality
of generated images is often highly sensitive to the weights
assigned to regularization terms, so these hyper-parameters
need to be carefully calibrated for each individual network.
In addition, methods requiring batch norm parameters are
not applicable to emerging architectures.
To overcome these limitations, we present Plug-In Inversion (PII), an augmentation-based approach to class inversion. PII does not require any explicit regularization, which eliminates the need to tune regularizer-specific
hyper-parameters for each model or image instance. We
show that PII is able to invert CNNs, ViTs, and MLP networks using the same architecture-agnostic method, and
with the same architecture-agnostic hyper-parameters.

