Online Balanced Experimental Design

David Arbour * 1 Drew Dimmery * 2 Tung Mai 1 Anup Rao 1

Abstract
We consider the experimental design problem
in an online environment, an important practical
task for reducing the variance of estimates in randomized experiments which allows for greater
precision, and in turn, improved decision making. In this work, we present algorithms that
build on recent advances in online discrepancy
minimization which accommodate both arbitrary
treatment probabilities and multiple treatments.
The proposed algorithms are computationally efficient, minimize covariate imbalance, and include randomization which enables robustness to
misspecification. We provide worst case bounds
on the expected mean squared error of the causal
estimate and show that the proposed estimator is
no worse than an implicit ridge regression, which
are within a logarithmic factor of the best known
results for offline experimental design. We conclude with a detailed simulation study showing
favorable results relative to complete randomization as well as to offline methods for experimental design with time complexities exceeding our
algorithm, which has a linear dependence on the
number of observations, by polynomial factors.

1. Introduction
Randomized experimentation is a fundamental tool for obtaining counterfactual estimates. The efficacy of randomization comes from a very simple intuition–by randomly
assigning treatment status dependence between observed
(and unobserved) treatment and pre-treatment covariates
necessarily tends to zero as a function of the number of
units. In the context of experimentation, this independence condition on observed covariates, commonly known
as balance (Imai et al., 2008; Imai and Ratkovic, 2014), reduces the variance of estimates of the average treatment ef*

Equal contribution 1 Adobe Research, San Jose, CA, USA
Data Science @ University of Vienna, Vienna, AT. Correspondence to: David Arbour <darbour26@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

fect (Greevy et al., 2004; Higgins et al., 2016; Kallus, 2018;
Li et al., 2018; Harshaw et al., 2020). Under the appropriate conditions such corrections can result in large increases
in effective sample size, allowing for the detection of the
small effects which are commonplace in many large scale
studies and industrial applications (Dimmery et al., 2019;
Azevedo et al., 2020). These contexts rely heavily on experimentation for decision-making, so reduced variance directly translates into more reliable decisions (Kohavi et al.,
2012).
Traditional experimental design like blocking (Greevy
et al., 2004; Higgins et al., 2016) or even the novel GramSchmidt Walk design (Harshaw et al., 2020) require more
than one pass over the sample and their sample complexity
is greater than O(n). Even algorithms which admit sequential assignment such as Moore and Moore (2017) suffer
from the fact that the algorithm is not linear time and, thus,
respondents late in the experiment may take substantially
longer to receive a treatment assignment (Cavaille, 2018).
Our work is motivated by this setting to provide a lineartime, single-pass (i.e. sequential) algorithm for balancing
experimental design. Our focus is on linear measures of
balance (often of particular interest to applied researchers).
This provides a new avenue through which experimenters
can ensure that their experiments optimize the information
they gain from costly samples.
We start by presenting four desiderata for effective, practical online experimental design. First, a method must be
computationally efficient. In a review of existing methods
for online assignment in the case of survey experiments,
Cavaille (2018) finds that existing methods become slow to
unusable as increasingly more respondents are included in
a study. This resulting speed is fundamentally incompatible with effective administration of an experiment. In short,
high latency will cause disproportionately large dropoff in
an experiment, which may completely nullify the gains
from using more sophisticated experimental design. Any
algorithm with greater than linear time complexity exacerbates this problem: higher latency for later subjects than
earlier subjects will tend to cause non-random sample attrition, as later subjects (who may be different than earlier
respondents) will be more likely to drop out.
Second, an experimental design must reduce covariate im-

