Deep Networks on Toroids: Removing Symmetries Reveals the Structure of
Flat Regions in the Landscape Geometry

Fabrizio Pittorino 1 Antonio Ferraro 1 Gabriele Perugini 1 2 Christoph Feinauer 1 Carlo Baldassi 1
Riccardo Zecchina 1

Abstract
We systematize the approach to the investigation
of deep neural network landscapes by basing it on
the geometry of the space of implemented functions rather than the space of parameters. Grouping classifiers into equivalence classes, we develop a standardized parameterization in which
all symmetries are removed, resulting in a toroidal
topology. On this space, we explore the error landscape rather than the loss. This lets us derive a
meaningful notion of the flatness of minimizers
and of the geodesic paths connecting them. Using
different optimization algorithms that sample minimizers with different flatness we study the mode
connectivity and relative distances. Testing a variety of state-of-the-art architectures and benchmark datasets, we confirm the correlation between
flatness and generalization performance; we further show that in function space flatter minima
are closer to each other and that the barriers along
the geodesics connecting them are small. We also
find that minimizers found by variants of gradient
descent can be connected by zero-error paths composed of two straight lines in parameter space, i.e.
polygonal chains with a single bend. We observe
similar qualitative results in neural networks with
binary weights and activations, providing one of
the first results concerning the connectivity in this
setting. Our results hinge on symmetry removal,
and are in remarkable agreement with the rich phenomenology described by some recent analytical
studies performed on simple shallow models.

1

AI Lab, Institute for Data Science and Analytics, Bocconi
University, 20136 Milano, Italy 2 Dept. of Applied Science and
Technology, Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Torino, Italy. Correspondence to: Fabrizio Pittorino <fabrizio.pittorino@unibocconi.it>,
Carlo Baldassi <carlo.baldassi@unibocconi.it>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The loss landscape of a typical deep neural network performing a supervised learning task is in general highly nonconvex. Moreover, even small networks (by the current
standards) have a huge number of configurations of small
loss, corresponding to zero or near-zero training error. In
this sense, most modern networks operate in a strongly overparameterized regime. Understanding how simple variants
of first-order algorithms are able to escape bad local minima and yet avoid overfitting is a fundamental problem,
which has received a lot of attention from several perspectives (Belkin et al., 2019; Rocks & Mehta, 2020).
A natural and promising approach for addressing this issue is to investigate the geometrical properties of the loss
landscape. Broadly speaking, there are two related but conceptually distinct main research directions in this area: one
is about the dynamics of gradient-based learning algorithms
(e.g. Feng & Tu (2021)); the other concerns a static description of the geometry, its overall structure and its relation to
the generalization properties of the network on unseen data
(e.g. Gotmare et al. (2018)). In this paper, we focus on the
latter.
A first basic observation is that (near-)minimizers of the loss,
corresponding to (near-)zero training error, can have dramatically different generalization properties (Keskar et al.,
2016; Liu et al., 2020; Pittorino et al., 2021). A growing
amount of evidence shows a consistent correlation between
the flatness of the minima of the loss and the test accuracy,
across a large number of models and with several alternative measures of flatness, see e.g. Dziugaite & Roy (2017);
Jiang* et al. (2020); Pittorino et al. (2021); Yue et al. (2020).
Moreover, several studies indicate that stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) and its variants introduce a bias, compared to
full-batch gradient descent, towards flatter minima (Keskar
et al., 2016; Chaudhari & Soatto, 2018; Feng & Tu, 2021;
Pittorino et al., 2021). This effect seems to be amplified by
other operating procedures, e.g. the use of the cross-entropy
loss function, drop-out, judicious initialization, ReLU transfer functions (Baldassi et al., 2018; 2020; 2019; Liu et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2021). Therefore, in practical applications, bad minima are seldom reported or observed, even

