Examining Scaling and Transfer of Language Model Architectures
for Machine Translation
Biao Zhang 1 * Behrooz Ghorbani 2 Ankur Bapna 2 Yong Cheng 2 Xavier Garcia 2
Jonathan Shen 2 Orhan Firat 2

Abstract
Natural language understanding and generation
models follow one of the two dominant architectural paradigms: language models (LMs) that
process concatenated sequences in a single stack
of layers, and encoder-decoder models (EncDec)
that utilize separate layer stacks for input and output processing. In machine translation, EncDec
has long been the favoured approach, but with
few studies investigating the performance of LMs.
In this work, we thoroughly examine the role of
several architectural design choices on the performance of LMs on bilingual, (massively) multilingual and zero-shot translation tasks, under systematic variations of data conditions and model
sizes. Our results show that: (i) Different LMs
have different scaling properties, where architectural differences often have a significant impact on
model performance at small scales, but the performance gap narrows as the number of parameters
increases, (ii) Several design choices, including
causal masking and language-modeling objectives
for the source sequence, have detrimental effects
on translation quality, and (iii) When paired with
full-visible masking for source sequences, LMs
could perform on par with EncDec on supervised
bilingual and multilingual translation tasks, and
improve greatly on zero-shot directions by facilitating the reduction of off-target translations.

1. Introduction
The popularity of large, general-purpose text generation
models has skyrocketed in recent years due to their outstanding performance across a wide range of natural language
∗
Work done while interning at Google Research. 1 School of
Informatics, University of Edinburgh 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Biao Zhang <b.zhang@ed.ac.uk>, Orhan Firat
<orhanf@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

processing (NLP) tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Raffel et al.,
2020; Xue et al., 2021). These generative models come
in two flavors: encoder-decoder (EncDec) models (Raffel
et al., 2020) with two independent modules for encoding
and decoding, and encoder-only (Devlin et al., 2019) or
decoder-only models (Brown et al., 2020) that use a single
module for both encoding and decoding functions (LMs).
Often, these two types of architectures deliver comparable
downstream performance under large-scale pretraining.
However, in neural machine translation (NMT), EncDec
has been the dominant paradigm across all translation tasks
(e.g. high/low-resource, multilingual and zero-shot translations) (Barrault et al., 2020; Ansari et al., 2020) with
very few studies investigating the application of LMs (He
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021). Compared to EncDec,
LM offers a more compact architecture by sharing the parameters across encoding and decoding procedures. Considering these procedures are over distinct source/target
languages for machine translation, sharing of the parameters across them implicitly affects the transfer dynamics:
may result in improved representations by positive knowledge transfer across languages (Arivazhagan et al., 2019b),
or may hurt the end-quality by amplifying capacity dilution problem (Lample & Conneau, 2019). With concurrent
streams of research in understanding the scaling properties
of LM (Kaplan et al., 2020) and EncDec (Ghorbani et al.,
2021) paradigms, we see value in revisiting the NMT architecture inductive biases on a diverse set of translation
tasks.
In this paper, we explore various configurations of LM architectures for translation as illustrated in Figure 1. We compare them with the customary EncDec architecture along
two axes, parameter scaling and cross-lingual transfer. We
conduct a systematic study under a variety of data conditions, tasks (bilingual, multilingual and zero-shot) and
examine recent architectural design choices associated with
LMs, including causal masking (CausalLM) vs. full-visible
masking (PrefixLM) for source sequences,1 layer-wise co1
Also known as unidirectional vs bidirectional language modelling, where in the unidirectional case a token representation takes
into account only the preceding tokens and their representations,
but the bidirectional case takes into account both preceding and

