Model-Value Inconsistency as a Signal for Epistemic Uncertainty

Angelos Filos * 1 2 Eszter Vértes * 1 Zita Marinho * 1 Gregory Farquhar 1 Diana Borsa 1 Abram Friesen 1
Feryal Behbahani 1 Tom Schaul 1 André Barreto 1 Simon Osindero 1

Abstract
Using a model of the environment and a value
function, an agent can construct many estimates
of a state’s value, by unrolling the model for different lengths and bootstrapping with its value
function. Our key insight is that one can treat
this set of value estimates as a type of ensemble,
which we call an implicit value ensemble (IVE).
Consequently, the discrepancy between these estimates can be used as a proxy for the agent’s
epistemic uncertainty; we term this signal modelvalue inconsistency or self-inconsistency for short.
Unlike prior work which estimates uncertainty by
training an ensemble of many models and/or value
functions, this approach requires only the single
model and value function which are already being
learned in most model-based reinforcement learning algorithms. We provide empirical evidence in
both tabular and function approximation settings
from pixels that self-inconsistency is useful (i)
as a signal for exploration, (ii) for acting safely
under distribution shifts, and (iii) for robustifying
value-based planning with a learned model.

1

Introduction

Agents that employ learning to improve their decision
making should be equipped with mechanisms for representing and using their acquired knowledge effectively.
Learned models of the environment (Sutton, 1991) and
value functions (Sutton, 1988) are explicit ways that
reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto, 2018) agents
use to represent their knowledge about the environment.
Equally important is the agents’ ability to reason about their
ignorance (i.e., epistemic uncertainty, Strens, 2000) and
factor it in their decisions (Milnor, 1951). In tabular settings,
exact Bayesian inference can be used for quantifying the
*
Equal contribution 1 DeepMind 2 University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Angelos Filos <angelos.filos@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

s

v̂

0
v̂m̂
(s)

s

Tm̂

v̂

1
v̂m̂
(s)

s

Tm̂

Tm̂

v̂

2
v̂m̂
(s)

s

Tm̂

···

Tm̂

v̂

v(s)

s

(b) At initialisation
v(s)

k
v̂m̂
(s)

(a) Implicit Value Ensemble (IVE)

s

(c) After training

Figure 1: Implicit value ensemble (IVE) estimated from
a single learned model m̂ and value function v̂. (a)
Computation graph. The model-induced Bellman operator
Tm̂ is repeatedly applied k times on the approximate
k
value function v̂, i.e., v̂m̂
(s) , (Tm̂ )k v̂(s). (b-c) Didactic
example with 1D state space: Value predictions (in
k 10
blue) for different values of k, i.e., {v̂m̂
}k=0 , along with
the ensemble mean µ-IVE(10) and standard deviation
σ-IVE(10) (in orange), before (b) and after (c) training
with value targets (black circles). The ensemble standard
deviation is non-trivial at out-of-distribution (OOD) states
and zero at in-distribution states.
agents’ uncertainty in both model-free (Dearden et al., 1998)
and model-based (Dearden et al., 1999) RL approaches.
However, in complex RL problems, since exact Bayesian
inference is intractable, proxy signals are often used instead,
including prediction error (Lopes et al., 2012; Pathak et al.,
2017), approximate state visitation counts (Bellemare et al.,
2016) and disagreement of samples from either approximate
posterior distributions over learned parameters (Blundell
et al., 2015) or explicit ensembles of value functions (Osband et al., 2016) or world models (Chua et al., 2018).
In this work, we introduce a novel signal for capturing
RL agents’ ignorance, termed model-value inconsistency
or self-inconsistency for short. A k-step self-inconsistency
signal is constructed by applying the model-induced Bellman operator Tm̂ to learned value function v̂, k times.
This produces k + 1 different estimates of the state value:
{v̂, Tm̂ v̂, (Tm̂ )2 v̂, . . . , (Tm̂ )k v̂}, as illustrated in Figures 1
and 2c. Our key insight is that these can be thought of as
predictions from an ensemble of value functions, which we
call the implicit value ensemble (IVE).

