Federated Minimax Optimization:
Improved Convergence Analyses and Algorithms

Pranay Sharma 1 Rohan Panda 1 Gauri Joshi 1 Pramod K. Varshney 2

Abstract
In this paper, we consider nonconvex minimax
optimization, which is gaining prominence in
many modern machine learning applications, such
as GANs. Large-scale edge-based collection
of training data in these applications calls for
communication-efficient distributed optimization
algorithms, such as those used in federated learning, to process the data. In this paper, we analyze
local stochastic gradient descent ascent (SGDA),
the local-update version of the SGDA algorithm.
SGDA is the core algorithm used in minimax
optimization, but it is not well-understood in a
distributed setting. We prove that Local SGDA
has order-optimal sample complexity for several
classes of nonconvex-concave and nonconvexnonconcave minimax problems, and also enjoys
linear speedup with respect to the number of
clients. We provide a novel and tighter analysis,
which improves the convergence and communication guarantees in the existing literature. For
nonconvex-PL and nonconvex-one-point-concave
functions, we improve the existing complexity
results for centralized minimax problems. Furthermore, we propose a momentum-based localupdate algorithm, which has the same convergence guarantees, but outperforms Local SGDA
as demonstrated in our experiments.

1. Introduction
In the recent years, minimax optimization theory has found
relevance in several modern machine learning applications
including Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Good*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
2
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY.. Correspondence to: Pranay
Sharma <pranaysh@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

fellow et al., 2014; Arjovsky et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al.,
2017), adversarial training of neural networks (Sinha et al.,
2017; Madry et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021), reinforcement
learning (Dai et al., 2017, 2018), and robust optimization
(Namkoong & Duchi, 2016, 2017; Mohri et al., 2019). Many
of these problems lie outside the domain of classical convexconcave theory (Daskalakis et al., 2021; Hsieh et al., 2021).
In this work, we consider the following smooth nonconvex
minimax distributed optimization problem:
min max

x∈Rd1 y∈Rd2

n

f (x, y) :=

n
o
1X
fi (x, y) ,
n i=1

(1)

where n is the number of clients, and fi represents the
local loss function at client i, defined as fi (x, y) =
Eξi ∼Di [L(x, y; ξi )]. Here, L(·, ·; ξi ) denotes the loss for
the data point ξi , sampled from the local data distribution
Di at client i. The functions {fi } are smooth, nonconvex in
x, and concave or nonconcave in y.
Stochastic gradient descent ascent (SGDA) (Heusel et al.,
2017; Daskalakis et al., 2018), a simple generalization of
SGD (Bottou et al., 2018), is one of the simplest algorithms
used to iteratively solve (1). It carries out alternate (stochastic) gradient descent/ascent for the min/max problem. The
exact form of the convergence results depends on the (non)convexity assumptions which the objective function f in
(1) satisfies with respect to x and y. For example, stronglyconvex strongly-concave (in x and y, respectively), nonconvex-strongly-concave, non-convex-concave, etc.
Most existing literature on minimax optimization problems
is focused on solving the problem at a single client. However, in big data applications that often rely on multiple
sources or clients for data collection (Xing et al., 2016),
transferring the entire dataset to a single server is often undesirable. Doing so might be costly in applications with
high-dimensional data, or altogether prohibitive due to the
privacy concerns of the clients (Léauté & Faltings, 2013).
Federated Learning (FL) is a recent paradigm (Konečnỳ
et al., 2016; Kairouz et al., 2019) proposed to address this
problem. In FL, the edge clients are not required to send
their data to the server, improving the privacy afforded to
the clients. Instead, the central server offloads some of its
computational burden to the clients, which run the training

