Finding Global Homophily in Graph Neural Networks When Meeting
Heterophily

Xiang Li 1 Renyu Zhu 1 Yao Cheng 1 Caihua Shan 2 Siqiang Luo 3 Dongsheng Li 2 Weining Qian 1

Abstract

We investigate graph neural networks on graphs
with heterophily. Some existing methods amplify
a node’s neighborhood with multi-hop neighbors
to include more nodes with homophily. However, it is a significant challenge to set personalized neighborhood sizes for different nodes. Further, for other homophilous nodes excluded in
the neighborhood, they are ignored for information aggregation. To address these problems, we
propose two models GloGNN and GloGNN++,
which generate a node’s embedding by aggregating information from global nodes in the graph.
In each layer, both models learn a coefficient matrix to capture the correlations between nodes,
based on which neighborhood aggregation is performed. The coefficient matrix allows signed values and is derived from an optimization problem
that has a closed-form solution. We further accelerate neighborhood aggregation and derive a
linear time complexity. We theoretically explain
the models’ effectiveness by proving that both
the coefficient matrix and the generated node embedding matrix have the desired grouping effect.
We conduct extensive experiments to compare
our models against 11 other competitors on 15
benchmark datasets in a wide range of domains,
scales and graph heterophilies. Experimental results show that our methods achieve superior performance and are also very efficient.

1

School of Data Science and Engineering, East China Normal
University, Shanghai, China 2 Microsoft Research Asia, Shanghai,
China 3 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Xiang
Li <xiangli@dase.ecnu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data is ubiquitous in a variety of domains
including chemistry, biology and sociology. In graphs (networks), nodes and edges represent entities and their relations, respectively. To enrich the information of graphs,
nodes are usually associated with various features. For
example, on Facebook, users are connected by the friendship relation and each user has features like age, gender
and school. Both node features and graph topology provide sources of information for graph-based learning. Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling,
2016; Veličković et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017) have
received significant attention for the capability to seamlessly
integrate the two sources of information and they have been
shown to serve as effective tools for representation learning
on graph-structured data.
Based on the implicit graph homophily assumption, traditional GNNs (Kipf & Welling, 2016) adopt a non-linear
form of smoothing operation and generate node embeddings
by aggregating information from a node’s neighbors. Specifically, homophily is a key characteristic in a wide range of
real-world graphs, where linked nodes tend to share similar features or have the same label. These graphs include
friendship networks (McPherson et al., 2001), political networks (Gerber et al., 2013) and citation networks (Ciotti
et al., 2016). However, in the real world, there also exist
graphs with heterophily, where nodes with dissimilar features or different labels are more likely to be connected.
For example, different amino acid types are connected in
protein structures; predator and prey are related in the ecological food webs. In these networks, due to the heterophily,
the smoothing operation could generate similar representations for nodes with different labels, which lead to the poor
performance of GNNs.
To generalize GNNs to heterophilous graphs, some recent
works (Zhu et al., 2020b; Bo et al., 2021; Chien et al., 2020)
have been proposed to leverage high-pass convolutional
filters and multi-hop neighbors to address the heterophily
issue. On the one hand, the high-pass filters can be used to
push away a node’s feature vector from its neighbors’ while
the low-pass filters used by traditional GNNs do the opposite. The combination of low-pass and high-pass filters in

