Understanding Robust Generalization in Learning Regular Languages

Soham Dan 1 Osbert Bastani 1 Dan Roth 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
A key challenge facing deep learning is its inability to generalize robustly to shifts in the underlying distribution. For
example, Lake & Baroni (2018) demonstrate that recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) have difficulty in generalizing to
longer sentences than those seen during training and is also
1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania.
Correspondence to:
Soham
Dan <sohamdan@seas.upenn.edu>, Osbert Bastani <obastani@seas.upenn.edu>, Dan Roth <danroth@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

100

Accuracy (%)

A key feature of human intelligence is the ability
to generalize beyond the training distribution, for
instance, parsing longer sentences than seen in
the past. Currently, deep neural networks struggle
to generalize robustly to such shifts in the data
distribution. We study robust generalization in
the context of using recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) to learn regular languages. We hypothesize that standard end-to-end modeling strategies
cannot generalize well to systematic distribution
shifts and propose a compositional strategy to address this. We compare an end-to-end strategy
that maps strings to labels with a compositional
strategy that predicts the structure of the deterministic finite state automaton (DFA) that accepts the
regular language. We theoretically prove that the
compositional strategy generalizes significantly
better than the end-to-end strategy. In our experiments, we implement the compositional strategy
via an auxiliary task where the goal is to predict
the intermediate states visited by the DFA when
parsing a string. Our empirical results support
our hypothesis, showing that auxiliary tasks can
enable robust generalization. Interestingly, the
end-to-end RNN generalizes significantly better
than the theoretical lower bound, suggesting that
it is able to achieve at least some degree of robust
generalization.

90
80
70
60
0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
L∞ distance between P and Q

1

1.2

Figure 1. The parity task is to classify whether x ∈ {0, 1}∗ has
an odd (y = 1) or even (y = 0) number of zeros. We show the
edge Markov Chains for generating (a) training, and (b) shifted test
examples. We also plot test accuracies as a function of ∥P − Q∥∞ ,
where P and Q are the transition probabilities of the edge Markov
chains (the train accuracy is always 100%). The test accuracy
drops significantly as ∥P − Q∥∞ increases. We plot accuracy w.r.t
the ℓ∞ norm in order to compare with our theoretical bounds as
discussed in Sec. 5.3.

unable to understand novel combinations of familiar components, i.e., they lack systematic compositionality. Subsequent work have provided evidence of this failure across
different architectures (Dessı̀ & Baroni, 2019; Furrer et al.,
2020) and tasks (Ruis et al., 2020; Kim & Linzen, 2020).
Humans, on the other hand, are remarkably robust to such
shifts, suggesting that robust generalization is possible in
practice. Thus, a key question is how to design deep learning
algorithms that achieve this property. In the theoretical
direction, most work has focused on learning in the presence
of covariate shift—i.e., shift in the distribution over inputs
(Blitzer et al., 2008; Pagnoni et al., 2018). However, these
results largely rely on the shift being small (in particular,

