On Measuring Causal Contributions via do-interventions

Yonghan Jung 1 Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan 2 Jin Tian 3 Dominik Janzing 2 Patrick Blöbaum 2
Elias Bareinboim 4

Abstract
Causal contributions measure the strengths of different causes to a target quantity. Understanding
causal contributions is important in empirical sciences and data-driven disciplines since it allows
to answer practical queries like “what are the contributions of each cause to the effect?” In this
paper, we develop a principled method for quantifying causal contributions. First, we provide
desiderata of properties (axioms) that causal contribution measures should satisfy and propose the
do-Shapley values (inspired by do-interventions
(Pearl, 2000)) as a unique method satisfying these
properties. Next, we develop a criterion under
which the do-Shapley values can be efficiently
inferred from non-experimental data. Finally, we
provide do-Shapley estimators exhibiting consistency, computational feasibility, and statistical
robustness. Simulation results corroborate with
the theory.

1. Introduction
Inferring causal effects is a fundamental problem throughout the data sciences since it can answer queries like “what
would be an expected outcome if inputs had been fixed to
certain values?”. There is a growing literature tackling this
question in both understanding the conditions under which
causal conclusions can be drawn from non-experimental
data (causal effect identification) (Pearl, 1995; Tian & Pearl,
2003; Huang & Valtorta, 2006; Shpitser & Pearl, 2006;
Bareinboim & Pearl, 2016; Jaber et al., 2018; Lee et al.,
2019; 2020; Lee & Bareinboim, 2020), and in estimating
the identified causal functions using the data (causal effect
estimation) (Jung et al., 2020; Bhattacharya et al., 2020;
Jung et al., 2021a;b; Bhattacharyya et al., 2020; 2021). Beyond the task of causal inference, interpreting the result
1

Purdue University 2 Amazon 3 Iowa State Univerity
Columbia University. Correspondence to: Yonghan Jung
<jung222@purdue.edu>.
4

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of causal inference, including “what is the most important
cause of the effect?” or more generally, “what are the contributions of each cause to the effect?”, is also practically
important. Answering these queries fall under the task of
measuring causal contributions, which quantifies the degree
of contribution of causes to a target effect. As a motivation,
consider the following scenario:
Example 1. A video streaming service company has collected data that contains various features (as described
in (Lundberg, 2021)) including sales call (S), product needs
(P ), interaction with customers (I), monthly usage (M ),
discounts provided (D), last upgrade (L), economic factors
(E), Ad spend (A), bugs reported (B). These features are
causally related and affect the target variable: customer
retention (Y ) (see Fig. 1a). The company aims to measure
causal contributions of these features to the target effect –
the expected customer retention if each feature had been
fixed to a certain value (e.g., set to lower sales calls, higher
product needs, etc.).
Example 1 captures practical cases where the target quantity
is related to the query ‘what would be the output if inputs
had been fixed to certain values?’ This includes cases where
the target quantity is a machine learning (ML) model output
since the output is the quantity derived by fixing inputs to
specific values, which details are described in Remark 1.
In the area of explainable AI (XAI), there has been a recent thrust on measuring the contributions of features to the
ML output (e.g., (Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Schwab & Karlen,
2019; Janzing et al., 2020b; Heskes et al., 2020; Covert et al.,
2021)). The majority of existing methods have focused on
queries where the target quantity is induced from an accessible model (we say a model for target Y is accessible if the
model can be evaluated to obtain Y value for arbitrary input
features), with little attention paid to the cases where the
target is induced by nature (i.e., the data-generating process
is inaccessible; e.g., the customer retention in Example 1)
or the ML models are inaccessible. Also, many existing
techniques are based on correlation (rather than causation)
between the features and the ML model output (e.g., (Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Frye et al., 2020)). Even if another thread
of methods focused on measuring contributions based on
causation (e.g., (Schwab & Karlen, 2019; Janzing et al.,
2020b; Heskes et al., 2020)), these methods often assume

