Nonparametric Involutive Markov Chain Monte Carlo

Carol Mak 1 Fabian Zaiser 1 Luke Ong 1

Abstract
A challenging problem in probabilistic programming is to develop inference algorithms that work
for arbitrary programs in a universal probabilistic programming language (PPL). We present the
nonparametric involutive Markov chain Monte
Carlo (NP-iMCMC) algorithm as a method for
constructing MCMC inference algorithms for nonparametric models expressible in universal PPLs.
Building on the unifying involutive MCMC framework, and by providing a general procedure for
driving state movement between dimensions, we
show that NP-iMCMC can generalise numerous
existing iMCMC algorithms to work on nonparametric models. We prove the correctness of the
NP-iMCMC sampler. Our empirical study shows
that the existing strengths of several iMCMC algorithms carry over to their nonparametric extensions. Applying our method to the recently
proposed Nonparametric HMC, an instance of
(Multiple Step) NP-iMCMC, we have constructed
several nonparametric extensions (all of which
new) that exhibit significant performance improvements.

1. Introduction
Universal probabilistic programming (Goodman et al.,
2008) is the idea of writing probabilistic models in a Turingcomplete programming language. A universal probabilistic
programming language (PPL) can express all computable
probabilistic models (Vákár et al., 2019), using only a handful of basic programming constructs such as branching and
recursion. In particular, nonparametric models, where the
number of random variables is not determined a priori and
possibly unbounded, can be described naturally in a universal PPL. In programming language terms, this means
the number of sample statements is unknown prior to
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.
Correspondence to: Carol Mak
<pui.mak@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

execution. On the one hand, such programs can describe
probabilistic models with an unknown number of components, such as Bayesian nonparametric models (Richardson
& Green, 1997), variable selection in regression (Ratner,
2010), and models for signal processing (Murray et al.,
2018). On the other hand, there are models defined on
infinite-dimensional spaces, such as probabilistic context
free grammars (Manning & Schütze, 1999), birth-death
models of evolution (Kudlicka et al., 2019) and statistical
phylogenetics (Ronquist et al., 2021).
However, since universal PPLs are expressively complete, it
is challenging to design and implement inference engines
that work for arbitrary programs written in them. The parameter space of a nonparametric model is a disjoint union
of spaces of varying dimensions. To approximate the posterior distribution via a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
algorithm (say), the transition kernel will have to switch
between (possibly an unbounded number of) states of different dimensions, and to do so reasonably efficiently. This
explains why providing theoretical guarantees for MCMC algorithms that work for universal PPLs (Wingate et al., 2011;
Wood et al., 2014; Tolpin et al., 2015; Hur et al., 2015; Mak
et al., 2021b) is very challenging. For instance, the original
version of Lightweight MH (Wingate et al., 2011) was incorrect (Kiselyov, 2016). In fact, most applications requiring
Bayesian inference rely on custom MCMC kernels, which
are error-prone and time-consuming to design and build.
Contributions We introduce Nonparametric Involutive
MCMC (NP-iMCMC) for designing MCMC samplers for
universal PPLs. It is an extension of the involutive MCMC
(iMCMC) framework (Neklyudov et al., 2020; CusumanoTowner et al., 2020) to densities arising from nonparametric
models (for background on both, see Sec. 2). We explain
how NP-iMCMC moves between dimensions and how a
large class of existing iMCMC samplers can be extended
for universal PPLs (Sec. 3). We also discuss necessary assumptions and prove its correctness. Furthermore, there are
general transformations and combinations of NP-iMCMC,
to derive more powerful samplers systematically (Sec. 4),
for example by making them nonreversible to reduce mixing
time. Finally, our experimental results show that our method
yields significant performance improvements over existing
general MCMC approaches (Sec. 5).

