Convergence and Recovery Guarantees of the K-Subspaces Method
for Subspace Clustering

Peng Wang 1 Huikang Liu 2 Anthony Man-Cho So 3 Laura Balzano 1

Abstract
The K-subspaces (KSS) method is a generalization of the K-means method for subspace clustering. In this work, we present local convergence
analysis and a recovery guarantee for KSS, assuming data are generated by the semi-random union
of subspaces model, where N points are randomly
sampled from K ≥ 2 overlapping subspaces. We
show that if the initial assignment of the KSS
method lies within a neighborhood of a true clustering, it converges at a superlinear rate and finds
the correct clustering within Θ(log log N ) iterations with high probability. Moreover, we propose a thresholding inner-product based spectral
method for initialization and prove that it produces a point in this neighborhood. We also
present numerical results of the studied method
to support our theoretical developments.

1. Introduction
Subspace clustering (SC) is a fundamental problem in unsupervised learning, which can be applied to do dimensionality
reduction and data analysis. It has found wide applications
in diverse fields, such as computer vision (Ho et al., 2003;
Vidal et al., 2008), gene expression analysis (Jiang et al.,
2004; Ucar et al., 2011), and image segmentation (Hong
et al., 2006), to name a few. In research on SC, the union of
subspace (UoS) model, which assumes that data points lie
in one of multiple underlying subspaces, is a typical model
for studying SC. In particular, substantial advances have
been made recently on designing algorithms for solving the
SC problem and on establishing theoretical foundations in
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 2 Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Sciences, School of Information Management and Engineering, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai
3
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Peng Wang <peng8wang@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the UoS model; see, e.g., Vidal (2011); Vidal et al. (2016);
Meng et al. (2018) and the references therein.
In the UoS model, the goal of SC is to recover the underlying subspaces and cluster the unlabeled data points into
the corresponding subspaces. To achieve this goal, many
algorithms have been proposed in the past two decades,
such as sparse subspace clustering methods (Elhamifar &
Vidal, 2013; Wang & Xu, 2013), low-rank representationbased methods (Liu et al., 2012), thresholding-based methods (Heckel & Bölcskei, 2015; Li & Gu, 2021), and Ksubspaces (KSS) method (Bradley & Mangasarian, 2000).
In these methods, the KSS method, which is known as a
generalization of the K-means method, can handle clusters
in subspaces. In particular, it is conceptually simple and has
linear complexity per iteration. This computational benefits
render it suitable to handle large-scale datasets in practice.
However, a complete theoretical understanding of its convergence behavior and recovery performance is not found
in the literature, to the best of our knowledge. This is due in
part to its alternating and discrete nature, as well as the fact
that as with the K-means, KSS can easily get stuck in bad
local minima without a good initialization. Consequently, it
remains a major challenge to provide the theoretical foundations for KSS. In this work, we provide guarantees for the
convergence behavior and recovery performance of the KSS
method. We also develop a simple initialization method
with provable guarantees for the KSS method. It is worth
mentioning that our results improve on state-of-the-art theory with respect to allowable affinity between subspaces,
and support the algorithm’s competitive performance in our
numerical evaluation.
1.1. Related Works
Over the past years, a substantial body of literature explores
algorithmic development and theoretical analysis of SC.
One of the most well-studied methods is arguably sparse
subspace clustering (SSC), which is motivated by representing each data point as a sparse linear combination of the
remaining ones. A seminal work by Elhamifar & Vidal
(2013) proposed and studied this method. The algorithm
proceeds by solving a convex sparse optimization problem,
followed by applying spectral clustering to the graph con-

