Causal Dynamics Learning for Task-Independent State Abstraction

Zizhao Wang 1 Xuesu Xiao 2 Zifan Xu 2 Yuke Zhu 2 Peter Stone 2 3

Abstract
Learning dynamics models accurately is an important goal for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL), but most MBRL methods learn a
dense dynamics model which is vulnerable to spurious correlations and therefore generalizes poorly
to unseen states. In this paper, we introduce
Causal Dynamics Learning for Task-Independent
State Abstraction (CDL), which first learns a theoretically proved causal dynamics model that removes unnecessary dependencies between state
variables and the action, thus generalizing well
to unseen states. A state abstraction can then be
derived from the learned dynamics, which not
only improves sample efficiency but also applies
to a wider range of tasks than existing state abstraction methods. Evaluated on two simulated
environments and downstream tasks, both the dynamics model and policies learned by the proposed method generalize well to unseen states
and the derived state abstraction improves sample
efficiency compared to learning without it.

1. Introduction
Model-based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) enables an
agent to predict what would happen if it executed various
actions, thus allowing it to learn from imagined experience
(Hafner et al., 2019). However, such an approach relies on
the model being learned accurately. Many model-based
approaches rely on dense models that predict the next step
value of each variable based on the action and all variables
in the current state, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Such dense
models are sensitive to spurious correlations which lead to
poor generalization. For example, when door B is at angles
unseen during training or the clock is at unseen times, the
prediction of door A can be inaccurate due to unnecessary
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, USA 3 Sony AI. Correspondence to: Zizhao Wang
<zizhao.wang@utexas.edu>.
2

th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. With two doors that the robot can open and go through
and a clock on the wall, (a) dense dynamics models predict dynamics of each state variable unnecessarily using all variables; (b)
based on a pre-defined reward (e.g., for navigation), existing state
abstractions learn to omit the clock but still use a dense model for
the remaining variables; (c) our causal models reason and only
keep necessary dependencies (i.e., doors A and B depend on the
action individually) and derives a state abstraction independent
from any reward function.

dependence on those variables in the model.
Observing that unnecessary dependencies are the source of
poor generalization, existing state abstractions mitigate this
problem by removing some of those dependencies. Specifically, state abstractions group many states into an abstract
state by omitting some state variables (Chapman & Kaelbling, 1991; McCallum, 1996; Jong & Stone, 2005). For
example, bisimulation (Zhang et al., 2020b), which is particularly related to this paper, omits variables irrelevant to
a pre-defined reward function. Though doing so removes
unnecessary dependence on omitted variables, as shown in
Fig. 1 (b), the same generalization issues persist as dense
models are still used for the remaining variables, leaving
unnecessary dependencies in the abstract state. Furthermore,
despite bisimulation improving sample efficiency of task
learning by reducing the learning space, such methods only
find problem-dependent abstractions: they may omit variables that are irrelevant to the current task but that the agent
can control and utilize for future tasks.
Given that good generalization requires only keeping necessary dependencies, this paper introduces Causal Dynamics Learning (CDL) for Task-Independent State Abstraction
which learns a causal model that explicitly reasons about

