Plan Better Amid Conservatism:
Offline Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Actor Rectification

Ling Pan 1 Longbo Huang 1 Tengyu Ma 2 Huazhe Xu 2

Abstract
Conservatism has led to significant progress in
offline reinforcement learning (RL) where an
agent learns from pre-collected datasets. However, as many real-world scenarios involve interaction among multiple agents, it is important to resolve offline RL in the multi-agent setting. Given
the recent success of transferring online RL algorithms to the multi-agent setting, one may expect
that offline RL algorithms will also transfer to
multi-agent settings directly. Surprisingly, we
empirically observe that conservative offline RL
algorithms do not work well in the multi-agent
setting—the performance degrades significantly
with an increasing number of agents. Towards mitigating the degradation, we identify a key issue
that non-concavity of the value function makes
the policy gradient improvements prone to local
optima. Multiple agents exacerbate the problem
severely, since the suboptimal policy by any agent
can lead to uncoordinated global failure. Following this intuition, we propose a simple yet effective method, Offline Multi-Agent RL with Actor
Rectification (OMAR), which combines the firstorder policy gradients and zeroth-order optimization methods to better optimize the conservative
value functions over the actor parameters. Despite
the simplicity, OMAR achieves state-of-the-art results in a variety of multi-agent control tasks.

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) has shown great potential in advancing the deployment of RL in real-world
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences,
Tsinghua University 2 Stanford University.
Correspondence to:
Ling Pan <pl17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Longbo
Huang
<longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Tengyu Ma <tengyuma@stanford.edu>,
Huazhe Xu
<huazhexu@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tasks where interaction with the environment is prohibitive,
costly, or risky (Thomas, 2015). Since an agent has to learn
from a given pre-collected dataset in offline RL, it becomes
challenging for online off-policy RL algorithms due to extrapolation error (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2021).
There has been recent progress in tackling the problem
based on conservatism. Behavior regularization (Wu et al.,
2019; Kumar et al., 2019), e.g., TD3 with Behavior Cloning
(TD3+BC) (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021), compels the learning
policy to stay close to the data manifold. Yet, its performance highly depends on the data quality. Another line
of research incorporates conservatism into the value function by critic regularization (Nachum et al., 2019; Kostrikov
et al., 2021a), e.g., Conservative Q-Learning (CQL) (Kumar
et al., 2020), which usually learns a conservative estimate
of the value function to directly address extrapolation error.
However, many practical scenarios involve multiple agents,
e.g., multi-robot control (Amato, 2018), autonomous driving (Pomerleau, 1989; Sadigh et al., 2016). Therefore, offline multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) (Yang
et al., 2021; Jiang & Lu, 2021; Mathieu et al., 2021) is crucial for solving real-world tasks. Recent results have shown
that online RL algorithms can be applied to multi-agent
scenarios through either decentralized training or a centralized value function without bells and whistles. For example,
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) leads to the effective methods Independent PPO (Witt et al., 2020) and Multi-Agent
PPO (Yu et al., 2021) for the multi-agent setting. Thus, we
naturally expect that offline RL algorithms can also transfer
easily when applied to multi-agent tasks.
Surprisingly, we find that the performance of the state-ofthe-art conservatism-based CQL algorithm in offline RL
degrades dramatically with an increasing number of agents,
as shown in Figure 2(b) in our experiments. We demonstrate that actor optimization suffers from poor local optima,
failing to leverage the global information in the conservative critics well. As a result, it leads to uncoordinated
suboptimal learning behavior. The issue is exacerbated
severely with more agents and exponentially-sized joint action space (Yang et al., 2021) in the offline setting, because
the suboptimal policy of a single agent could lead to a global
failure due to lack of coordination. For example, consider a

