Variational Inference for Infinitely Deep Neural Networks

Achille Nazaret 1 David Blei 1 2

Abstract
We introduce the unbounded depth neural network (UDN), an infinitely deep probabilistic
model that adapts its complexity to the training
data. The UDN contains an infinite sequence of
hidden layers and places an unbounded prior on
a truncation ℓ, the layer from which it produces
its data. Given a dataset of observations, the posterior UDN provides a conditional distribution of
both the parameters of the infinite neural network
and its truncation. We develop a novel variational
inference algorithm to approximate this posterior,
optimizing a distribution of the neural network
weights and of the truncation depth ℓ, and without any upper limit on ℓ. To this end, the variational family has a special structure: it models
neural network weights of arbitrary depth, and it
dynamically creates or removes free variational
parameters as its distribution of the truncation is
optimized. (Unlike heuristic approaches to model
search, it is solely through gradient-based optimization that this algorithm explores the space
of truncations.) We study the UDN on real and
synthetic data. We find that the UDN adapts its
posterior depth to the dataset complexity; it outperforms standard neural networks of similar computational complexity; and it outperforms other
approaches to infinite-depth neural networks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have propelled research progress in
many domains (Goodfellow et al., 2016). However, selecting an appropriate complexity for the architecture of a deep
neural network remains an important question: a network
that is too shallow can hurt the predictive performance,
and a network that is too deep can lead to overfitting or
1
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University,
New York, USA 2 Department of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Achille Nazaret
<achille.nazaret@columbia.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

to unnecessary complexity.
In this paper, we introduce the unbounded depth neural network (UDN), a deep probabilistic model whose size adapts
to the data, and without an upper limit. With this model, a
practitioner need not be concerned with explicitly selecting
the complexity for her neural network.
A UDN involves an infinitely deep neural network and a
latent truncation level ℓ, which is drawn from a prior. The
infinite neural network can be of arbitrary architecture and
interleave different types of layers. For each datapoint, it
generates an infinite sequence of hidden states (hk )k≥1 from
the input x, and then uses the hidden state at the truncation
hℓ to produce the response y. Given a dataset, the posterior
UDN provides a conditional distribution over the neural network’s weights and over the truncation depth. A UDN thus
has access to the flexibility of an infinite neural network and,
through its posterior, can select a distribution of truncations
that best describes the data. The model is designed to ensure
that ℓ has no upper limit.
We approximate the posterior UDN with a novel method for
variational inference. The method uses a variational family
that employs an infinite number of parameters to cover the
whole posterior space. However, this family has a special
property: Though it covers the infinite space of all possible
truncations, each member provides support over a finite
subset. With this family, and thanks to its special property,
the variational objective can be efficiently calculated and
optimized. The result is a gradient-based algorithm that
approximates the posterior UDN, dynamically exploring its
infinite space of truncations and weights.
We study the UDN on real and synthetic data. We find that
(i) on synthetic data, the UDN achieves higher accuracy
than finite neural networks of similar architecture (ii) on
real data, the UDN outperforms finite neural networks and
other models of infinite neural networks (iii) for both types
of data, the inference adapts the UDN posterior to the data
complexity, by exploring distinct sets of truncations.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We introduce the unbounded depth neural network: an
infinitely deep neural network which can produce data
from any of its hidden layers. In its posterior, it adapts
its truncation to fit the observations.

