Optimizing Sequential Experimental Design with Deep Reinforcement
Learning

Tom Blau 1 Edwin V. Bonilla 1 Iadine Chades 2 Amir Dezfouli 1

Abstract
Bayesian approaches developed to solve the optimal design of sequential experiments are mathematically elegant but computationally challenging. Recently, techniques using amortization have
been proposed to make these Bayesian approaches
practical, by training a parameterized policy that
proposes designs efficiently at deployment time.
However, these methods may not sufficiently explore the design space, require access to a differentiable probabilistic model and can only optimize
over continuous design spaces. Here, we address
these limitations by showing that the problem of
optimizing policies can be reduced to solving a
Markov decision process (MDP). We solve the
equivalent MDP with modern deep reinforcement
learning techniques. Our experiments show that
our approach is also computationally efficient at
deployment time and exhibits state-of-the-art performance on both continuous and discrete design
spaces, even when the probabilistic model is a
black box.

1. Introduction
One of the fundamental building blocks of scientific investigation is the development of predictive models that describe
natural phenomena. Such models must be learned from
data, which can only be acquired by conducting experiments.
Since experiments are often costly and time-consuming, this
naturally leads to the question of how to design experiments
so that they are maximally informative. The formalism
of Bayesian optimal experimental design (BOED, Lindley,
1956) casts this problem as optimization of expected information gain. BOED is a popular approach in many scientific
fields (Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995; Ryan et al., 2016).
1

CSIRO’s Data61, Australia 2 CSIRO’s Land and
Water, Australia.
Correspondence to:
Tom, Blau
<tom.blau@data61.csiro.au>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Following a Bayesian optimal experimental design (BOED)
approach, let p(y | θ, d) be a probabilistic model describing some phenomenon. Here d represents our independent
variables, or experimental design, y is the dependent variables, or experimental outcome, and θ the parameters of the
model. We do not know the exact values of θ, but we have
some prior belief about it represented as a distribution p(θ).
The goal is then to find the design d∗ that maximizes the
expected information gain (EIG) from the experiment:
d∗ = arg max Ep(y | d) [H(p(θ)) − H(p(θ | y, d))] , (1)
d∈D

where p(y | d) can be computed as an expectation over the
original model, H(·) is the entropy of a distribution, and
D is the space of possible designs. Simply put, this means
maximizing the expected decrease in entropy from the prior
to the posterior. In the sequential setting, after conducting
an experiment and observing its outcome, the new posterior
p(θ | y, d) is used instead of the prior and a new design is
computed. This can be repeated for as long as resources
allow, a process called iterated experimental design.
Evaluating the above expression requires computing an expectation w.r.t. the joint probability distribution p(y, θ | d) =
p(y | d)p(θ | y, d), which can be challenging by itself (Hong
& Juneja, 2009). An even more difficult problem occurs
when we have a budget of T experiments and wish to find
the non-myopically optimal design that maximizes expected
information gain w.r.t. all future experiments. This requires
computing repeatedly nested expectations, with the depth of
nesting growing at a rate of O(T ), and the convergence rate
1
of evaluating this expectation being O(n− T +1 ) (Rainforth
et al., 2018), where n is the number of samples. Approaches
to non-myopically optimal design that rely on estimating
this expectation are therefore intractable.
Recently amortized methods have been introduced to solve
the problem of non-myopic optimization (Foster et al., 2021;
Ivanova et al., 2021). In this amortized approach a design
policy is introduced that maps the history of designs and
outcomes to the next design. A lower bound estimate of
the non-myopic EIG is optimized w.r.t. the parameters of
this policy, rather than optimizing the designs directly. After training, the policy achieves inference times orders of
magnitude faster and EIG superior to (non-amortized) itera-

