Principled Knowledge Extrapolation with GANs

Ruili Feng 1 Jie Xiao 1 Kecheng Zheng 1 Deli Zhao 2 Jingren Zhou 3 Qibin Sun 1 Zheng-Jun Zha 1

Abstract
Human can extrapolate well, generalize daily
knowledge into unseen scenarios, raise and answer counterfactual questions. To imitate this ability via generative models, previous works have
extensively studied explicitly encoding Structural
Causal Models (SCMs) into architectures of generator networks. This methodology, however, limits the flexibility of the generator as they must be
carefully crafted to follow the causal graph, and
demands a ground truth SCM with strong ignorability assumption as prior, which is a nontrivial
assumption in many real scenarios. Thus, many
current causal GAN methods fail to generate high
fidelity counterfactual results as they cannot easily leverage state-of-the-art generative models. In
this paper, we propose to study counterfactual synthesis from a new perspective of knowledge extrapolation, where a given knowledge dimension
of the data distribution is extrapolated, but the remaining knowledge is kept indistinguishable from
the original distribution. We show that an adversarial game with a closed-form discriminator can
be used to address the knowledge extrapolation
problem, and a novel principal knowledge descent
method can efficiently estimate the extrapolated
distribution through the adversarial game. Our
method enjoys both elegant theoretical guarantees
and superior performance in many scenarios.

1. Introduction
Human beings exhibit remarkable ability of cognitive extrapolation (Ehrlich, 2005; Beck et al., 2006) in a variety
of aspects. For example, we can accurately extrapolate
the motion of objects (Ehrlich, 2005), imagine unseen objects (Kocaoglu et al., 2018), raise and answer counterfac1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
Ant Research, Hangzhou, China 3 Alibaba Group, Hangzhou,
China. Correspondence to: Zheng-Jun Zha <zhazj@ustc.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Knowledge extrapolation. All the above objects are counterfactual, rarely existent in real world. The origin domains of them
are written benzene, and the extrapolated knowledge is marked in
purple.

tual questions (Beck et al., 2006). There is a temptation to
wonder whether Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al., 2014) can generalize well to examples
whose distribution is arbitrarily far from that of the given
training data (or even counterfactual examples), as shown in
Fig. 1. Specifically, this knowledge extrapolation ability of
GANs can be reflected as synthesizing out-of-distribution
examples and manipulating semantic features to constitute
counterfactual combinations.
Counterfactual synthesis (Kocaoglu et al., 2018; Sauer &
Geiger, 2020; Nemirovsky et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021;
Averitt et al., 2020; Thiagarajan et al., 2021) is one of the
most promising tasks to achieve the general goal of knowledge extrapolation in GANs. For counterfactual synthesis,
if brusquely ignoring differences in details, most existing
methods follow the framework of the same fashion — directly modeling a Structural Causal Model (SCM) (Pearl,
2009a) in well-designed architectures of generator networks.
Factors of interest in the causal graph are designed as labels
to control the synthesis of the generator. However, this type
of approaches is somewhat inflexible. Specifically, it demands a prior SCM to identify all the causalities in the data

