GenLabel : Mixup Relabeling using Generative Models

Jy-yong Sohn 1 Liang Shang 1 Hongxu Chen 1 Jaekyun Moon 2 Dimitris Papailiopoulos 1 Kangwook Lee 1

Abstract
Mixup is a data augmentation method that generates new data points by mixing a pair of input
data. While mixup generally improves the prediction performance, it sometimes degrades the
performance. In this paper, we first identify the
main causes of this phenomenon by theoretically
and empirically analyzing the mixup algorithm.
To resolve this, we propose GenLabel , a simple
yet effective relabeling algorithm designed for
mixup. In particular, GenLabel helps the mixup
algorithm correctly label mixup samples by learning the class-conditional data distribution using
generative models. Via theoretical and empirical
analysis, we show that mixup, when used together
with GenLabel , can effectively resolve the aforementioned phenomenon, improving the accuracy
of mixup-trained model.

1. Introduction
Mixup (Zhang et al., 2018) is a widely adopted data augmentation algorithm used when training a classifier, which generates synthetic samples by linearly interpolating two randomly chosen samples. Each mixed sample is soft-labeled,
i.e., it is labeled as a mixture of two (possibly same) classes
of the chosen samples. The rationale behind the mixup algorithm is that such mixed samples can fill up the void space
in between different class manifolds, effectively regularizing the model behavior. Mixup has been shown to improve
generalization on multiple benchmark image datasets. Various variants of mixup have been proposed in the past few
years such as Manifold-mixup (Verma et al., 2019), which
apply mixup in the latent feature space, and several computer vision-specific variants (Yun et al., 2019; Kim et al.,
2020; Uddin et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021). Recent studies
also provide some theoretical explanations for the success
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA 2 School of Electrical Engineering, Daejeon, KAIST. Correspondence to: Kangwook Lee
<kw1jjang@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of mixup (Zhang et al., 2021; Carratino et al., 2020).
Mixup, however, does not always improve accuracy, and
sometimes it even hurts. Guo et al. (2019) observed that
the accuracies of mixup is up to 1.8% worse than vanilla
training on some image classification tasks. Greenewald
et al. (2021) reported a similar finding; the original mixup
degrades the accuracy of vanilla training up to 2.5% on an
UCI classification task (Dua & Graff, 2017). Despite such
empirical findings, (1) why mixup fails and (2) how we can
prevent them are not fully understood yet.
1.1. Main contributions
In this work, we first take a closer look at the failure scenarios of mixup, particularly focusing on the low-dimensional
input setting. As a result, we identify two main reasons
behind mixup’s failure scenarios. The first one is manifold
intrusion, which was defined in (Guo et al., 2019). Samples
generated by mixing two classes may intrude the manifold
of another class, causing label conflicts with the samples
from the intruded class. We perform analysis of the effect
of manifold intrusion. The second reason we identify is
linear labeling. Mixup assigns a mixed sample with a linear
combination of the two one-hot encoded labels. We prove
that, focusing on a specific softmax regression setting, such
linear labeling results in a strictly suboptimal margin and
accuracy.
After identifying the key reasons behind mixup’s failure, we
propose a simple yet effective fix for mixup. Our proposed
algorithm GenLabel is a relabeling algorithm designed for
mixup. The idea is strikingly simple – GenLabel relabels a
mixed sample using the likelihoods that are estimated with
learned generative models.
Consider a three-way classification problem in Fig. 1. GenLabel learns generative models to estimate the likelihood
of a mixed sample. Let pc (x) be the likelihood of sample x drawn from class c, and let pbc (x) be the estimated
likelihood. Given a mixed sample xmix , GenLabel first computes all three likelihoods pbc (xmix ) for class c ∈ {1, 2, 3},
and then assigns the mixed sample the following label:
y gen = softmax(log pb1 (xmix ), log pb2 (xmix ), log pb3 (xmix )).
mix
)
Note that the cth entry of y gen is P3 pbc (x
, which
pc0 (xmix )
c0 =1

c

b = c|xmix ),
equals the posterior probability estimate P(y

