Bayesian Optimization under Stochastic Delayed Feedback

Arun Verma * 1 Zhongxiang Dai * 1 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a widely-used
sequential method for zeroth-order optimization
of complex and expensive-to-compute black-box
functions. The existing BO methods assume that
the function evaluation (feedback) is available
to the learner immediately or after a fixed delay.
Such assumptions may not be practical in many
real-life problems like online recommendations,
clinical trials, and hyperparameter tuning where
feedback is available after a random delay. To
benefit from the experimental parallelization
in these problems, the learner needs to start
new function evaluations without waiting for
delayed feedback. In this paper, we consider the
BO under stochastic delayed feedback problem.
We propose algorithms with sub-linear regret
guarantees that efficiently address the dilemma
of selecting new function queries while waiting
for randomly delayed feedback. Building on
our results, we also make novel contributions
to batch BO and contextual Gaussian process
bandits. Experiments on synthetic and real-life
datasets verify the performance of our algorithms.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al., 2015; Frazier,
2018; Garnett, 2022) is a popular and widely-used sequential
method for zeroth-order optimization of unknown black-box
functions that are complex and expensive to compute. The
existing BO methods assume that the function evaluation
(feedback) is available to the learner immediately or after a
fixed delay. However, these assumptions are impractical in
many real-life problems where feedback is available after
a random delay. To take advantage of the experimental
parallelization in these problems, the learner needs to start
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore.
Correspondence to: Arun Verma <arunverma100@gmail.com>,
Zhongxiang Dai <daiz9109@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022.
Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

new function evaluations without waiting for the randomly
delayed feedback. We refer to this new BO problem as
‘Bayesian Optimization under Stochastic Delayed Feedback’
(BO-SDF). In this paper, we propose algorithms that
efficiently address the problem of selecting new function
queries while waiting for randomly delayed feedback.
Specifically, we answer the following question:
How to start a new function query when the observations
of the past function queries are randomly delayed?
Many real-life applications can be cast as BO-SDF problems.
For example, when performing clinical trials to discover new
medicines, we need to optimize the amount of different raw
materials in order to find their most effective composition
using a small number of clinical trials (Chow & Chang,
2006), which is a natural application for BO due to
its sample efficiency. However, the evaluation of the
effectiveness of a medicine needs to take into account the
side effects which are usually not observed immediately
but are instead revealed after a random period due to
the varying physiology of different patients. Therefore,
a natural challenge here is how to use BO to choose the
next composition for testing, while accounting for the
stochastically delayed observations from some previous
clinical trials. A similar challenge also arises when we aim
to find the most effective dose of a new medicine through
clinical trials (Takahashi & Suzuki, 2021).
Another motivating example arises from online product
recommendation (Chapelle, 2014; Diemert et al., 2017).
Most online platforms make recommendations in
milliseconds, but the user’s response (i.e., watching a movie
or buying a product) generally happens after a random time
period which may range from hours to days or even weeks.
Furthermore, the issue of randomly delayed feedback
also plagues other common applications of BO such as
hyperparameter tuning of machine learning (ML) models
(Snoek et al., 2012) (e.g., the training time of a neural
network depends on the number of layers, network width,
among others) and material discovery (Ueno et al., 2016).
The closest BO setting to our BO-SDF is batch BO
(Desautels et al., 2014; Daxberger & Low, 2017; Chowdhury
& Gopalan, 2019) which also allows multiple queries to
be performed on the black-box function in parallel. Both
problems require choosing an input query to evaluate

