Efficiently Learning the Topology and Behavior of a
Networked Dynamical System Via Active Queries

Daniel J. Rosenkrantz 1 Abhijin Adiga * 2 Madhav V. Marathe * 3 Zirou Qiu * 3
S. S. Ravi * 1 Richard E. Stearns * 1 Anil Vullikanti * 3

Abstract
Many papers have addressed the problem of learning the behavior (i.e., the local interaction function at each node) of a networked system through
active queries, assuming that the network topology is known. We address the problem of inferring both the network topology and the behavior
of such a system through active queries. Our results are for systems where the state of each node
is from {0, 1} and the local functions are Boolean.
We present inference algorithms under both batch
and adaptive query models for dynamical systems
with symmetric local functions. These algorithms
show that the structure and behavior of such dynamical systems can be learnt using only a polynomial number of queries. Further, we establish
a lower bound on the number of queries needed
to learn such dynamical systems. We also present
experimental results obtained by running our algorithms on synthetic and real-world networks.

1. Introduction
Many practical problems in social, behavioral and biological sciences can be modeled using networked dynamical systems (also known as graphical dynamical systems) (Laubenbacher & Stigler, 2009; Eubank et al., 2004;
Lum et al., 2014; Kauffman et al., 2003; Macy & Willer,
2002; Granovetter, 1978). Such systems also occur naturally in the study of agent-based modeling and analysis
(Bonabeau, 2002; Namatame & Chen, 2016), and graphical
∗
Equal Contribution. 1 Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA and Department
of Computer Science, University at Albany – SUNY, Albany, NY,
USA. 2 Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. 3 Biocomplexity Institute and
Initiative and Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. Correspondence to: S. S. Ravi
<ssravi0@gmail.com>, Zirou Qiu <zq5au@virginia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

games (Kearns & Vazirani, 1994; Abouheaf et al., 2014). A
networked dynamical system has three components: (i) a
set of agents, (ii) a network that specifies how the agents
interact and (iii) a local interaction function (behavior) associated with each node. Starting from an initial value (state)
for each node, the system evolves in time as each node updates its state based on its own state and the states of its
neighbors. The vector consisting of the states of all the
nodes at a time t is called the system’s configuration at
time t. The temporal evolution can occur synchronously or
asynchronously. For a configuration C at time t, the configuration C ′ at time t + 1 is the successor of C. Our focus is on
networked systems where the system evolves synchronously
and each local function is Boolean. We refer to these as
synchronous dynamical systems (SyDSs).
The problem of learning one or more components of a SyDS
has been recently studied under various query and observation models. Here, we consider the active query model,
where the user queries the unknown system, and based on
the responses from the system, attempts to infer its properties. This is similar in form to the teacher model (Goldman
& Kearns, 1995; Dasgupta et al., 2019) in the context of
concept learning, where a teacher selects instances so that
a student can learn the target concept from a concept class.
Also, this query model is a more general version of the
model used in the literature for learning a Boolean function f (Abasi et al., 2014; Angluin & Slonim, 1994), where
each query specifies an input α to f and an oracle returns
the value f (α). In all these cases (including ours), the objective is to find a minimum set of queries that is sufficient
to learn the object. Several papers have used active querying
of networked dynamical systems to learn classes of local
functions (e.g., (Adiga et al., 2018; 2020)). In these works, a
user provides as input a set Q of configurations. The system
(or an oracle which has a complete description of the system
to be inferred) returns the successor of each configuration
in Q. The user tries to infer the SyDS from the responses
to the queries. Similar work has also been conducted under
other query models such as passive observation and probably approximately correct (PAC) model (Adiga et al., 2017;
2019; Narasimhan et al., 2015; Kempe et al., 2003).

