Value Function Based Difference-of-Convex Algorithm for Bilevel
Hyperparameter Selection Problems

Lucy Gao 1 Jane J. Ye 2 Haian Yin 3 Shangzhi Zeng 2 Jin Zhang 3 4

Abstract
Gradient-based optimization methods for hyperparameter tuning guarantee theoretical convergence to stationary solutions when for fixed upperlevel variable values, the lower level of the bilevel
program is strongly convex (LLSC) and smooth
(LLS). This condition is not satisfied for bilevel
programs arising from tuning hyperparameters in
many machine learning algorithms. In this work,
we develop a sequentially convergent Value Function based Difference-of-Convex Algorithm with
inexactness (VF-iDCA). We show that this algorithm achieves stationary solutions without LLSC
and LLS assumptions for bilevel programs from a
broad class of hyperparameter tuning applications.
Our extensive experiments confirm our theoretical findings and show that the proposed VF-iDCA
yields superior performance when applied to tune
hyperparameters.

1. Introduction
Virtually all machine learning algorithms require hyperparameter tuning. For example, in regression and classification
problems, regularization is often used to induce structured
solutions and to control model complexity. The degree of
regularization is typically controlled by hyperparameters.
Careful tuning of these hyperparameters is critical to the
predictive accuracy of the fitted model.
An effective hyperparameter selection strategy is to choose
the hyperparameters that minimize a loss function on a
1
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University
of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada 2 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Victoria, Victoria, British
Columbia, Canada 3 Department of Mathematics, SUSTech International Center for Mathematics, Southern University of Science
and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China 4 National Center
for Applied Mathematics Shenzhen, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
Correspondence to: Jin Zhang <zhangj9@sustech.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

held-out validation set, which amounts to solving a bilevel
program (BLP). We consider the following BLP framework:
min

x∈Rn ,λ∈RJ
+

L(x)
(

s.t. x ∈ arg min
′
n
x ∈R

′

l(x ) +

J
X

)

(1)

′

λi Pi (x ) ,

i=1

where L, l : Rn → R and Pi : Rn → R+ , i = 1, . . . , J
are merely convex (possibly non-smooth) functions. In BLP
Eq. (1), λ is a vector of hyperparameters, the upper-level
(UL) problem minimizes the validation error in terms of the
hyperparameters, and the lower-level (LL) problem fits a
model to training data for a given choice of hyperparameters.
Note that in BLP Eq. (1), we assume that for each λ ∈ RJ+ ,
the LL problem has solutions.
Table 1 presents examples of bilevel hyperparameter selection problems of the form (1) with non-strongly convex
and/or non-smooth LL objective functions. In Section 4,
we will study a generalization of BLP Eq. (1) with LL
constraints, which captures the support vector machine classification example in Table 1.
1.1. Related Work
The simplest hyperparameter selection approach is bruteforce grid search, which is seldom applied when there are
more than two hyperparameters due to its unfavourable
computational complexity. The current gold standard in
the presence of more than two hyperparameters is Bayesian
optimization, which models the conditional probability of
the performance on some metric given hyperparameters and
a dataset. However, these gradient-free methods often scale
poorly beyond 10 to 20 hyperparameters.
Gradient-based optimization methods (GM) can handle up
to a few hundred hyperparameters. Existing gradient-based
methods can be roughly divided into two categories based
on the strategy used for calculating the hypergradient (the
gradient of the UL objective). Implicit gradient methods
(IGM), also known as implicit differentiation (Pedregosa,
2016; Rajeswaran et al., 2019; Lorraine et al., 2020), replace
the LL sub-problem with an implicit equation. These IGM
apply the implicit function theorem (IFT) to the optimal-

