Sparse Invariant Risk Minimization

Xiao Zhou * 1 Yong Lin * 1 Weizhong Zhang * 1 Tong Zhang 1 2

Abstract
Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) is an emerging invariant feature extracting technique to help
generalization with distributional shift. However,
we find that there exists a basic and intractable
contradiction between the model trainability and
generalization ability in IRM. On one hand, recent studies on deep learning theory indicate the
importance of large-sized or even overparameterized neural networks to make the model easy to
train. On the other hand, unlike empirical risk
minimization that can be benefited from overparameterization, our empirical and theoretical analyses show that the generalization ability of IRM
is much easier to be demolished by overfitting
caused by overparameterization. In this paper, we
propose a simple yet effective paradigm named
Sparse Invariant Risk Minimization (SparseIRM)
to address this contradiction. Our key idea is to
employ a global sparsity constraint as a defense
to prevent spurious features from leaking in during the whole IRM process. Compared with
sparisfy-after-training prototype by prior work
which can discard invariant features, the global
sparsity constraint limits the budget for feature
selection and enforces SparseIRM to select the
invariant features. We illustrate the benefit of
SparseIRM through a theoretical analysis on a
simple linear case. Empirically we demonstrate
the power of SparseIRM through various datasets
and models and surpass state-of-the-art methods
with a gap up to 29%.

1. Introduction
In the last decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
achieved unprecedented successes in numerous applications,
including but not limited to computer vision (He et al., 2016;
*

Equal contribution 1 The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Tong Zhang
<tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; Sun
et al., 2014) and natural language processing (Bahdanau
et al., 2014; Luong et al., 2015). Most deep learning models are trained by the Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)
paradigm, under the I.I.D. assumption that the training and
testing samples are independently drawn from an identical distribution. However, more and more failure cases of
DNNs (Beery et al., 2018; Geirhos et al., 2020; DeGrave
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022b) are reported in the latest
studies where the I.I.D. assumption is violated in application
due to distributional shifts.
IRM (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Creager et al., 2021; Krueger
et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2021c;b; Jin et al., 2020) is an emerging learning
paradigm to enable the generalization with distributional
shifts. The key idea of IRM is to learn an invariant feature
representation on the datasets drawn from multiple environments, in the sense that based on this representation
one should be able to learn a common classifier working
well in all these environments. Due to the consistent good
performance achieved in these existing environments, the
generalization in new environments with unseen distributional shifts can be expected, which has been verified by the
promising empirical results (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Krueger
et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2020; Jin et al.,
2020). However, IRM is found to be less effective when
applied to deep models (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020; Lin
et al., 2021). In this work, we argue that the reason is that
there exists a basic and intractable contradiction between
the model trainability and generalization ability in the IRM
paradigm:
• On one hand, to make the model easy to train, we
should use large-sized or even overparameterized
DNNs (Zhang et al., 2021a), i.e., networks with massive neurons. Empirically, it is observed that such
DNNs are easy to train, while small-sized ones could
easily get stuck at bad local minima, that’s why modern
DNNs are always overparameterized. Theoretically,
recent studies on deep learning theory show that DNNs
behave like convex systems and their loss landscapes
become smoother when the number of the neurons
goes to infinity (Gu et al., 2020; Mei et al., 2018).
• On the other hand, when overparameterized, the gener-

