ROCK : Causal Inference Principles
for Reasoning about Commonsense Causality

Jiayao Zhang 1 2 Hongming Zhang 1 3 Weijie J. Su 2 Dan Roth 1 4

Abstract
Commonsense causality reasoning (CCR) aims
at identifying plausible causes and effects in natural language descriptions that are deemed reasonable by an average person. Although being of great academic and practical interest, this
problem is still shadowed by the lack of a wellposed theoretical framework; existing work usually relies on deep language models wholeheartedly, and is potentially susceptible to confounding
co-occurrences. Motivated by classical causal
principles, we articulate the central question of
CCR and draw parallels between human subjects
in observational studies and natural languages
to adopt CCR to the potential-outcomes framework which, to the best of our knowledge, is the
first such attempt for commonsense tasks. We
propose a novel framework, ROCK, to Reason
O(A)bout Commonsense K(C)ausality, which utilizes temporal signals as incidental supervision,
and balances confounding effects using temporal propensities that are analogous to propensity
scores. ROCK is modular and zero-shot, and
demonstrates good CCR capabilities.

1. Introduction
Commonsense causality reasoning (CCR) is an important
yet non-trivial task in natural language processing (NLP)
that exerts broad industrial and societal impacts (Kuipers,
1984; Gordon et al., 2012; Mostafazadeh et al., 2020; Sap
et al., 2020). We articulate this task as
reasoning about cause-and-effect relationships
between events in natural language descriptions
1

Cognitive Computation Group, University of Pennsylvania, USA. 2 Department of Statistics and Data Science,
University of Pennsylvania, USA. 3 Tencent AI Lab Seattle,
USA. 4 Amazon AWS AI Labs, USA. Correspondence to:
<{zjiayao,hzhangal,danroth,suw}@upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

E1: Alice entered
a restaurant.

causes?

E2: Alice ordered a pizza.
Time

X1: Alice felt hungry.

A1: Alice opened a
food-delivery app.

Figure 1: An Example of CCR: does E1 cause E2 ? The
temporal order E1 ≺ E2 does not necessitate causation
due to confounding co-occurrences (e.g., X1 ). Since when
conditioning on X1 , a comparable intervention A1 of E1
also precedes E2 , the effect from E1 to E2 shrinks.

that are deemed reasonable by an average person.
This definition naturally excludes questions that are beyond
commonsense knowledge, such as those scientific in nature
(e.g., does a surgery procedure reduce mortality?). Instead,
it accommodates causal queries within the reach of an ordinary reasonable person. As a concrete instantiation, we
consider the problem of defining and estimating the strength
of causation from one given event, E1 , to another, E2 . For
example, in Figure 1, is Alice’s “entering a restaurant” (E1 )
a plausible cause for her “ordering a pizza” (E2 )? Although
the precedence from E1 to E2 is logical, it might be less a
“cause” compared with Alice’s “feeling hungry” (X1 ).
Temporality informs causation, but it is still unclear how to
account for confounding co-occurrences (such as X1 in Figure 1). Motivated by causal inference principles (Section 2),
we formulate CCR as estimating the change in the likelihood of E2 ’s occurrence due to intervening E1 (denoted by
¬E1 ):
∆ = P (E1 ≺ E2 ) − P (¬E1 ≺ E2 )
(1)
where P(·) can be estimated by pretrained language models
(LMs) e.g., via masked language modeling (see Section 4
for implementation details). The estimand ∆ measures the
average treatment effect (ATE): its magnitude signifies the
strength of the effect and its sign informs the direction. For
example, when ∆ is close to −1, E1 has a strong effect on
E2 towards making E2 less prone to occurring. If the occurrences of E1 and ¬E1 on any unit are purely random, a direct
estimation of the temporal probabilities in Equation (1) suffices; however, due to confounding co-occurrences (e.g.,

