Towards Uniformly Superhuman Autonomy via Subdominance Minimization

Brian D. Ziebart 1 Sanjiban Choudhury 2 Xinyan (Shane) Yan 2 Paul Vernaza 2

Abstract
Prevalent imitation learning methods seek to produce behavior that matches or exceeds average human performance. This often prevents achieving
expert-level or superhuman performance when
identifying the better demonstrations to imitate is
difficult. We instead assume demonstrations are
of varying quality and seek to induce behavior
that is unambiguously better (i.e., Pareto dominant or minimally subdominant) than all human
demonstrations. Our minimum subdominance
inverse optimal control training objective is primarily defined by high quality demonstrations;
lower quality demonstrations, which are more
easily dominated, are effectively ignored instead
of degrading imitation. With increasing probability, our approach produces superhuman behavior incurring lower cost than demonstrations on
the demonstrator’s unknown cost function—even
if that cost function differs for each demonstration. We apply our approach on a computer cursor
pointing task, producing behavior that is 78% superhuman, while minimizing demonstration suboptimality provides 50% superhuman behavior—
and only 72% even after selective data cleaning.

Figure 1. Combining high quality demonstrations (black points
A) with low quality demonstrations (gray points B or C) to train
existing methods shifts the high quality learned behavior (red point,
learned from A only) to lower quality (magenta points, A ∪ B and
A ∪ C) on the Pareto frontier (blue curve). Our approach instead
seeks to Pareto dominate (red dashed lines) all demonstrations.

ity demonstrations (Figure 1) pose significant challenges to
existing cost function learning approaches that seek to minimize the suboptimality of demonstrated behavior (Ratliff
et al., 2006; Ziebart et al., 2008). The set of training demonstrations may be carefully cleansed of harmful outliers, but
this can become more art than science, with undesirable
sensitivities to laborious or haphazard cleaning processes.

1
Computer Science, University of Illinois Chicago 2 Aurora
Innovation. Correspondence to: B. Ziebart <bziebart@uic.edu>.

We instead seek uniformly superhuman behavior that is
unambiguously better than all demonstrations (i.e., Pareto
dominant or smaller in all cost features). Achieving this by
a large margin enables better generalization to the broader
population distribution of human behaviors. Since low quality demonstrations are typically easy to Pareto dominate,
their influence on learned behavior is minimal. Unfortunately, strict improvement over all demonstrated behaviors
is often impossible, so we relax our objective to minimization of subdominance. This hinge-loss surrogate of the
Pareto dominance measures the largest (or sum of) difference(s) in costs preventing induced behavior from Pareto
dominating a demonstration. This is reminiscent of structured support vector machines (Tsochantaridis et al., 2004;
Taskar et al., 2003): higher quality demonstrations that are
not sufficiently dominated by the learned behavior serve as
support vectors for the learned cost function.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Our learned behavior’s superhuman percentile (i.e., percentage of demonstrations that it Pareto dominates) on unseen demonstrations is bounded in expectation by the rela-

1. Introduction
Learning from human demonstrations is a desirable alternative to hand-crafting an autonomous system’s policy or
specifying its cost function (Osa et al., 2018). Inverse reinforcement learning (Ng & Russell, 2000; Abbeel & Ng,
2004) seeks to learn cost functions that reflect human preferences and induce human-like behaviors across different
decision processes. However, human demonstrations of sequential control (even from experts) often vary in quality due
in part to visuomotor system imprecisions (Wolpert et al.,
1995) and/or bounded rationality (Simon, 1997). Low qual-

