DAdaQuant: Doubly-adaptive quantization for communication-efficient
Federated Learning

Robert Hönig 1 Yiren Zhao 2 Robert Mullins 2

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a powerful technique
to train a model on a server with data from several clients in a privacy-preserving manner. FL
incurs significant communication costs because
it repeatedly transmits the model between the
server and clients. Recently proposed algorithms
quantize the model parameters to efficiently
compress FL communication. We find that
dynamic adaptations of the quantization level
can boost compression without sacrificing model
quality. We introduce DAdaQuant as a doublyadaptive quantization algorithm that dynamically
changes the quantization level across time and
different clients. Our experiments show that
DAdaQuant consistently improves client→server
compression, outperforming the strongest nonadaptive baselines by up to 2.8×.

1. Introduction
Edge devices such as smartphones, remote sensors and
smart home appliances generate massive amounts of data
(Wang et al., 2018b; Cao et al., 2017; Shi & Dustdar, 2016).
In recent years, Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a
technique to train models on this data while preserving privacy (McMahan et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018).
In FL, we have a single server that is connected to many
clients. Each client stores a local dataset that it does not
want to share with the server because of privacy concerns
or law enforcement (Voigt & Von dem Bussche, 2017). The
server wants to train a model on all local datasets. To this
end, it initializes the model and sends it to a random subset
of clients. Each client trains the model on its local dataset
and sends the trained model back to the server. The server
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland 2 Department of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Robert Hönig <rhoenig@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

accumulates all trained models into an updated model for
the next iteration and repeats the process for several rounds
until some termination criterion is met. This procedure enables the server to train a model without accessing any local
datasets.
Today’s neural network models often have millions or even
billions (Brown et al., 2020) of parameters, which makes
high communication costs a concern in FL. In fact, Qiu
et al. (2020) suggest that communication between clients
and server may account for over 70% of energy consumption in FL. Reducing communication in FL is an attractive
area of research because it lowers bandwidth requirements,
energy consumption and training time.
Communication in FL occurs in two phases: Sending parameters from the server to clients (downlink) and sending
updated parameters from clients to the server (uplink). Uplink bandwidth usually imposes a tighter bottleneck than
downlink bandwidth. This has several reasons. For one, the
average global mobile upload bandwidth is currently less
than one fourth of the download bandwidth (Speedtest).
For another, FL downlink communication sends the same
parameters to each client. Broadcasting parameters is usually more efficient than the accumulation of parameters
from different clients that is required for uplink communication (Amiri et al., 2020; Reisizadeh et al., 2019). For
these reasons, we seek to compress uplink communication.
A large class of compression algorithms for FL apply some
lossy quantizer Q, optionally followed by a lossless compression stage. Q usually provides a “quantization level”
hyperparameter q to control the coarseness of quantization (e.g. the number of bins for fixed-point quantization).
When q is kept constant during training, we speak of static
quantization. When q changes, we speak of adaptive quantization. Adaptive quantization can exploit asymmetries in
the FL framework to minimize communication. One such
asymmetry lies in FL’s training time, where Jhunjhunwala
et al. (2021) observed that early training rounds can use
a lower q without affecting convergence. Figure 2 illustrates how time-adaptive quantization leverages this phenomenon to minimize communication. Another asymmetry lies in FL’s client space, because most FL algorithms
weight client contributions to the global model proportional

