Fairness with Adaptive Weights

Junyi Chai 1 Xiaoqian Wang 1

Abstract
Fairness is now an important issue in machine
learning. There are arising concerns that automated decision-making systems reflect real-world
biases. Although a wide range of fairness-related
methods have been proposed in recent years, the
under-representation problem has been less studied. Due to the uneven distribution of samples
from different populations, machine learning models tend to be biased against minority groups when
trained by minimizing the average empirical risk
across all samples. In this paper, we propose a
novel adaptive reweighing method to address representation bias. The goal of our method is to
achieve group-level balance among different demographic groups by learning adaptive weights
for each sample. Our approach emphasizes more
on error-prone samples in prediction and enhances
adequate representation of minority groups for
fairness. We derive a closed-form solution for
adaptive weight assignment and propose an efficient algorithm with theoretical convergence guarantees. We theoretically analyze the fairness of
our model and empirically verify that our method
strikes a balance between fairness and accuracy.
In experiments, our method achieves comparable
or better performance than state-of-the-art methods in both classification and regression tasks.
Furthermore, our method exhibits robustness to
label noise on various benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
As machine learning techniques are widely applied in many
fields, the fairness of machine learning has become an important issue. Automated decision-making algorithms, if
not properly constrained, may make decisions that are discriminated to certain population groups. These groups are
1

Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University. Correspondence to: Xiaoqian Wang <joywang@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

characterized by sensitive attributes, including age, gender,
race, etc. There have been many cases showing that fairness is not a trivial problem in machine learning, and that
fairness could not be achieved by simply removing the sensitive attributes from data. Research on COMPAS dataset
(Chouldechova, 2017) shows that a well-calibrated classification algorithm tends to classify black defendants as of
higher risk while classify white defendants as of lower risk.
This discrimination results in much higher false positive rate
for black defendants. Offers of same-day delivery coverage
by Amazon are severely biased with respect to race, even
if the algorithm does not take into consideration the race of
customers (Ingold & Soper, 2016). For machine learning algorithms used in various fields of society, only having high
classification accuracy is not enough. It is crucial to make
sure that the algorithm is not biased against specific populations and does not reveal real-world discrimination, as many
real-world datasets are unevenly distributed or biased.
Current approaches for fairness are mainly based on two
different assumptions. Works including (Krasanakis et al.,
2018) and (Jiang & Nachum, 2020) assume that the discrimination arises from the biased labeling process, which could
result in wrongly labelled samples, and that there exists an
underlying unbiased label mapping which maps the original label to the unbiased label based on different fairness
criteria. The goal is to approximate the mapping by labelbased methods, like adjusting the labels of sensitive groups
(Jiang & Nachum, 2020) or adjusting the loss function values in sensitive groups (Krasanakis et al., 2018). Another
widely applied assumption in fairness approaches is that
the discrimination arises from the sensitive information that
is correlated to sensitive attributes, and by removing the
sensitive information from input data we are able to build
classifiers that meet the specified fairness constraints. Methods including (Creager et al., 2019) are proposed based on
this assumption. However, few methods on fairness have
explicitly addressed the issue of representation bias, which
arises due to insufficient amount of data in certain groups
or subgroups. This kind of bias is also referred to as underrepresentation. One intuitive idea regarding this problem
is: if all the groups and subgroups are adequately represented with enough data, the bias would be greatly reduced,
if not eliminated. For representation bias, the sensitive attributes are not necessarily correlated with input features,

