Searching for BurgerFormer with Micro-Meso-Macro Space Design

Longxing Yang 1 2 3 Yu Hu 1 2 3 Shun Lu 1 2 3 Zihao Sun 1 2 3 Jilin Mei 1 2 3 Yinhe Han 1 2 3 Xiaowei Li 2 3

Abstract
With the success of Transformers in the computer vision field, the automated design of vision Transformers has attracted significant attention. Recently, MetaFormer found that simple
average pooling can achieve impressive performance, which naturally raises the question of
how to design a search space to search diverse
and high-performance Transformer-like architectures. By revisiting typical search spaces, we
design micro-meso-macro space to search for
Transformer-like architectures, namely BurgerFormer. Micro, meso, and macro correspond
to the granularity levels of operation, block and
stage, respectively. At the microscopic level, we
enrich the atomic operations to include various
normalizations, activation functions, and basic
operations (e.g., multi-head self attention, average pooling). At the mesoscopic level, a hamburger structure is searched out as the basic BurgerFormer block. At the macroscopic level, we
search for the depth, width, and expansion ratio
of the network based on the multi-stage architecture. Meanwhile, we propose a hybrid sampling
method for effectively training the supernet. Experimental results demonstrate that the searched
BurgerFormer architectures achieve comparable
even superior performance compared with current
state-of-the-art Transformers on the ImageNet and
COCO datasets. The codes can be available at
https://github.com/xingxing-123/BurgerFormer.

1

Research Center for Intelligent Computing Systems, Institute
of Computing Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 State Key Laboratory of Computer Architecture, Institute of Computing Technology, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3 School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yu Hu <huyu@ict.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Since the emergence of landmark works such as Vision
Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), DeiT (Touvron et al., 2021b) and Swin (Liu et al., 2021), Transformers
have made encouraging performance advances in the Computer Vision (CV) field such as recognition, detection, and
segmentation. As a result, combining Transformer and Neural Architecture Search (NAS) (Chen et al., 2021b;a) has
also gained increasing attention. Recently, MetaFormer (Yu
et al., 2022) leverages simple average pooling to achieve
impressive performance, which naturally raises the question
of how to design a search space to search high-performance
Transformer-like architectures.
Recalling the development of NAS, the design of search
space plays a key role. In the early stage, the NAS-RL
(Zoph & Le, 2017) search space is proposed to find out
optimal hyper-parameters of the entire network. Afterwards,
NASNet (Zoph et al., 2018) proposes a search space containing 13 operations for searching cells and then stacks
cells into a network. The search space is further compacted
to 8 operations in DARTS (Liu et al., 2019). ProxylessNAS
(Cai et al., 2019) and FBNet (Wu et al., 2019) search spaces
borrow from the block design of MobileNet (Sandler et al.,
2018), which means the search spaces contain various MBConv blocks. Similarly, in Transformer NAS, the search
space of AutoFormer (Chen et al., 2021b) is borrowed from
the block design of Transformer.
As shown in Fig. 1, we classify the typical search space design according to the granularity of operations, blocks, and
stages from the micro, meso, and macro perspectives. In the
NASNet and DARTS search spaces, diverse and rich atomic
operations belong to micro design. The ProxylessNAS,
FBNet, AutoFormer, and ViT-ResNAS (Liao et al., 2021)
search spaces contain MobileNet or Transformer blocks
which belong to meso design. In the RegNet (Ilija et al.,
2020), FBNet, AutoFormer and ViT-ResNAS search spaces,
the search for hyper-parameters such as depth and width of
the stage belongs to macro design.
In this paper, we aim to design a search space at the micromeso-macro level to search for more efficient Transformerlike architectures. At the microscopic level, we use richer
atomic operations, including various normalizations, activation functions, and basic operations (e.g., multi-head self

