A Unified View on PAC-Bayes Bounds for Meta-Learning

Arezou Rezazadeh 1

Abstract
Meta learning automatically infers an inductive
bias, that includes the hyperparameter of the baselearning algorithm, by observing data from a finite number of related tasks. This paper studies PAC-Bayes bounds on meta generalization
gap. The meta-generalization gap comprises two
sources of generalization gaps: the environmentlevel and task-level gaps resulting from observation of a finite number of tasks and data samples
per task, respectively. In this paper, by upper
bounding arbitrary convex functions, which link
the expected and empirical losses at the environment and also per-task levels, we obtain new PACBayes bounds. Using these bounds, we develop
new PAC-Bayes meta-learning algorithms. Numerical examples demonstrate the merits of the
proposed novel bounds and algorithm in comparison to prior PAC-Bayes bounds for meta-learning.

1. Introduction
Based on Mitchell’s definition (Mitchell, 1997), a machine
learns a task from an experience when its performance improves with training examples of the task. In other words,
during the learning process, the learner can produce a hypothesis that performs well on future examples of the same
task. This learning process is done based on the set of
assumptions known as inductive bias (Baxter, 2000). In
many machine learning problems, finding methods for automatically learning the inductive bias is desirable. Meta
learning also known as learning to learn (Thrun & Pratt,
1998) formalizes this goal by observing data from a number
of inherently related tasks. Then, it uses the gained experience and knowledge to learn appropriate bias which can
This work has been funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie
Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 893082.
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of
Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. Correspondence to: Arezou
Rezazadeh <arezour@chalmers.se>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

be fine-tuned to perform well on new tasks. Thus, the metalearner speeds up the learning of a new, previously unseen
task (Baxter, 2000). For instance, learning the initialization
and the learning rate of a training algorithm (Finn et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2017), the model architectures of a neural
network (Zoph et al., 2018), or the optimization algorithm of
a neural network (Ravi & Larochelle, 2017), all are within
the scope of meta-learning.
As mentioned, the goal is extracting knowledge from several
observed tasks referred to as meta-training set, and using
the knowledge to improve performance on a novel task. The
meta-learner generalizes well if after observing sufficiently
training tasks, it infers a hyperparameter which contains
good solutions to novel tasks. The good solution means that
meta-generalization loss, which is defined as the average
loss incurred by the hyperparameter when used on a new
task, is minimized. However, since both data and task distributions are unknown, the meta-generalization loss can not
be optimized. Instead, the meta-learner evaluates the empirical meta-training loss for the hyperparameter based on
the meta-training set. Meta-generalization gap is defined as
the difference between the meta-generalization loss and the
meta-training loss. If the meta-generalization gap is small,
it means that the meta-training loss is a good estimation of
the meta-generalization loss.
Thus, bounding the meta-generalization gap is a key technique to understanding how the prior knowledge acquired
from previous tasks may improve the performance of learning an unseen task. Here, a key question is ‘how to regularize the meta-learner, to avoid overfitting?’ The probably
approximately correct (PAC)-Bayes generalization bound,
is one way to answer this question.
In this paper, we derive a general framework that gives PACBayes bounds on the meta-generalization gap. Under certain
setups, different families of PAC-Bayes bounds, namely
classic, quadratic and fast-rate families, can be re-obtained
by the general framework. We also propose new PAC-Bayes
classic bounds which reduce the meta-overfitting problem.

Related Work In statistical meta-learning problems, one
line of research is learning of the parameters of the optimization algorithms, and analyzing gradients based on
meta-learning methods (Finn et al., 2017; Konobeev et al.,

