Optimization-Induced Graph Implicit Nonlinear Diffusion

Qi Chen 1 Yifei Wang 1 Yisen Wang 2 3 Jiansheng Yang 1 Zhouchen Lin 2 3 4

Abstract
Due to the over-smoothing issue, most existing
graph neural networks can only capture limited dependencies with their inherently finite aggregation
layers. To overcome this limitation, we propose
a new kind of graph convolution, called Graph
Implicit Nonlinear Diffusion (GIND), which implicitly has access to infinite hops of neighbors
while adaptively aggregating features with nonlinear diffusion to prevent over-smoothing. Notably,
we show that the learned representation can be
formalized as the minimizer of an explicit convex optimization objective. With this property,
we can theoretically characterize the equilibrium
of our GIND from an optimization perspective.
More interestingly, we can induce new structural
variants by modifying the corresponding optimization objective. To be specific, we can embed prior
properties to the equilibrium, as well as introducing skip connections to promote training stability.
Extensive experiments show that GIND is good at
capturing long-range dependencies, and performs
well on both homophilic and heterophilic graphs
with nonlinear diffusion. Moreover, we show that
the optimization-induced variants of our models
can boost the performance and improve training
stability and efficiency as well. As a result, our
GIND obtains significant improvements on both
node-level and graph-level tasks.

1. Introduction
In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) rise to be the
state-of-the-art models for graph mining (Kipf & Welling,
2016; Veličković et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Li et al.,
2022a) and have extended applications in various scenar1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, China
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of Artificial
Intelligence, Peking University, China 3 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, China 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China.
Correspondence to: Zhouchen Lin <zlin@pku.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ios such as biochemical structure discovery (Gilmer et al.,
2017; Wan et al., 2019), recommender systems (Ying et al.,
2018; Fan et al., 2019), natural language processing (Gao
et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2019), and computer vision (Pang &
Cheung, 2017; Valsesia et al., 2020). Despite the success,
these GNNs typically lack the ability to capture long-range
dependencies. In particular, the common message-passing
GNNs can only aggregate information from T -hop neighbors with T propagation steps. However, existing works
have observed that GNNs often degrade catastrophically
when propagation steps T ≥ 2 (Li et al., 2018), a phenomenon widely characterized as over-smoothing. Several
works try to alleviate it with more expressive aggregations
of higher-order neighbors (Abu-El-Haija et al., 2019; Zhu
et al., 2020). Nevertheless, their ability to capture global
information is inherently limited by the finite propagation
steps.
Recently, implicit GNNs provide a new solution to this problem by replacing the deeply stacked explicit propagation
layers with an implicit layer, which is equivalent to infinite propagation steps (Gu et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021a;
Park et al., 2021). Thereby, implicit GNNs could capture
very long range dependencies and benefit from the global
receptive field. Specifically, implicit GNNs achieve this
by regularizing the explicit forward propagation to a rootfinding problem with convergent equilibrium states. They
further adopt implicit differentiation (Krantz & Parks, 2012)
directly through the equilibrium states to avoid long range
back-propagation. As a result, the methods could get rid of
performance degradation caused by explosive variance with
more depth (Zhou et al., 2021) while having constant memory footprint even with infinite propagation steps. These
advantages indicate that implicit GNNs are promising alternatives to existing explicit GNNs.
The performance of implicit GNNs is largely determined by
the design of the implicit layer. However, it is overlooked by
previous works. Their implicit layers are direct adaptations
of recurrent GNNs (Gu et al., 2020) and lack theoretical
justifications of their diffusion properties. Notably, a major
drawback is that their aggregation mechanisms correspond
to a linear isotropic diffusion that treats all neighbors equally.
However, as noted by recent theoretical discussions (Oono
& Suzuki, 2019), this isotropic property is exactly the cause
of the over-smoothing issue. Thus, it is still hard for them

