Batched Dueling Bandits

Arpit Argarwal 1 Rohan Ghuge 2 Viswanath Nagarajan 2

Abstract
The K-armed dueling bandit problem, where the
feedback is in the form of noisy pairwise comparisons, has been widely studied. Previous works
have only focused on the sequential setting where
the policy adapts after every comparison. However, in many applications such as search ranking
and recommendation systems, it is preferable to
perform comparisons in a limited number of parallel batches. We study the batched K-armed
dueling bandit problem under two standard settings: (i) existence of a Condorcet winner, and
(ii) strong stochastic transitivity and stochastic
triangle inequality. For both settings, we obtain
algorithms with a smooth trade-off between the
number of batches and regret. Our regret bounds
match the best known sequential regret bounds
(up to poly-logarithmic factors), using only a logarithmic number of batches. We complement
our regret analysis with a nearly-matching lower
bound. Finally, we also validate our theoretical
results via experiments on synthetic and real data.

feedback (in our case, given two alternatives, which of the
two is preferred). Designing learning algorithms for such
relative feedback becomes crucial in domains where qualitative feedback is easily obtained, but real-valued feedback
would be arbitrary or not interpretable. We illustrate this
using the web-search ranking application.

1. Introduction

Web-search ranking is an example of a complex information
retrieval system, where the goal is to provide a list (usually
ranked) of candidate documents to the user of the system
in response to a query (Radlinski et al., 2008; Joachims,
2002; Yue & Joachims, 2009; Hofmann et al., 2013). Modern day search engines comprise hundreds of parameters
which are used to output a ranked list in response to a query.
However, manually tuning these parameters can sometimes
be infeasible, and online learning frameworks (based on
user feedback) have been invaluable in automatically tuning
these parameters (Liu, 2009). These methods do not affect
user experience, enable the system to continuously learn
about user preferences, and thus continuously adapt to user
behavior. For example, given two rankings ℓ1 and ℓ2 , they
can be interleaved and presented to the user in such a way
that clicks indicate which of the two rankings is more preferable to the user (Radlinski et al., 2008). The availability
of such pairwise comparison data motivates the study of
learning algorithms that exploit such relative feedback.

The K-armed dueling bandits problem has been widely
studied in machine learning due to its applications in search
ranking, recommendation systems, sports ranking, etc. (Yue
& Joachims, 2011; Yue et al., 2012; Urvoy et al., 2013;
Ailon et al., 2014; Zoghi et al., 2014; 2015a;b; Dudik et al.,
2015; Jamieson et al., 2015; Komiyama et al., 2015; 2016;
Ramamohan et al., 2016; Chen & Frazier, 2017). It is a variation of the traditional stochastic bandit problem in which
feedback is obtained in the form of pairwise preferences.
This problem falls under the umbrella of preference learning
(Wirth et al., 2017), where the goal is to learn from relative

Previous learning algorithms have focused on a fully adaptive setting; in the web-ranking application this corresponds
to the learning algorithm updating its parameters after each
query. Such updates might be impractical in large systems.
For example, if the parameters are fine-tuned for each user
and a user makes multiple queries in a short time, such continuous updates require a lot of computational power. Even
if users are assigned to a small number of classes (and parameters are fine-tuned for each user-class), multiple users
from the same class may simultaneously query the system,
making it impractical to adapt after each interaction.

1

Data Science Institute, Columbia University, New York, USA
Department of Industrial and Operations Engineering, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA. Research supported in part by NSF
grants CMMI-1940766 and CCF-2006778.. Correspondence to:
Rohan Ghuge <rghuge@umich.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Motivated by this, we introduce the batched K-armed dueling bandits problem (or, batched dueling bandits), where
the learning algorithm is only allowed to adapt a limited
number of times. Specifically, the algorithm uses at most
B adaptive rounds and in each round it commits to a fixed
batch of pairwise comparisons. The feedback for a batch is
received simultaneously, and the algorithm chooses the next

