G2 CN: Graph Gaussian Convolution Networks with Concentrated Graph Filters

Mingjie Li 1 Xiaojun Guo 1 Yifei Wang 2 Yisen Wang 1 3 Zhouchen Lin 1 3 4

Abstract
Recently, linear GCNs have shown competitive
performance against non-linear ones with less
computation cost, and the key lies in their propagation layers. Spectral analysis has been widely
adopted in designing and analyzing existing graph
propagations. Nevertheless, we notice that existing spectral analysis fails to explain why existing graph propagations with the same global tendency, such as low-pass or high-pass, still yield
very different results. Motivated by this situation,
in this paper, we develop a new framework for
spectral analysis from a detailed spectral analysis called concentration analysis. In particular,
we propose three attributes: concentration centre,
maximum response, and bandwidth for our analysis. Through a dissection of the limitations of
existing graph propagations via the above analysis, we proposed a new kind of propagation layer,
Graph Gaussian Convolution Networks (G2 CN),
in which the three properties are decoupled and
the whole structure becomes more flexible and
applicable on different kinds of graphs. Extensive
experiments show that we can obtain state-of-theart performance on various benchmark datasets
with our proposed Graph Gaussian Convolution
Networks.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks have achieved excellent performance
on various graph-related tasks on social relationship (Li &
Goldwasser, 2019; Qiu et al., 2018; Tong et al., 2019), traffic (Bogaerts et al., 2020; Cui et al., 2019; Li et al., 2018b),
recommendation (Ying et al., 2018; Feng et al., 2022), medical researches and others (Zhao et al., 2019; Rathi et al.,
1

Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of Artificial
Intelligence, Peking University. 2 School of Mathematical Sciences,
Peking University. 3 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking
University. 4 Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to:
Zhouchen Lin <zlin@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2020; Jiang et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022). GCNs mainly
consist of the graph propagation part and feature transformation part. The graph propagation part first processes the
graph signals to obtain the features with global or local
graph properties. Then the signals are fed to a neural network with several or only one layer. Several works (Wu
et al., 2019; Zhu & Koniusz, 2020) have shown that even a
linear transformation layer can achieve better performance
on many benchmark datasets. Therefore, graph propagation
is the key part of a GCN model and attracts a lot of attention
these days. Among the researches on graph propagation,
graph spectral analysis has been widely adopted in designing and analyzing the existing graph propagation (Wu et al.,
2019; Balcilar et al., 2020). It treats the graph propagations as graph filters on the spectrum of the graph Laplacian
and classifies various graph propagation via the spectral response. For example, a graph filter that responds to amplify
eigenvalues and diminish large eigenvalues will be classified
as a low-pass graph filter.
However, the former spectral analysis mainly focuses on the
global tendency. These analyses cannot completely explain
why GCNs with different graph propagation will show different results even if their corresponding graph filter share
the same low-pass or high-pass tendency. Motivated by this,
we’d analyze the filters’ pass band since it determines the
output of the graph propagation. Since the filters’ responses
are concentrated on the passband, we called the analysis
as spectral concentration analysis to distinguish from the
previous study. And we propose three attributes called the
concentration attributes for spectral analysis on the graph
propagation contrast to the filter’s global tendency: maximum response R, bandwidth BW and band concentration
centre b in the following papers.
We analyze existing graph propagation with these attributes
and find that their different performance can be attributed
to their various concentration flexibility. Models with high
concentration flexibility can apply different graph filters on
various graphs, leading to better performance. With these
findings, we also propose our Gaussian Graph Convolution,
whose graph filters can be assumed as the combination of
several Gaussian filters. Our Gaussian graph filter decouples
the above attributes and can be easily adapted to perform as
different kinds of filters to suit the graph desire. Then we
implement our Gaussian graph filter in a linear graph model

