Streaming Algorithms for High-Dimensional Robust Statistics

Ilias Diakonikolas 1 Daniel M. Kane 2 Ankit Pensia 1 Thanasis Pittas 1

Abstract
We study high-dimensional robust statistics tasks
in the streaming model. A recent line of work
obtained computationally efficient algorithms for
a range of high-dimensional robust statistics tasks.
Unfortunately, all previous algorithms require
storing the entire dataset, incurring memory at
least quadratic in the dimension. In this work, we
develop the first efficient streaming algorithms
for high-dimensional robust statistics with nearoptimal memory requirements (up to logarithmic
factors). Our main result is for the task of highdimensional robust mean estimation in (a strengthening of) Huber’s contamination model. We give
an efficient single-pass streaming algorithm for
this task with near-optimal error guarantees and
space complexity nearly-linear in the dimension.
As a corollary, we obtain streaming algorithms
with near-optimal space complexity for several
more complex tasks, including robust covariance
estimation, robust regression, and more generally
robust stochastic optimization.

albeit with runtimes exponential in the dimension. A recent
line of work in computer science, starting with (Diakonikolas et al., 2016; Lai et al., 2016), developed polynomial time
robust estimators for a range of high-dimensional statistical
tasks. Algorithmic high-dimensional robust statistics is by
now a relatively mature field, see, e.g., (Diakonikolas &
Kane, 2019; Diakonikolas et al., 2021a) for surveys.
This recent progress notwithstanding, even for the basic task
of mean estimation, previous robust estimators require the
entire dataset in main memory. This space requirement can
be a major bottleneck in large-scale applications, where an
algorithm has access to a very large stream of data. Indeed,
practical machine learning methods are typically simple iterative algorithms that make a single pass over the data and
require a small amount of storage — with stochastic gradient descent being the prototypical example (Bottou, 2010;
Bottou et al., 2018). Concretely, in prior applications of
robust statistics in data analysis (Diakonikolas et al., 2017a)
and data poisoning defenses (Diakonikolas et al., 2019a),
the storage requirements of the underlying algorithms were
observed to significantly hinder scalability1 . This discussion
motivates the following natural question:
Can we develop efficient robust estimators in the streaming
model with (near-) optimal space complexity?

1. Introduction
This work studies high-dimensional learning in the presence of a constant fraction of arbitrary outliers. Outlierrobust learning in high dimensions is motivated by pressing
machine learning (ML) applications, including ML security (Barreno et al., 2010; Biggio et al., 2012; Steinhardt
et al., 2017; Tran et al., 2018; Diakonikolas et al., 2019a) and
exploratory analysis of datasets with natural outliers (Rosenberg et al., 2002; Paschou et al., 2010; Li et al., 2008). This
field has its roots in robust statistics, a branch of statistics initiated in the 60s with the pioneering works of Tukey and Huber (Tukey, 1960; Huber, 1964). Early work developed minimax optimal estimators for various robust estimation tasks,
1

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
University of
Wisconsin-Madison 2 University of California, San Diego. Correspondence to: Ankit Pensia <ankitp@cs.wisc.edu>, Thanasis
Pittas <pittas@wisc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

We emphasize that this broad question is meaningful and interesting even ignoring computational considerations. While
any method requires space complexity Ω(d), where d is the
dimension of the problem (to store a single sample), it is not
obvious that a matching upper bound exists. We note that
it is relatively simple to design O(d)-memory streaming
algorithms with sample complexity exponential in d. But
it is by no means clear whether there exists an estimator
with near-linear space requirements and poly(d) sample
complexity (independent of its runtime).
1.1. Our Results
In this work, we initiate a systematic investigation of highdimensional robust statistics in the streaming model. We
start by focusing on the most basic task — that of robust
mean estimation. Our main result is the first space-efficient
streaming algorithm for robust mean estimation under nat1

See, for example, Section 5.1 of (Diakonikolas et al., 2017b).

