On Collective Robustness of Bagging Against Data Poisoning

Ruoxin Chen 1 Zenan Li 1 Jie Li 1 Chentao Wu 1 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract
Bootstrap aggregating (bagging) is an effective
ensemble protocol, which is believed can enhance
robustness by its majority voting mechanism. Recent works further prove the sample-wise robustness certificates for certain forms of bagging (e.g.
partition aggregation). Beyond these particular
forms, in this paper, we propose the first collective certification for general bagging to compute
the tight robustness against the global poisoning attack. Specifically, we compute the maximum number of simultaneously changed predictions via solving a binary integer linear programming (BILP) problem. Then we analyze the robustness of vanilla bagging and give the upper
bound of the tolerable poison budget. Based on
this analysis, we propose hash bagging to improve the robustness of vanilla bagging almost for
free. This is achieved by modifying the random
subsampling in vanilla bagging to a hash-based
deterministic subsampling, as a way of controlling the influence scope for each poisoning sample universally. Our extensive experiments show
the notable advantage in terms of applicability
and robustness. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/Emiyalzn/ICML22-CRB.

1. Introduction
Bagging (Breiman, 1996), refers to an ensemble learning
protocol that trains sub-classifiers on the subsampled subtrainsets and makes predictions by majority voting, which
is a commonly used method to avoid overfitting. Recent
works (Biggio et al., 2011; Levine & Feizi, 2021; Jia et al.,
2021) show its superior certified robustness in defending
data poisoning attacks. Moreover, compared to other cer1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering and MoE
Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China. Jie Li and Junchi Yan are also with Shanghai
AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Jie Li <
lijiecs@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tified defenses, bagging is a natural plug-and-play method
with a high compatibility with various model architectures
and training algorithms, which suggests its great potential.
Some works (Levine & Feizi, 2021; Jia et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2022) have proved the sample-wise robustness certificates against the sample-wise attack (the attacker aims to
corrupt the prediction for the target data) for certain forms of
bagging. However, we notice that, there is a white space in
the collective robustness certificates against the global poisoning attack (the attacker attempts to maximize the number
of simultaneously changed predictions when predicting the
testset), although the global attack is more general and critical than the sample-wise attack for: I) the sample-wise
attack is only a variant of the global poisoning attack when
the testset size is one; II) unlike adversarial examples (Goodfellow et al., 2014) which is sample-wise, data poisoning
attacks are naturally global, where the poisoned trainset
has a global influence on all the predictions; III) the global
attack is believed more harmful than the sample-wise attack.
Current works (Levine & Feizi, 2021; Jia et al., 2021) simply count the number of robust predictions guaranteed by
the sample-wise certification, as a lower bound of the collective robustness. However, this lower bound often overly
under-estimates the actual value. We aim to provide a formal collective certification for general bagging, to fill the
gap in analyzing the certified robustness of bagging.
In this paper, we take the first step towards the collective
certification for general bagging. Our idea is to formulate
a binary integer linear programming (BILP) problem, of
which objective function is to maximize the number of simultaneously changed predictions w.r.t. the given poison
budget. The certified collective robustness equals the testset
size minus the computed objective value. To reduce the cost
of solving the BILP problem, a decomposition strategy is
devised, which allows us to compute a collective robustness
lower bound within a linear time of testset size.
Moreover, we analyze the certified robustness of vanilla
bagging, demonstrating that it is not an ideal certified defense by deriving the upper bound of its tolerable poison
budget. To address this issue, we propose hash bagging to
improve the robustness of vanilla bagging almost for free.
Specifically, we modify the random subsampling in vanilla
bagging to hash-based subsampling, to restrict the influence

