Breaking Down Out-of-Distribution Detection: Many Methods Based on OOD
Training Data Estimate a Combination of the Same Core Quantities

Julian Bitterwolf 1 Alexander Meinke 1 Maximilian Augustin 1 Matthias Hein 1

Abstract
It is an important problem in trustworthy machine learning to recognize out-of-distribution
(OOD) inputs which are inputs unrelated to the indistribution task. Many out-of-distribution detection methods have been suggested in recent years.
The goal of this paper is to recognize common
objectives as well as to identify the implicit scoring functions of different OOD detection methods.
We focus on the sub-class of methods that use surrogate OOD data during training in order to learn
an OOD detection score that generalizes to new
unseen out-distributions at test time. We show
that binary discrimination between in- and (different) out-distributions is equivalent to several
distinct formulations of the OOD detection problem. When trained in a shared fashion with a standard classifier, this binary discriminator reaches
an OOD detection performance similar to that of
Outlier Exposure. Moreover, we show that the
confidence loss which is used by Outlier Exposure has an implicit scoring function which differs in a non-trivial fashion from the theoretically
optimal scoring function in the case where training and test out-distribution are the same, which
again is similar to the one used when training an
Energy-Based OOD detector or when adding a
background class. In practice, when trained in
exactly the same way, all these methods perform
similarly.

1. Introduction
While deep learning has significantly improved performance
in many application domains, there are serious concerns for
using deep neural networks in applications which are of
1
University of Tübingen.
Correspondence to: <julian.bitterwolf@uni-tuebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

safety-critical nature. With one major problem being adversarial samples (Szegedy et al., 2014; Madry et al., 2018),
which are small imperceptible modifications of the image
that change the decision of the classifier, another major
problem are overconfident predictions (Nguyen et al., 2015;
Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Hein et al., 2019) for images
not belonging to the classes of the actual task. Here, one
distinguishes between far out-of-distribution data, e.g. different forms of noise or completely unrelated tasks like
CIFAR-10 vs. SVHN, and close out-of-distribution data
which can for example occur in related image classification tasks where the semantic structure is very similar e.g.
CIFAR-10 vs. CIFAR-100. Both are important to be distinguished from the in-distribution, but it is conceivable that
close out-of-distribution data is the more difficult problem
with potentially fatal consequences: in an automated diagnosis system we want that the system recognizes that it “does
not know” when a new unseen disease comes in rather than
assigning high confidence into a known class leading to fatal
treatment decisions. Thus out-of-distribution awareness is a
key property of trustworthy AI systems.
In this paper, we focus on the setting of OOD detection
where during training time, there is no information available
on the distribution of OOD inputs that might appear when
the model is used for inference. It is often reasonable to
assume access to a surrogate out-distribution during training.
One can however not assume that these surrogate is related
to the OOD inputs that will be encountered at test-time.
A large number of different approaches to OOD detection
based on combinations of density estimation, classifier confidence, logit space energy, feature space geometry, behaviour
on auxiliary tasks, and other principles has been proposed
to tackle this problem. We give a detailed overview of existing OOD detection methods in Appendix D. However,
most OOD detection papers are focused on establishing superior empirical detection performance and provide little
theoretical background on differences but also similarities
to existing methods. In this paper we want to take a different path as we believe that a solid theoretical basis is
needed to make further progress in this field. Our goal is
to identify, at least for a particular subclass of techniques,
whether the differences are indeed due to a different underlying theoretical principle or whether they are due to the

