Lyapunov Density Models:
Constraining Distribution Shift in Learning-Based Control

Katie Kang 1 Paula Gradu 1 Jason Choi 1 Michael Janner 1 Claire Tomlin 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
Learned models and policies can generalize effectively when evaluated within the distribution of
the training data, but can produce unpredictable
and erroneous outputs on out-of-distribution inputs. In order to avoid distribution shift when
deploying learning-based control algorithms, we
seek a mechanism to constrain the agent to states
and actions that resemble those that it was trained
on. In control theory, Lyapunov stability and
control-invariant sets allow us to make guarantees
about controllers that stabilize the system around
specific states, while in machine learning, density
models allow us to estimate the training data distribution. Can we combine these two concepts,
producing learning-based control algorithms that
constrain the system to in-distribution states using
only in-distribution actions? In this work, we propose to do this by combining concepts from Lyapunov stability and density estimation, introducing Lyapunov density models: a generalization of
control Lyapunov functions and density models
that provides guarantees on an agent’s ability to
stay in-distribution over its entire trajectory.

1. Introduction
Learning-based control algorithms, including model-free
and model-based reinforcement learning, have shown the
capability to surpass the performance of traditional modelbased control on a number of complex, difficult-to-model
systems (Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Akkaya et al., 2019; Li
et al., 2021), by leveraging data in place of approximate
mathematical models. However, the data-dependent nature of these learning-enabled controllers also leads to new
challenges. One such challenge is that learned models can
only provide reliable predictions when queried within the
1
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Katie
Kang <katiekang@eecs.berkeley.edu >.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

training data distribution. If the inputs to a learning-based
controller deviate far from its training data, the controller
can suffer from model exploitation, in which mispredictions
from the machine learning model causes the controller to
output suboptimal or even catastrophic action commands.
To mitigate the negative effects of distribution shift, can
we design controllers that perform the desired task while
ensuring the system remains in-distribution? One approach
is to learn a density model of the training data, and use
it to constrain or regularize the controller to prevent the
agent from taking low-likelihood actions or visiting lowlikelihood states (Richter & Roy, 2017; McAllister et al.,
2019; Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019; Wu et al.,
2019). However, because density models are not aware of
system dynamics, this kind of approach “greedily” chooses
actions that are in-distribution at the next timestep, but does
not provide a mechanism for staying in-distribution over a
long horizon. On the other hand, guaranteed long-horizon
constraint satisfaction has been widely studied in control
theory. Lyapunov functions map each state to a non-negative
scalar which must decrease as the system evolves, providing
a mechanism for ensuring the stability of a system over
an infinite horizon. However, these notions of stability
are formulated relative to fixed points of the system, and
unrelated to any data or distribution.
The goal of our work is to provide a mechanism for ensuring that a system controlled by a learning-based policy will
remain in-distribution throughout its trajectory. To this end,
the main contribution of our work is the Lyapunov density
model (LDM), a function that combines the data-aware aspect of density models with the dynamics-aware aspect of
Lyapunov functions. Analogous to how control Lyapunov
functions are used to guarantee that a controller stabilizes
a system, we show how LDMs can be used to design controllers that are guaranteed to keep a system in-distribution,
where naïvely using a density model will fail. We also
present an algorithm for learning the LDM and its associated
policy function directly from a training set of transitions,
without assuming any knowledge of the underlying dynamics or active system interaction. Since learning the LDM
is itself a data-dependent process which may suffer from
distribution shift, we also provide theoretical analysis of our

