Describing Differences between Text Distributions with Natural Language

Ruiqi Zhong 1 Charlie Snell 1 Dan Klein 1 Jacob Steinhardt 1

Abstract
How do two distributions of text differ? Humans
are slow at answering this, since discovering patterns might require tediously reading through hundreds of samples. We propose to automatically
describe the differences by “learning a natural language hypothesis”: given two distributions D0
and D1 , we search for a description that is more
often true for D1 , e.g., “is military-related.” To
tackle this problem, we fine-tune GPT-3 to propose descriptions with the prompt: “[samples of
D0 ] + [samples of D1 ] + the difference between
them is .” We then re-rank the descriptions by
checking how often they hold on a larger set of
samples with a learned verifier. On a benchmark
of 54 real-world binary classification tasks, while
GPT-3 Curie (13B) only generates a description
similar to human annotation 7% of the time, the
performance reaches 61% with fine-tuning and reranking, and our best system using GPT-3 Davinci
(175B) reaches 76%. We apply our system to describe distribution shifts, debug dataset shortcuts,
summarize unknown tasks, and label text clusters, and present analyses based on automatically
generated descriptions.

City won only seven games from 28 …
presided at the Council of Auster eld in 702 …

D0

Gun emplacements were made . . .
He had surgery shortly afterward
...
Hostile displaced 1,350 long tons …
called for the 38 DD tanks to be launched …

D1

M -122 began at US 2 ( now Business …
thick plates protected the gun ports …
...

s

“is military-related”

Figure 1. Given two distributions (top), our system automatically
discovers their differences and describes them with natural language (bottom). Grey/white background represents D0 /D1 and
red/blue represents whether a sample matches the description s.

natural language. We reduce the above questions to “learning a natural language hypothesis” (Section 2): given two
text distributions D0 and D1 , we search for a natural language hypothesis s that is more often true for samples from
D1 than samples from D0 . For instance:

1. Introduction
What inputs trigger a neuron in my deep learning model?
How are the train and test distributions different for my
application? How did public opinions on Twitter change
from last year to this year? These questions have significant
scientific, economic, and social consequences. However,
discovering new patterns sometimes requires scanning over
thousands of examples, intractable for humans. An automated solution would be far more scalable.
To address this, we develop a method to discover the differences between two distributions and describe them with
1
Computer Science Division, University of California, Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Ruiqi Zhong <ruiqi-zhong@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

• We can describe what triggers an artificial neuron by
setting D1 to be inputs that trigger it and D0 for other
inputs. s could be “is military-related” (Figure 1).
• We can describe the differences between the train and
test distributions by setting them to be D0 and D1 . A
possible s would be “is longer in sentence length.”
• We can describe how public opinions shifted by setting
D0 /D1 to be the opinions from last year/this year. s
could be “is optimistic about the pandemic.”
We develop a new method to learn a natural language hypothesis. We first prompt GPT-3 Davinci (175B) (Brown
et al., 2020) with samples from each distribution and ask it
to propose candidate hypotheses s (Section 3.1). However,
since GPT-3 has a limited context size, this prompt can only

