Learning Dynamics and Generalization in Deep Reinforcement Learning

Clare Lyle 1 Mark Rowland 2 Will Dabney 2 Marta Kwiatkowksa 1 Yarin Gal 1

Abstract
Solving a reinforcement learning (RL) problem
poses two competing challenges: fitting a potentially discontinuous value function, and generalizing well to new observations. In this paper,
we analyze the learning dynamics of temporal
difference algorithms to gain novel insight into
the tension between these two objectives. We
show theoretically that temporal difference learning encourages agents to fit non-smooth components of the value function early in training,
and at the same time induces the second-order
effect of discouraging generalization. We corroborate these findings in deep RL agents trained
on a range of environments, finding that neural networks trained using temporal difference
algorithms on dense reward tasks exhibit weaker
generalization between states than randomly initialized networks and networks trained with policy
gradient methods. Finally, we investigate how
post-training policy distillation may avoid this pitfall, and show that this approach improves generalization to novel environments in the ProcGen suite
and improves robustness to input perturbations.

1. Introduction
The use of function approximation in reinforcement learning
(RL) faces two principal difficulties: existing algorithms are
vulnerable to divergence and instability (Baird, 1993), and
value estimates that do converge tend to generalize poorly to
new observations (Zhang et al., 2018). Crucial to both
of these difficulties is the concept of interference, the degree
to which an update to an agent’s predictions at one state influences its predictions at other states. Function approximation
schemes with weaker interference, such as those induced
by tabular value functions or tile coding schemes, have been
shown empirically to produce more stable behaviour and
1

Department of Computer Science, University of
Oxford 2 DeepMind.
Correspondence to:
Clare Lyle
<clare.lyle@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

faster convergence in value-based algorithms on a number of
classic control domains (Ghiassian et al., 2020). However,
such schemes by construction require treating the value
functions for different states independently, limiting the
function approximator’s potential for generalization.
Deep RL algorithms are notoriously prone to overfitting
to their training. environment’s observations and dynamics
(Lewandowski, 2020; Farebrother et al., 2018; Cobbe et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2018). While many prior works have
sought training methodologies to improve generalization
(Igl et al., 2019; Raileanu et al., 2021), the source of the
relative tendency of deep RL methods to overfit to their
training distribution remains under-explored. This work
studies a mechanism to explain why value-based deep RL
agents tend to generalize poorly to new environments and
observations. One avenue that we will draw on in particular
is the study of agents’ learning dynamics, which can reveal
insights into not just the convergence of algorithms, but
also into the trajectory taken by the agent’s value function.
In this work, we study how interference evolves in deep RL
agents. Our primary contributions will be twofold: first, to
provide a rigorous theoretical and empirical analysis of
the relationship between generalization, interference, and
the dynamics of temporal difference learning; second, to
study the effect of distillation, which avoids the pitfalls of
temporal difference learning, on generalization to novel
environments. Towards this first contribution, we extend the
analysis of Lyle et al. (2021) to show that the dynamics of
temporal difference learning accelerate convergence along
non-smooth components of the value function first, resulting
in implicit regularization towards learned representations
that generalize weakly between states. Our findings present
an explanation for widely-observed vulnerability of valuebased deep RL agents to overfit to their training observations
(Raileanu and Fergus, 2021; Zhang et al., 2018).
We then evaluate whether these findings hold empirically
across a range of popular deep RL benchmarks. We measure
interference by constructing a summary statistic which evaluates the extent to which optimization steps computed for
one state influence predictions on other states, which we call
the update rank. We find that value-based agents trained
with temporal difference (TD) methods learn representations with weak interference between states, performing

