Optimal Clipping and Magnitude-aware Differentiation
for Improved Quantization-aware Training

Charbel Sakr 1 Steve Dai 1 Rangharajan Venkatesan 1 Brian Zimmer 1 William J. Dally 1 Brucek Khailany 1

Abstract
Data clipping is crucial in reducing noise in quantization operations and improving the achievable
accuracy of quantization-aware training (QAT).
Current practices rely on heuristics to set clipping threshold scalars and cannot be shown to
be optimal. We propose Optimally Clipped Tensors And Vectors (OCTAV), a recursive algorithm
to determine MSE-optimal clipping scalars. Derived from the fast Newton-Raphson method, OCTAV finds optimal clipping scalars on the fly, for
every tensor, at every iteration of the QAT routine. Thus, the QAT algorithm is formulated
with provably minimum quantization noise at
each step. In addition, we reveal limitations in
common gradient estimation techniques in QAT
and propose magnitude-aware differentiation as
a remedy to further improve accuracy. Experimentally, OCTAV-enabled QAT achieves state-ofthe-art accuracy on multiple tasks. These include
training-from-scratch and retraining ResNets and
MobileNets on ImageNet, and Squad fine-tuning
using BERT models, where OCTAV-enabled QAT
consistently preserves accuracy at low precision
(4-to-6-bits). Our results require no modifications
to the baseline training recipe, except for the insertion of quantization operations where appropriate.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are powerful models achieving state-of-the-art accuracy on various cognitive tasks such
as image classification, object detection, and natural language processing (LeCun et al., 2015). However, DNN
successes have been achieved at the expense of a high computational and parameter complexity. Indeed, networks
1

The authors are with NVIDIA Corporation, Santa
Clara, CA 95051 USA. Correspondence to: Charbel Sakr
<csakr@nvidia.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

commonly require around 4 billion multiply-accumulates
(MACs) (He et al., 2016) or have over 100 million parameters (Taigman et al., 2014). With further progress in deep
learning, the growth of DNN resource requirements shows
no sign of slowing down (Bianco et al., 2018). Fortunately,
reduced-precision implementation has been shown to largely
lower the computational complexity of deep learning models
(Gupta et al., 2015).
Reduced-precision deep learning is widely adopted and
multi-faceted. One option is to perform post-training quantization (PTQ), which benefits inference only and consists of
taking a pretrained network and implementing it in reducedprecision, with no retraining allowed. While conceptually
simple, PTQ is challenging, as determining an accuracypreserving quantization strategy is non-trivial. In recent
works, proposed practical PTQ solutions include speculative hybrid high/low precision number formats (Jain et al.,
2019; Lin et al., 2017) and Batch-Norm-guided data free
quantization (Nagel et al., 2019).
The results presented in our work apply to any quantization
setup, including PTQ. However, the main feature is the
ability to optimize quantization metadata on the fly. This
is most arguably effective for another facet: quantizationaware training (QAT), where weights and activations are
quantized during training. A superset of this problem is fully
quantized training (FQT) (Sakr & Shanbhag, 2019), where
gradients and weight updates are also quantized. While we
focus on QAT here, an interesting and important extension
of our work is to apply our results to FQT.
1.1

Quantization-aware training and related works

There are three main use cases for QAT: training-fromscratch where the starting point is a randomly initialized
network; retraining where a pretrained model is quantized
and retrained for a short time on the same dataset; and finetuning where the starting point is a model pretrained on one
dataset and trained on another.
Early works on QAT showed that binary-weighted (Courbariaux et al., 2015) and fully-binarized (Hubara et al.,
2016) networks can be accurately trained on simple models
and datasets. To improve accuracy in more difficult tasks,

