Instance-dependent Regret Analysis of Kernelized Bandits

Shubhanshu Shekhar 1 Tara Javidi 2

Abstract
We study the problem of designing an adaptive
strategy for querying a noisy zeroth-order-oracle
to efficiently learn about the optimizer of an unknown function f . To make the problem tractable,
we assume that f lies in the reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS) associated with a known
kernel K, with its norm bounded by M < ∞.
Prior results, working in a minimax framework,
have characterized the worst-case (over all functions in the problem class) limits on regret achievable by any algorithm, and have constructed algorithms with matching (modulo polylogarithmic
factors) worst-case performance for the Matérn
family of kernels. These results suffer from two
drawbacks. First, the minimax lower bound gives
limited information about the limits of regret
achievable by the commonly used algorithms on
a specific problem instance f . Second, the existing upper bound analysis fails to adapt to easier problem instances within the function class.
Our work takes steps to address both these issues.
First, we derive instance-dependent regret lower
bounds for algorithms with uniformly (over the
function class) vanishing normalized cumulative
regret. Our result, valid for several practically
relevant kernelized bandits algorithms, such as,
GP-UCB, GP-TS and SupKernelUCB, identifies a fundamental complexity measure associated
with every problem instance. We then address
the second issue, by proposing a new minimax
near-optimal algorithm which also adapts to easier
problem instances.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of optimizing a function f : X =
[0, 1]d 7→ R by adaptively gathering information about it
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of California, San
Deigo. Correspondence to: Shubhanshu Shekhar <shubhan2@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

via noisy zeroth-order-oracle queries. To make the problem
tractable, we assume that (1) f lies in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) associated with a given positivedefinite kernel K, and (2) the RKHS norm of f is bounded
by a known constant M < ∞. The function f can be accessed through noisy zeroth-order-oracle queries that return
yx = f (x) + η at a query point x ∈ X , with η denoting
the additive observation noise. Given a total budget n, the
goal of an agent is to design an adaptive querying strategy,
denoted by A, to select a sequence of query points (xt )nt=1 ,
that incur a small cumulative regret Rn (A, f ), defined as

Rn (A, f ) :=

n
X
t=1

f (x∗ ) − f (xt ),

x∗ ∈ arg max f (x).
x∈X

The cumulative regret forces the agent to address the
exploration-exploitation trade-off and prevents it from
querying too many points from the sub-optimal regions
of the domain.
The problem described above is referred to as the kernelized
bandit or agnostic Gaussian Process bandit problem (Srinivas et al., 2012). Prior theoretical works in this area have
focused on establishing lower and upper bounds on the performance achievable by algorithms in the minimax setting.
These results characterize the worst-case limits, over all
functions in the given RKHS, of performance achievable
by any adaptive sampling algorithm (see Section 1.1 for
details). The minimax framework does not account for the
fact that there may exist functions that are easier to optimize than others in the same function class. As a result,
the minimax regret bounds may not accurately reflect the
performance of carefully designed adaptive strategies in the
typical, non-adversarial, problem instances. In this paper,
we take a step towards addressing this issue and present the
first instance-dependent analysis for kernelized bandits.
In this paper, we focus on the RKHS corresponding to the
Matérn family of kernels, denoted by {HKν : ν > 0}.
These kernels are highly relevant for practical applications
and allow a graded control over the smoothness of its elements (through a smoothness parameter ν > 0) as described
by Stein (2012). We believe that our arguments can be extended to Squared-Exponential (SE) kernels by using the
Fourier domain constructions of Scarlett et al. (2017), al-

