Understanding Instance-Level Impact of Fairness Constraints

Jialu Wang 1 Xin Eric Wang 1 Yang Liu 1

Abstract
A variety of fairness constraints have been proposed in the literature to mitigate group-level statistical bias. Their impacts have been largely
evaluated for different groups of populations corresponding to a set of sensitive attributes, such
as race or gender. Nonetheless, the community
has not observed sufficient explorations for how
imposing fairness constraints fare at an instance
level. Building on the concept of influence function, a measure that characterizes the impact of
a training example on the target model and its
predictive performance, this work studies the influence of training examples when fairness constraints are imposed. We find out that under certain assumptions, the influence function with respect to fairness constraints can be decomposed
into a kernelized combination of training examples. One promising application of the proposed
fairness influence function is to identify suspicious training examples that may cause model
discrimination by ranking their influence scores.
We demonstrate with extensive experiments that
training on a subset of weighty data examples
leads to lower fairness violations with a trade-off
of accuracy.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models have been deployed in a variety
of real-world decision-making systems, including hiring
(Ajunwa et al., 2016; Bogen & Rieke, 2018; Raghavan et al.,
2020), loan application (Siddiqi, 2005; Ustun et al., 2019),
medical treatments (Pfohl et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021),
recidivism assessment (Angwin et al., 2016; Chouldechova,
2017) and more. Nonetheless, a number of studies have
reported unfair treatments from a machine learning model
(Mayson, 2019; Dieterich et al., 2016; Buolamwini & Gebru,
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of California, Santa Cruz, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yang Liu
<yangliu@ucsc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2018; Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Mitchell et al., 2019). The fair
machine learning community has responded with solutions
(Corbett-Davies et al., 2017; Feldman et al., 2015; Chuang
& Mroueh, 2021; Taskesen et al., 2020), with the core idea
being to impose fairness constraints on either the group level
(Hardt et al., 2016; Agarwal et al., 2018; Madras et al., 2018;
Woodworth et al., 2017) or the individual level (Dwork et al.,
2012; Kusner et al., 2017a; Balcan et al., 2019).
Despite the successes of the algorithmic treatments, the
question of why a particular “fair” training process leads
to a more fair model remains less addressed. The explanation for the above why question is essential in improving
user trustworthiness in the models and often regulated by
legal requirements (Ninth Circuit Jury Instructions Committee, 2017). There has been a recent surge of interest in
explaining algorithmic fairness. Much of the work chose to
quantify the importance of the input feature variables used
to make fair decisions (Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Sundararajan & Najmi, 2020; Mase et al., 2021). This line of research
makes explanations on the population level, as the importance measures are quantified statistically over the entire
subset of instances.
Nevertheless, the impact of fairness constraints on individual instances is rarely discussed. The central inquiry of this
paper is how each individual training instance influences
the model decisions when a fairness constraint is imposed.
Demystifying and characterizing the influence of individual instances subject to fairness constraints is important
and opens up the possibility of auditing a machine learning
model at the instance level. Among other potentials, we
believe that such understanding might help with developing preprocessing solutions to mitigate bias by emphasizing
more on instances that have a high influence on fairness.
To this end, we borrow the idea from recent literature on
influence function (Sundararajan et al., 2017), which has
largely focused on approximating the effect of training
examples in prediction accuracy rather than fairness constraints. Concretely, an influence function characterizes the
change of model predictions compared to the counterfactual
that one training example is removed. We instantiate the
change, due to the penalty of disparity, on prominent fairness criteria that have been widely applied in the community.
We illustrate that the influence scores can be potentially ap-

