Variational Mixtures of ODEs for Inferring Cellular Gene Expression Dynamics

Yichen Gu 1 David Blaauw * 1 Joshua Welch * 1 2

Abstract
A key problem in computational biology is discovering the gene expression changes that regulate cell fate transitions, in which one cell type
turns into another. However, each individual cell
cannot be tracked longitudinally, and cells at the
same point in real time may be at different stages
of the transition process. This can be viewed as
a problem of learning the behavior of a dynamical system from observations whose times are
unknown. Additionally, a single progenitor cell
type often bifurcates into multiple child cell types,
further complicating the problem of modeling the
dynamics. To address this problem, we developed
an approach called variational mixtures of ordinary differential equations. By using a simple
family of ODEs informed by the biochemistry of
gene expression to constrain the likelihood of a
deep generative model, we can simultaneously
infer the latent time and latent state of each cell
and predict its future gene expression state. The
model can be interpreted as a mixture of ODEs
whose parameters vary continuously across a latent space of cell states. Our approach dramatically improves data fit, latent time inference, and
future cell state estimation of single-cell gene expression data compared to previous approaches.

1. Introduction
The human body contains many cell types with distinct
forms and functions, which arise from progenitor cells in a
stepwise developmental process. A key question in molecular biology is what regulates this process of cellular development. In general, the diversity of cell types arises not
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, United
States 2 Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, United States. Correspondence to: David Blaauw <blaauw@umich.edu>, Joshua Welch
<welchjd@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

from cell-to-cell differences in the DNA sequence itself, but
in which portions of the DNA sequence (genes) are used
(expressed) in each cell. The central dogma of molecular
biology states that genes are first transcribed into messenger RNAs (mRNAs) and these mRNAs are then translated
into proteins, which carry out biochemical functions. The
expression level of a gene in a cell can thus be quantified by
the number of mRNA molecules present in the cell. Therefore, understanding cellular development requires modeling
how mRNA expression changes over time. Such models are
crucial for numerous areas of biology and medicine, such
as neuroscience, cancer research, and regenerative stem-cell
therapies.
We are interested in the following problem that arises in
the context of modeling cellular gene expression changes.
Each sample (cell), indexed by i, is represented by a vector
Xi (t) ∈ Rd parametrized by time t. The trajectory Xi (t) is
governed by some differential equation plus random noise.
However, for each i, only the vector xi := Xi (ti ) is observed at some unknown time ti . Our goal is two-fold:
recover the latent time ti for each sample and predict future
states, i.e., Xi (t) for t > ti .
This unusual observation model stems from the limitations
of single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), the predominant experimental technology for measuring gene expression. The scRNA-seq technology (Tang et al., 2009) counts
the number of mRNA sequences expressed within a set of
individual cells, ultimately yielding a matrix of expression
levels for 20, 000 genes across 104 − 106 cells. However,
measurement destroys the cell, so scRNA-seq gives only one
single static snapshot of each cell at some moment in time.
Second, the process of cell development is asynchronous–
each cell takes a different amount of time to develop, so at a
given moment, cells in a population will be at different developmental stages. An additional challenge is that a single
starting cell type often bifurcates into multiple distinct cell
types, so that cell-type-specific dynamics emerge over time.
Our key insight is that knowledge about the biochemical
steps required for gene expression can serve as a regularization or constraint for this otherwise ill-posed problem.
By partially specifying the form of a differential equation
describing the data generation process, we can simultaneously recover the unknown times and predict future states

