Inductive Biases and Variable Creation in Self-Attention Mechanisms
Benjamin L. Edelman 1 Surbhi Goel 2 Sham Kakade 1 Cyril Zhang 2

Abstract
Self-attention, an architectural motif designed
to model long-range interactions in sequential
data, has driven numerous recent breakthroughs
in natural language processing and beyond. This
work provides a theoretical analysis of the inductive biases of self-attention modules. Our
focus is to rigorously establish which functions and long-range dependencies self-attention
blocks prefer to represent. Our main result shows
that bounded-norm Transformer networks “create sparse variables”: a single self-attention head
can represent a sparse function of the input sequence, with sample complexity scaling only
logarithmically with the context length. To support our analysis, we present synthetic experiments to probe the sample complexity of learning
sparse Boolean functions with Transformers.

1. Introduction
Self-attention mechanisms have comprised an era-defining
cornerstone of deep learning in recent years, appearing
ubiquitously in empirical breakthroughs in generative sequence modeling and unsupervised representation learning.
Starting with natural language (Vaswani et al., 2017), selfattention has enjoyed surprising empirical successes in numerous and diverse modalities of data. In many of these
settings, self-attention has supplanted traditional recurrent
and convolutional architectures, which are understood to
incorporate inductive biases about temporal and translational invariances in the data. Self-attention models discard
these functional forms, in favor of directly and globally
modeling long-range interactions within the input context.
The proliferation of self-attention raises a fundamental
question about its inductive biases: which functions do selfattention networks prefer to represent? Various intuitions
1

Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Microsoft Research, New York, NY, USA.
Correspondence to: Cyril Zhang <cyrilzhang@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

and empirics inform the design of these architectures, but
formal statistical abstractions and analyses are missing in
this space. To this end, this work initiates an analysis of the
statistical foundations of self-attention.
We identify an inductive bias for self-attention, for which
we coin the term sparse variable creation: a bounded-norm
self-attention head learns a sparse function (which only depends on a small subset of input coordinates, such as a
constant-fan-in gate in a Boolean circuit) of a length-T context, with sample complexity scaling as log(T ). The main
technical novelty in this work is a covering number-based
capacity bound for attention mechanisms (including Transformer heads, as well as related and future architectures),
implying norm-based generalization bounds. This is accompanied by a matching representational result, showing
that bounded-norm self-attention heads are indeed capable
of representing s-sparse functions with weight norms 2O(s)
(or poly(s), for symmetric sparse functions). This provides
a theoretical account for why attention models can learn
long-range dependencies without overfitting.
Finally, we conduct synthetic experiments to probe the
sample efficiency of learning sparse interactions with selfattention. We train Transformer models to identify sparse
Boolean functions with randomly chosen indices, and corroborate the sample complexity scaling law predicted by
the theory. A variant of this experiment (with i.i.d. samples) reveals a computational mystery, beyond the scope of
our current statistical analysis: we find that Transformers
can successfully learn the “hardest” (in the sense of SQdimension) s-sparse functions: the XOR (parity) functions.
1.1. Related work
The direct precursors to modern self-attention architectures
were recurrent and convolutional networks augmented with
attention mechanisms (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Luong et al.,
2015; Xu et al., 2015). Landmark work by Vaswani
et al. (2017) demonstrated significantly improvements in
machine translation via a pure self-attention architecture;
autoregressive language models (Liu et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2018; 2019; Brown et al., 2020), and selfsupervised representation learning via masked language
modeling (Devlin et al., 2018) followed shortly.

