Interactive Correlation Clustering with Existential Cluster Constraints

Rico Angell 1 Nicholas Monath 2 Nishant Yadav 1 Andrew McCallum 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of clustering with user
feedback. Existing methods express constraints
about the input data points, most commonly
through must-link and cannot-link constraints on
data point pairs. In this paper, we introduce existential cluster constraints: a new form of feedback
where users indicate the features of desired clusters. Specifically, users make statements about
the existence of a cluster having (and not having)
particular features. Our approach has multiple advantages: (1) constraints on clusters can express
user intent more efficiently than point pairs; (2)
in cases where the users’ mental model is of the
desired clusters, it is more natural for users to
express cluster-wise preferences; (3) it functions
even when privacy restrictions prohibit users from
seeing raw data. In addition to introducing existential cluster constraints, we provide an inference
algorithm for incorporating our constraints into
the output clustering. Finally, we demonstrate empirically that our proposed framework facilitates
more accurate clustering with dramatically fewer
user feedback inputs.

1. Introduction
Real-world deployed machine learning systems will inevitably be imperfect despite ever growing labeled training data and model sizes. Machine learning models will
encounter novel inputs and patterns and noise unseen at
training which will lead to incorrect predictions. This lack
of precision is amplified in applications where training data
is limited or the objective is misaligned with the task. Fortunately, human users interacting with machine learning
systems over time have the ability to provide feedback to
correct the model outputs and thus improve the precision
and safety of the system.
1

Manning College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Rico Angell <rangell@cs.umass.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Techniques and approaches for gathering, representing, and
utilizing human feedback have been developed for tasks in
both supervised and unsupervised machine learning. For
classification, human-in-the-loop active labeling techniques
have been employed to gather labels for problematic inputs
and fine-tune the model (Settles, 2009). Weak supervision
enables noisy label gathering by allowing users to write
labeling rules for data where labeled data is scarce (Ratner
et al., 2017). Integrating human feedback about relevant
features instead of input example labels into classification
models has been shown useful (Chang et al., 2007; Druck
et al., 2009; Liang et al., 2009; Ganchev et al., 2010; Dasgupta et al., 2018). Human preferences about agent actions in complicated environments have been integrated into
reinforcement learning systems to improve policy learning (Christiano et al., 2017; Griffith et al., 2013). Tasks with
difficult to define objectives, such as learning to summarize
text (Stiennon et al., 2020), have been shown to benefit from
human feedback. Interactive models have been used for applications such as knowledge base construction (Kratzwald
et al., 2020) and entity resolution (Kobren et al., 2019). Human user feedback has also been used to correct both flat
and hierarchical clusterings (Balcan & Blum, 2008; Davidson & Basu, 2009; Vikram & Dasgupta, 2016; Mazumdar
& Saha, 2017; Bibi et al., 2019; Nie et al., 2021).
Clustering is an area of machine learning that could particularly benefit from human feedback. Since clustering
is often unsupervised and used for discovery of entities,
patterns, and groups, it generally needs additional input
or side information to guide predictions. In past work on
clustering with human feedback, users interact with the
predicted clustering and provide feedback in the form of
pairwise point constraints (Wagstaff & Cardie, 2000), relative comparisons among data points (Frome et al., 2007),
and cluster sizes (Xu et al., 2009). Existing approaches
either directly integrate this feedback into existing clustering frameworks (Wagstaff et al., 2001; Shental et al., 2004;
Klein et al., 2002) or adapt the similarity measure of the
data to produce a more accurate predicted clustering (Kulis
et al., 2009; Lu & Carreira-Perpinan, 2008; Li et al., 2008;
2009; Xing et al., 2002).
In this paper, we introduce a novel feedback mechanism
for clustering in which users make statements about the
features of desired clusters. More specifically, human users

