Multicoated Supermasks Enhance Hidden Networks

Yasuyuki Okoshi * 1 Ángel López Garcı́a-Arias * 1 Kazutoshi Hirose 1 Kota Ando 1 Kazushi Kawamura 1
Thiem Van Chu 1 Masato Motomura 1 Jaehoon Yu * 1

Abstract
Hidden Networks (Ramanujan et al., 2020)
showed the possibility of finding accurate subnetworks within a randomly weighted neural network by training a connectivity mask, referred
to as supermask. We show that the supermask
stops improving even though gradients are not
zero, thus underutilizing backpropagated information. To address this issue, we propose a
method that extends Hidden Networks by training
an overlay of multiple hierarchical supermasks—
a Multicoated Supermask. This method shows
that using multiple supermasks for a single task
achieves higher accuracy without additional training cost. Experiments on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet show that Multicoated Supermasks enhance the tradeoff between accuracy and model
size. A ResNet-101 using a 7-coated supermask
outperforms its Hidden Networks counterpart by
4%, matching the accuracy of a dense ResNet-50
while being an order of magnitude smaller.
Code available at: https://github.com/
yasu0001/multicoated-supermasks

1. Introduction
Since the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin,
2019) showed that overparametrized dense networks contain
a subnetwork as effective as the original, multiple studies
have followed up on its analysis to deepen the understanding
of neural network connectivity pruning. One of the most significant line of follow-up studies found that, not only could
these subnetworks be identified in the early stages of the
training phase (You et al., 2020), but even before training,
at initialization time (Lee et al., 2019; 2020; Wang et al.,
*

1
Equal contribution
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan.
Correspondence to:
Yasuyuki Okoshi
<okoshi.yasuyuki@artic.iir.titech.ac.jp>,
Ángel
López
Garcı́a-Arias <lopez@artic.iir.titech.ac.jp>, Jaehoon Yu
<yu.jaehoon@artic.iir.titech.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2020a;b; Tanaka et al., 2020; Hayou et al., 2021; Frankle
et al., 2021; Sreenivasan et al., 2022b).
This line of research took a leap forward when Zhou et
al. (2019) discovered that winning tickets can be found just
by pruning, without the need of any weight training. In this
ablation study, which clarifies the role of each component
composing winning tickets, Zhou et al. demonstrate the existence of binary masks—supermasks—that, when applied
to a randomly initialized network, uncover a subnetwork
that achieves high accuracy without the need of ever updating weights. The discovery that weights do not need to be
learned, which has come to be known as the Strong Lottery
Ticket Hypothesis, broke common sense regarding neural
network training. Hidden Networks (Ramanujan et al., 2020)
further refined the idea of supermasks with an algorithm
for learning a supermask (edge-popup), thus removing
the stochasticity from the algorithm proposed by Zhou et al.
This approach achieved an inference accuracy comparable
to that of a dense network. A following series of papers provided theoretical ground to this phenomenon by analyzing
the bounds of necessary overparametrization (Malach et al.,
2020; Pensia et al., 2020; Orseau et al., 2020) in addition to
showing the robustness of these subnetworks to binarization
(Diffenderfer & Kailkhura, 2021; Sreenivasan et al., 2022a).
Supermasks have drawn attention to the intriguing fact that
winning tickets are present in randomly initialized neural
networks from the beginning. But that is not its only virtue,
as they also offer a fresh point of view for the deployment
of neural networks. The most practical feature of Hidden
Networks is that they can be reconstructed from a small
amount of information: unlearned weights are obtained from
a random number generator, and the only data that needs
to be stored are the random seed and a sparse supermask.
These features can be exploited for implementing efficient
inference accelerators on specialized hardware (Hirose et al.,
2022).
There are compression, quantization, and pruning methods
that provide similar advantages, such as pruning connections
based on importance (Han et al., 2015), Deep Compression (Han et al., 2016), and coreset-based neural network
compression (Dubey et al., 2018), but Hidden Networks are
unique in that supermasks handle quantization and pruning

