Discriminator-Weighted Offline Imitation Learning
from Suboptimal Demonstrations

Haoran Xu 1 Xianyuan Zhan 2 Honglei Yin 1 Huiling Qin 1

Abstract
We study the problem of offline Imitation Learning (IL) where an agent aims to learn an optimal expert behavior policy without additional online environment interactions. Instead, the agent
is provided with a supplementary offline dataset
from suboptimal behaviors. Prior works that address this problem either require that expert data
occupies the majority proportion of the offline
dataset, or need to learn a reward function and
perform offline reinforcement learning (RL) afterwards. In this paper, we aim to address the problem without additional steps of reward learning
and offline RL training for the case when demonstrations contain a large proportion of suboptimal
data. Built upon behavioral cloning (BC), we introduce an additional discriminator to distinguish
expert and non-expert data. We propose a cooperation framework to boost the learning of both
tasks, Based on this framework, we design a new
IL algorithm, where the outputs of discriminator
serve as the weights of the BC loss. Experimental
results show that our proposed algorithm achieves
higher returns and faster training speed compared to baseline algorithms. Code is available at
https://github.com/ryanxhr/DWBC.

1. Introduction
The recent success of reinforcement learning (RL) in many
domains showcases the great potential of applying this family of learning methods to real-world applications. A key
prerequisite for RL is to design a reward function that specifies what kind of agent behavior is preferred. However, in
many real-world applications, designing a reward function
1
JD Technology, Beijing, China 2 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Haoran Xu <ryanxhr@gmail.com>, Xianyuan Zhan
<zhanxianyuan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

is prohibitively difficult (Ng et al., 1999; Irpan, 2018). By
contrast, imitation learning (IL) provides a much easier way
to leverage the reward function implicitly from the collected
demonstrations and has achieved great success in many sequential decision making problems (Pomerleau, 1989; Ng
& Russell, 2000; Ho & Ermon, 2016).
However, popular IL methods such as behavioral cloning
(BC) (Pomerleau, 1989) and generative adversarial imitation
learning (GAIL) (Ho & Ermon, 2016) assume the expert
demonstration is optimal. Unfortunately, it is often difficult
to obtain sufficient optimal demonstrations for many realworld tasks, because human experts often make mistakes
due to various reasons, such as the difficulty of the task,
partial observability of the environment, or the presence of
distraction. Given such noisy expert demonstrations, which
contain records of both optimal and non-optimal behaviors,
BC and GAIL all fail to imitate the optimal policy (Wu et al.,
2019a; Ma, 2020). Current methods that deal with suboptimal demonstrations either require additional labels, which
can be done explicitly by annotating each demonstration
with confidence scores by human experts (Wu et al., 2019a),
or implicitly by ranking noisy demonstrations according
to their relative performance through interacting with the
environment (Brown et al., 2019; 2020; Zhang et al., 2021).
However, human annotation and environment interaction
are laborious and expensive in real-world settings, such as
in medicine, healthcare, and industrial processes.
In this work, we investigate a pure offline learning setting
where the agent has access to neither the expert nor the
environment for additional information. The agent, instead,
has only access to a small pre-collected dataset sampled
from the expert and a large batch offline dataset sampled
from one or multiple behavior policies that could be highly
sub-optimal. This strictly offline imitation learning problem
arises in many real-world problems, where environment interactions and expert annotations are costly. Prior works
that address the problem are based on variants of BC or
inverse RL. Sasaki & Yamashina (2021) reuses another policy learned by BC as the weight of original BC objective.
However, this requires that expert data occupy the majority
proportion of the offline dataset, otherwise the policy will
be misguided to imitate the suboptimal data. Zolna et al.

