On Finite-Sample Identifiability of Contrastive Learning-Based Nonlinear
Independent Component Analysis

Qi Lyu 1 Xiao Fu 1

Abstract
Nonlinear independent component analysis
(nICA) aims at recovering statistically independent latent components that are mixed by unknown nonlinear functions. Central to nICA is
the identifiability of the latent components, which
had been elusive until very recently. Specifically,
Hyvärinen et al. have shown that the nonlinearly
mixed latent components are identifiable (up to
often inconsequential ambiguities) under a generalized contrastive learning (GCL) formulation,
given that the latent components are independent
conditioned on a certain auxiliary variable. The
GCL-based identifiability of nICA is elegant, and
establishes interesting connections between nICA
and popular unsupervised/self-supervised learning paradigms in representation learning, causal
learning, and factor disentanglement. However,
existing identifiability analyses of nICA all build
upon an unlimited sample assumption and the
use of ideal universal function learners—which
creates a non-negligible gap between theory and
practice. Closing the gap is a nontrivial challenge,
as there is a lack of established “textbook” routine
for finite sample analysis of such unsupervised
problems. This work puts forth a finite-sample
identifiability analysis of GCL-based nICA. Our
analytical framework judiciously combines the
properties of the GCL loss function, statistical
generalization analysis, and numerical differentiation. Our framework also takes the learning
function’s approximation error into consideration,
and reveals an intuitive trade-off between the complexity and expressiveness of the employed function learner. Numerical experiments are used to
validate the theorems.
1 School of EECS, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, United States.
Correspondence to: Xiao Fu
<xiao.fu@oregonstate.edu>, Qi Lyu <lyuqi@oregonstate.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Independent component analysis (ICA) has been an indispensable unsupervised learning tool across multiple domains. Theory and methods have been developed for ICA
since the 1990s; see, e.g., (Comon, 1994). The classic
ICA guarantees to identify linearly mixed statistically independent latent components in an unsupervised fashion.
The ICA technique has advanced many tasks such as blind
speech/audio separation and brain signal denoising. Since
the late 1990s, attempts have been made towards generalizing the classic linear mixture model (LMM)-based ICA to
nonlinear mixture models, e.g., in (Hyvarinen, 1999; Taleb
& Jutten, 1999; Ziehe et al., 2003; Oja, 1997), driven by the
ubiquity of nonlinearity in real-world data.
Formally, the nonlinear independent component analysis
(nICA) problem deals with scenarios where statistically
independent latent components are mixed by unknown nonlinear functions. The nICA technique aims at recovering
the latent components up to certain (inconsequential) ambiguities. The nICA task finds many connections to modern
machine learning and unsupervised representation learning problems. For example, a number of works used the
nICA perspective to develop deep neural feature extractors
for latent factor disentanglement (Bengio et al., 2013; Locatello et al., 2019; Higgins et al., 2017; Kim & Mnih, 2018;
Chen et al., 2018). The disentanglement perspective was
further connected to causal factor learning (Peters et al.,
2017; Zhang & Hyvärinen, 2009; Monti et al., 2020). Furthermore, nICA and its close relatives were also used to
understand popular neural representation learning frameworks such as contrastive learning (Hyvarinen & Morioka,
2016; 2017; Hyvarinen et al., 2019), variational autoencoder (VAE) (Khemakhem et al., 2020) and data-augmented
self-supervised learning (Zimmermann et al., 2021). For
all these tasks, nICA offers theory-driven perspectives to
understand their successes and sometimes to improve their
learning methods. In particular, the identifiability of the latent independent components under nICA models can often
provide useful insights into these aspects.
The (n)ICA identifiability problem is concerned with the
conditions and learning criteria under which one can reverse the unknown mixing process to recover the latent

