Cliff Diving: Exploring Reward Surfaces in Reinforcement Learning
Environments
Ryan Sullivan * 1 2 J K Terry * 1 2 Benjamin Black * 1 2 John P. Dickerson 2

Abstract
Visualizing optimization landscapes has led to
many fundamental insights in numeric optimization, and novel improvements to optimization
techniques. However, visualizations of the objective that reinforcement learning optimizes (the
“reward surface”) have only ever been generated
for a small number of narrow contexts. This work
presents reward surfaces and related visualizations of 27 of the most widely used reinforcement learning environments in Gym for the first
time. We also explore reward surfaces in the policy gradient direction and show for the first time
that many popular reinforcement learning environments have frequent “cliffs” (sudden large drops
in expected return). We demonstrate that A2C
often “dives off” these cliffs into low reward regions of the parameter space while PPO avoids
them, confirming a popular intuition for PPO’s improved performance over previous methods. We
additionally introduce a highly extensible library
that allows researchers to easily generate these
visualizations in the future. Our findings provide
new intuition to explain the successes and failures
of modern RL methods, and our visualizations
concretely characterize several failure modes of
reinforcement learning agents in novel ways.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning typically attempts to optimize the
expected discounted return of an agent’s policy. Policy gradient methods represent the policy with a neural network,
and learn this policy by approximating the gradient of the
reinforcement learning objective over policy network parameters. This means that that the benefits and challenges of
*

Equal contribution 1 Swarm Labs 2 Department of Computer
Science, University of Maryland, College Park. Correspondence
to: Ryan Sullivan <rsulliumd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Reward surface for the Solaris Atari environment.

deep learning apply to policy gradient methods. However,
unlike most deep learning tasks, reinforcement learning
is notoriously unstable, and agents often experience sharp
drops in reward during training. Studying the reward surface
and how RL algorithms interact with it is critical to understanding the successes and failures of deep reinforcement
learning.
A “reward surface” is the high dimensional surface of the
reinforcement learning objective (the cumulative expected
reward when following a given policy in an environment)
over the policy network parameter space. Reward surfaces
have been used to study specific questions in limited contexts (Ilyas et al., 2020) but have never been generated for a
wide variety of environments. Loss landscapes have been
used in computer vision to understand the effect that residual connections have on computer vision tasks (Li et al.,
2018), and we expect that visualizations of reward surfaces
could be similarly valuable for understanding techniques
in reinforcement learning. As a first step toward this goal,
we produce visualizations of the reward surfaces for 27 of
the most popular reinforcement learning environments, and
identify new patterns in these surfaces for the first time.
We see common traits of environments that are generally
perceived to be "easy" for reinforcement learning to solve,
and visual explanations of failure modes in sparse reward

