SkexGen: Autoregressive Generation of CAD Construction
Sequences with Disentangled Codebooks

Xiang Xu 1 Karl D.D. Willis 2 Joseph G. Lambourne 2
Chin-Yi Cheng 2 Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman 2 Yasutaka Furukawa 1

Abstract
We present SkexGen, a novel autoregressive generative model for computer-aided design (CAD)
construction sequences containing sketch-andextrude modeling operations. Our model utilizes
distinct Transformer architectures to encode topological, geometric, and extrusion variations of
construction sequences into disentangled codebooks. Autoregressive Transformer decoders generate CAD construction sequences sharing certain properties specified by the codebook vectors.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our disentangled codebook representation generates diverse and high-quality CAD models, enhances
user control, and enables efficient exploration of
the design space. The code is available at https:
//samxuxiang.github.io/skexgen.

1. Introduction
Professional designers generate a diverse set of computer
aided design (CAD) models with topological or geometric
variations while achieving a design goal. In early concept
design, designers explore shapes with aesthetic and functional advantages. In mechanical design, designers optimize
the physical properties of a part to maximize strength while
minimizing weight and manufacturing cost.
Training a computational agent with the capabilities of
a professional designer is an extremely challenging machine learning task. Designers traditionally rely on parametric CAD models that allow one to correct small mistakes (Camba et al., 2016), optimize geometric properties (Grasel et al., 2004), and generate a product family
by altering just a few parameters (Chakrabarti et al., 2011;
Maher et al., 1996). However, a parametric CAD model
1

2

Simon Fraser University, Canada Autodesk Research. Correspondence to: Xiang Xu <xuxiangx@sfu.ca>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

is brittle and fails over large design changes such as topological modifications. Furthermore, the construction of a
parametric CAD model itself requires the expertise of a
professional designer.
With the advance of deep learning, neural networks empower a family of exciting new methodologies (Wu et al.,
2021; Willis et al., 2021a; Ganin et al., 2021) towards an
intelligent system capable of diverse generation while understanding a design goal and allowing user control. This
paper pushes the frontier of the state-of-the-art by introducing “SkexGen”, a sketch-and-extrude generative model
for CAD construction sequences that enhances variations
in design generation while enabling effective control and
exploration of the design space.
SkexGen is a novel autoregressive generative model that
uses discrete codebooks (van den Oord et al., 2017) for
CAD model generation. We employ a sketch-and-extrude
modeling language to describe CAD construction sequences,
where a sketch operation creates 2D primitives and an extrude operation lifts and combines them into 3D. Transformer encoders learn a disentangled latent representation
as three codebooks, capturing topological, geometric, and
extrusion variations. Given codebook vectors, autoregressive Transformer decoders generate sketch-and-extrude construction sequences, which are processed into a CAD model.
We evaluate SkexGen on a large-scale sketch-and-extrude
dataset (Wu et al., 2021). Qualitative and quantitative evaluations against multiple baselines and state-of-the-art methods
demonstrate that our method generates more realistic and
diverse CAD models, while allowing effective control and
efficient exploration of the design space not possible with
prior approaches. We make the following contributions.
• SkexGen architecture that autoregressively generates high
quality and diverse CAD construction sequences.
• Disentangled codebooks, which encode topological, geometric, and extrusion variations of construction sequences,
enabling effective control and exploration of designs.
• Extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations on public benchmarks, demonstrating state-of-the-art performance.

