Deep Reference Priors: What is the best way to pretrain a model?

Yansong Gao * 1 Rahul Ramesh * 2 Pratik Chaudhari 3

Abstract
What is the best way to exploit extra data—be it
unlabeled data from the same task, or labeled data
from a related task—to learn a given task? This
paper formalizes the question using the theory
of reference priors. Reference priors are objective, uninformative Bayesian priors that maximize
the mutual information between the task and the
weights of the model. Such priors enable the
task to maximally affect the Bayesian posterior,
e.g., reference priors depend upon the number
of samples available for learning the task and
for very small sample sizes, the prior puts more
probability mass on low-complexity models in
the hypothesis space. This paper presents the first
demonstration of reference priors for mediumscale deep networks and image-based data. We
develop generalizations of reference priors and
demonstrate applications to two problems. First,
by using unlabeled data to compute the reference
prior, we develop new Bayesian semi-supervised
learning methods that remain effective even with
very few samples per class. Second, by using labeled data from the source task to compute the
reference prior, we develop a new pretraining
method for transfer learning that allows data from
the target task to maximally affect the Bayesian
posterior. Empirical validation of these methods is conducted on image classification datasets.
Code is available at https://github.com/grasplyrl/deep reference priors.

*

Equal contribution 1 Applied Mathematics and Computational Sciences, University of Pennsylvania 2 Computer and
Information Science, University of Pennsylvania 3 Electrical
and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania. Correspondence to: Yansong Gao <gaoyans@sas.upenn.edu>,
Rahul Ramesh <rahulram@seas.upenn.edu>, Pratik Chaudhari
<pratikac@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Exploiting extra data, e.g., labeled data from a related task,
or unlabeled data from the same task, is a powerful way
of reducing the number of training data required to learn a
given task. This idea lies at the heart of burgeoning fields
like transfer, meta-, semi- and self-supervised learning, and
these fields have developed a wide variety of methods to
incorporate such extra information. To give a few examples, methods for transfer learning fine-tune a representation
that was pretrained on labeled data from another—ideally
related—task. Methods for semi-supervised learning pretrain the representation using unlabeled data, which may
come from the same task or from other related tasks, before
using the labeled data. In this paper, we ask the question:
what is the best way to exploit extra data for learning a
task? In other words, if we have some pool of data—be it
labeled or unlabeled, from the same task, or from another
task—what is the optimal way to pretrain a representation?
As posed, the answer to the question above depends upon
the downstream task that we seek to solve. But we can ask
a more reasonable question by recognizing that a pretrained
representation can be thought of as a Bayesian prior (or a
sample from it). Fundamentally, a prior restricts the set
of models that can be fitted upon the task. So we could
instead ask: how to best use the extra data to restrict the set
of models that we could fit on the desired task. This paper
formalizes the question using the concept of reference priors
and makes the following contributions.

(1) We formalize the problem of “how to best pretrain a
model” using the theory of reference priors, which are objective, uninformative Bayesian priors computed by maximizing the mutual information between the task and the weights.
We show how these priors maximize the KL-divergence between the posterior computed from the task and the prior,
on average over the distribution of the unknown future data.
This allows the samples from the task to maximally influence the posterior. We discuss how reference priors are
supported on a discrete set of atoms in the weight space. We
develop a method to compute reference priors for deep
networks. To our knowledge, this is the first instantiation of reference priors for deep networks that preserves
their characteristic discrete nature.

