Dual Perspective of Label-Specific Feature Learning
for Multi-Label Classification
Jun-Yi Hang 1 2 Min-Ling Zhang 1 2

Abstract
Label-specific features serve as an effective strategy to facilitate multi-label classification, which
account for the distinct discriminative properties of each class label via tailoring its own features. Existing approaches implement this strategy in a quite straightforward way, i.e. finding the most pertinent and discriminative features for each class label and directly inducing
classifiers on constructed label-specific features.
In this paper, we propose a dual perspective
for label-specific feature learning, where labelspecific discriminative properties are considered
by identifying each label’s own non-informative
features and making the discrimination process
immutable to variations of these features. To instantiate it, we present a perturbation-based approach D ELA to provide classifiers with labelspecific immutability on simultaneously identified non-informative features, which is optimized
towards a probabilistically-relaxed expected risk
minimization problem. Comprehensive experiments on 10 benchmark data sets show that our
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art counterparts.

1. Introduction
Multi-label classification allows to learn from instances associated with multiple labels simultaneously (Zhang & Zhou,
2014; Liu et al., 2021). Nowadays, researches on multi-label
classification have been greatly driven by real-world applications, where multi-semantic objects widely exist, such
as image annotation (You et al., 2020), text categorization
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2 Key Laboratory of Computer
Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China. Correspondence to: Min-Ling Zhang
<zhangml@seu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Xun et al., 2020), and bioinformatics analysis (Chen et al.,
2017), etc.
The most straightforward strategy for dealing with multilabel data is to exploit the identical representation of an
instance in inducing classification models. However, this
strategy might be suboptimal as it fails to consider that each
class label may possess its own discriminative properties.
With the ability to model distinct characteristics of each
class label, label-specific features have become a promising
strategy to facilitate the discrimination of each class label by
tailoring its own features (Zhang & Wu, 2015; Huang et al.,
2016b; Zhang et al., 2018; Jia et al., 2020; Yu & Zhang,
2021).
As a seminal work, LIFT (Zhang & Wu, 2015) firstly performs clustering analysis on positive and negative instances
of each class label, and then heuristically constructs labelspecific features via prototype-based feature transformation.
While LLSF (Huang et al., 2015) employs feature selection
to obtain the most pertinent feature subset for each class
label under a lasso-based framework. Recent works (Hang
& Zhang, 2021; Hang et al., 2022) resort to the powerful
representation learning capability of deep neural networks
to learn label-specific features in an end-to-end manner. It
is worth noting that existing approaches focus on finding
the most pertinent and discriminative features for each class
label and directly inducing classifiers on constructed labelspecific features.
In this paper, we attack the problem of label-specific feature learning from a dual perspective. Instead of finding
the most pertinent and discriminative features for each class
label as existing approaches do, we attempt to identify each
label’s own non-informative features and endow classifiers
with immutability on these identified features. For example,
to discriminate plane and non-plane images, existing approaches induce classifier on the most pertinent features, e.g.
shape-based features. Instead, we aim to make the discrimination process immutable to variations of non-informative
features, e.g. color-based features. We hypothesize that if
non-informative features specific to each class label could
be identified and their influence on the discrimination process could be eliminated, a more effective approach to learn
from multi-label data could be achieved.

