Provable Stochastic Optimization for Global Contrastive Learning:
Small Batch Does Not Harm Performance
Zhuoning Yuan 1 Yuexin Wu 2 Zi-Hao Qiu 3 Xianzhi Du 2 Lijun Zhang 3 Denny Zhou 2 Tianbao Yang 1

Abstract
In this paper, we study contrastive learning from
an optimization perspective, aiming to analyze
and address a fundamental issue of existing contrastive learning methods that either rely on a large
batch size or a large dictionary of feature vectors.
We consider a global objective for contrastive
learning, which contrasts each positive pair with
all negative pairs for an anchor point. From the
optimization perspective, we explain why existing methods such as SimCLR require a large
batch size in order to achieve a satisfactory result. In order to remove such requirement, we propose a memory-efficient Stochastic Optimization
algorithm for solving the Global objective of
Contrastive Learning of Representations, named
SogCLR. We show that its optimization error is
negligible under a reasonable condition after a
sufficient number of iterations or is diminishing
for a slightly different global contrastive objective.
Empirically, we demonstrate that SogCLR with
small batch size (e.g., 256) can achieve similar
performance as SimCLR with large batch size
(e.g., 8192) on self-supervised learning task on
ImageNet-1K. We also attempt to show that the
proposed optimization technique is generic and
can be applied to solving other contrastive losses,
e.g., two-way contrastive losses for bimodal contrastive learning. The proposed method is implemented in our open-sourced library LibAUC
(www.libauc.org).

1. Introduction
Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) for pre-training
deep neural networks, which springs from natural language
processing (Mikolov et al., 2013; Devlin et al., 2018; Lan
1
University of Iowa 2 Google Research 3 Nanjing University.
Correspondence to: Tianbao Yang <tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2019), has emerged to be a popular paradigm in computer vision for learning visual representations (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020c; Liu et al., 2021). A simple
yet effective framework of SSL for learning visual representations is contrastive learning (Chopra et al., 2005; Chen
et al., 2020a), which uses the gradient of a contrastive loss to
update model, aiming to push the similarity scores between
positive pairs (augmented data from the same image) to be
higher than that between negative pairs (augmented data
from different images).
While the great performance of contrastive learning methods
and their alternatives have been demonstrated on popular
benchmarks (e.g., ImageNet), some fundamental problems
of contrastive learning remain unresolved. One such problem is the requirement for large batch size. Unlike supervised learning methods, the performance of SimCLR (Chen
et al., 2020a) decreases as the batch size decreases, and a
satisfactory performance can be only achieved with a large
batch size on natural image datasets (e.g., 8192 for ImageNet). However, in practice, training models with such a
large batch size can be memory-intensive and requires more
computational resources, especially when adopting largescale backbones (e.g., Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021; Zhai et al., 2021)) or taking video sequences as
input (Qian et al., 2021).
To address this issue, some ad-hoc approaches have been investigated. For example, the MoCo method (He et al., 2020)
uses a large dictionary to maintain a set of feature vectors
for constructing negative pairs with data in the mini-batch.
Other approaches choose to get around such issue by optimizing pairwise loss (Grill et al., 2020; Zbontar et al., 2021;
Chen & He, 2021) or other losses (Caron et al., 2020). Nevertheless, the fundamental issue of optimizing a contrastive
loss with a large batch size requirement still exists. This
also occurs in other tasks with a similar contrastive loss, e.g.,
bimodal SSL tasks by optimizing a two-way contrastive loss
(e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)).
In this paper, we aim to address this fundamental problem
from the optimization perspective by considering a global
objective for contrastive learning, providing a rigorous analysis to explain why SimCLR requires a large mini-batch
size, and designing a memory-efficient stochastic algorithm

