Counterfactual Transportability: A Formal Approach

Juan D. Correa 1 Sanghack Lee 2 Elias Bareinboim 3

Abstract
Generalizing causal knowledge across environments is a common challenge shared across many
of the data-driven disciplines, including AI and
ML. Experiments are usually performed in one
environment (e.g., in a lab, on Earth, in a training ground), almost invariably, with the intent of
being used elsewhere (e.g., outside the lab, on
Mars, in the real world), in an environment that
is related but somewhat different than the original
one, where certain conditions and mechanisms are
likely to change. This generalization task has been
studied in the causal inference literature under the
rubric of transportability (Pearl and Bareinboim,
2011). While most transportability works focused
on generalizing associational and interventional
distributions, the generalization of counterfactual
distributions has not been formally studied. In
this paper, we investigate the transportability of
counterfactuals from an arbitrary combination of
observational and experimental distributions coming from disparate domains. Specifically, we introduce a sufficient and necessary graphical condition and develop an efficient, sound, and complete
algorithm for transporting counterfactual quantities across domains in nonparametric settings.
Failure of the algorithm implies the impossibility
of generalizing the target counterfactual from the
available data without further assumptions.

1. Introduction
Counterfactuals form the basis for different notions across
human cognition and decision-making, including credit assignment, regret, responsibility and blame. Counterfactual
relations require retrospective thinking, where one must be
1

Department of Computer Science, Universidad Autónoma de
Manizales, Manizales, Colombia 2 Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea 3 Department
of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Juan D. Correa <jcorrea@autonoma.edu.co>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

able to compare what did happen with what would have
happened under some alternative hypothesis (Pearl, 2000).
Given the impossibility of observing an alternative outcome
once an action is taken, counterfactuals evoke “what if?”
questions which answer can only be approached by imagining hypothetical conditions usually contrary to the factual
evidence. For instance, questions such as “what would be
the death rates had the vaccination started two weeks earlier?” or “given that I arrived late, would I have been on
time had I taken the subway instead of the taxi?” require
us to carry out a mental experiment where we recover some
state of affairs, perform a change in the sequence of events,
and let a hypothetical situation to play out. More generally,
counterfactuals are an important component in the construction of explanations regarding why events occurred the way
they did. For instance, the previous questions could be related to “why did the death rate achieve the number it did?”
or “was it the way of transportation that caused my late
arrival?” (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018)[Ch. 8].
Formally, a structural account of causation provides suitable
semantics for representing counterfactual statements (Pearl,
2000). Each structural causal model (SCM) M models a
generative process and induces a collection of distributions
related to the activities of seeing (observational), acting
(interventional), and imagining (counterfactual), which together form what is known as the ladder of causation (Pearl
& Mackenzie, 2018; Bareinboim et al., 2022). In practice,
the SCM M is usually not fully observable, which leads to
the inferential challenge of using data from one part of the
ladder to make inferences about another. For instance, there
exist a plethora of methods allowing for inferences from observational to experimental (i.e., layers 1 to 2 in the ladder)
(Pearl, 1995; Tian & Pearl, 2003; Shpitser & Pearl, 2006;
Huang & Valtorta, 2006; Bareinboim & Pearl, 2012b; Lee
et al., 2019), and from observational and experimental to
counterfactual distributions (Pearl, 2001; Avin et al., 2005;
Shpitser & Pearl, 2007; Correa et al., 2021).
In practice, obtaining different experimental distributions
for the same population is often highly nontrivial. One of
the key aspects of human cognition is the ability to generalize concepts from one domain to another. The task of
leveraging causal invariances to extrapolate and fuse experimental knowledge across settings has been formally
studied in the causal inference literature under the rubric

