Architecture Agnostic Federated Learning for Neural Networks

Disha Makhija 1 Xing Han 1 Nhat Ho 1 Joydeep Ghosh 1

Abstract
With growing concerns regarding data privacy and
rapid increase in data volume, Federated Learning
(FL) has become an important learning paradigm.
However, jointly learning a deep neural network
model in a FL setting proves to be a non-trivial
task because of the complexities associated with
the neural networks, such as varied architectures
across clients, permutation invariance of the neurons, and presence of non-linear transformations
in each layer. This work introduces a novel framework, Federated Heterogeneous Neural Networks
(FedHeNN), that allows each client to build a
personalised model without enforcing a common
architecture across clients. This allows each client
to optimize with respect to local data and compute
constraints, while still benefiting from the learnings of other (potentially more powerful) clients.
The key idea of FedHeNN is to use the instancelevel representations obtained from peer clients
to guide the simultaneous training on each client.
The extensive experimental results demonstrate
that the FedHeNN framework is capable of learning better performing models on clients in both
the settings of homogeneous and heterogeneous
architectures across clients.

1. Introduction
Distributed machine learning has been an important field of
study for long and is becoming more and more important
with time (Park & Kargupta, 2003). Federated Learning is
a type of distributed machine learning setting that consists
of many end devices or silo organisations (clients) which
have access to the data stored locally and a global server
which can orchestrate the learning without accessing all the
data. With the ever so rapidly growing amount of data and
the concerns around data privacy, federated learning has
1

The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Disha Makhija <disham@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

emerged as a very promising direction, as it allows learning
of a global model using the data present at each client but
without explicitly sharing the data outside the client devices,
thus helping in ensuring data privacy and also reducing the
cost of centralised training and storage.
FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) is the de-facto federated
learning algorithm where each client performs SGD steps
towards training its local model using its own data and compute resources. The client models are then periodically
shared with the server and the server aggregates the client
models to create a global model which is sent back to the
clients. However, the solution obtained from FedAvg has
been shown to diverge in presence of statistical heterogeneity across clients (Li et al., 2020). Over the years several
modifications have been proposed to the original algorithm
addressing different aspects like data heterogeneity, availability of clients for training, modifying the aggregation
mechanism, optimizing communication costs, personalised
client models etc. (Li et al., 2020), (Li et al., 2021b), (Karimireddy et al., 2020), (Eichner et al., 2019), (Smith et al.,
2017a), (Wang et al., 2020a), (Collins et al., 2021). In all of
these methods the global model parameters are obtained by
appropriately aggregating the local model parameters.
Yet in most practical settings where the clients are heterogeneous and differ a lot in their compute resources and data
distributions, these methods may face significant challenges.
Several real-world FL scenarios require training over end devices which have very different hardware. In such cases, for
the above methods, the clients that are incapable of training
large models will never be able to take part in the training
process. Similarly, if the common model architecture is kept
small to accommodate all the clients, some clients will be
under-utilised. These negative effects might become more
prominent in the cross-silo FL setting where the total number of clients is even smaller (typically less than 100). An
illustrative experiment shown in Figure 1 demonstrates the
drop in accuracy of the global methods like FedAvg and
FedProx when a few clients are left out of the training.
In this work, we propose a systematic framework for architecture agnostic federated learning called FedHeNN. This
framework is able to overcome the aforementioned challenges of client heterogeneity by allowing each client to
build a personalised model without any constraint on the

