Random Forest Density Estimation

Hongwei Wen 1 Hanyuan Hang 1

Abstract
We propose a density estimation algorithm called
random forest density estimation (RFDE) based
on random trees where the split of cell is along
the midpoint of the randomly chosen dimension.
By combining the efficient random tree density
estimation (RTDE) and the ensemble procedure,
RFDE can alleviate the problems of boundary
discontinuity suffered by partition-based density
estimations. From the theoretical perspective, we
first prove the fast convergence rates of RFDE if
the density function lies in the Hölder space C 0,α .
Moreover, if the density function resides in the
subspace C 1,α , which contains smoother density
functions, we for the first time manage to explain
the benefits of ensemble learning in density estimation. To be specific, we show that the upper
bound of the ensemble estimator RFDE turns out
to be strictly smaller than the lower bound of
its base estimator RTDE in terms of convergence
rates. In the experiments, we verify the theoretical
results, and show the promising performance of
RFDE on both synthetic and real world datasets.
Moreover, we evaluate our RFDE through the
problem of anomaly detection as a possible application.

1. Introduction
In the field of machine learning, the leverage of feature
density can be found in most tasks. For example, regression and classification problems employ feature density to
enhance the estimation of the label density conditioned on
features (Maldonado et al., 2019; Tumiran & Sivakumar,
2021; Steininger et al., 2021; Silverman, 2018); clustering
and anomaly detection directly use feature density to determine the neighbors or outsiders (Campello et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2020; Corizzo et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2018; Zhao &
1

Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Twente,
Enschede, The Netherlands. Correspondence to: Hongwei Wen
<h.wen@utwente.nl>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Shi, 2019; Emadi & Mazinani, 2018); And for adversarial
attacks and defenses, algorithms always seek the weakness
in feature density to tamper the outcomes (Huang et al.,
2021; Hu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019), etc. Consequently,
the study of density estimation, which targets on estimating
the underlying probability density function of features, has
attracted more and more attention (Bodin et al., 2021; Cui
et al., 2021).
Density estimation assumes the observations are i.i.d. drawn
from the underlying probability density function and constructs an approximated version accordingly. The most
popular and widely-used method is called kernel density
estimation (KDE) (Rosenblatt, 1956; Parzen, 1962). However, KDE has its own drawbacks. That is, the lack of local
adaptivity. In particular, when KDE encounters density functions with different local properties, the performance will be
badly affected. Subsequently, partition-based methods have
been proposed, which construct appropriate partitions of
the input space to better use the local information (Klemelä,
2009; López-Rubio, 2013; Liu & Wong, 2014; Li et al.,
2016). The first and most intuitional idea is the histogram
density estimation (HDE), which quickly comes into vogue
in academy as the basic form of density estimation (Freedman & Diaconis, 1981; Härdle et al., 2012). Although HDE
enjoys sound theoretical properties, the histogram partition
is of low computational efficiency and even corrupts for
high dimension data, which forces researchers to seek treebased algorithms (Ram & Gray, 2011; Criminisi et al., 2011;
Criminisi & Shotton, 2013). Unfortunately, a majority of
tree-based methods fail to gain theoretical support from
the perspective of the statistical learning theory. Moreover,
they suffer from the boundary discontinuity, i.e. the density
estimator is discontinuous at the partition boundary.
To overcome the challenges in density estimation problems,
we propose a tree-based learning method with learning
theory guarantees called random tree density estimation
(RTDE) based on random tree partition (Breiman, 2004;
Biau, 2012). The construction procedure of RTDE starts
with partitioning the feature space into non-overlapping
cells along the midpoint of the randomly-chosen dimension,
which helps separating the local features from area to area.
Then we apply a constant estimator to each cell and obtain
an RTDE estimator. Since the density estimation at each
point is only affected by the samples falling into the cell

