Generative Coarse-Graining of Molecular Conformations
Wujie Wang 1 Minkai Xu 2 3 Chen Cai 4 Benjamin Kurt Miller 5 Tess Smidt 1 Yusu Wang 4 Jian Tang 2 6 7
Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli 1

Abstract
Coarse-graining (CG) of molecular simulations
simplifies the particle representation by grouping selected atoms into pseudo-beads and drastically accelerates simulation. However, such
CG procedure induces information losses, which
makes accurate backmapping, i.e., restoring finegrained (FG) coordinates from CG coordinates, a
long-standing challenge. Inspired by the recent
progress in generative models and equivariant networks, we propose a novel model that rigorously
embeds the vital probabilistic nature and geometric consistency requirements of the backmapping
transformation. Our model encodes the FG uncertainties into an invariant latent space and decodes
them back to FG geometries via equivariant convolutions. To standardize the evaluation of this
domain, we provide three comprehensive benchmarks based on molecular dynamics trajectories.
Experiments show that our approach always recovers more realistic structures and outperforms
existing data-driven methods with a significant
margin.

1. Introduction
Defined as an operation to perform dimension reductions
over continuous distributions, coarse-graining (CG) was
first proposed by Paul Ehrenfest and Tatyana Afanasyeva
in their study of molecular chaos (Ehrenfest & Ehrenfest,
1912). After nearly a century of theoretical developments,
CG has become a powerful technique to simplify many complicated problems in physics. Useful applications of CG
include the renormalization group techniques for critical
phenomena (Kadanoff, 1966; Wilson, 1971) and the usage
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 2 Mila - Québec
AI Institute, Canada 3 Universite de Montréal, Canada 4 University
of California San Diego, USA 5 University of Amsterdam, Netherlands 6 HEC Montréal, Canada 7 CIFAR AI Chair, Canada. Correspondence to: Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli <rafagb.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: An analogical illustration of the tackled generative coarse-graining problem. Top: Image super-resolution
recovers higher resolution portraits1 . Bottom: Generative
CG generates fine-grained molecular structures.
of collective variables to study reaction dynamics (Laio &
Parrinello, 2002). In molecular simulations, CG refers to
the simplification of the particle representation by lumping
groups of original atoms x into individual beads X with
a rule-based CG mapping. CG molecular dynamics (MD)
can significantly speed up computational discovery over
chemical spaces with simpler combination rules (Marrink
et al., 2007; Menichetti et al., 2019); for simulations of large
molecules with hundreds of thousands of atoms such as
biological and artificial polymers, CG MD allows accessing
the long time scales of phenomena like protein folding or
polymer reptation (Levitt & Warshel, 1975; Kremer et al.,
1988). However, such acceleration comes at the cost of
losing fine-grained (FG) atomic details, which are important for studying properties and interactions of atom-level
structures or continuing simulations at FG scale. How to
accurately recover the FG structure x from CG coordinates
X remains a challenging problem.
So far, several methods have been proposed for the backmapping problem based on random projection (Wassenaar et al.,
2014) or geometric rules (Shih et al., 2007). However, these
methods usually can only produce poor initial geometries
which require subsequent restraining molecular dynamics
(Shih et al., 2007; Brocos et al., 2012), incurring considerable computational cost and large deviation from the original
1
Portraits of P. Ehrenfest and T. Afanasyeva, taken from Dibner
Library of the History of Science and Technology.

