Adaptive Second Order Coresets for Data-efficient Machine Learning

Omead Pooladzandi 1 David Davini 2 Baharan Mirzasoleiman 2

Abstract
Training machine learning models on massive
datasets incurs substantial computational costs.
To alleviate such costs, there has been a sustained
effort to develop data-efficient training methods
that can carefully select subsets of the training
examples that generalize on par with the full training data. However, existing methods are limited
in providing theoretical guarantees for the quality of the models trained on the extracted subsets,
and may perform poorly in practice. We propose
A DAC ORE, a method that leverages the geometry of the data to extract subsets of the training
examples for efficient machine learning. The key
idea behind our method is to dynamically approximate the curvature of the loss function via an
exponentially-averaged estimate of the Hessian to
select weighted subsets (coresets) that provide a
close approximation of the full gradient preconditioned with the Hessian. We prove rigorous
guarantees for the convergence of various first
and second-order methods applied to the subsets
chosen by A DAC ORE. Our extensive experiments
show that A DAC ORE extracts coresets with higher
quality compared to baselines and speeds up training of convex and non-convex machine learning
models, such as logistic regression and neural networks, by over 2.9x over the full data and 4.5x
over random subsets1 .

1. Introduction
Large datasets have been crucial for the success of modern
machine learning models. Learning from massive datasets,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Omead Pooladzandi
<opooladz@ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/
opooladz/AdaCore

however, incurs substantial computational costs and becomes very challenging (Asi & Duchi, 2019; Strubell et al.,
2019; Schwartz et al., 2019). Crucially, not all data points
are equally important for learning (Birodkar et al., 2019;
Katharopoulos & Fleuret, 2018; Toneva et al., 2018). While
several examples can be excluded from training without
harming the accuracy of the final model (Birodkar et al.,
2019; Toneva et al., 2018), other points need to be trained on
many times to be learned (Birodkar et al., 2019). To improve
scalability of machine learning, it is essential to theoretically
understand and quantify the value of different data points on
training and optimization. This allows identifying examples
that contribute the most to learning and safely excluding
those that are redundant or non-informative.
To find essential data points, recent empirical studies used
heuristics such as the fully trained or a smaller proxy
model’s uncertainty (entropy of predicted class probabilities) (Coleman et al., 2020), or forgetting events (Toneva
et al., 2018) to identify examples that frequently transition
from being classified correctly to incorrectly. Others employ
either the gradient norm (Alain et al., 2015; Katharopoulos
& Fleuret, 2018) or the loss (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2015;
Schaul et al., 2015) to sample important points that reduce
variance of stochastic optimization methods. Such methods,
however, do not provide any theoretical guarantee for the
quality of the trained model on the extracted examples.
Quantifying the importance of different data points without training a model to convergence is very challenging.
First, the value of each example cannot be measured without updating the model parameters and measuring the loss
or accuracy. Second, as the effect of different data points
changes throughout training, their value cannot be precisely
measured before training converges. Third, to eliminate
redundancies, one needs to look at the importance of individual data points as well as the higher-order interactions
between data points. Finally, one needs to provide theoretical guarantees for the performance and convergence of the
model trained on the extracted data points.
Here, we focus on finding data points that contribute the
most to learning and automatically excluding redundancies
while training a model. A practical and effective approach
is to carefully select a small subset of training examples
that closely approximate the full gradient, i.e., the sum of

