Efficient Learning for AlphaZero via Path Consistency

Dengwei Zhao 1 Shikui Tu 1 Lei Xu 1

Abstract
In recent years, deep reinforcement learning have
made great breakthroughs on board games. Still,
most of the works require huge computational
resources for a large scale of environmental interactions or self-play for the games. This paper
aims at building powerful models under a limited
amount of self-plays which can be utilized by a
human throughout the lifetime. We proposes a
learning algorithm built on AlphaZero, with its
path searching regularised by a path consistency
(PC) optimality, i.e., values on one optimal search
path should be identical. Thus, the algorithm is
shortly named PCZero. In implementation, historical trajectory and scouted search paths by MCTS
makes a good balance between exploration and
exploitation, which enhances the generalization
ability effectively. PCZero obtains 94.1% winning rate against the champion of Hex Computer
Olympiad in 2015 on 13 × 13 Hex, much higher
than 84.3% by AlphaZero. The models consume
only 900K self-play games, about the amount humans can study in a lifetime. The improvements
by PCZero have been also generalized to Othello and Gomoku. Experiments also demonstrate
the efficiency of PCZero under offline learning
setting.

1. Introduction
Combining heuristic search with the deep neural network
has been a key to success in Reinforcement Learning (RL)
(Silver et al., 2016; 2017; 2018). Many efforts have been
made to sequential decision-making problems following
such an idea. However, tree search is a slow reasoning
process and needs heuristic as a counselor to narrow the
search space (Anthony et al., 2017). In AlphaZero, the pol*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to: Shikui Tu <tushikui@sjtu.edu.cn>, Lei Xu
<leixu@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

icy network reduces the width of the search tree while the
value network bounds the depth, both of which are learned
through the iterative generation of higher quality games.
The network’s final performance highly depends on the
number of self-play games, thus requiring huge computational power for model training. For example, reproductions
of AlphaZero123 either employ thousands of GPUs or train
for years.
In AlphaZero, deep neural network is updated with the selfplay generated games, and each game can be regarded as a
playing path, which consists of the sequential game states
from the initial to the terminal. For one complete game or
path, the learning objective is predicting the policy and the
value of current state accurately, so as to guide the MonteCarlo Tree Search (MCTS) effectively. The above regular
training process can be improved by a path optimality constraint called path consistency (PC), i.e., “values on one
optimal path should be identical” (Xu et al., 1987), which is
suggested to regularize path searching for many sequential
decision-making problems simply by adding a weighted
penalty to the loss function (Xu, 2018) :
L(θ) = LRL (θ) + λLPC (θ),

(1)

where LRL is the RL loss that results from the interaction
with the environment, LPC is the PC constraint, and θ denotes the network parameters.
The key problem is how the term LPC is formulated, which
is L1 or L2 deviation from an estimated value of optimal
path that could be simply a moving average within a window
of estimated optimal path (Xu, 2018). It needs further investigation to implement and test the potential of this direction,
as well as to explore various possible ways to estimated the
value of optimal path. This paper provides a solid evidence
to demonstrate the effectiveness of PC for the first time. Our
contribution is summarized from three aspects4 :
• We propose a data-efficient learning algorithm for
games, called PCZero, which is built on AlphaZero
1

https://github.com/pytorch/ELF
https://github.com/Tencent/PhoenixGo
3
https://github.com/leela-zero/leela-zero
4
The source codes are available at https://github.com/
CMACH508/PCZero.
2

