Score-based Generative Modeling of Graphs via
the System of Stochastic Differential Equations

Jaehyeong Jo 1 * Seul Lee 1 * Sung Ju Hwang 1 2

Abstract
Generating graph-structured data requires learning the underlying distribution of graphs. Yet,
this is a challenging problem, and the previous
graph generative methods either fail to capture the
permutation-invariance property of graphs or cannot sufficiently model the complex dependency
between nodes and edges, which is crucial for
generating real-world graphs such as molecules.
To overcome such limitations, we propose a novel
score-based generative model for graphs with a
continuous-time framework. Specifically, we propose a new graph diffusion process that models the joint distribution of the nodes and edges
through a system of stochastic differential equations (SDEs). Then, we derive novel score matching objectives tailored for the proposed diffusion
process to estimate the gradient of the joint logdensity with respect to each component, and introduce a new solver for the system of SDEs to
efficiently sample from the reverse diffusion process. We validate our graph generation method
on diverse datasets, on which it either achieves
significantly superior or competitive performance
to the baselines. Further analysis shows that our
method is able to generate molecules that lie close
to the training distribution yet do not violate the
chemical valency rule, demonstrating the effectiveness of the system of SDEs in modeling the
node-edge relationships. Our code is available at
https://github.com/harryjo97/GDSS.

*

Equal contribution 1 Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST), Seoul, South Korea 2 AITRICS,
South Korea.
Correspondence to: Jaehyeong Jo <harryjo97@kaist.ac.kr>, Seul Lee <seul.lee@kaist.ac.kr>, Sung Ju
Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Learning the underlying distribution of graph-structured
data is an important yet challenging problem that has
wide applications, such as understanding the social networks (Grover et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2018), drug design (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018; Li et al., 2018c),
neural architecture search (NAS) (Xie et al., 2019; Lee et al.,
2021), and even program synthesis (Brockschmidt et al.,
2019). Recently, deep generative models have shown success in graph generation by modeling complicated structural
properties of graphs, exploiting the expressivity of neural
networks. Among them, autoregressive models (You et al.,
2018b; Liao et al., 2019) construct a graph via sequential decisions, while one-shot generative models (De Cao & Kipf,
2018; Liu et al., 2019) generate components of a graph
at once. Although these models have achieved a certain
degree of success, they also possess clear limitations. Autoregressive models are computationally costly and cannot
capture the permutation-invariant nature of graphs, while
one-shot generative models based on the likelihood fail to
model structural information due to the restriction on the
architectures to ensure tractable likelihood computation.
Apart from the likelihood-based methods, Niu et al. (2020)
introduced a score-based generative model for graphs,
namely, edge-wise dense prediction graph neural network (EDP-GNN). However, since EDP-GNN utilizes the
discrete-step perturbation of heuristically chosen noise
scales to estimate the score function, both its flexibility
and its efficiency are limited. Moreover, EDP-GNN only
generates adjacency matrices of graphs, thus is unable to
fully capture the node-edge dependency which is crucial for
the generation of real-world graphs such as molecules.
To overcome the limitations of previous graph generative
models, we propose a novel score-based graph generation
framework on a continuous-time domain that can generate
both the node features and the adjacency matrix. Specifically, we propose a novel Graph Diffusion via the System of
Stochastic differential equations (GDSS), which describes
the perturbation of both node features and adjacency through
a system of SDEs, and show that the previous work of Niu
et al. (2020) is a special instance of GDSS. Diffusion via the
system of SDEs can be interpreted as the decomposition of

