When Are Linear Stochastic Bandits Attackable?
Huazheng Wang * 1 Haifeng Xu 2 Hongning Wang 2

Abstract
We study adversarial attacks on linear stochastic
bandits: by manipulating the rewards, an adversary aims to control the behaviour of the bandit algorithm. Perhaps surprisingly, we first show that
some attack goals can never be achieved. This
is in a sharp contrast to context-free stochastic
bandits, and is intrinsically due to the correlation
among arms in linear stochastic bandits. Motivated by this finding, this paper studies the attackability of a k-armed linear bandit environment.
We first provide a complete necessity and sufficiency characterization of attackability based on
the geometry of the arms’ context vectors. We
then propose a two-stage attack method against
LinUCB and Robust Phase Elimination. The
method first asserts whether the given environment is attackable; and if yes, it poisons the rewards to force the algorithm to pull a target arm
linear times using only a sublinear cost. Numerical experiments further validate the effectiveness
and cost-efficiency of the proposed attack method.

1. Introduction
In a contextual bandit problem, a learner takes sequential
actions to interact with an environment to maximize its
received cumulative reward. As a natural and important
variant, linear stochastic bandits (Auer, 2002; Li et al., 2010;
Abbasi-yadkori et al., 2011) assume the expected reward of
an arm a is a linear function of its feature vector xa and an
unknown bandit parameter θ ∗ . A linear bandit algorithm
thus adaptively improves its estimation of θ ∗ based on the
reward feedback on its pulled arms. Thanks to their sound
theoretical guarantees and promising empirical performance,
linear stochastic bandits have become a reference solution to
many real-world problems, such as content recommendation
and online advertisement (Li et al., 2010; Chapelle & Li,
*

Most work was done while with University of Virginia.
Princeton University 2 University of Virginia. Correspondence to:
Huazheng Wang <huazhengwang@gmail.com>.

2011; Durand et al., 2018).
Since bandit algorithms adapt their behavior according to its
received feedback, such algorithms are susceptible to adversarial attacks, especially poisoning attacks. Under such an
attack, a malicious adversary observes the pulled arm and its
reward feedback, and then modifies the reward to misguide
the bandit algorithm to pull a target arm, which is of the
adversary’s interest. Due to the wide applicability of bandit
algorithms in practice as mentioned before, understanding
the robustness of such algorithms under poisoning attacks
becomes increasingly important (Jun et al., 2018; Liu &
Shroff, 2019; Garcelon et al., 2020).
Most existing studies on adversarial attacks in bandits focused on the context-free stochastic multi-armed bandit
(MAB) settings. Jun et al. (2018) and Liu & Shroff (2019)
showed that an adversary can force any MAB algorithm to
pull a target arm linear times only using a logarithmic cost.
Garcelon et al. (2020) showed the vulnerability of k-armed
linear contextual bandits under poisoning attacks. Linear
stochastic bandits are related to context-free stochastic bandits and linear contextual bandits. Interestingly, however,
there is no known result about attacks on linear stochastic
bandit until now. This paper shall provide a formal explanation for this gap — the analysis of attacks to linear
stochastic bandits turns out to be significantly more challenging due to the correlation among arms; in fact, some
learning environment is provably unattackable.
Specifically, we fill the aforementioned gap by studying poisoning attacks on k-armed linear stochastic bandits, where
an adversary modifies the reward using a sublinear attack
cost to misguide the bandit algorithm to pull a target arm
x̃ linear times. We first show that a linear stochastic bandit environment is not always efficiently attackable1 , and
its attackability is governed by the feasibility of finding a
parameter vector θ̃, under which the rewards of all nontarget arms are smaller than the reward of target arm x̃ and
the reward of x̃ remains the same as that in the original
environment specified by θ ∗ . Intuitively, to promote the
target arm x̃, an adversary needs to lower the rewards of

1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1
Throughout this paper, “efficient attack” means fooling the
bandit algorithm to pull the target arm for linear times with a
sublinear attack cost. We will use attackable and efficiently attackable interchangeably, as the adversary normally only has a limited
budget and needs to design a cost-efficient strategy.

