Principal Component Flows

Edmond Cunningham 1 2 Adam Cobb 2 Susmit Jha 2

Abstract
Normalizing flows map an independent set of latent variables to their samples using a bijective
transformation. Despite the exact correspondence
between samples and latent variables, their high
level relationship is not well understood. In this
paper we characterize the geometric structure of
flows using principal manifolds and understand
the relationship between latent variables and samples using contours. We introduce a novel class
of normalizing flows, called principal component
flows (PCF), whose contours are its principal manifolds, and a variant for injective flows (iPCF)
that is more efficient to train than regular injective
flows. PCFs can be constructed using any flow
architecture, are trained with a regularized maximum likelihood objective and can perform density
estimation on all of their principal manifolds. In
our experiments we show that PCFs and iPCFs
are able to learn the principal manifolds over a
variety of datasets. Additionally, we show that
PCFs can perform density estimation on data that
lie on a manifold with variable dimensionality,
which is not possible with existing normalizing
flows.

1. Introduction
A normalizing flow is a generative model that generates a
probability distribution by transforming a simple base distribution into a target distribution using a bijective function
(Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Papamakarios et al., 2019).
Despite the fact that flows can compute the log likelihood
of their samples exactly and associate a point in the data
space with a unique point in the latent space, they are still
poorly understood as generative models. This poor understanding stems from the unidentifiablity of their latent space
- the latent space of a flow can be transformed into another
1
University of Massachusetts 2 SRI International. Correspondence to: Edmond Cunningham <edmondcunnin@cs.umass.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

valid latent space using any one of an infinite number of
volume preserving transformations (Hyvärinen & Pajunen,
1999). Furthermore, methods that are rooted in mutual information (Alemi et al., 2018a; Higgins et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2016) that are used to understand other kinds of generative models break down when applied to flows because
there is a deterministic mapping between the latent and data
space (Ardizzone et al., 2020). To understand the generative
process of flows, we need two items. The first is a set of
informative structural properties of a probability distribution and the second is knowledge of how changes to the
latent variables affect corresponding samples. We discuss
the former using the concept of principal manifolds and the
latter using contours.
The principal manifolds of a probability distribution can be
understood as manifolds that span directions of maximum
change (Gorban et al., 2008b). We locally define them using
principal components which are the orthogonal directions
of maximum variance around a data point, the same way
that the principal components used in PCA (Jolliffe, 2011)
are the orthogonal directions of maximum variance of a
Gaussian approximation of a dataset. Principal manifolds
capture the geometric structure of a probability distribution
and are also an excellent fit for normalizing flows because it
is possible to compute the principal components of a flow
due to the bijective mapping between the latent and data
spaces (see Definition 1).
The relationship between changes to latent variables and the
effect on the corresponding sample in the data space can be
understood through the contours of a flow. The contours
of a flow are manifolds that trace the path that a sample
can take when only some latent variables are changed. An
important relationship we investigate is how the probability
density on a contour relates to the probability density under
the full model. This insight gives us a novel way to reason
about how a flow assigns density to its samples.
We introduce a class of normalizing flows called principal
component flows (PCFs) whose contours are its principal
manifolds. We develop deep insights into the generative
behavior of normalizing flows that help explain how flows
assign density to data points. This directly leads to a novel
test time algorithm for density estimation on manifolds that
requires no assumptions about the underlying data dimen-

