Analysis of Stochastic Processes through Replay Buffers

Shirli Di Castro Shashua 1 Shie Mannor 1 2 Dotan Di Castro 3

Abstract
Replay buffers are a key component in many reinforcement learning schemes. Yet, their theoretical
properties are not fully understood. In this paper
we analyze a system where a stochastic process X
is pushed into a replay buffer and then randomly
sampled to generate a stochastic process Y from
the replay buffer. We provide an analysis of the
properties of the sampled process such as stationarity, Markovity and autocorrelation in terms of
the properties of the original process. Our theoretical analysis sheds light on why replay buffer may
be a good de-correlator. Our analysis provides
theoretical tools for proving the convergence of
replay buffer based algorithms which are prevalent in reinforcement learning schemes.

1. Introduction
A Replay buffer (RB) is a mechanism for saving past generated data samples and for sampling data for off-policy
reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms (Lin, 1993). The
RB serves a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) buffer with a fixed capacity and it enables sampling mini-batches from previously
saved data points. Its structure and sampling mechanism provide a unique characteristic: the RB serves as de-correlator
of data samples. Typically, the agent in RL algorithms encounters sequences of highly correlated states and learning
from these correlated data points may be problematic since
many deep learning algorithms suffer from high estimation
variance when data samples are dependent. Thus, a mechanism that decorrelates the input such as the RB can improve
data efficiency and reduce sample complexity.
Since its usage in the DQN algorithm (Mnih et al., 2013),
RB mechanism have become popular in many off-policy
RL algorithms (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al., 2018).
Previous work has been done on the empirical benefits of
1

Technion Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 2 NVIDIA Research, Israel 3 Bosch Center of AI, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence
to: Shirli Di Castro Shashua <sdicastro@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

RB usage (Fedus et al., 2020; Zhang & Sutton, 2017), but
still there is a lack in theoretical understanding of how the
RB mechanism works. Understanding the properties of
RBs is crucial for convergence and finite sample analysis
of algorithms that use a RB in training. For the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work to tackle these theoretical
aspects.
In this work we focus on the following setup. We define a
random process X that is pushed into a N samples size RB
and analyze the characteristics of the stochastic process of
K samples that is sampled from the RB. We analyze if properties of the original random process such as Markovity and
stationarity are maintained and quantify the auto-correlation
and covariance in the new RB process (later denoted by Y )
when possible.
Our motivation comes from RL algorithms that use RB.
Specifically, we focus on the induced Markov chain given
a policy but we note that the analysis in this paper is also
relevant to general random processes that are kept in a FIFO
queue. This is relevant for domains such as First Come First
Served domains (Laguna & Marklund, 2013). Our goal is
to provide analytical tools for analyzing algorithms that use
RBs. Our results can provide theoretical understanding of
phenomena seen in experiments using RBs that have never
been analyzed theoretically before. Our theory for RBs
provides tools for proving convergence of RB-based RL
algorithms. Our main contributions are:
1. Formulating RBs as random processes and analyze
their properties such as stationarity, Markovity, ergodicity, auto-correlation and covariance.
2. Comparing between properties of the original random
process that was pushed into the RB and the sampled
process at the output of the RB. Particularly we prove
that when sampling uniformly from the RB, the RB
forms as a de-correlator between the sampled batches.
3. Connecting our RB theory to RL by demonstrating
this connection through a RB-based actor critic RL
algorithm that samples K transitions from RB with
size N for updating its parameters. We prove, for
the first time, the asymptotic convergence of such RBbased actor critic algorithm.

