Variational Feature Pyramid Networks

Panagiotis Dimitrakopoulos 1 Giorgos Sfikas 1 2 3 Christophoros Nikou 1

Abstract
Recent architectures for object detection adopt
a Feature Pyramid Network as a backbone for
deep feature extraction. Many works focus on the
design of pyramid networks which produce richer
feature representations. In this work, we opt to
learn a dataset-specific architecture for feature
pyramid networks. With the proposed method,
the network fuses features at multiple scales, it
is efficient in terms of parameters and operations,
and yields better results across a variety of tasks
and datasets. Starting by a complex network, we
adopt Variational Inference to prune redundant
connections. Our model, integrated with standard
detectors, outperforms the state-of-the-art feature
fusion networks.

1. Introduction
Object detection and instance segmentation are two of the
most fundamental problems in the computer vision field.
These problems are quite difficult to solve and provide multiple challenges as multiple objects have to be detected or
segmented at multiple scales, locations and under different
conditions. The majority of those problems in practice are
today approached via the use of deep learning architectures.
In the recent years multiple deep architectures have been
proposed, leading to widely known models in computer vision (Ren et al., 2016; He et al., 2017; Redmon et al., 2016;
Carion et al., 2020). Neural network-based detectors are
typically built and designed upon deep robust feature extraction (sub-)networks referred to as backbones. The task of
these components is to transform the input image to a deep
embedded representation, subsequently fed to the detector
head in order to have it produce the required predictions.
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece 2 University of West Attica, Athens, Greece 3 National Center for Scientific Research
“Demokritos”, Athens, Greece. Correspondence to: Panagiotis
Dimitrakopoulos <p.dimitrakopoulos@uoi.gr>, Giorgos Sfikas
<sfikas@cse.uoi.gr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

P7

P6

P5

P7

P6

P5

P4

P3

Figure 1. An illustration of pruning under the proposed method.
The image on the left depicts the initial model before training
which is highly complex, including multiple-level feature fusion
and is “fully” connected. On the right, the same network is shown
after 10 epochs of training, where redundant connections and
building blocks have been pruned, leading to an efficient fusion
network.

These networks heavily rely on good representations, as
the input feature must be descriptive enough to capture the
different relations and scales among the image objects. A
common practice is to use pretrained deep convolutional
backbones such as ResNet (He et al., 2016) or Inception
(Szegedy et al., 2015) to first extract rich features at different scales from the input image. Subsequently, their output
is processed using a pyramidal-shaped multi-scale fusion
network in order to create richer and more descriptive features. Since the introduction of Feature Pyramid Networks
(FPNs) (Lin et al., 2017a), which standardize the above procedure, works have been proposed to design more flexible,
sophisticated and also efficient fusion networks.
In the current work, we are using Variational Inference (VI)
in order to build more sophisticated feature fusion networks
that can be used for detection tasks. The model we propose
is applicable in a generic deep-learning based detection context. We combine multiple parts of state-of-the-art fusion
networks to create an “initial” complex network, that is subsequently pruned to its more efficient counterpart. In order
to obtain the pruned network, we opt to learn to highlight the
network components that are more suitable for the specific
task and dataset that it is trained on. Numerical experiments show that the models produced using the proposed
method, combined with various object detectors, produce
state-of-the-art results on a variety of detection tasks.

