Revisiting Some Common Practices in
Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Wei Fu 1 Chao Yu 2 Zelai Xu 2 Jiaqi Yang 3 Yi Wu 1 4

Abstract
Many advances in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) are based on two
common design principles: value decomposition
and parameter sharing. A typical MARL algorithm of this fashion decomposes a centralized
Q-function into local Q-networks with parameters shared across agents. Such an algorithmic
paradigm enables centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) and leads to efficient
learning in practice. Despite all the advantages,
we revisit these two principles and show that in
certain scenarios, e.g., environments with a highly
multi-modal reward landscape, value decomposition, and parameter sharing can be problematic
and lead to undesired outcomes. In contrast, policy gradient (PG) methods with individual policies provably converge to an optimal solution in
these cases, which partially supports some recent
empirical observations that PG can be effective in
many MARL testbeds. Inspired by our theoretical
analysis, we present practical suggestions on implementing multi-agent PG algorithms for either
high rewards or diverse emergent behaviors and
empirically validate our findings on a variety of
domains, ranging from the simplified matrix and
grid-world games to complex benchmarks such
as StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge and Google
Research Football. We hope our insights could
benefit the community towards developing more
general and more powerful MARL algorithms.
Check our project website at https://sites.
google.com/view/revisiting-marl.
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua
University, China 2 Department of Electronics Engineering, Tsinghua University, China 3 Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, CA,
USA 4 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, China. Correspondence to: Wei
Fu <fuwth17@gmail.com>, Yi Wu <jxwuyi@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Value decomposition has become the most popular paradigm
for tackling cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) problems (Sunehag et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020c;
Rashid et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020a; Hu et al., 2021).
Under this paradigm, algorithms decompose the global Qfunction into local Q-functions that satisfy the Individual
Global Max (IGM) principle (Son et al., 2019). Then the
optimal global policy can simply be derived via greedily selecting locally optimal actions for each agent. This process
enables centralized training and decentralized execution
(CTDE) (Foerster et al., 2016a; Gupta et al., 2017), and the
factorized representation has also led to enormous benefits,
including credit assignment (Zhang et al., 2020), emergent
communication (Wang et al., 2019b), exploration (Liu et al.,
2021), etc. In addition, the local Q-networks are typically
implemented with shared parameters leading to a shared
replay buffer across agents, which not only reduces the
number of total parameters but also results in more stable
training (Christianos et al., 2020).
Despite all the aforementioned advantages, in this paper,
we revisit popular cooperative MARL methods and argue
that some common practices including value-decomposition
representation and parameter sharing, can be problematic in
certain scenarios. We start our discussion by considering a
simple 2-by-2 matrix game, the XOR game, which has two
symmetric global optimal solutions. We prove that even for
this particularly simple game, a value-decomposition-based
algorithm cannot represent the underlying payoff structure,
and thus may not learn the optimal policy via factorized
local Q-networks. Interestingly, we notice that in this example, policy gradient (PG) with individual policies provably
converges to either of the two optimal solutions. In addition, we also introduce another policy-based auto-regressive
representation and show that PG with such a representation can learn all the strategy modes even on the N -player
version of the XOR game, which has exponentially many
optimal solutions. Our theoretical findings suggest that on
certain multi-modal problems, policy gradient, which is often considered sample-inefficient as an on-policy method,
can be preferable compared to popular value-based learning
methods. This insight can be served as initial evidence to

