Reconstructing Nonlinear Dynamical Systems from Multi-Modal Time Series

Daniel Kramer, 1 * Philine Lou Bommer, 2 * Carlo Tombolini, 1 Georgia Koppe 1 3 and Daniel Durstewitz 1 4

Abstract
Empirically observed time series in physics,
biology, or medicine, are commonly generated
by some underlying dynamical system (DS)
which is the target of scientific interest. There
is an increasing interest to harvest machine
learning methods to reconstruct this latent DS in
a data-driven, unsupervised way. In many areas
of science it is common to sample time series
observations from many data modalities simultaneously, e.g. electrophysiological and behavioral
time series in a typical neuroscience experiment.
However, current machine learning tools for
reconstructing DSs usually focus on just one data
modality. Here we propose a general framework
for multi-modal data integration for the purpose
of nonlinear DS reconstruction and the analysis of
cross-modal relations. This framework is based
on dynamically interpretable recurrent neural
networks as general approximators of nonlinear
DSs, coupled to sets of modality-specific decoder
models from the class of generalized linear
models. Both an expectation-maximization
and a variational inference algorithm for model
training are advanced and compared. We show on
nonlinear DS benchmarks that our algorithms can
efficiently compensate for too noisy or missing
information in one data channel by exploiting
other channels, and demonstrate on experimental
neuroscience data how the algorithm learns to
link different data domains to the underlying
dynamics.

*

Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Theoretical Neuroscience,
Central Institute of Mental Health, Heidelberg University, Germany. 2 Dept. of Machine Learning, Technical University Berlin,
Berlin, Germany. 3 Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim, Germany. 4 Faculty
of Physics and Astronomy, Heidelberg University, Germany..
Correspondence to: Daniel Durstewitz <daniel.durstewitz@zimannheim.de>, Philine Lou Bommer <philine.l.bommer@tuberlin.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Many natural phenomena, from physics to psychology, as
well as many engineered systems, can genuinely be described as (usually nonlinear) dynamical systems (DSs),
whose temporal evolution is specified by a set of differential or time-recursive equations. While traditionally these
systems are derived by scientific insight, in recent years
there has been growing interest to infer the governing equations directly from time series observations, in a purely
data-driven way, using machine learning tools, such as polynomial regression (Brunton et al., 2016; Champion et al.,
2019), Gaussian processes (Duncker et al., 2019), or recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Lu et al., 2017a; Durstewitz,
2017b; Koppe et al., 2019; Hernandez et al., 2018; Vlachas
et al., 2018; Pathak et al., 2018). Based on Cybenko’s universal approximation theorem (Cybenko, 1989), it has been
shown that RNNs with sigmoid (Funahashi & Nakamura,
1993; Kimura & Nakano, 1998; Hanson & Raginsky, 2020)
or Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) (Lu et al., 2017b; Lin &
Jegelka, 2018) activation functions are theoretically powerful enough to approximate any DS, i.e. its vector field,
to arbitrary precision in its own set of dynamical equations
(Funahashi & Nakamura, 1993; Trischler & D’Eleuterio,
2016). The objective of reconstructing, or approximating,
the underlying DS itself, is more challenging compared
to the more common goal of training a system to produce
good ahead-predictions of temporal sequences (Koppe et al.,
2019). This is because in DS reconstruction we require the
trained model to also reproduce invariant properties of the
underlying system in the limit t → ∞, including the geometrical structure of its limit sets (attractors) or its temporal
structure as assessed by the power spectrum.
Many natural and engineered DSs can be observed through
many different measurement channels that produce time
series: In Smartphone apps tracking psychiatric risk and behavior, for instance, one may want to combine categorical or
ordinal information from ecological momentary assessments
(EMA) with different continuous sensor readings, typing
dynamics, proxies for social interactions, and GPS tracking
(Radu et al., 2016; Koppe et al., 2018). In typical experiments in neuroscience one observes at the same time both
continuous, often high-dimensional, measurements from
the brain by means of electrophysiological or neuroimaging
tools, and a subject’s often categorical behavioral responses

