A Rigorous Study of Integrated Gradients Method and Extensions to Internal
Neuron Attributions
Daniel Lundstrom 1 Tianjian Huang 1 Meisam Razaviyayn 1

Abstract
As deep learning (DL) efficacy grows, concerns
for poor model explainability grow also. Attribution methods address the issue of explainability by
quantifying the importance of an input feature for
a model prediction. Among various methods, Integrated Gradients (IG) sets itself apart by claiming
other methods failed to satisfy desirable axioms,
while IG and methods like it uniquely satisfy said
axioms. This paper comments on fundamental
aspects of IG and its applications/extensions: 1)
We identify key differences between IG function
spaces and the supporting literature’s function
spaces which problematize previous claims of IG
uniqueness. We show that with the introduction
of an additional axiom, non-decreasing positivity,
the uniqueness claims can be established. 2) We
address the question of input sensitivity by identifying function classes where IG is/is not Lipschitz
in the attributed input. 3) We show that axioms
for single-baseline methods have analogous properties for methods with probability distribution
baselines. 4) We introduce a computationally efficient method of identifying internal neurons that
contribute to specified regions of an IG attribution map. Finally, we present experimental results
validating this method.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have revolutionized the field of vision processing, showing marked accuracy for varied and
large scale computer vision tasks (Huang et al., 2017), (Ren
et al., 2016), (Bochkovskiy et al., 2020). At the same time,
deep neural networks suffer from a lack of interpretability. Various methods have been developed to address the
interpretability problem by quantifying, or attributing, the
This work is supported by a gift from Meta Platforms and by the
USC-Meta Center for Research and Education in AI and Learning.
1
University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Daniel
Lundstrom <lundstro@usc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

importance of each input feature to a model’s output. Basic
techniques inspect the gradient of the output with respect
to an input (Baehrens et al., 2010). Deconvolutional networks (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014) employ deep networks to
produce attributions, while guided back-propagation (Springenberg et al., 2014) gives attributions to internal neuron
activations. Methods such as Deeplift (Shrikumar et al.,
2017) and Layer-wise relevance propagation (Binder et al.,
2016) employ a baseline to use as a comparison to the input
(called baseline attributions). Further methods include Zhou
et al. (2016), Zintgraf et al. (2016).
Sundararajan et al. (2017) introduced the baseline attribution
method of Integrated Gradients (IG). The paper identified a
set of desirable axioms for attributions, demonstrated that
previous methods fail to satisfy them, and introduced the IG
method which satisfied the axioms. Included was the claim
that any method satisfying a subset of the axioms must be a
more general form of IG (called path methods).
Contributions. This paper addresses multiple aspects of
the IG method: its foundational claims, mathematical behavior, and extensions. The IG paper of Sundararajan et al.
(2017) applies results from Friedman (2004) (given here
as Theorem 1) to claim that path methods (defined below)
are the only methods that satisfy a set of desirable axioms.
Upon inspection, we observe that there are key assumptions
of the function spaces of Friedman (2004), such as functions being non-decreasing, which are not true in the DL
context. These differences in function spaces were unaddressed in Sundararajan et al. (2017). We show that because
the function spaces differ, Theorem 1 does not apply and
the uniqueness claim is false. This observation also invalidates other uniqueness claims found in Xu et al. (2020)
and Sundararajan & Najmi (2020). With the introduction of
an additional axiom, non-decreasing positivity (NDP), we
show that Theorem 1 can apply, and rigorously extend it
into a broad-ranging DL function space.
We address the mathematical behavior of IG and an extension. We identify a common class of functions where IG
may be hypersensitive to the input image by failing to be
Lipschitz continuous, as well as a function class where IG
is guaranteed to be Lipschitz continuous. We also note that
the axioms in Sundararajan et al. (2017) apply to single

