Robust Imitation Learning against Variations in Environment Dynamics

Jongseong Chae 1 Seungyul Han 2 Whiyoung Jung 1 Myungsik Cho 1 Sungho Choi 1 Youngchul Sung 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a robust imitation learning (IL) framework that improves the robustness
of IL when environment dynamics are perturbed.
The existing IL framework trained in a single environment can catastrophically fail with perturbations in environment dynamics because it does not
capture the situation that underlying environment
dynamics can be changed. Our framework effectively deals with environments with varying dynamics by imitating multiple experts in sampled
environment dynamics to enhance the robustness
in general variations in environment dynamics.
In order to robustly imitate the multiple sample
experts, we minimize the risk with respect to the
Jensen-Shannon divergence between the agent’s
policy and each of the sample experts. Numerical
results show that our algorithm significantly improves robustness against dynamics perturbations
compared to conventional IL baselines.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a framework that produces
optimal policies for tasks. Deep neural networks enable RL
to handle complex tasks in various simulation environments
(Mnih et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Fujimoto et al.,
2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Schulman et al., 2015a; 2017).
However, current RL still has limitations for deployment
into the real world. Two of the main limitations are robustness and design of reward function. A typical RL algorithm
interacts with a single environment and evaluates the policy
with the interaction environment, so the policy becomes specialized to the trained environment and mostly fails when
the underlying dynamics are perturbed from the trained environment. In the real world, underlying dynamics are highly
likely to be perturbed. For example, consider autonomous
driving with RL. The physical dynamics of an autonomous
1

School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea. 2 Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST, Ulsan, South
Korea. Correspondence to: Seungyul Han <syhan@unist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

driving car including handling, braking, the road friction
coefficient of a rainy day change from those of a clear day.
To cope with such uncertainty, one could consider learning
an expert policy for each of all possible environment dynamics for a given task like car driving, estimating the realized
dynamics, and using one of the learned expert policies for
the estimated dynamics. However, estimating the realized
environment dynamics is difficult because the dynamics of
the environment depend on many correlated environment
parameters such as gravity, mass, aging, etc. Furthermore,
learning a policy for each of all possible dynamics perturbations is infeasible when the dynamics vary continuously.
Robust Reinforcement Learning (Robust RL) is a framework
that produces a robust policy against such environment perturbations for a given task. The aim is to learn a policy that
works well in all possible dynamics perturbations without
estimating the perturbation. Typical robust RL allows the
agent to interact in multiple environments (Derman et al.,
2018; Mankowitz et al., 2018; 2019) and the policy optimizes the worst case of the expected returns in the multiple
interaction environments. This agent can work well both
in all the interaction environments and even in an unseen
environment with similar dynamics. Even if such dynamics
variation can be handled by robust RL, there still remains
the issue of reward function design for many real-world control problems including our example of autonomous driving,
since robust RL relies on a well-designed reward function.
When we observe a human drive, it is difficult to know what
reward the driver has for each of the driver’s actions.
Imitation Learning (IL) has been developed to cope with
such situations by learning a policy for a given task without
a reward function (Torabi et al., 2018a; Finn et al., 2016;
Syed et al., 2008). IL uses demonstrations generated from
an expert for the task instead of a reward function, and the
agent tries to mimic the expert. GAIL is one of the popular
IL algorithms and tries to mimic an expert by matching
occupancy measure, which is the unnormalized distribution
of state-action pairs (Ho & Ermon, 2016). Up to now, however, most IL algorithms have been proposed for a single
interaction environment with perfect or non-perfect expert
demonstration to yield a policy that is specialized to the
single interaction environment.
In this paper, we consider robust IL to learn a robust policy

