Influence-Augmented Local Simulators:
A Scalable Solution for Fast Deep RL in Large Networked Systems

Miguel Suau 1 Jinke He 1 Matthijs T. J. Spaan 1 Frans A. Oliehoek 1

Abstract
Learning effective policies for real-world problems is still an open challenge for the field of
reinforcement learning (RL). The main limitation
being the amount of data needed and the pace at
which that data can be obtained. In this paper, we
study how to build lightweight simulators of complicated systems that can run sufficiently fast for
deep RL to be applicable. We focus on domains
where agents interact with a reduced portion of a
larger environment while still being affected by
the global dynamics. Our method combines the
use of local simulators with learned models that
mimic the influence of the global system. The
experiments reveal that incorporating this idea
into the deep RL workflow can considerably accelerate the training process and presents several
opportunities for the future.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of Deep Reinforcement Leaning
(RL) on paper is in stark contrast with its narrow applicability to real-world problems. Among many other reasons, the
most important factor preventing the practical deployment
of this framework is perhaps its high sample complexity
(Botvinick et al., 2019). This is a very well-known issue
and there is a long list of previous works that in one way
or another have tried to alleviate it (Kakade, 2003; Mnih
et al., 2015; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018). Nonetheless, there
have been relatively few real-world successes thus far. Here,
rather than proposing yet another method that tries to solve
the problem directly, we present a more pragmatic approach
to get around it. Our solution is based on the observation that
Deep RL’s best results have been obtained in domains like
video games (Bellemare et al., 2013; Vinyals et al., 2019)
or simulated environments (Brockman et al., 2016; Ganesh
1
Delft University of Technology. Correspondence to: Miguel
Suau <m.suadecastro@tudelft.nl>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2019; Bellemare et al., 2020) where data collection is
extremely fast. Unfortunately, real-world problems are typically more complex and simulators, if available, are usually
very slow (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019).
In this work, we design lightweight versions of large simulators with the goal of speeding up the overall training process.
The method we propose applies to domains where agents
only interact with a reduced local part of a larger environment, yet they are indirectly being affected by the global
dynamics. Traffic control is one example of such environments. Say, for instance, that we wanted to train an agent to
control the traffic lights of a particular intersection in a very
large city. To do so we could build a small local simulator
that captures only the information that is directly relevant to
the agent (traffic density in the neighborhood; van der Pol
& Oliehoek 2016). However, after training, we may find
out that an agent that does very well in the small simulator,
performs poorly in the real intersection. The performance
gap would be caused by a data distribution shift (QuioneroCandela et al., 2009; Arjovsky, 2021). Even though the
simulator might be able to closely mimic the local dynamics
(i.e. cars moving within the intersection), it would fail to
account for the interactions of the local neighborhood with
the rest of the city. Thus, the agent learns a policy based on
certain transition dynamics that turn out to be very different
in the real world. Alternatively, we could try to model the
dynamics of a sufficiently large portion of the city, but this
would surely result in a very slow simulator.
One important property of the traffic domain is that, although the agent’s local problem may be affected by many
external variables (traffic densities in other parts of the city),
it is only directly influenced by the road segments that connect the intersection with the rest of the city. Hence, we can
simply monitor the traffic densities at these road segments
since, from the agent’s local perspective, they summarize
the effect of all the external variables. This insight is not specific to the traffic domain. It is in fact common in networked
systems (e.g. warehouse commissioning, Claes et al. 2017;
electrical power grids, Wang et al. 2021; heating systems,
Gupta et al. 2021; telecommunication networks, Suau et al.
2021) that interactions between different components occur
through a limited number of variables.

