On the Surrogate Gap between Contrastive and Supervised Losses

Abstract
Contrastive representation learning encourages
data representation to make semantically similar pairs closer than randomly drawn negative
samples, which has been successful in various
domains such as vision, language, and graphs.
Recent theoretical studies have attempted to explain the benefit of the large negative sample size
by upper-bounding the downstream classification
loss with the contrastive loss. However, the previous surrogate bounds have two drawbacks: they
are only legitimate for a limited range of negative sample sizes and prohibitively large even
within that range. Due to these drawbacks, there
still does not exist a consensus on how negative
sample size theoretically correlates with downstream classification performance. Following the
simplified setting where positive pairs are drawn
from the true distribution (not generated by data
augmentation; as supposed in previous studies),
this study establishes surrogate upper and lower
bounds for the downstream classification loss for
all negative sample sizes that best explain the empirical observations on the negative sample size
in the earlier studies. Our bounds suggest that the
contrastive loss can be viewed as a surrogate objective of the downstream loss and larger negative
sample sizes improve downstream classification
because the surrogate gap between contrastive and
supervised losses decays. We verify that our theory is consistent with experiments on synthetic,
vision, and language datasets.

1. Introduction
The contrastive loss (Chopra et al., 2005) is one of the popular loss functions in metric learning (Kulis, 2012) and representation learning (Bengio et al., 2013). The contrastive
*

Equal contribution 1 The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Han Bao (currently with Kyoto University) <bao@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Upper bound & Supervised loss values

Han Bao * 1 2 Yoshihiro Nagano * 1 2 Kento Nozawa * 1 2

Ours
Arora et al.
Nozawa & Sato
Ash et al.
Supervised loss

106
105
104
103
102
101

4

16

32

64

128

512

K (Negative sample size)

Figure 1: Empirical comparison of our upper bound and the
existing bounds of the classification loss with CIFAR-10
(C = 10), showing that we improve the classification loss
bound by exponentially large margins. Arora et al.’s and
Nozawa & Sato’s bounds are valid only at K + 1 ≥ C.
Note that Arora et al.’s and Ash et al.’s bounds become
infinity at K = 512, where K and C are the numbers of
negative samples and classes, respectively. As can be seen,
our bound is the closest approximator of the true mean
supervised losses. The detailed setup is in Section 5.2.

loss forces data representation of semantically similar pairs
closer in some metric space than multiple random samples,
called negative samples. Many state-of-the-art representation learning algorithms use a type of contrastive losses
in natural language processing (Mikolov et al., 2013; Logeswaran & Lee, 2018), vision (Chopra et al., 2005; He
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020), and graph (Lirong et al.,
2021) domains. A simple model built on top of the learned
representation can achieve almost the same accuracy as
supervised learning does.
Recent empirical studies observed that downstream classification performance could be improved with a sufficiently
large negative sample size (denoted by K), compared with
the number of classes (denoted by C) (He et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2020). To better understand the underlying mechanism of this large K benefit, several studies attempted to
derive surrogate upper bounds of the downstream classification loss by the contrastive loss. Arora et al. (2019) success-

