Generalized Federated Learning via Sharpness Aware Minimization

Zhe Qu * 1 Xingyu Li * 2 Rui Duan 1 Yao Liu 3 Bo Tang 2 Zhuo Lu 1

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a promising framework for performing privacy-preserving, distributed learning with a set of clients. However,
the data distribution among clients often exhibits
non-IID, i.e., distribution shift, which makes efficient optimization difficult. To tackle this problem, many FL algorithms focus on mitigating
the effects of data heterogeneity across clients by
increasing the performance of the global model.
However, almost all algorithms leverage Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) to be the local optimizer, which is easy to make the global model
fall into a sharp valley and increase a large deviation of parts of local clients. Therefore, in
this paper, we revisit the solutions to the distribution shift problem in FL with a focus on local
learning generality. To this end, we propose a
general, effective algorithm, FedSAM, based on
Sharpness Aware Minimization (SAM) local optimizer, and develop a momentum FL algorithm
to bridge local and global models, MoFedSAM.
Theoretically, we show the convergence analysis
of these two algorithms and demonstrate the generalization bound of FedSAM. Empirically, our
proposed algorithms substantially outperform existing FL studies and significantly decrease the
learning deviation.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) is a collaborative training framework that enables a large number
of clients, which can be phones, network sensors, or alternative local information sources (Kairouz et al., 2019; Mohri
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering,
University of South Florida, Tampa, USA 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mississippi State University,
Starkville, USA 3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Florida, Tampa, USA. Correspondence to:
Zhe Qu <zhequ@usf.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2019). FL trains machine learning models without
transmitting client data over the network, and thus it can
protect data privacy at some basic levels. Two important
settings are introduced in FL (Kairouz et al., 2019): the
cross-device FL and the cross-silo FL. The cross-silo FL is
related to a small number of reliable clients, e.g., medical
or financial institutions. By contrast, the cross-device FL
includes a large number of clients, e.g., billion-scale android
phones (Hard et al., 2018). In cross-device FL, clients are
usually deployed in various environments. It is unavoidable
that the distribution of the local dataset of each client varies
considerably and incurs a distribution shift problem, highly
degrading the learning performance.
Many existing FL studies focus on the distribution shift
problem mainly based on the following three directions:
(i) The most popular solution to address this problem is to
set the number of local training epochs performed between
each communication round (Li et al., 2020b; Yang et al.,
2021). (ii) Many algorithmic solutions in (Li et al., 2018b;
Karimireddy et al., 2020; Acar et al., 2021) mainly focus
on mitigating the influence of heterogeneity across clients
via giving a variety of proximal terms to control the local
model updates close to the global model. (iii) Knowledge
distillation based techniques (Lin et al., 2020; Gong et al.,
2021; Zhu et al., 2021) aggregate locally-computed logits
for building global models, helping eliminate the need for
each local model to follow the same architecture to the
global model.
Motivation. In centralized learning, the network generalization technique has been well studied to overcome the
overfitting problem (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Woodworth et al., 2020). Even in standard settings where the
training and test data are drawn from a similar distribution,
models still overfit the training data and the training model
will fall into a sharp valley of the loss surface by using Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) (Chaudhari et al., 2019).
This effect is further intensified when the training and test
data are of different distributions. Similarly, in FL, overfitting the local training data of each client is detrimental
to the performance of the global model, as the distribution
shift problem creates conflicting objectives among local
models. The main strategy to improve the FL performance
is to mitigate the local models to the global model from the
average perspective (Karimireddy et al., 2020; Yang et al.,

