TAM: Topology-Aware Margin Loss for Class-Imbalanced Node Classification

Jaeyun Song * 1 Joonhyung Park * 1 Eunho Yang 1 2

Abstract
Learning unbiased node representations under
class-imbalanced graph data is challenging due
to interactions between adjacent nodes. Existing
studies have in common that they compensate the
minor class nodes ‘as a group’ according to their
overall quantity (ignoring node connections in
graph), which inevitably increase the false positive cases for major nodes. We hypothesize that
the increase in these false positive cases is highly
affected by the label distribution around each node
and confirm it experimentally. In addition, in order to handle this issue, we propose TopologyAware Margin (TAM) to reflect local topology on
the learning objective. Our method compares the
connectivity pattern of each node with the classaveraged counter-part and adaptively adjusts the
margin accordingly based on that. Our method
consistently exhibits superiority over the baselines on various node classification benchmark
datasets with representative GNN architectures.

1. Introduction
The importance of learning qualitative node representation
has been emerging to accurately classify the node property in real-world graphs such as social networks, commercial graphs, and chemical molecules (Mohammadrezaei
et al., 2018; Ying et al., 2018; Hamilton et al., 2017). Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) (Welling & Kipf,
2016; Veličković et al., 2018; Hamilton et al., 2017) are
widely adopted to handle graph-structured data and have
shown remarkable success in various fields. However, as
natural graphs could be class-imbalanced inherently, GNNs
are prone to be biased toward major classes. Learning from
those graphs without handling class-imbalanced issue leads
*

Equal contribution 1 Graduate School of AI, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon,
South Korea 2 AITRICS, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to:
Jaeyun Song <mercery@kaist.ac.kr>, Joonhyung Park <deepjoon@kaist.ac.kr>, Eunho Yang <eunhoy@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

to low accuracy for minor classes. Although the simple solution is to curate class-balanced graphs, collecting data in
a balanced way is not always possible.
To address this problem, diverse imbalance handling strategies for node classification (Shi et al., 2020; Zhao et al.,
2021; Qu et al., 2021; Park et al., 2021) have been recently
proposed. These methods fortify minor classes in their own
way such as extending SMOTE method (Chawla et al., 2002)
to graph-structured data (Zhao et al., 2021), mixing nodes
by considering neighbor structure (Park et al., 2021) or generating virtual minor nodes via the conditional GAN (Shi
et al., 2020).
However, these approaches overlook the fact that when compensating the minor classes based on their quantity, certain
nodes could significantly degrade the performance of other
classes. Considering the innate characteristics of message
passing algorithms of GNNs, we hypothesize that the entire
representation learning procedure can be misled by weighted
minor nodes in the aggregation of message passing and that
the effect is more attributed to nodes with high connectivity rates with other (major) classes. Toward this direction,
we observe that compensating such minor nodes with high
connectivity rates to major class significantly increase false
positives for major nodes. In line with this observation, we
confirm that existing imbalance handling algorithms show
sub-optimal performances as they do not reflect this local
topology when weighting the minor classes. Although not
directly related to our hypothesis, ReNode (Chen et al.,
2021) is somehow related in terms of adjusting the weights
of some nodes; this method decreases the weights of nodes
close to topological class boundaries. However, this method
can only work for homogeneously-connected graphs. Moreover, since the connectivity patterns and class-wise relative
weighting for multi-class cases are not considered in the
weighting process, the impacts of individual nodes affecting
other classes are still not properly identified.
Armed with this hypothesis, in this paper we propose
Topology-Aware Margin (TAM), a node-wise logit adjustment method, which takes into account their local topology
in terms of class-pair connectivity and neighbor distribution statistics. Our key principle is as follows: if a (minor)
node is highly likely to be confused with specific (major)
classes considering its local topology, we should decrease

