Learning to Estimate and Refine Fluid Motion with Physical Dynamics

Mingrui Zhang 1 Jianhong Wang 2 James Tlhomole 1 Matthew D. Piggott 1

Abstract
Extracting information on fluid motion directly
from images is challenging. Fluid flow represents a complex dynamic system governed by the
Navier-Stokes equations. General optical flow
methods are typically designed for rigid body motion, and thus struggle if applied to fluid motion
estimation directly. Further, optical flow methods only focus on two consecutive frames without
utilising historical temporal information, while
the fluid motion (velocity field) can be considered a continuous trajectory constrained by timedependent partial differential equations (PDEs).
This discrepancy has the potential to induce physically inconsistent estimations. Here we propose an unsupervised learning based predictioncorrection scheme for fluid flow estimation. An
estimate is first given by a PDE-constrained optical flow predictor, which is then refined by a
physical based corrector. The proposed approach
outperforms optical flow methods and shows competitive results compared to existing supervised
learning based methods on a benchmark dataset.
Furthermore, the proposed approach can generalize to complex real-world fluid scenarios where
ground truth information is effectively unknowable. Finally, experiments demonstrate that the
physical corrector can refine flow estimates by
mimicking the operator splitting method commonly utilised in fluid dynamical simulation.

1. Introduction
Fluid flow motion estimation is a topic of interest for
many science and engineering fields, including geophysics,
oceanology, biology, and environmental engineering. Measuring fluid motion and understanding the underlying dy1
Department of Earth Science and Engineering, Imperial College London, UK 2 Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, UK. Correspondence to: Mingrui Zhang <mingrui.zhang18@imperial.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

namics are crucial for exploring complex fluid phenomena
in these fields.
One natural way to understand and analyze fluid motion
is via visual observation. However, there are generally no
strong visible patterns in transparent fluid flow such as water
and air. Therefore, visual markers of some description are
commonly introduced to allow the optical measurement of
the motion. One effective method is to inject these markers
into the fluid and record their motion with one or multiple
high-speed cameras. By comparing the resulting flow images at different time levels, velocity field information can
be extracted. Based on this idea, one of most prominent
techniques for fluid motion estimation in experimental fluid
mechanics is Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) (Adrian &
Westerweed., 2011). Traditionally, PIV can be regarded as
an optical flow estimation problem (Ruhnau et al., 2005)
and tackled using variational optical flow methods (D. Heitz,
2010).
With the success of deep learning in optical flow estimation, these methods have also been adopted to solve the
corresponding PIV problem. However, pure dense optical
flow methods assume brightness constancy and flow smoothness, while the visible tracers in the fluid are driven by fluid
dynamics. The missing dynamical information in the estimation model may induce physically implausible results and
temporal inconsistency, which would typically be crucial for
useful flow diagnosis in rigorous science and engineering
applications. In this work we seek to bridge the gap between
optical estimation and the governing fluids-based physical
models for motion estimation problem. Specifically, a novel
unsupervised learning framework is proposed in this paper. The framework is designed as a prediction-correction
scheme, which consists of an optical flow based fluid motion
predictor and a physical corrector.
The estimation process is inspired by Chorin’s projection
method, an operator splitting method (Chorin, 1968; Strang.,
1968), often used in numerical fluid simulation. The operator splitting method separates the original PDE system into
two parts over a time step, separately computes the solution
to each part, and then combines the two separate solutions
to form a solution to the original system. However, these
kinds of methods are limited to physical models, and thus
cannot incorporate optical fluid observations, and this can-

