ActiveHedge: Hedge meets Active Learning

Bhuvesh Kumar 1 Jacob Abernethy 1 Venkatesh Saligrama 2

Abstract
We consider the classical problem of multiclass
prediction with expert advice, but with an active
learning twist. In this new setting the learner will
only query the labels of a small number of examples, but still aims to minimize regret to the best
expert as usual; the learner is also allowed a very
short burn-in phase where it can fast-forward and
query certain highly-informative examples. We
design an algorithm that utilizes Hedge (aka Exponential Weights) as a subroutine, and we show
that under a very particular combinatorial constraint on the matrix of expert predictions we can
obtain a very strong regret guarantee while querying very few labels. This constraint, which we
refer to as ζ-compactness, or just compactness,
can be viewed as a non-stochastic variant of the
disagreement coefficient, another popular parameter used to reason about the sample complexity
of active learning in the IID setting. We also give
a polynomial time algorithm to calculate the ζcompactness of a matrix up to an approximation
factor of 3.

1. Introduction
The problem of multiclass prediction with expert advice has
emerged as a simple yet powerful framework for reasoning
about sequential decision tasks. We imagine we have a set
of N experts, at each round there are K possible outcomes,
and where each expert j makes a prediction Xt,j ∈ [K] at
time t about an unknown label yt ∈ [K]. Our learning task
is to emit our own estimate ŷt ∈ ∆k of yt , that takes into
account the advice of each expert along with their historical
performance up until this time point. The simple goal is: can
we predict well, in the long run, relative to the expert who
performs optimally over the full sequence of predictions,
despite that we do not know in advance which expert is
1

Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Boston University. Correspondence to:
Bhuvesh Kumar <bhuvesh@gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

best? Moreover, what can we guarantee even when some of
these experts may be predicting in an arbitrary or perhaps
adversarial fashion? These questions have received a great
deal of attention over the past two decades.
The classical algorithm for this problem is commonly known
as Hedge (Freund & Schapire, 1995), although variants are
often referred to as exponential weights or weighted majority. While we give a precise description in Algorithm 1,
Hedge is quite simple to explain in words: the algorithm
combines the predictions of all the experts on a given round
by taking their weighted average, where the weight of an
expert exponentially decays according to the number of previous mistakes. Important details must be addressed, such
as the exponential decay factor and what to do with fractional predictions, but a great deal of research has made one
point very clear: Hedge is essentially the minimax optimal
algorithm for the problem of prediction with expert advice.
One of the downsides of Hedge, as with many online learning algorithms, is that it is not label efficient: the learning
process requires that we observe the target y t on each round.
Obtaining individual labels can, quite often, be very expensive to the learner; indeed this is central to why we design
prediction algorithms in the first place. Active learning,
which refers broadly to a family of frameworks in which
the learning algorithm can make selective label queries, are
designed precisely with the goal of minimizing the number
of needed labels while achieving a suitable learning performance. The key idea is that we do not necessarily need
to have a batch of labelled examples prior to training, in
many natural scenarios the algorithm may be able to actively
engage with the labelling process to query labels on a set of
unlabelled examples. The classical Binary Search algorithm
is, in some sense, an active learning algorithm to find an
element in a sorted list.
It would be hard to argue against the wealth of empirical
results showing the benefits of active learning (Settles, 2011;
Nguyen & Smeulders, 2004; Wang & Hua, 2011; Kapoor
et al., 2007; Li & Guo, 2013). At the same time, while
our theoretical understanding of the label-efficiency gains
achieved using this new learning model has been studied
in a range of scenarios (Hanneke, 2007; Zhang, 2018; Hanneke & Yang, 2012; Hanneke, 2011; Kulkarni et al., 1993;
Koltchinskii, 2006; Freund et al., 1997; Dasgupta et al.,

