Linear Adversarial Concept Erasure

Shauli Ravfogel 1 2 Michael Twiton 3 Yoav Goldberg 1 2 Ryan Cotterell 4

Abstract
Modern neural models trained on textual data
rely on pre-trained representations that emerge
without direct supervision. As these representations are increasingly being used in real-world
applications, the inability to control their content
becomes an increasingly important problem. This
paper formulates the problem of identifying and
erasing a linear subspace that corresponds to a
given concept in order to prevent linear predictors
from recovering the concept. Our formulation
consists of a constrained, linear minimax game.
We consider different concept-identification
objectives, modeled after several tasks such
as classification and regression. We derive a
closed-form solution for certain objectives, and
propose a convex relaxation, R-LACE , that
works well for others. When evaluated in the
context of binary gender removal, our method
recovers a low-dimensional subspace whose
removal mitigates bias by intrinsic and extrinsic
evaluation. We show that the method—despite
being linear—is highly expressive, effectively
mitigating bias in deep nonlinear classifiers while
maintaining tractability and interpretability.
https://github.com/shauli-ravfogel/
rlace-icml

1. Introduction
This paper studies concept erasure, the removal of information from a given vector representation, such as those
that are derived from neural language models (Melamud
1

Department of Computer Science, Bar Ilan Uni2
versity
Allen
Institue
for
Artificial
Intelligence
3
Independent researcher 4 ETH Zürich.
Correspondence
to:
Shauli Ravfogel <shauli.ravfogel@gmail.com>,
Michael Twiton <mtwito101@gmail.com>, Yoav Goldberg
<yoav.goldberg@gmail.com>,
Ryan
Cotterell
<ryan.cotterell@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Removal of gender information from GloVe representations using R-LACE , after PCA (Experiment § 5.1). Left: original
space; Right: after a rank-1 R-LACE projection. Word vectors are
colored according to being male-biased of female-biased.

et al., 2016; Peters et al., 2018; Howard and Ruder, 2018;
Devlin et al., 2019). Specifically, we ask the following
question: Given a set of vectors x1 , . . . , xN ∈ RD , and
corresponding response variables y1 , . . . , yN , can we derive a concept-erasure function r(·) such that the resulting
vectors r(x1 ), . . . , r(xN ) are not predictive of the concept
y1 , . . . , yN , but such that r(xn ) preserves the information
found in xn as much as possible? This problem relates to
the more general question of obtaining representations that
do not contain information about a given concept, however,
unlike adversarial methods (Edwards and Storkey, 2016; Xie
et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Elazar and Goldberg, 2018;
Zhang et al., 2018) that change the model during training,
here we are interested in post-hoc methods, which assume a
fixed, pre-trained set of vectors, e.g., those from GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014), BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), or GPT
(Radford et al., 2019), and aim to learn an additional function r(·) that removes information from the set of vectors.
In this work, we focus on the case where the function r(·)
is linear—in other words, we aim to identify and remove a
linear concept subspace from the representation, preventing
any linear predictor from recovering the concept. By
restricting ourselves to the linear case, we obtain a tractable
solution while also enjoying the increased interpretability
of linear methods. Linear concept removal was pioneered
by Bolukbasi et al. (2016), who used principal component
analysis to identify a linear gender bias subspace.1 Another
linear concept removal technique is iterative nullspace projection (INLP; Ravfogel et al., 2020). INLP learns the linear
1
Gonen and Goldberg (2019) demonstrate that the method of
Bolukbasi et al. (2016) does not exhaustively remove bias.

