Inducing Causal Structure for Interpretable Neural Networks

Atticus Geiger * 1 Zhengxuan Wu * 1 Hanson Lu * 1 Josh Rozner 1 Elisa Kreiss 1
Thomas Icard 1 Noah D. Goodman 1 Christopher Potts 1

Abstract
In many areas, we have well-founded insights
about causal structure that would be useful to
bring into our trained models while still allowing
them to learn in a data-driven fashion. To achieve
this, we present the new method of interchange
intervention training (IIT). In IIT, we (1) align
variables in a causal model (e.g., a deterministic
program or Bayesian network) with representations in a neural model and (2) train the neural
model to match the counterfactual behavior of
the causal model on a base input when aligned
representations in both models are set to be the
value they would be for a source input. IIT is
fully differentiable, flexibly combines with other
objectives, and guarantees that the target causal
model is a causal abstraction of the neural model
when its loss is zero. We evaluate IIT on a structural vision task (MNIST-PVR), a navigational
language task (ReaSCAN), and a natural language
inference task (MQNLI). We compare IIT against
multi-task training objectives and data augmentation. In all our experiments, IIT achieves the
best results and produces neural models that are
more interpretable in the sense that they more
successfully realize the target causal model.

1. Introduction
In many domains, we have well-founded insights about
causal structure that we can express in symbolic terms,
ranging from commonsense intuitions about how the world
works to advanced scientific knowledge. These insights
have the potential to make up for gaps in available data,
or more generally to provide useful inductive biases. Can
we bring these insights into our models while still allowing
them to learn in a data-driven fashion?
*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University, Stanford, California.
Correspondence to: Atticus Geiger <atticusg@stanford.edu>,
Zhengxuan Wu <wuzhengx@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In this paper, we present interchange intervention training
(IIT), a new method that trains a neural network to realize
the abstract structure of a causal model. In IIT, we (1) align
the variables in a causal model C with the representations
in a neural model N and (2) train N to have the counterfactual behavior of C by performing aligned interchange
interventions (swapping of internal states created for different inputs) on N using C’s counterfactual output as the gold
label for the counterfactual prediction of N . IIT objectives
are differentiable and guarantee that, when the loss is zero,
the target causal model is a causal abstraction of the neural
network in the sense of Beckers & Halpern (2019).
IIT is an extension of the causal abstraction analysis of
Geiger et al. (2021), which can be placed under the broader
rubric of structural evaluations of neural models, which
includes probing and many kinds of feature attribution. Our
central point of differentiation from this prior work is that we
go beyond passive study of static models, by pushing them
to learn specific causal structures as part of optimization.
This allows for a productive interplay between model analysis and model improvement: we not only assess whether
models have systematic, interpretable internal structure but
also push them to acquire such structure.
We evaluate IIT in three contexts: (1) ResNet trained on a
vision task where one part of an image “points” to another
(MNIST-PVR), (2) a CNN-LSTM model trained to produce
action sequences in a grid world given a natural language
command (ReaSCAN), and (3) a pretrained BERT model
fine-tuned to label the semantic relation between two sentences (MQNLI). For each context, we define a high-level
causal model that capture aspects of the task. We then align
high-level causal variables to low-level neural representations to define IIT training objectives.
For the three case studies, we report two kinds of evaluation:
traditional behavioral evaluations using systematic generalization tasks that assess whether a model has learned a truly
general solution, and structural evaluations that directly assess the interpretability of our models by evaluating whether
they realize the target causal model. We compare IIT against
multi-task training objectives and data augmentation methods defined to make use of our causal models, finding that
IIT leads to models that both perform better on systematic

