COAT: Measuring Object Compositionality in Emergent Representations

Sirui Xie * 1 Ari Morcos 2 Song-Chun Zhu 1 3 Ramakrishna Vedantam 2

Abstract
Learning representations that can decompose a
multi-object scene into its constituent objects and
recompose them flexibly is desirable for objectoriented reasoning and planning. Built upon object masks in the pixel space, existing metrics
for objectness can only evaluate generative models with an object-specific “slot” structure. We
propose to directly measure compositionality in
the representation space as a form of objectness,
making such evaluations tractable for a wider
class of models. Our metric, COAT (Compositional Object Algebra Test), evaluates if a generic
representation exhibits certain geometric properties that underpin object compositionality beyond what is already captured by the raw pixel
space. Our experiments on the popular CLEVR
(Johnson et.al., 2018) domain reveal that existing disentanglement-based generative models are
not as compositional as one might expect, suggesting room for further modeling improvements.
We hope our work allows for a unified evaluation
of object-centric representations, spanning generative as well as discriminative, self-supervised
models.

1. Introduction
Understanding a complex, visual scene in terms of the objects in it and their properties is an important scene understanding problem. A lot of work in representation learning recently has focused on the property of “objectness”,
where the goal is to form abstract, low dimensional representations z ∈ RD of input scenes x ∈ RN (D << N )
that parse the scene into its constituent objects such that
these object primitives can be recomposed together to parse
entirely novel scenes (Burgess et al., 2019; Bapst et al.,
Work done when SX was an intern at FAIR. 1 Department of
Computer Science, UCLA 2 Fundamental AI Research (FAIR,
Meta Inc.) 3 Department of Statistics, UCLA. Correspondence
to: Sirui Xie <srxie@ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

A

C

B

D

D’

(a) COAT test case

𝑧"
𝑧!

𝑧#

𝑧$%
𝑧$

(b) Compositional representation

𝑧"
𝑧!

𝑧#

𝑧$

𝑧$%

(c) Non-compositional representation

Figure 1. An illustration of the parallelogram in COAT. The transformation from scene A to scene B is to add two blue rubber cubes,
so is the one from C to D. Hence in the representation space, we
would expect the translation vector zB − zA to be identical to
zD − zC . Further, we would expect the parallelogram not to hold
for A, B, C and hard negative D′ . Here D′ is the pixel-level hard
negative, resulted from B − A + C in the pixel space.

2019; Goyal et al., 2020; Greff et al., 2019; 2020; Kosiorek
et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2021; van Steenkiste et al., 2018;
Ali Eslami et al., 2016; Huang & Murphy, 2015). Such
representations can support reasoning and higher level tasks
such as counting (Chattopadhyay et al., 2017; Agrawal et al.,
2015), abstraction (Higgins et al., 2016; Vedantam et al.,
2020; 2018), puzzle solving (Barrett et al., 2018) and reinforcement learning (Bapst et al., 2019). More generally,
objectness is a promising inductive bias for generalization
to out-of-distribution scenes (Locatello et al., 2020; Chattopadhyay et al., 2017).
One can formalize the notion of object-centric representations or abstractions from the viewpoint of compositionality (Mikolov et al., 2013a) or disentanglement (Higgins
et al., 2016). For compositionality, we aim to learn representations featuring low-level primitives that can be composed
via simple vector operations to represent more complex
inputs. Critically, such a representation should be learnable from a small set of primitive combinations and enable
those vector operations to generalize to any combination
of primitives (Lake & Baroni, 2018; Radford et al., 2015;
Mitchell & Lapata, 2008). Disentanglement takes a stricter
view in which we not only aim to infer and compose different factors of variation, but also require that these factors
are partitioned into distinct dimensions zi or K “slots”,
D
namely, zk ∈ R K of the representation space Z to recover

