Dataset Condensation via Efficient Synthetic-Data Parameterization

Jang-Hyun Kim 1 Jinuk Kim 1 Seong Joon Oh 2 3 Sangdoo Yun 2 Hwanjun Song 2 Joonhyun Jeong 4
Jung-Woo Ha 2 Hyun Oh Song 1

The great success of machine learning with massive amounts of data comes at a price of huge
computation costs and storage for training and
tuning. Recent studies on dataset condensation
attempt to reduce the dependence on such massive
data by synthesizing a compact training dataset.
However, the existing approaches have fundamental limitations in optimization due to the limited
representability of synthetic datasets without considering any data regularity characteristics. To
this end, we propose a novel condensation framework that generates multiple synthetic data with
a limited storage budget via efficient parameterization considering data regularity. We further
analyze the shortcomings of the existing gradient matching-based condensation methods and
develop an effective optimization technique for
improving the condensation of training data information. We propose a unified algorithm that
drastically improves the quality of condensed data
against the current state-of-the-art on CIFAR-10,
ImageNet, and Speech Commands.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great success in various fields
thanks to the recent advances in technology and the availability of massive real-world data (LeCun et al., 2015). However, this success with massive data comes at a price: huge
computational and environmental costs for large-scale neural network training, hyperparameter tuning, and architecture search (Patterson et al., 2021; Brown et al., 2020; Cubuk
et al., 2019; Zoph & Le, 2017).
An approach to reduce the costs is to construct a compact
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul
National University 2 NAVER AI Lab 3 University of Tübingen
4
Image Vision, NAVER Clova. Correspondence to: Hyun Oh Song
<hyunoh@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Forward Pass

...

Abstract

Backpropagation

Original
training data

Classifier
(shared)

Matching
loss D

Multiformation f

Condensed data

Synthetic
training data

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed dataset condensation framework with multi-formation. Under the fixed-size storage for condensed data, multi-formation synthesizes multiple data used to
train models. We optimize the condensed data in an end-to-end
fashion by using the differentiable multi-formation functions.

dataset that contains sufficient information from the original
dataset to train models. A classic approach to construct
such a dataset is to select the coreset (Phillips, 2016). However, selection-based approaches have limitations in that
they depend on heuristics and assume the existence of representative samples in the original data (Zhao & Bilen, 2021b).
To overcome these limitations, recent studies, called dataset
condensation or dataset distillation, propose to synthesize a
compact dataset that has better storage efficiency than the
coresets (Wang et al., 2018). The synthesized datasets have
a variety of applications such as increasing the efficiency
of replay exemplars in continual learning and accelerating
neural architecture search (Zhao et al., 2021).
The natural data satisfy regularity conditions that form a
low-rank data subspace (Huang & Mumford, 1999), e.g.,
spatially nearby pixels in a natural image look similar and
temporally adjacent signals have similar spectra in speech
(Zhang et al., 2017). However, the existing condensation
approaches directly optimize each data element, e.g., pixel
by pixel, without imposing any regularity conditions on the
synthetic data (Nguyen et al., 2021; Zhao & Bilen, 2021a).
Under the limited storage budget, this inefficient parameterization of synthetic datasets results in the synthesis of a
limited number of data, having fundamental limitations on
optimization. Furthermore, optimizing the synthetic data
that have comparable training performance to the original
data is challenging because it requires unrolling the entire
training procedure. Recent studies propose surrogate ob-

