PAGE-PG: A Simple and Loopless Variance-Reduced Policy Gradient Method
with Probabilistic Gradient Estimation
Matilde Gargiani 1 Andrea Zanelli 2 Andrea Martinelli 1 Tyler H. Summers 3 John Lygeros 1

Abstract
Despite their success, policy gradient methods suffer from high variance of the gradient estimator,
which can result in unsatisfactory sample complexity. Recently, numerous variance-reduced extensions of policy gradient methods with provably
better sample complexity and competitive numerical performance have been proposed. After a compact survey on some of the main variance-reduced
REINFORCE-type methods, we propose ProbAbilistic Gradient Estimation for Policy Gradient
(PAGE-PG), a novel loopless variance-reduced
policy gradient method based on a probabilistic
switch between two types of update. Our method
is inspired by the PAGE estimator for supervised
learning and leverages importance sampling to
obtain an unbiased gradient estimator.
We show

that PAGE-PG enjoys a O ϵ−3 average sample complexity to reach an ϵ-stationary solution,
which matches the sample complexity of its most
competitive counterparts under the same setting.
A numerical evaluation confirms the competitive
performance of our method on classical control
tasks.

1. Introduction
Policy gradient methods have proved to be really effective in
many challenging deep reinforcement learning (RL) applications (Sutton & Barto, 2018). Their success is also due to
their versatility as they are applicable to any differentiable
policy parametrization, including complex neural networks,
and they admit easy extensions to model-free settings and
continuous state and action spaces. This class of methods has a long history in the RL literature that dates back
1
Automatic Control Laboratory at ETH Zurich 2 Institute for
Dynamic Systems and Control at ETH Zurich 3 Department of
Mechanical Engineering at the University of Texas at Dallas. Correspondence to: Matilde Gargiani <gmatilde@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

to (Williams, 1992), but only very recent work (Agarwal
et al., 2019) has characterized their theoretical properties,
such as convergence to a globally optimal solution and sample and iteration complexity. Since in RL it is generally
not possible to compute the exact gradient, but we rely
on sample-based approximations, policy gradient methods
are negatively affected by the high-variance of the gradient
estimator, which slows down convergence and leads to unsatisfactory sample complexity. To reduce the variance of
the gradient estimators, actor-critic methods are deployed,
where not only the policy, but also the state-action value
function or the advantage function are parameterized (Mnih
et al., 2016). Alternatively, taking inspiration from stochastic optimization, various variance-reduced policy gradient
methods have been proposed (Sidford et al., 2018; Papini
et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019; 2021; Yuan et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2021).
In this work, we focus on variance-reduced extensions of REINFORCE-type methods, such as REINFORCE (Williams, 1992), GPOMDP (Baxter & Bartlett,
2001) and their variants with baseline (Sutton & Barto,
2018). After reviewing the principal variance-reduced extensions of REINFORCE-type methods, we introduce a
novel variance-reduced policy gradient method, PAGE-PG,
based on the recently proposed PAGE estimator for supervised learning (Liet al., 2021). We prove that PAGE-PG
only takes O ϵ−3 trajectories on average to achieve an ϵstationary policy, which translates into a near-optimal solution for gradient dominated objectives. This result matches
the bounds on total sample complexity of the most competitive variance-reduced REINFORCE-type methods under
the same setting. The key feature of our method consists
in replacing the double-loop structure typical of variancereduced methods with a probabilistic switch between two
types of updates. According to recent works in supervised
learning (Kovalev et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021), variancereduced methods that do not rely on the classical doubleloop structure, also called loopless, are easier to tune, analyze and generally lead to superior and more robust practical
behavior. For policy gradient optimization, similar advantages are discussed in (Yuan et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020),
where the authors propose STORM-PG and IS-MBPG, respectively, which, to the best of our knowledge, are the only

