You Only Cut Once: Boosting Data Augmentation with a Single Cut

Junlin Han 1 2 3 Pengfei Fang 1 2 Weihao Li 1 Jie Hong 1 2 Mohammad Ali Armin 1
Ian Reid 3 Lars Petersson 1 Hongdong Li 2

Abstract
We present You Only Cut Once (YOCO) for performing data augmentations. YOCO cuts one
image into two pieces and performs data augmentations individually within each piece. Applying
YOCO improves the diversity of the augmentation
per sample and encourages neural networks to recognize objects from partial information. YOCO
enjoys the properties of parameter-free, easy usage, and boosting almost all augmentations for
free. Thorough experiments are conducted to
evaluate its effectiveness. We first demonstrate
that YOCO can be seamlessly applied to varying
data augmentations, neural network architectures,
and brings performance gains on CIFAR and ImageNet classification tasks, sometimes surpassing
conventional image-level augmentation by large
margins. Moreover, we show YOCO benefits contrastive pre-training toward a more powerful representation that can be better transferred to multiple
downstream tasks. Finally, we study a number
of variants of YOCO and empirically analyze the
performance for respective settings. Code is available at GitHub.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been widely applied to various computer vision tasks such as image classification (He
et al., 2016b; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014), semantic segmentation (Long et al., 2015;
Chen et al., 2014), and object detection (He et al., 2017;
Girshick et al., 2014). However, with the rapid gains in
computational resources, neural networks can easily overfit
a training set with numerous images (Russakovsky et al.,
2015), leading to a large generalization gap on test data.
1
Data61-CSIRO, Canberra, Auistralia 2 Australian National
University, Canberra, Australia 3 University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
Correspondence to: Junlin Han <junlin.han@data61.csiro.au>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Aug
Concat

Cut

Aug

Aug
Concat
Cut
Aug

Color jitter

Aug
Aug

Horizontal flip

Figure 1. YOCO cuts one image into two equal pieces, either in the
height or the width dimension. The same data augmentations are
performed independently within each piece. Augmented pieces are
then concatenated together to form one single augmented image.
The upper row shows the results of YOCO applied to Color
jitter, where the two pieces are both augmented, producing a
diversified fully-augmented image. The lower row presents the
result of employing YOCO to Horizontal flip, only the left
piece has been augmented, yielding a partially-augmented image.

In addition, neural networks can be effortlessly fooled by
adversarial examples or attacks (Hendrycks et al., 2021a;
Madry et al., 2018). Thus, to improve the generalization
performance and robustness of neural networks, multiple
training strategies have been proposed mainly from two
views: regularization techniques (Srivastava et al., 2014;
Huang et al., 2016; Szegedy et al., 2016) and data augmentations (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). In this work, we focus on
improving data augmentations in particular.
Standard data augmentations are mostly performed at the
image-level, which yields all-round performance improvements in both generality and robustness. Usually, imagelevel augmentation preserves semantics globally, following
humans’ cognitive intuition. Yet, human beings are also
able to recognize objects from partial information alone.
Patches, i.e., the internal information of images, are strong
natural signals. Before the deep learning era, the power of
patches has been exploited in many low-level vision (Efros
& Leung, 1999; Kervrann & Boulanger, 2006) and highlevel vision (Sivic & Zisserman, 2003; Csurka et al., 2004;
Lazebnik et al., 2006) works. Recently, splitting one image into multiple non-overlapping patches as the input for
neural networks is a key success of Vision Transformer
(ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). However, how to perform

