Active Fairness Auditing

Tom Yan * 1 Chicheng Zhang * 2

Abstract
The fast spreading adoption of machine learning (ML) by companies across industries poses
significant regulatory challenges. One such challenge is scalability: how can regulatory bodies
efficiently audit these ML models, ensuring that
they are fair? In this paper, we initiate the study
of query-based auditing algorithms that can estimate the demographic parity of ML models in
a query-efficient manner. We propose an optimal deterministic algorithm, as well as a practical randomized, oracle-efficient algorithm with
comparable guarantees. Furthermore, we make
inroads into understanding the optimal query complexity of randomized active fairness estimation
algorithms. Our first exploration of active fairness
estimation aims to put AI governance on firmer
theoretical foundations.

1. Introduction
With the growing usage of artificial intelligence across industries, governance efforts are increasingly ramping up. A
key challenge in regulatory efforts is the problem of scalability. Even for well-resourced countries like Norway, which
is a pioneer in AI governance, regulators are only able to
monitor and engage with a “small fraction of the companies” (McCarthy, 2021). This growing issue calls for a
better understanding of efficient algorithms that can audit
machine learning (ML) models, which we now formalize.
Problem Formulation: A regulatory institution is interested in auditing an unknown model h∗ : X → {−1, 1}
held by a company (e.g. a lending company in the finance
sector), where X is the feature space (e.g. of all information
supplied by users). We assume that the regulatory institution only has knowledge of the hypothesis class H where
*
1
Equal contribution
Carnegie Mellon University
University of Arizona.
Correspondence to:
Tom
Yan
<tyan2@andrew.cmu.edu>,
Chicheng
Zhang
<chichengz@cs.arizona.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

h∗ comes from (e.g. the family of linear classifiers), and it
would like to estimate µ(h∗ ) for a function µ that measures
the model property of interest. To this end, the institution is
allowed to send black-box queries to the model h∗ , i.e. send
the company a query example x and receive h∗ (x). The
regulatory institution’s goal is to efficiently estimate µ(h∗ )
to within an error of at most  > 0.
We measure an algorithm’s efficiency in terms of both its
query complexity and computational complexity. Having an
auditing algorithm with low query and computational complexity naturally helps to address the scalability challenge:
greater efficiency means that each audit may be processed
faster and more audits may be processed at a time.
Property of Interest: While which properties µ to assess is still heavily debated by regulators, we initiate the
study of algorithms that audit fairness, a mainstay in regulatory efforts. In particular, we will take µ to be Demographic Parity (DP)1 : given distribution DX over X ×{0, 1}
(where feature x and sensitive attribute xA are jointly
drawn from), µDX (h) = Pr(x,xA )∼DX (h(x) = 1|xA =
1) − Pr(x,xA )∼DX (h(x) = 1|xA = 0). For brevity, when it
is clear from context, we abbreviate PrDX , µDX as Pr, µ,
respectively. DP measures the degree of disparate treatment of model h on the two sub-populations x | xA = 0
and x | xA = 1, which we assume are non-negligible:
p := min(Pr(xA = 1), Pr(xA = 0)) = Ω(1). Achieving a small Demographic Parity may be thought of as a
stronger version of the US Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission’s “four-fifths rule”.2
To focus on query complexity, we will abstract away the
difficulty of evaluating µ by assuming that DX is known,
which means that for any h we may evaluate µ(h) to arbitrary precision; for instance, this may be achieved with
the availability of an arbitrarily large number of (unlabeled)
samples randomly drawn from x | xA = 0 and x | xA = 1.
Our main challenge is that we do not know h∗ and only
want to query h∗ insofar as to be able to accurately estimate
µ(h∗ ).
1
While fairness is the focus of our work, our algorithm may be
adapted to any µ which is a function of X and h∗ .
2
The “selection rate for any race, sex, or ethnic group [must
be at least] four-fifths (4/5) (or eighty percent) of the rate for the
group with the highest rate.”

