Modular Conformal Calibration
Charles Marx * 1 Shengjia Zhao * 1 Willie Neiswanger 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
Uncertainty estimates must be calibrated (i.e., accurate) and sharp (i.e., informative) in order to be
useful. This has motivated a variety of methods
for recalibration, which use held-out data to turn
an uncalibrated model into a calibrated model.
However, the applicability of existing methods is
limited due to their assumption that the original
model is also a probabilistic model. We introduce a versatile class of algorithms for recalibration in regression that we call modular conformal calibration (MCC). This framework allows
one to transform any regression model into a calibrated probabilistic model. The modular design
of MCC allows us to make simple adjustments
to existing algorithms that enable well-behaved
distribution predictions. We also provide finitesample calibration guarantees for MCC algorithms. Our framework recovers isotonic recalibration, conformal calibration, and conformal interval prediction, implying that our theoretical results apply to those methods as well. Finally, we
conduct an empirical study of MCC on 17 regression datasets. Our results show that new algorithms designed in our framework achieve nearperfect calibration and improve sharpness relative to existing methods.

1. Introduction
Uncertainty estimates can inform human decisions (Pratt
et al., 1995; Berger, 2013), flag when an automated decision system requires human review (Kang et al., 2021),
and serve as an internal component of automated systems.
For example, uncertainty informs treatment decisions in
medicine (Begoli et al., 2019) and supports safety in autonomous navigation (Michelmore et al., 2018). In such
settings, the benefits of accounting for uncertainty hinge on

our ability to produce calibrated uncertainty estimates—
e.g., of those events to which one assigns a probability of
90%, the events should indeed occur 90% of the time. A
model that is not calibrated can consistently make confident
predictions that are incorrect.
Many models, such as neural networks (Guo et al., 2017)
and Gaussian processes (Rasmussen, 2003; Tran et al.,
2019), achieve high accuracy but have poorly calibrated or
absent uncertainty estimates. In other cases, a pretrained
model is released for wide use and it is difficult to guarantee that it will produce calibrated uncertainty estimates in
new settings (Zhao et al., 2021). This leads us to the question: how can we safely deploy models with high predictive
value but poor or absent uncertainty estimates?
These challenges have motivated work on recalibration,
whereby a model with poor uncertainty estimates is transformed into a probabilistic model that outputs calibrated
probabilities (Kuleshov et al., 2018; Vovk et al., 2020;
Niculescu-Mizil & Caruana, 2005; Chung et al., 2021). Recalibration methods are attractive because they require only
black-box access to a given model and can return wellcalibrated probabilistic predictions.
However, calibration is not the only goal of probabilistic
models. It is also important for a probabilistic model to predict sharp (i.e., low variance) distributions to convey more
information. Furthermore, recalibration methods need to
be data efficient to calibrate models in data poor regimes.
In this paper, we introduce modular conformal calibration
(MCC), a class of algorithms that unifies existing recalibration methods and gives well-behaved distribution predictions from any model. Our main contributions are:

Equal contribution 1 Computer Science Department, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Charles Marx <ctmarx@stanford.edu>.

1. We introduce modular conformal calibration, a class
of algorithms for recalibration in regression, which
can be applied to recalibrate almost any regression
model. MCC unifies isotonic calibration (Kuleshov
et al., 2018), conformal calibration (Vovk et al., 2020),
and conformal interval prediction (Vovk et al., 2005)
under a single theoretical framework, and additionally
leads to new algorithms.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2. We provide finite-sample calibration guarantees, showing that MCC can achieve  calibration error with
O(1/) samples. These results also apply to the afore-

*

