Offline Meta-Reinforcement Learning with Online Self-Supervision

Vitchyr H. Pong 1 Ashvin Nair 1 Laura Smith 1 Catherine Huang 1 Sergey Levine 1

Abstract
Meta-reinforcement learning (RL) methods can
meta-train policies that adapt to new tasks with orders of magnitude less data than standard RL, but
meta-training itself is costly and time-consuming.
If we can meta-train on offline data, then we can
reuse the same static dataset, labeled once with
rewards for different tasks, to meta-train policies
that adapt to a variety of new tasks at meta-test
time. Although this capability would make metaRL a practical tool for real-world use, offline metaRL presents additional challenges beyond online
meta-RL or standard offline RL settings. Meta-RL
learns an exploration strategy that collects data
for adapting, and also meta-trains a policy that
quickly adapts to data from a new task. Since this
policy was meta-trained on a fixed, offline dataset,
it might behave unpredictably when adapting to
data collected by the learned exploration strategy, which differs systematically from the offline
data and thus induces distributional shift. We propose a hybrid offline meta-RL algorithm, which
uses offline data with rewards to meta-train an
adaptive policy, and then collects additional unsupervised online data, without any reward labels to
bridge this distribution shift. By not requiring reward labels for online collection, this data can be
much cheaper to collect. We compare our method
to prior work on offline meta-RL on simulated
robot locomotion and manipulation tasks and find
that using additional unsupervised online data collection leads to a dramatic improvement in the
adaptive capabilities of the meta-trained policies,
matching the performance of fully online metaRL on a range of challenging domains that require
generalization to new tasks.

1
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to:
Vitchyr H. Pong <vitchyr@eecs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) agents are often described as
learning from reward and punishment analogously to animals: in the same way that a person might train a dog by
providing treats, we might train RL agents by providing
rewards. However, in reality, modern deep RL agents require so many trials to learn a task that providing rewards by
hand is often impractical. Meta-reinforcement learning in
principle can mitigate this, by learning to learn using a set of
meta-training tasks, and then acquiring new behaviors in just
a few trials at meta-test time. Current meta-RL methods are
so efficient that meta-trained policies require only a handful
of trajectories (Rakelly et al., 2019), which is reasonable for
a human to provide by hand. However, the meta-training
phase in these algorithms still requires a large number of
online samples, often even more than standard RL, due to
the multi-task nature of the meta-learning problem.
A potential solution to this issue is to use offline reinforcement learning methods, which use only prior experience
without active data collection. These methods are promising because a user must only annotate multi-task data with
rewards once in the offline dataset, rather than doing so in
the inner loop of RL training, and the same offline multitask data can be reused repeatedly for many training runs.
While a few recent works have proposed offline meta-RL
algorithms (Dorfman & Tamar, 2020; Mitchell et al., 2021),
we identify a specific problem when an agent trained with
offline meta-RL is tested on a new task: the distributional
shift between the behavior policy from the offline data and
the meta-test time exploration policy means that adaptation
procedures learned from offline data might not perform well
on the (differently distributed) data collected by the exploration policy at meta-test time. This mismatch in training
distribution occurs because offline meta-RL never trains on
data generated by the meta-learned exploration policy. In
practice, we find that this mismatch leads to a large degradation in performance when adapting to new tasks. Moreover,
we do not want to remove this distributional shift by simply
adopting a conservative exploration strategy, because learning an exploration strategy enables an agent to collect better
data for faster adaptation.
We propose to address this challenge by collecting additional online data without any reward supervision, leading

