FedScale: Benchmarking Model and System Performance of Federated
Learning at Scale

Fan Lai 1 Yinwei Dai 1 Sanjay S. Singapuram 1 Jiachen Liu 1 Xiangfeng Zhu 1 2 Harsha V. Madhyastha 1
Mosharaf Chowdhury 1

1. Introduction

Internet

Client Selection

①

②

Y

Available?

Selected? Y

N

N

③
Training

Aggregation
④
N

Drop out or
miss deadline?

Round i+1

We present FedScale, a federated learning (FL)
benchmarking suite with realistic datasets and a
scalable runtime to enable reproducible FL research. FedScale datasets encompass a wide
range of critical FL tasks, ranging from image
classification and object detection to language
modeling and speech recognition. Each dataset
comes with a unified evaluation protocol using
real-world data splits and evaluation metrics. To
reproduce realistic FL behavior, FedScale contains a scalable and extensible runtime. It provides high-level APIs to implement FL algorithms, deploy them at scale across diverse hardware and software backends, and evaluate them at
scale, all with minimal developer efforts. We combine the two to perform systematic benchmarking experiments and highlight potential opportunities for heterogeneity-aware co-optimizations
in FL. FedScale is open-source and actively maintained by contributors from different institutions
at http://fedscale.ai. We welcome feedback and contributions from the community.

Server

Aggregation

Execution

Selection

Abstract

Client device
Round i

① Devices check-in with server; then ③ On-device training is performed; then model
server selects a subset of clients
update is reported back if training succeeds
② Model and configuration are sent ④ Server aggregates updates into the global
to selected devices
model; then training moves to next round

Figure 1. Standard FL protocol.

devices as well as non-IID data distributions, existing efforts have focused on optimizing different aspects of FL:
(1) System efficiency: reducing computation load (e.g., using
smaller models (Sandler et al., 2018)) or communication
traffic (e.g., local SGD (McMahan et al., 2017)) to achieve
shorter round duration; (2) Statistical efficiency: designing
data heterogeneity-aware algorithms (e.g., client clustering
(Ghosh et al., 2020b)) to obtain better training accuracy with
fewer training rounds; (3) Privacy and security: developing reliable strategies (e.g., differentially private training
(Kairouz et al., 2021a)) to make FL more privacy-preserving
and robust to potential attacks.

Department of Computer Science, University of Michigan
Department of Computer Science, University of Washington. Correspondence to: Fan Lai <fanlai@umich.edu>.

A comprehensive benchmark to evaluate an FL solution
must investigate its behavior under the practical FL setting
with (1) data heterogeneity and (2) device heterogeneity
under (3) heterogeneous connectivity and (4) availability
conditions at (5) multiple scales on a (6) broad variety of
ML tasks. While the first two aspects are oft-mentioned in
the literature (Li et al., 2020), realistic network connectivity
and the availability of client devices can affect both types of
heterogeneity (e.g., distribution drift (Eichner et al., 2019)),
impairing model convergence. Similarly, evaluation at a
large scale can expose an algorithm’s robustness, as practical
FL deployment often runs across thousands of concurrent
participants out of millions of clients (Yang et al., 2018).
Overlooking any one aspect can mislead FL evaluation (§2).

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Unfortunately, existing FL benchmarks often fall short
across multiple dimensions (Table 1). First, they are limited
in the versatility of data for various real-world FL appli-

Federated learning (FL) is an emerging machine learning
(ML) setting where a logically centralized coordinator orchestrates many distributed clients (e.g., smartphones or laptops) to collaboratively train or evaluate a model (Bonawitz
et al., 2019; Kairouz et al., 2021b) (Figure 1). It enables
model training and evaluation on end-user data, while circumventing high cost and privacy risks in gathering the raw
data from clients, with applications across diverse ML tasks.
In the presence of heterogeneous execution speeds of client
1

2

