Equivariant Diffusion for Molecule Generation in 3D

Emiel Hoogeboom * 1 Victor Garcia Satorras * 1 Clément Vignac * 2 Max Welling 1

Abstract
This work introduces a diffusion model for
molecule generation in 3D that is equivariant to
Euclidean transformations. Our E(3) Equivariant
Diffusion Model (EDM) learns to denoise a diffusion process with an equivariant network that
jointly operates on both continuous (atom coordinates) and categorical features (atom types). In addition, we provide a probabilistic analysis which
admits likelihood computation of molecules using
our model. Experimentally, the proposed method
significantly outperforms previous 3D molecular
generative methods regarding the quality of generated samples and efficiency at training time.

diffuse

denoise

diffuse

denoise

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning methods are starting to make an important impact on molecular sciences. Behind the success
of Alphafold in protein folding prediction (Jumper et al.,
2021), an increasing body of literature develops deep learning models to analyze or synthesize (in silico) molecules
(Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018; Gebauer et al., 2019;
Klicpera et al., 2020; Simm et al., 2021).
Molecules live in the physical 3D space, and as such are subject to geometric symmetries such as translations, rotations,
and possibly reflections. These symmetries are referred to
as the Euclidean group in 3 dimensions, E(3). Leveraging
these symmetries in molecular data is important for good
generalization and has been extensively studied (Thomas
et al., 2018; Fuchs et al., 2020; Finzi et al., 2020).
Although developed for discriminative tasks, E(n) equivariant layers can also be used for molecule generation in 3D.
In particular, they have been integrated into autoregressive
models (Gebauer et al., 2018; 2019) which artificially in*

Equal contribution 1 UvA-Bosch Delta Lab, University of
Amsterdam, Netherlands 2 EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Emiel Hoogeboom <e.hoogeboom@uva.nl>,
Victor Garcia Satorras <v.garciasatorras@uva.nl>, Clément Vignac <clement.vignac@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Overview of the EDM. To generate a molecule, a normal
distributed set of points is denoised into a molecule consisting
of atom coordinates x in 3D and atom types h. As the model is
rotation equivariant, the likelihood is preserved when a molecule
is rotated by R.

troduce an order in the atoms and are known to be difficult
to scale during sampling (Xu et al., 2021b). Alternatively,
continuous-time normalizing flows such as Köhler et al.
(2020) or E-NF (Satorras et al., 2021a) are expensive to
train since they have to integrate a differential equation,
leading to limited performance and scalability.
In this work, we introduce E(3) Equivariant Diffusion Models (EDMs). EDMs learn to denoise a diffusion process that
operates on both continuous coordinates and categorical
atom types. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first diffusion model that directly generates molecules in 3D space.
Our method does not require a particular atom ordering (in
contrast to autoregressive models) and can be trained much
more efficiently than normalizing flows. To give an example, EDMs generate up to 16 times more stable molecules
than E-NFs when trained on QM9, while requiring half of
the training time. This favourable scaling behaviour allows
EDMs to be trained on larger drug-like datasets such as
GEOM-Drugs (Axelrod & Gomez-Bombarelli, 2020).
Our contributions can be summarized as follows. We intro-

