Visual Attention Emerges from Recurrent Sparse Reconstruction

Baifeng Shi 1 Yale Song 2 Neel Joshi 2 Trevor Darrell 1 Xin Wang 2

Abstract
Visual attention helps achieve robust perception
under noise, corruption, and distribution shifts
in human vision, which are areas where modern
neural networks still fall short. We present VARS,
Visual Attention from Recurrent Sparse reconstruction, a new attention formulation built on
two prominent features of the human visual attention mechanism: recurrency and sparsity. Related
features are grouped together via recurrent connections between neurons, with salient objects
emerging via sparse regularization. VARS adopts
an attractor network with recurrent connections
that converges toward a stable pattern over time.
Network layers are represented as ordinary differential equations (ODEs), formulating attention
as a recurrent attractor network that equivalently
optimizes the sparse reconstruction of input using
a dictionary of “templates” encoding underlying
patterns of data. We show that self-attention is
a special case of VARS with a single-step optimization and no sparsity constraint. VARS can be
readily used as a replacement for self-attention in
popular vision transformers, consistently improving their robustness across various benchmarks.

1. Introduction
One of the hallmarks of human visual perception is its robustness under severe noise, corruption, and distribution
shifts (Biederman, 1987; Bisanz et al., 2012). Although having surpassed human performance on ImageNet (He et al.,
2015), convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are still far
behind the human visual systems on robustness (Dodge &
Karam, 2017; Geirhos et al., 2017) – CNNs are vulnerable
under random image corruption (Hendrycks & Dietterich,
2019), adversarial perturbation (Szegedy et al., 2013), and
distribution shifts (Wang et al., 2019; Djolonga et al., 2021).
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Baifeng Shi <baifeng shi@berkeley.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Vision transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) have been
reported to be more robust to image corruption and distribution shifts than CNNs under certain conditions (Naseer
et al., 2021; Paul & Chen, 2021). One hypothesis is that the
self-attention module, a key component of vision transformers, helps improve robustness (Paul & Chen, 2021), achieving state-of-the-art performance on a variety of robustness
benchmarks (Mao et al., 2021). Although the robustness
of vision transformers still seems to be far behind human
vision (Hendrycks et al., 2021a; Dodge & Karam, 2017),
recent work suggests that attention is a key to achieving
(perhaps human-level) robustness in computer vision.
The cognitive science literature has also suggested a close
relationship between attention mechanisms and robustness
in human vision (Kar et al., 2019; Wyatte et al., 2012).1
For example, visual attention in human vision has been
shown to selectively amplify certain patterns in the input
signal and repress others that are not desired or meaningful,
leading to robust recognition under challenging conditions
such as occlusion (Tang et al., 2018), clutter (Mnih et al.,
2014; Walther et al., 2005), and severe corruptions (Wyatte
et al., 2014). These findings motivate us to improve robustness of neural networks by designing attention inspired by
the human visual attention. However, despite the existing
computational models of human visual attention (e.g., Li
(2014)), their concrete instantiation in DNNs is still missing, and the connection between human visual attention and
existing attention designs is also vague (Sood et al., 2020).
In this work, we introduce VARS—Visual Attention from
Recurrent Sparse reconstruction—a new attention formulation inspired by the recurrency and sparsity commonly
observed in the human visual system. Human visual attention contains the process of grouping and selecting salient
features while repressing irrelevant signals (Desimone &
Duncan, 1995). One of its neural foundations is the recurrent
connections between neurons in the same layer, as opposed
to the feed-forward connections from lower to higher layers (Stettler et al., 2002; Gilbert & Wiesel, 1989; Bosking
et al., 1997; Li, 1998; Lamme & Roelfsema, 2000). By
iteratively connecting neurons, salient features with strong
1

Here we limit our focus on bottom-up attention, i.e.,, attention
that fully depends on input and is not modulated by the high-level
task. See Li (2014) for a review on different types of attention in
the human visual system.

