Model Agnostic Sample Reweighting for Out-of-Distribution Learning

Xiao Zhou * 1 Yong Lin * 1 Renjie Pi * 1 Weizhong Zhang 1 Renzhe Xu 2 Peng Cui 2 Tong Zhang 1 3

Abstract
Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) and
invariant risk minimization (IRM) are two popular
methods proposed to improve out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization performance of machine
learning models. While effective for small models, it has been observed that these methods can
be vulnerable to overfitting with large overparameterized models. This work proposes a principled
method, Model Agnostic samPLe rEweighting
(MAPLE), to effectively address OOD problem,
especially in overparameterized scenarios. Our
key idea is to find an effective reweighting of
the training samples so that the standard empirical risk minimization training of a large model
on the weighted training data leads to superior
OOD generalization performance. The overfitting issue is addressed by considering a bilevel
formulation to search for the sample reweighting,
in which the generalization complexity depends
on the search space of sample weights instead
of the model size. We present theoretical analysis in linear case to prove the insensitivity of
MAPLE to model size, and empirically verify its
superiority in surpassing state-of-the-art methods
by a large margin. Code is available at https:
//github.com/x-zho14/MAPLE.

1. Introduction
Despite the unprecedented success of deep learning in recent
decades, machine learning methods are vulnerable to even
slight distributional shift (Goyal et al., 2019; Sagawa et al.,
2020; Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020). Actually, the common
independent and identical distribution (IID) assumption in
machine learning can be easily violated due to data selection
biases or unobserved confounders that widely exist in real
data (Liu et al., 2021b). Arjovsky et al. (2019) suggests that
*

Equal contribution 1 The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology 2 Tsinghua University 3 Google Research. Correspondence to: Tong Zhang <tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

models trained by empirical risk minimization (ERM) can
fail to learn causal factors but instead exploit the easier-tofit spurious correlations, which are prone to distributional
shift from training to testing domains (Gulrajani & LopezPaz, 2020). A typical example is that deep neural networks
(DNN) can rely on the background (spurious features: sand
or grassland) to distinguish between caw and camel (core
features) (Beery et al., 2018). Such model can fail dramatically in recognizing a cow in desert. How to enable the deep
models to generalize well under distributional shifts is an
important long-standing problem.
In an effort to prevent DNN from exploiting the undesired
spurious correlation, a popular research direction targets on
regularizing DNN during training, including distributionally
robust optimization (DRO) (Ben-Tal et al., 2013; Duchi
et al., 2019; 2021; Sagawa et al., 2020) and invariant risk
minimization (IRM) (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Krueger et al.,
2021a; Xie et al., 2020). We refer them as regularizationbased methods in this paper. DRO aims to optimize the
worst case performance in a set of distributions within a
certain distance to the original training distribution while
IRM tries to learn an invariant representation that discards
the spurious features. DRO and IRM have gained their
popularity owed to promising performance on small models
and datasets (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Duchi et al., 2019)
and simplicity to perform training in an end-to-end manner.
However, they are reported to be less effective when applied
to DNNs in recent studies (Sagawa et al., 2019; Cherepanova
et al., 2021; Yong Lin, 2021). Overparamterized DNN can
easily reduce the regularization term of DRO or IRM to zero
during training while still relying on the spurious features.
Another line of research is based on reweighting including
importance sampling (Kanamori et al., 2009; Ben-Tal et al.,
2013; Fang et al., 2020) and stable learning (Kuang et al.,
2020; Shen et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021). We refer to them
as reweighting-based methods. They generally perform
a two-stage pipeline: 1) reweight the data distribution by
some heuristics; 2) perform ERM training on the reweighted
distribution. In the first stage, they assign a weight to each
sample: importance sampling upweights the rare group inversely to its group size and stable learning tries to find a
weight that makes each feature orthogonal. With the weights
found in the first stage, the second stage of weighted ERM
training becomes resistant to spurious features. Since the

