A deep convolutional neural network that is invariant to time rescaling

Brandon G. Jacques 1 Zoran Tiganj 2 Aakash Sarkar 3 Marc W. Howard 3 Per B. Sederberg 1

Abstract
Human learners can readily understand speech,
or a melody, when it is presented slower or
faster than usual. This paper presents a deep
Scale-Invariant Temporal History Convolution
network (SITHCon) that uses a logarithmically
compressed temporal representation at each level.
Because time rescaling of the input results in a
translation of the memory representation over log
time, and because the output of the convolution is
equivariant to translations, this network can generalize to out-of-sample data that are temporal
rescalings of a learned pattern. We compare the
performance of SITHCon to a Temporal Convolution Network (TCN) on classification and regression problems with both univariate and multivariate time series. We find that SITHCon, unlike TCN, generalizes robustly over rescalings of
about an order of magnitude. Moreover, we show
that the network can generalize over exponentially
large scales without retraining the weights simply by extending the range of the logarithmicallycompressed temporal memory.

1. Introduction
Many problems in machine perception require integration
of information over continuous time. In the natural world,
these temporal signals can unfold over different time scales.
This material is based upon work supported by the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under Agreement
No. HR00112190036, ONR MURI N00014-16-1-2832, and a
Google-AI Faculty Research Award. The authors acknowledge
Research computing at The University of Virginia for providing computational resources and technical support that have contributed to the results reported within this publication. URL:
https://rc.virginia.edu. 1 Department of Psychology, University
of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States 2 Department of
Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, United
States 3 Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Boston
University, Boston, MA, United States. Correspondence to: Per B.
Sederberg <pbs5u@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

For instance, one would want a speech recognition system to
be able to identify words spoken more quickly than usual—
perhaps the user is in a hurry—as well as more slowly—
perhaps the user is tired or has one of several neurological
conditions that affect the rate of speech. People can naturally
adapt to time series presented at different rates. For instance
most people can easily identify a familiar melody played
at an unfamiliar speed, yet this is a class of problems that
proven difficult for many forms of AI. Although deep neural
networks have revolutionized a number of fields that rely
on representing time series, including speech perception
(Lea et al., 2017), they do not generalize across rates of
presentation and need to be explicitly trained on a wide
range of time scales (Chan et al., 2021). This paper presents
a deep convolutional neural network (CNN), inspired by
recent work in neuroscience, that generalizes to time series
presented at untrained rates.
The way the mammalian brain retains information about the
time of past events provides a novel strategy to construct
deep networks that are invariant to rescalings of their inputs.
Populations of neurons referred to as “time cells” (within
the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and lateral prefrontal
cortex) fire in sequence after a triggering stimulus (Fig. 1,
Eichenbaum, 2014). Different time cells fire at different
characteristic times after the triggering stimulus form a temporal basis set. Because different sequences of cells are
triggered by different environmental stimuli (e.g., Tiganj
et al., 2018; Taxidis et al., 2020), the population forms a
representation of what happened when in the past. Critically,
the temporal basis set is compressed (Kraus et al., 2013).
Psychological data and theoretical considerations suggest
that the basis set ought to evenly cover log time rather than
linear time (Balsam & Gallistel, 2009; Shankar & Howard,
2013; Tiganj et al., 2018; Howard et al., 2015). Notably,
neurophysiological evidence suggests that the brain uses a
logarithmically-compressed temporal memory in a number
of widely-spaced brain regions, including auditory cortex,
cerebellum and hippocampus (Rahman et al., 2020; Guo
et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2021).
A temporal memory constructed over log time is uniquely
robust to temporal rescalings. Consider a time series that
is rescaled by a factor a, t → at (Fig. 1). Because
log(at) = log(t) + log(a), rescaling time by a factor a
simply results in a translation, by a factor log(a), along a

