TPC: Transformation-Specific Smoothing for Point Cloud Models

Wenda Chu 1 Linyi Li 2 Bo Li 2

Abstract
Point cloud models with neural network architectures have achieved great success and have been
widely used in safety-critical applications, such as
Lidar-based recognition systems in autonomous
vehicles. However, such models are shown to
be vulnerable to adversarial attacks that aim to
apply stealthy semantic transformations such as
rotation and tapering to mislead model predictions. In this paper, we propose a transformationspecific smoothing framework TPC, which provides tight and scalable robustness guarantees
for point cloud models against semantic transformation attacks. We first categorize common
3D transformations into three categories: additive (e.g., shearing), composable (e.g., rotation),
and indirectly composable (e.g., tapering), and we
present generic robustness certification strategies
for all categories respectively. We then specify
unique certification protocols for a range of specific semantic transformations and their compositions. Extensive experiments on several common
3D transformations show that TPC significantly
outperforms state of the art. For example, our
framework boosts the certified accuracy against
twisting transformation along the z-axis (within
±20◦ ) from 20.3% to 83.8%. Codes and models are available at https://github.com/
Qianhewu/Point-Cloud-Smoothing.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks that take point clouds data as inputs (point cloud models) are widely used in computer vision (Qi et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019; Zhou & Tuzel,
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, P. R. China (work done during remote internship at UIUC) 2 University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), Illinois, USA. Correspondence
to: Wenda Chu <chuwd19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Linyi Li
<linyi2@illinois.edu>, Bo Li <lbo@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Car
Rotation

TransformationSpecific
Smoothing
Strategy

…

TPC Smoothed
Point Cloud
Model

Point Cloud
Model

Prediction:
Table

TPC
Certification

Guarantee:
For any rotation
with 5°,
prediction is Car

TPC Framework

Figure 1. Overview of TPC framework. TPC includes smoothing and certification strategies to provide certified robustness for
point cloud models against semantic transformations. Besides the
rotation as shown in the figure, TPC provides strong robustness
certification for a wide range of other semantic transformations.

2018) and autonomous driving (Li, 2017; Chen et al., 2017;
2020). For instance, modern autonomous driving systems
are equipped with LiDAR sensors that generate point cloud
inputs to feed into point cloud models (Cao et al., 2019).
Despite their successes, point cloud models are shown to be
vulnerable to adversarial attacks that mislead the model’s
prediction by adding stealthy perturbations to point coordinates or applying semantic transformations (e.g., rotation,
shearing, tapering) (Cao et al., 2019; Xiang et al., 2019;
Xiao et al., 2019; Fang et al., 2021). Specifically, semantic
transformation based attacks can be easily operated on point
cloud models by simply manipulating sensor positions or
orientations (Cao et al., 2019; 2021). These attacks may
lead to severe consequences such as forcing an autonomous
driving vehicle to steer toward the cliff (Pei et al., 2017). A
wide range of empirical defenses against these attacks has
been studied (Zhu et al., 2017; Aoki et al., 2019; Sun et al.,
2020; 2021b;a), while defenses with robustness guarantees
are less explored (Lorenz et al., 2021; Fischer et al., 2021)
and provides loose and less scalable certification.
In this paper, we propose a transformation-specific smoothing framework TPC that provides tight and scalable probabilistic robustness guarantees for point cloud models against
a wide range of semantic transformation attacks. We first
categorize common semantic transformations into three categories: additive (e.g., shearing), composable (e.g., rotation),
and indirectly composable (e.g., tapering). For each category, our framework proposes novel smoothing and robustness certification strategies. With TPC, for each common
semantic transformation or composition, we prove the corresponding robustness conditions that yield efficient and tight
robustness certification.

