Fisher SAM: Information Geometry and Sharpness Aware Minimisation

Minyoung Kim 1 Da Li 1 Shell Xu Hu 1 Timothy M. Hospedales 1 2

Abstract
Recent sharpness-aware minimisation (SAM) is
known to find flat minima which is beneficial
for better generalisation with improved robustness. SAM essentially modifies the loss function by reporting the maximum loss value within
the small neighborhood around the current iterate. However, it uses the Euclidean ball to define
the neighborhood, which can be inaccurate since
loss functions for neural networks are typically
defined over probability distributions (e.g., class
predictive probabilities), rendering the parameter
space non Euclidean. In this paper we consider
the information geometry of the model parameter
space when defining the neighborhood, namely
replacing SAM’s Euclidean balls with ellipsoids
induced by the Fisher information. Our approach,
dubbed Fisher SAM, defines more accurate neighborhood structures that conform to the intrinsic
metric of the underlying statistical manifold. For
instance, SAM may probe the worst-case loss
value at either a too nearby or inappropriately distant point due to the ignorance of the parameter
space geometry, which is avoided by our Fisher
SAM. Another recent Adaptive SAM approach
stretches/shrinks the Euclidean ball in accordance
with the scale of the parameter magnitudes. This
might be dangerous, potentially destroying the
neighborhood structure. We demonstrate improved performance of the proposed Fisher SAM
on several benchmark datasets/tasks.

1. Introduction
Contemporary deep learning models achieve state of the
art generalisation performance on a wide variety of tasks.
These models are often massively overparameterised, and
capable of memorizing the entire training set (Zhang et al.,
1
Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK 2 University of Edinburgh.
Correspondence to: Minyoung Kim <mikim21@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2017). The training loss landscape of such models is complex and non-convex with multiple local and global minima
of highly varying generalisation performance. Good performance is therefore obtained by exploiting various explicit
and implicit regularisation schemes during learning to find
local minima in the training loss that actually generalise
well. Methods such as dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014),
weight-decay, and data augmentation have been developed
to provide explicit regularisation, while the dynamics of optimisers such as SGD can provide implicit regularisation, by
finding solutions with low-norm weights (Chaudhar et al.,
2017; Zhang et al., 2017).
A number of studies have linked the flatness of a given training minima to generalisation quality (Keskar et al., 2017;
Chaudhar et al., 2017). Searching for flat minima of the loss
function is intuitively appealing, as it is obviously beneficial
for finding models resilient to data noise and/or model parameter corruption/perturbation. This has led to an increasing number of optimisation methods (Chaudhar et al., 2017;
Foret et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021) designed to explicitly
search for flat minima. Despite this variety of noteworthy
theoretical and empirical work, existing approaches have yet
to scalably solve this problem, as developing computationally efficient methods for finding flat minima is non-trivial.
A seminal method in this area is known as sharpness-aware
minimisation (SAM) (Foret et al., 2021). SAM is a minimax type algorithm that essentially modifies the loss function to report the maximum loss value within the small
neighborhood around the current iterate. Optimising with
SAM thus prefers flatter minima than conventional SGD.
However, one of the main drawbacks of SAM is that it uses
a Euclidean ball to define the neighborhood, which is inaccurate since loss functions for neural networks are typically
defined over probability distributions (e.g., class predictive
probabilities), rendering the parameter space non Euclidean.
Another recent approach called Adaptive SAM (ASAM)
(Kwon et al., 2021) stretches/shrinks the Euclidean ball in
accordance with the scales of the parameter magnitudes.
However, this approach to determining the flatness ellipsoid of interest is heuristic and might severely degrade the
neighborhood structure. Although SAM and ASAM are
successful in many empirical tasks, ignorance of the underlying geometry of the model parameter space may lead to
suboptimal results.

