Multi-Grained Vision Language Pre-Training:
Aligning Texts with Visual Concepts

Yan Zeng 1 Xinsong Zhang 1 Hang Li 1

Abstract
Most existing methods in vision language pretraining rely on object-centric features extracted
through object detection and make fine-grained
alignments between the extracted features and
texts. It is challenging for these methods to learn
relations among multiple objects. To this end, we
propose a new method called X-VLM 1 to perform ‘multi-grained vision language pre-training.’
The key to learning multi-grained alignments is
to locate visual concepts in the image given the
associated texts, and in the meantime align the
texts with the visual concepts, where the alignments are in multi-granularity. Experimental results show that X-VLM effectively leverages the
learned multi-grained alignments to many downstream vision language tasks and consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. A comparison of (a) the existing methods relying on
object detection, (b) the methods aligning the texts with the whole
image, and (c) our approach.

1. Introduction
Vision language pre-training aims to learn vision language
alignments from a large number of image-text pairs. A pretrained Vision Language Model (VLM) fine-tuned with a
small amount of labeled data has shown the state-of-the-art
performances in many Vision Language (V+L) tasks such
as visual question answering and image-text retrieval.
Existing methods learning vision language alignments fall
into two approaches as shown in Figure 1 (a, b). Most of
them detect objects in the image and align the text with
fine-grained (object-centric) features. They either utilize
pre-trained object detectors (Tan & Bansal, 2019; Lu et al.,
2019; Li et al., 2019; 2020a; Chen et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2020b; Gan et al., 2020) or conduct object detection on-thefly in the pre-training process (Su et al., 2020; Xu et al.,
1
ByteDance AI Lab. Correspondence to:
<zengyan.yanne@bytedance.com>.

Yan Zeng

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
The code and pre-trained models are available at https:
//github.com/zengyan-97/X-VLM.

2021a). The other methods do not rely on object detection
and only learn alignments between the texts and coarsegrained (overall) features of the image (Huang et al., 2020;
2021; Kim et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021a).
Both the fine-grained and coarse-grained approaches have
drawbacks. Object detection identifies all possible objects
in the image, and some of them might not be relevant to
the text. Object-centric features cannot easily represent
relations among multiple objects, e.g. “man crossing the
street”. Moreover, it is challenging to pre-define the categories of objects suitable for downstream tasks. On the other
hand, the coarse-grained approaches cannot effectively learn
fine-grained alignments between vision and language, e.g.
object-level, which has shown to be critical for some downstream tasks such as visual reasoning, visual grounding, and
image captioning.
Ideally, we want a VLM to learn multi-grained alignments
between vision and language in pre-training, which are not
restricted to object-level or image-level, and leverage the
learned alignments to downstream V+L tasks. Unfortunately, existing methods cannot satisfactorily handle multi-

