Prototype-Anchored Learning for Learning with Imperfect Annotations

Xiong Zhou 1 Xianming Liu 1 2 Deming Zhai 1 Junjun Jiang 1 2 Xin Gao 3 2 Xiangyang Ji 4

Abstract
The success of deep neural networks greatly relies on the availability of large amounts of highquality annotated data, which however are difficult or expensive to obtain. The resulting labels
may be class imbalanced, noisy or human biased.
It is challenging to learn unbiased classification
models from imperfectly annotated datasets, on
which we usually suffer from overfitting or underfitting. In this work, we thoroughly investigate
the popular softmax loss and margin-based loss,
and offer a feasible approach to tighten the generalization error bound by maximizing the minimal
sample margin. We further derive the optimality
condition for this purpose, which indicates how
the class prototypes should be anchored. Motivated by theoretical analysis, we propose a simple
yet effective method, namely prototype-anchored
learning (PAL), which can be easily incorporated
into various learning-based classification schemes
to handle imperfect annotation. We verify the effectiveness of PAL on class-imbalanced learning
and noise-tolerant learning by extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, deep neural networks have achieved
impressive performance in various tasks of computer vision
(Goodfellow et al., 2016), such as image classification, segmentation, object detection, etc. One critical factor that
attributes to the success of deep learning is the availability
of large amounts of annotated training data. However, in
many real-world scenarios, it would be difficult to attain
perfect supervision for fully supervised learning due to a
variety of limitations, such as inaccurate human annotation
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China 2 Peng Cheng
Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 3 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia 4 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xianming Liu
<csxm@hit.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(Han et al., 2020), difficulty in collecting enough samples
for all classes (Zhang et al., 2021c), etc. In this work, we
specially consider the task of image classification under two
imperfect annotation scenarios that are commonly encountered in practical applications:
Imbalanced Annotation. Real-world data usually exhibits
highly-skewed class distribution, due to the nature that some
classes are easy to collect sufficient examples while many
classes are associated with only a few ones (Zhang et al.,
2021c). For instance, in plant disease classification, it is
comparatively easier to obtain images for common diseases
than rare diseases during data collection. This results in
that a few majority classes contain most of the data while
massive minority classes only contain a scarce amount of
instances. This issue would make naive learning biased
towards the majority classes while with poor accuracy on
the minority ones, posing a challenge for generalization.
Inaccurate Annotation. Data annotation tasks that require
a high level of competency make the acquisition of handlabeled data time-consuming and expensive. One common
and economical way to collect large amounts of training data
is through online queries (Liu et al., 2011) or crowdsourcing
(Arpit et al., 2017), which however inevitably introduce
noisy labels due to that no domain expertise is involved and
a variety of human biases exist. This issue would lead deep
neural networks to overfit mislabeled data, which seriously
hampers the generalization ability of neural networks.
Learning unbiased classification models from imperfectly
annotated datasets is a challenging problem. Specifically,
for learning with imbalanced annotation, the main concern
is how to prevent overfitting to the majority classes and
achieve a better trade-off between the majority and minority
classes. The difficulty lies in that the spanned feature space
of the majority classes is spread while that of the minority
classes is concentrated, which hampers the generalization
of the learned classifier boundaries due to the lack of intraclass compactness and inter-class separation, as shown in
Fig. 1(b). For learning with noisy labels, the key is to
prevent overfitting to mislabeled data, as well as achieve
a good trade-off between robustness and the fitting ability.
The softmax loss enjoys the advantage of fitting ability due
to that the optimizer puts more emphasis on ambiguous
samples, which however suffers from the overfitting effect

