Robustness in Multi-Objective Submodular
Optimization: a Quantile Approach

Cedric Malherbe 1 Kevin Scaman 2 3

Abstract
The optimization of multi-objective submodular
systems appears in a wide variety of applications.
However, there are currently very few techniques
which are able to provide a robust allocation to
such systems. In this work, we propose to design and analyse novel algorithms for the robust
allocation of submodular systems through lens of
quantile maximization. We start by observing that
identifying an exact solution for this problem is
computationally intractable. To tackle this issue,
we propose a proxy for the quantile function using
a softmax formulation, and show that this proxy is
well suited to submodular optimization. Based on
this relaxation, we propose a novel and simple algorithm called SOFTSAT. Theoretical properties
are provided for this algorithm as well as novel
approximation guarantees. Finally, we provide numerical experiments showing the efficiency of our
algorithm with regards to state-of-the-art methods in a test bed of real-world applications, and
show that SOFTSAT is particularly robust and
well-suited to online scenarios.

1. Introduction
The maximization of submodular functions appears in many
practical scenarios, including feature selection (Das &
Kempe, 2018), network monitoring (de Badyn & Mesbahi,
2016), news article recommendation (El-Arini et al., 2009),
sensor placement (Tzoumas et al., 2016), influence maximization (Kempe et al., 2003) and document summarization
(Lin & Bilmes, 2011). In these applications, submodularity
allows the use of fast optimization algorithms while retaining strong theoretical guarantees (Krause & Golovin, 2014).
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 2 DI ENS, École normale supérieure,
CNRS, INRIA, PSL University 3 This work was done while the
author was working at Huawei.. Correspondence to: Cedric Malherbe <cedric.malherbe@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

While it is widely known that greedy methods work well
for a single objective (Nemhauser et al., 1978), the problem
becomes much harder when there are multiple objectives to
handle. In this paper, we focus on the case where the system
we wish to optimize is described by multiple submodular
functions F1 , . . . , Fd and we wish to provide a robust allocation among the objectives. In practice, standard approaches
(Kempe et al., 2003; Krause et al., 2008) to solve this problem consists of either aggregating the system
P through the
(possibly weighted) average-case (1/d) i Fi (S) or the
worst-case mini Fi (S) of the objectives. However, only
focusing on the average-case can lead to many objectives
with poor values, while considering the worst-case may be
too pessimistic to reflect the overall system and drastically
reduces their use in practice (more specifically when there
are outliers that naturally present low values). In this work,
we propose to tackle these limitations by following the risk
literature (Ben-Tal & Teboulle, 2007; Rostek, 2010) and
propose to use the maximization of the quantiles of the objectives Qp (F1 (S), . . . , Fd (S)). Indeed, maximizing the
p-th quantile of the objectives has already been shown to be
a reliable measure for robustness in the risk literature and
allows to discard the p × d outliers of the system with the
worst objectives from the optimization while still robustly
allocating the resources among the remaining objectives.
Unfortunately, the major drawback of this approach is that
the quantiles do not preserve submodularity and their direct
maximization is thus not trivial. In this work, we show how
to tackle this problem by introducing a novel tool: biased
expectations that act as proxies for quantiles and allows to
design provable algorithms. Up to our knowledge, our work
provides the first algorithm that is designed to solve the
robust submodular problem through quantile maximization.
More precisely, our contribution can be summarized as follows: (1) a novel formulation of the robust multi-objective
submodular maximization problem through the lens of quantile optimization; (2) an introduction to biased expectations
as generic aggregate functions for robustness as well as its
generic properties; (3) a novel algorithm called SOFTSAT
which relies on biased expectations and comes, to the best
of our knowledge, with the first approximation guarantees
for quantile robustness; (4) an application of SOFTSAT to
three motivating real-world optimization problems in natu-

