On Non-local Convergence Analysis of Deep Linear Networks

Kun Chen * 1 Dachao Lin * 2 Zhihua Zhang 1

Abstract
In this paper, we study the non-local convergence
properties of deep linear networks. Specifically,
under the quadratic loss, we consider optimizing
deep linear networks in which there is at least
a layer with only one neuron. We describe the
convergent point of trajectories with an arbitrary
balanced starting point under gradient flow, including the paths which converge to one of the
saddle points. We also show specific convergence
rates of trajectories that converge to the global
minimizers by stages. We conclude that the rates
vary from polynomial to linear. As far as we know,
our results are the first to give a non-local analysis
of deep linear neural networks with arbitrary balanced initialization, rather than the lazy training
regime which has dominated the literature of neural networks or the restricted benign initialization.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been successfully trained with
simple gradient-based methods, which require optimizing
highly non-convex functions. Many properties of the learning dynamic for deep neural networks are also present in
the idealized and simplified case of deep linear networks. It
is widely believed that deep linear networks could capture
some important aspects of optimization in deep learning
(Saxe et al., 2014). Therefore, many works have tried to
study this issue in recent years (Hardt & Ma, 2017; Arora
et al., 2018a;b; Bartlett et al., 2018; Shamir, 2019; Du & Hu,
2019; Hu et al., 2019; Zou et al., 2019; Eftekhari, 2020; Bah
et al., 2021). However, previous understanding mainly focuses on local analysis or lazy training (Chizat et al., 2019),
and there are few findings of the non-local analysis, even
for linear networks.
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking
University. 2 Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University.. Correspondence to: Zhihua Zhang
<zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn>.

Local analysis of deep linear networks with quadratic
loss. Several works analyzed linear networks with the
quadratic loss. Bartlett et al. (2018) provided a linear convergence rate of gradient descent with identity initialization
by assuming that the initial loss is small enough or the
target is positive semi-definite. Bartlett et al. (2018) also
showed the necessity of the positive definite target under
identity initialization. Arora et al. (2018a) proved linear
convergence rates of deep linear networks, by assuming
that the initialization has a positive deficiency margin and
is nearly balanced. Later on, a few works follow similar
ideas with the neural tangent kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al.,
2018) or lazy training (Chizat et al., 2019) to establish convergence analysis. Du & Hu (2019) demonstrated that if
the width of hidden layers is all larger than the depth, gradient descent with Gaussian random initialization could then,
with high probability, converge to a global minimum at a
linear rate. Hu et al. (2019) improved the lower bound of
width to be independent of depth, by utilizing orthogonal
weight initialization but requiring each layer to have the
same width. Moreover, Wu et al. (2019); Zou et al. (2019)
obtained linear convergence for linear ResNet (He et al.,
2016) with zero(-asymmetric) initialization, i.e., deep linear
network with identity initialization. Specifically, Wu et al.
(2019) adopted zero-asymmetric initialization requiring a
zero-initialized output layer and identity initialization for the
other layers. Such asymmetry also leads to a small variation
of weight matrices1 , which is similar to local analysis. Zou
et al. (2019) applied identity initialization (for deep linear
networks), but still requiring a small initial loss or a lower
bound for the width2 . These works of local analysis have
the feature of consistently bounded variation of weights3
to make the entire trajectory stay in the benign local landscape. Additionally, such a small variation of weights can
be satisfied by a slightly large width, a small initial loss, or
a suitable initialization as previous works have shown.
Non-local analysis of deep linear networks with the
quadratic loss. The non-local analysis requires a more
comprehensive understanding. As far as we know, current
works mainly focused on gradient flow, i.e., gradient descent
1

See Wu et al. (2019, Eq. (4.7)) for detail.
See Zou et al. (2019, Theorem 3.1 and Remark 3.2) for detail.
3
For more examples, see the definitions of C(t) in Du & Hu
(2019, Section 7) and Hu et al. (2019, Section 4.1).
2

th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

