Bayesian Continuous-Time Tucker Decomposition

Shikai Fang 1 2 Akil Narayan 2 3 Robert M. Kirby 1 2 Shandian Zhe 1

Abstract
Tensor decomposition is a dominant framework
for multiway data analysis and prediction. Although practical data often contains timestamps
for the observed entries, existing tensor decomposition approaches overlook or under-use this
valuable temporal information. They either drop
the timestamps or bin them into crude steps and
hence ignore the temporal dynamics within each
step or use simple parametric time coefficients. To
overcome these limitations, we propose Bayesian
Continuous-Time Tucker Decomposition (BCTT).
We model the tensor-core of the classical Tucker
decomposition as a time-varying function, and
place a Gaussian process prior to flexibly estimate
all kinds of temporal dynamics. In this way, our
model maintains the interpretability while is flexible enough to capture various complex temporal
relationships between the tensor nodes. For efficient and high-quality posterior inference, we
use the stochastic differential equation (SDE) representation of temporal GPs to build an equivalent state-space prior, which avoids huge kernel
matrix computation and sparse/low-rank approximations. We then use Kalman filtering, RTS
smoothing, and conditional moment matching to
develop a scalable message-passing inference algorithm. We show the advantage of our method
in simulation and several real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Multiway interaction data is omnipresent in real-world applications, such as in online advertising, e-commerce and
social networking. A popular and powerful framework for
multiway interaction analysis and prediction is tensor decomposition, which aims to estimate a set of latent factors to
1
School of Computing, University of Utah 2 Scientific Computing and Imaging (SCI) Institute, University of Utah 3 Department
of Mathematics, University of Utah. Correspondence to: Shandian
Zhe <zhe@cs.utah.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

represent the interaction nodes, and use the factors to reconstruct the observed tensor elements. The factors can reflect
unknown patterns in data, such as communities across the
nodes, and provide effective features to build downstream
predictive tools, such as product rating for recommendation
and clicks for advertisement display.
While many successful tensor decomposition methods have
been developed (Tucker, 1966; Harshman, 1970; Chu and
Ghahramani, 2009; Kang et al., 2012; Choi and Vishwanathan, 2014), these methods ignore or under-exploit
the valuable time information, which often comes along
with the tensor data, e.g., at which time point a user purchased an item at a specific Amazon store. Current methods
often throw out the timestamps or bin the timestamps into
crude steps, e.g., weeks or months, and augment the tensor with a time step mode (Xiong et al., 2010; Xu et al.,
2012; Rogers et al., 2013; Zhe et al., 2015; 2016a; Du
et al., 2018). While between the steps we can use conditional priors and/or nonlinear dynamics to model their
transition, the temporal dependencies within each step are
overlooked. The most recent work (Zhang et al., 2021)
although introduces continuous-time coefficients into the
CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition (Harshman,
1970), its parametric modeling of the coefficients, i.e., polynomial splines, might not be flexible enough to capture a
variety of different temporal dynamics in data (e.g., from
simple linear to highly nonlinear).
To overcome these limitations, we propose BCTT, a novel
continuous-time Bayesian dynamic decomposition model.
We extend the classical Tucker decomposition, which accounts for every multiplicative interaction between the factors across different tensor modes and is highly interpretable
and quite expressive. We model the tensor-core — weights
of the factor interactions — as a time-varying function. We
place a Gaussian process (GP) prior, a nonparametric function prior that can flexibly estimate all kinds of functions,
not restricted to any specific parametric form. In this way,
our model not only maintains the interpretability, but also
can automatically capture different, complex temporal dynamics from data. For efficient and high-quality posterior
inference, we construct a linear time-invariant (LTI) stochastic differential equation (SDE) (Hartikainen and Särkkä,
2010) as an equivalent representation of the temporal GP.
Based on the LTI-SDE, we build a state-space prior, which

