Improving Screening Processes via Calibrated Subset Selection

Lequn Wang 1 2 Thorsten Joachims 1 Manuel Gomez Rodriguez 3

Abstract
Many selection processes such as finding patients
qualifying for a medical trial or retrieval pipelines
in search engines consist of multiple stages, where
an initial screening stage focuses the resources on
shortlisting the most promising candidates. In this
paper, we investigate what guarantees a screening
classifier can provide, independently of whether
it is constructed manually or trained. We find that
current solutions do not enjoy distribution-free
theoretical guarantees and we show that, in general, even for a perfectly calibrated classifier, there
always exist specific pools of candidates for which
its shortlist is suboptimal. Then, we develop a
distribution-free screening algorithm—called Calibrated Subset Selection (CSS)—that, given any
classifier and some amount of calibration data,
finds near-optimal shortlists of candidates that
contain a desired number of qualified candidates
in expectation. Moreover, we show that a variant
of CSS that calibrates a given classifier multiple
times across specific groups can create shortlists
with provable diversity guarantees. Experiments
on US Census survey data validate our theoretical
results and show that the shortlists provided by
our algorithm are superior to those provided by
several competitive baselines.

1. Introduction
Screening is an essential part of many selection processes
where an often intractable number of candidates is reduced
to a shortlist of the most promising candidates for detailed—
and more resource intensive—evaluation. Screening thus
enables an allocation of resources that improves the overall
1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University 2 Most
of the work was done during Wang’s internship at the Max
3
Planck Institute for Software Systems.
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems. Correspondence to: Lequn Wang
<lw633@cornell.edu>, Thorsten Joachims <tj@cs.cornell.edu>,
Manuel Gomez Rodriguez <manuelgr@mpi-sws.org>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

quality of the decisions under limited resources. Examples of such screening problems are: finding patients in
a large database of electronic health records to manually
evaluate for qualification to take part in a medical trial (Liu
et al., 2021); the first stage of a multi-stage retrieval pipeline
of a search engine (Covington et al., 2016; Geyik et al.,
2019); or which people to reach out to with a personalized invitation to apply to a specific job posting (Raghavan
et al., 2020). In each of these examples, there is significant pressure to make high-quality, unbiased screening
decisions quickly and efficiently, often about thousands or
even millions of candidates under limited resources and
additional diversity requirements (Bendick Jr et al., 1997;
Bertrand & Mullainathan, 2004; Johnson et al., 2016; Covington et al., 2016). While these screening decisions have
been made manually or through manually constructed rules
in the past, automated predictive tools for optimizing screening decisions are becoming more prevalent (Cowgill, 2018;
Chamorro-Premuzic & Akhtar, 2019; Raghavan et al., 2020;
Sánchez-Monedero et al., 2020).
Algorithmic screening has been typically studied together
with other high-stakes decision making problems as a supervised learning problem (Corbett-Davies et al., 2017; Kilbertus et al., 2020; Sahoo et al., 2021). Under this perspective,
algorithmic screening reduces to: (i) training a classifier that
estimates the probability that a candidate is qualified given
a set of observable features; (ii) designing a deterministic
threshold rule that shortlists candidates by thresholding the
candidates’ probability values estimated by the classifier.
Here, the classifier and the threshold rule aim to maximize
a measure of average accuracy and average utility, respectively, possibly subject to diversity constraints. Only very
recently, it has been argued that the classifier must also
satisfy threshold calibration, a specific type of group calibration, to be able to accurately estimate the average utility
of the threshold rule (Sahoo et al., 2021).
Unfortunately, the above screening algorithms do not enjoy
distribution-free guarantees1 on the quality of the shortlisted candidates. As a result, they may not always hold
their promise of increasing the efficiency of a selection
1

We refer to distribution-free guarantees as finite-sample
distribution-free guarantees, since we never have infinite amount
of data in practice.

