Zero-Shot Reward Specification via Grounded Natural Language

Parsa Mahmoudieh 1 Deepak Pathak 2 Trevor Darrell 1
Training Phase

Abstract
Reward signals in reinforcement learning are expensive to design and often require access to the
true state which is not available in the real world.
Common alternatives are usually demonstrations
or goal images which can be labor-intensive to collect. On the other hand, text descriptions provide
a general, natural, and low-effort way of communicating the desired task. However, prior works
in learning text-conditioned policies still rely on
rewards that are defined using either true state or
labeled expert demonstrations. We use recent developments in building large-scale visuolanguage
models like CLIP to devise a framework that generates the task reward signal just from goal text
description and raw pixel observations which is
then used to learn the task policy. We evaluate the
proposed framework on control and robotic manipulation tasks. Finally, we distill the individual
task policies into a single goal text conditioned
policy that can generalize in a zero-shot manner
to new tasks with unseen objects and unseen goal
text descriptions.

1

Introduction

Previous efforts have explored image-based goal specification, with significant successes in visual navigation and
manipulation tasks (Pathak et al., 2018; Nair et al., 2018; Fu
et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2019). Yet existing image-based
goal specification paradigms are limited because they are
typically limited to a particular scene instance in an environment, whereas a semantic goal comprises multiple possible
scene configurations. Reinforcement learning offers one
of the most appealing premises in the study of AI: from a
reward signal alone, algorithms which learn optimal policies
that maximize expected reward can learn to perform navigation, dexterous manipulation, and host of other impactful
1

UC Berkeley 2 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence
to: Parsa Mahmoudieh <parsa.m@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Goal text
Rewards
ZSRM

Actions
Agent

Env
Obs

Train agents 1, …, n
with goal text 1, …, n}

Distill

Multi

Deployment Test Phase
Actions
New goal text

Multi

Env
Obs

Figure 1. Our method uses only goal text from user and images
from the environment at training time. We train several agents
on several tasks and distill their policies into a single goal text
conditioned policy that can generalize to new tasks with an unseen
goal text description in a zero-shot manner. We assume no access
to environment reward, state, demonstrations, or goal images at
either train or test time.

tasks. However, discovering or specifying a reward function for a given task is often a very challenging problem,
especially when one is considering agents that can learn
from un-instrumented environments, e.g., from raw image
observations alone. We wish to have an agent that can learn
purely from pixels, with no access to the underlying state of
the environment at any point during learning or task execution. Achieving this goal without access to an instrumented
reward function has been exceedingly challenging.
One can use image-based reward specification to cause a
robot agent to navigate to a particular chair next to a specific tall plant, but that agent may not always succeed at
the generic task of “go to a chair next to a tall flowering
plant”: e.g., if the goal specification image shows a red
chair next to a plant with a yellow flower the agent may

