Soft Truncation: A Universal Training Technique of
Score-based Diffusion Model for High Precision Score Estimation

Dongjun Kim 1 Seungjae Shin 1 Kyungwoo Song 2 Wanmo Kang 1 Il-Chul Moon 1 3

Abstract
Recent advances in diffusion models bring stateof-the-art performance on image generation tasks.
However, empirical results from previous research
in diffusion models imply an inverse correlation
between density estimation and sample generation performances. This paper investigates with
sufficient empirical evidence that such inverse
correlation happens because density estimation is
significantly contributed by small diffusion time,
whereas sample generation mainly depends on
large diffusion time. However, training a score
network well across the entire diffusion time is
demanding because the loss scale is significantly
imbalanced at each diffusion time. For successful
training, therefore, we introduce Soft Truncation,
a universally applicable training technique for diffusion models, that softens the fixed and static
truncation hyperparameter into a random variable.
In experiments, Soft Truncation achieves stateof-the-art performance on CIFAR-10, CelebA,
CelebA-HQ 256 × 256, and STL-10 datasets.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in generative models enable the creation
of highly realistic images. One direction of such modeling is likelihood-free models (Karras et al., 2019) based on
minimax training. The other direction is likelihood-based
models, including VAE (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020), autoregressive models (Parmar et al., 2018), and flow models (Grcić
et al., 2021). Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) are one of
the most successful likelihood-based models, where the reverse diffusion models the generative process. The success
of diffusion models achieves state-of-the-art performance in
image generation (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021).
1

KAIST, South Korea 2 University of Seoul, South
Korea 3 Summary.AI. Correspondence to: Dongjun Kim
<dongjoun57@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Previously, a model with the emphasis on Fréchet Inception
Distance (FID), such as DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) and ADM
(Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), trains the score network with the
variance weighting; whereas a model with the emphasis on
Negative Log-Likelihood (NLL), such as ScoreFlow (Song
et al., 2021a) and VDM (Kingma et al., 2021), trains the
score network with the likelihood weighting. Such models,
however, have the trade-off between NLL and FID: models
with the emphasis on FID perform poorly on NLL, and vice
versa. Instead of widely investigating the trade-off, they
limit their work by separately training the score network
on FID-favorable and NLL-favorable settings. This paper
introduces Soft Truncation that significantly resolves the
trade-off, with the NLL-favorable setting as the default training configuration. Soft Truncation reports a comparable FID
against FID-favorable diffusion models while keeping NLL
at the equivalent level of NLL-favorable models.
For that, we observe that the truncation hyperparameter is a
significant hyperparameter that determines the overall scale
of NLL and FID. This hyperparameter, , is the smallest
diffusion time to estimate the score function, and the score
function beneath  is not estimated. A model with small
enough  favors NLL at the sacrifice on FID, and a model
with relatively large  is preferable to FID but has poor NLL.
Therefore, we introduce Soft Truncation, which softens the
fixed and static truncation hyperparameter () into a random
variable (τ ) that randomly selects its smallest diffusion time
at every optimization step. In every mini-batch update, we
sample a new smallest diffusion time, τ , randomly, and the
batch optimization endeavors to estimate the score function only on [τ, T ], rather than [, T ], by ignoring beneath
τ . As τ varies by mini-batch updates, the score network
successfully estimates the score function on the entire range
of diffusion time on [, T ], which brings an improved FID.
There are two interesting properties of Soft Truncation. First,
though Soft Truncation is nothing to do with the weighting
function in its algorithmic design, surprisingly, Soft Truncation turns out to be equivalent to a diffusion model with
a general weight in the expectation sense (Eq. (10)). The
random variable of τ determines the weight function (Theorem 1), and this gives a partial reason why Soft Truncation
is successful in FID as much as the FID-favorable train-

