Bayesian Deep Embedding Topic Meta-Learner

Zhibin Duan * 1 Yishi Xu * 1 Jianqiao Sun 1 Bo Chen 1 Wenchao Chen 1 Chaojie Wang 1 Mingyuan Zhou 2

Abstract
Existing deep topic models are effective in capturing the latent semantic structures in textual data
but usually rely on a plethora of documents. This
is less than satisfactory in practical applications
when only a limited amount of data is available.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework that
efficiently solves the problem of topic modeling
under the small data regime. Specifically, the
framework involves two innovations: a bi-level
generative model that aims to exploit the task information to guide the document generation, and
a topic meta-learner that strives to learn a group
of global topic embeddings so that fast adaptation to the task-specific topic embeddings can
be achieved with a few examples. We apply the
proposed framework to a hierarchical embedded
topic model and achieve better performance than
various baseline models on diverse experiments,
including few-shot topic discovery and few-shot
document classification.

1. Introduction
Topic models (Blei et al., 2003) enjoy great popularity
among various text mining tools. Their prevalence stems
from their ability to organize a collection of documents into
a set of prominent themes. In addition to highlighting the
underlying patterns intuitively, these extracted topics can
also be used to derive low-dimensional representations of
the documents, which have proven useful in a series of natural language processing tasks, such as information retrieval
(Wang et al., 2007), text classification (Rubin et al., 2012),
and machine translation (Mimno et al., 2009).
Over the recent years, considerable progress has been made
*

Equal contribution 1 National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, China. 2 McCombs
School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712, USA. Correspondence to: Bo Chen
<bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Test phase

Training phase
Source
task 1

x11 x12 x13 


Source
task M

xM 1 xM 2 xM 3 

Embedded
Topic
embedding

α ∈R

K ×D

Art

x1

x2 x3

Target task
Hobby

System

Computer

Traditional
Word-topic
matrix

Φ ∈ RV × K
Vehicle

Word embedding

β ∈ RV ×D

Music

Image

Pixel

Car

Figure 1. Illustration of the advantage of embedded topic models
over traditional topic models in the few-shot setting. Considering
word embeddings as transferable knowledge reduces the difficulty
of discovering new topics from novel target tasks.

in topic modeling, ranging from exploring hierarchical document representations (Zhou et al., 2016; Guo et al., 2018)
to discovering more coherent topics (Bianchi et al., 2021).
In particular, the development of variational autoencoder
(VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013) shows the potential of
deep neural networks in posterior inference, motivating the
proposal of an array of neural topic models (NTMs) (Miao
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018; Dieng et al., 2020) that
possess better flexibility and scalability. However, relatively
little work has focused on few-shot adaptation in topic models (Iwata, 2021). This is partly because a topic model is
often supposed to deal with a large volume of text, but more
primarily due to the challenging nature of learning joint
distributions from a few samples in an unsupervised manner.
On the other side, there are inevitably times in real-world
applications when only a limited amount of data is available, such as written records of ancient history or news from
front-line reporters. Thus, it is crucial to explore effective
ways for few-shot learning in topic models.
Few-shot learning is a long-standing problem that aims to
efficiently solve new tasks with only a few examples by exploiting knowledge gained from a large number of related
tasks (Kim et al., 2019). While there have been many successful learning paradigms, most of them were originally
designed for supervised tasks and are not natural to be applied in topic models. Basically, the form of knowledge that
can be transferred to new tasks plays a key role in determining a few-shot algorithm. For instance, the model-agnostic
meta-learning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017) algorithm defines
the knowledge as a good initialization of model parameters
that can be adapted with a few gradient descent steps to

