Meaningfully Debugging Model Mistakes using Conceptual Counterfactual
Explanations

Abubakar Abid * 1 Mert Yuksekgonul * 2 James Zou 3

Abstract

Understanding and explaining the mistakes made
by trained models is critical to many machine
learning objectives, such as improving robustness, addressing concept drift, and mitigating biases. However, this is often an ad hoc process
that involves manually looking at the model’s
mistakes on many test samples and guessing at
the underlying reasons for those incorrect predictions. In this paper, we propose a systematic approach, conceptual counterfactual explanations (CCE), that explains why a classifier
makes a mistake on a particular test sample(s)
in terms of human-understandable concepts (e.g.
this zebra is misclassified as a dog because of
faint stripes). We base CCE on two prior ideas:
counterfactual explanations and concept activation vectors, and validate our approach on wellknown pretrained models, showing that it explains the models’ mistakes meaningfully. In
addition, for new models trained on data with
spurious correlations, CCE accurately identifies
the spurious correlation as the cause of model
mistakes from a single misclassified test sample. On two challenging medical applications,
CCE generated useful insights, confirmed by clinicians, into biases and mistakes the model makes
in real-world settings. The code for CCE is
publicly available at https://github.com/
mertyg/debug-mistakes-cce.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering,
Stanford University 2 Department of Computer Science, Stanford
University 3 Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA 94305. Correspondence to: Mert Yuksekgonul <merty@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
People who use machine learning (ML) models often need
to understand why a trained model is making a particular
mistake. For example, upon seeing a model misclassify
an image, an ML practitioner may ask questions such as:
Was this kind of image underrepresented in my training
distribution? Am I preprocessing the image correctly? Has
my model learned a spurious correlation or bias that is
hindering generalization? Answering this question correctly
affects the usability of a model and can help make the model
more robust. Consider a motivating example:
Example 1: Usability of a Pretrained Model. A pathologist downloads a pretrained model to classify histopathology
images. Despite a high reported accuracy, he finds the model
performing poorly on his images. He investigates why that
is the case, finding that the hues in his images are different
than in the original training data. Realizing the issue, he
is able to transform his own images with some preprocessing, matching the training distribution and improving the
model’s performance.
In the above example, we have a domain shift occurring
between training and test time, which degrades the model’s
performance (Subbaswamy et al., 2019; Koh et al., 2020).
By explaining the cause of the domain shift, we are able
to easily fix the model’s predictions. On the other hand, if
the domain shift is due to more complex spurious correlations the model has learned, it might need to be completely
retrained before it can be used. During development, identifying and explaining a model’s failure points can also make
it more robust (Abid et al., 2019; Kiela et al., 2021), as in
the following example:
Example 2: Discovering Biases During Development. A
dermatologist trains a machine learning classifier to classify
skin diseases from skin images collected from patients at
her hospital. She shares her trained model with a colleague
at a different hospital, who reports that the model makes
many mistakes with his own patients. She investigates why
the model is making mistakes, realizing that patients at her
colleague’s hospital have different skin colors and ages. Answering this question allows her to not only know her own
model’s biases but also guides her to expand her training set

