From block-Toeplitz matrices to differential equations on graphs: towards a
general theory for scalable masked Transformers

Krzysztof Choromanski * 1 2 Han Lin * 2 Haoxian Chen * 2 Tianyi Zhang 2 Arijit Sehanobish 3
Valerii Likhosherstov 4 Jack Parker-Holder 5 Tamas Sarlos 6 Adrian Weller 4 7 Thomas Weingarten 8

Abstract
In this paper we provide, to the best of our knowledge, the first comprehensive approach for incorporating various masking mechanisms into
Transformers architectures in a scalable way. We
show that recent results on linear causal attention
(Choromanski et al., 2021) and log-linear RPEattention (Luo et al., 2021) are special cases of this
general mechanism. However by casting the problem as a topological (graph-based) modulation of
unmasked attention, we obtain several results unknown before, including efficient d-dimensional
RPE-masking and graph-kernel masking. We
leverage many mathematical techniques ranging
from spectral analysis through dynamic programming and random walks to new algorithms for
solving Markov processes on graphs. We provide
a corresponding empirical evaluation.

1. Introduction & Related Work
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2020; Devlin et al., 2019) have revolutionized machine learning by
reintroducing an attention mechanism explicitly modeling
complicated relationships between elementary ingredients
of the ML models’ inputs, e.g. words for text data, or
patches/pixels for the image data (Han et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). Crucially, attention quantifies these
relationships via dynamic weights that depend on the input
data. This architectural solution is the strength and at the
same time the weakness of Transformer models. An attention matrix scales quadratically in the length of the input
sequence, making corresponding computations prohibitively
expensive for longer inputs.
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Brain Robotics 2 Columbia
University 3 Independent Researcher 4 University of Cambridge
5
University of Oxford 6 Google Research 7 The Alan Turing Institute 8 Google. Correspondence to: Krzysztof Choromanski
<kchoro@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Several solutions were proposed to address this limitation.
Local attention (Vaswani et al., 2021; Parmar et al., 2019)
explicitly narrows down the attention context to a fixed-size
window, effectively zeroing out most attention weights. In
applications where long-range attention is crucial (e.g. protein modeling), other techniques were introduced. These
include: (1) pooling mechanisms compressing sequences to
shorter-ones agglomerating multiple-tokens signal (Avsec
et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2020), (2) hashing/clustering methods
sparsifying attention by giving up attention modeling for tokens from different learnable hash-buckets/clusters (Kitaev
et al., 2020; Roy et al., 2021), (3) low-rank/kernel-based
methods decomposing the attention matrix (Choromanski
et al., 2020; 2021; Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Peng et al.,
2021; Xiong et al., 2021) and other (Qin et al., 2022).
Masking is a powerful mechanism altering the attention
matrix by incorporating structural inductive bias. Flagship
examples include (1) causal attention, applied in generative
Transformers (Yang et al., 2019), where the arrow of time
induces token-ordering with tokens not attending to their
successors in the sequences, (2) relative positional encoding
(RPE, Shaw et al., 2018) reducing interactions between distant tokens (but via a much more general mechanism than
local attention) and (3) graph attention incorporating topological signal from the graph (Ying et al., 2021b; Velickovic
et al., 2018). RPE-mechanisms were shown to significantly
improve speech models (Pham et al., 2020; Zhou et al.,
2019) and masks obtained from shortest-path length matrices were recently demonstrated to close the gap between the
best customized graph neural networks models and Transformers (Ying et al., 2021a). Straightforward application
of the masking mechanism requires materialization of the
attention matrix and consequently - impractical quadratic
time complexity for long input sequences (or large graphs).
In this paper we aim to answer the following question: Under which conditions can masking be incorporated into attention mechanisms in a scalable way, i.e. in sub-quadratic
time complexity in the number of input tokens?
So far this question was answered only partially. Causality
was incorporated in linear time into linear low-rank attention via the so-called prefix sum mechanism by Choroman-

