The Algebraic Path Problem for Graph Metrics

Enrique Fita Sanmartı́n 1 Sebastian Damrich 1 Fred A. Hamprecht 1

Abstract
Finding paths with optimal properties is a foundational problem in computer science. The notions
of shortest paths (minimal sum of edge costs),
minimax paths (minimal maximum edge weight),
reliability of a path and many others all arise
as special cases of the “algebraic path problem”
(APP). Indeed, the APP formalizes the relation between different semirings such as min-plus,
min-max and the distances they induce. We here
clarify, for the first time, the relation between
the potential distance and the log-semiring. We
also define a new unifying family of algebraic
structures that include all above-mentioned path
problems as well as the commute cost and others
as special or limiting cases. The family comprises
not only semirings but also strong bimonoids (that
is, semirings without distributivity). We call this
new and very general distance the “log-norm distance”. Finally, we derive some sufficient conditions which ensure that the APP associated with a
semiring defines a metric over an arbitrary graph.

1. Introduction
Graphs are a versatile abstraction permitting the modeling
and analysis of an extremely broad range of problems from
vision, NLP and learning with structured data. Measuring
the similarity between the nodes in a graph is, in turn, a task
of fundamental importance that often decides on success
or failure of an application. Consequently, the study and
development of graph node metrics with different properties
is a problem of high interest.
The shortest path distance is arguably the most popular
graph node metric. Given two nodes in a graph with edge
costs, the shortest path problem aims to find the path with
minimum cost, i.e., the path for which the sum over the
cost of its constituent edges is minimized. This problem
1
IWR at Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
Correspondence to: <>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

is determined by the min and + operations: the + to indicate that edge costs are summed along any path; and the
min to state that the overall cost is given by the smallest
cost of any single path. Together, these form the “min-plus”
semiring. A semiring is an algebraic structure with two
operations that relaxes the concept of a ring by dropping
the requirement for inverses under the “addition” operation.
The algebraic path problem (APP) generalizes the notion
of shortest path by replacing the min-plus semiring by an
alternative semiring. Different semirings result in dramatically different preferences of paths, see the toy example in
Table 1. This generalization encompasses a great variety
of problems and applications in diverse research areas like
NLP (Cortes et al., 2004; Schwartz et al., 2018) or routing
protocols (Griffin & Sobrinho, 2005). For more applications
see (Gondran & Minoux, 2008; Baras & Theodorakopoulos,
2010).
Other common graph metrics that raise from the APP
framework are the commute cost distance (CCD) (Klein
& Randić, 1993; Chandra et al., 1996; Eisner, 2001), which
calculates the average first passage cost between two nodes
in both directions; and the minimax or bottleneck shortest
path distance (Maggs & Plotkin, 1988; Challa et al., 2019),
which computes the path with minimal maximum edge cost
among its edges.
In some situations, these metrics may fail to take the global
structure of the graph into consideration. On the one hand,
the minimax and shortest path distances are determined by
a single path. Thus, they may ignore the topology of the
surrounding graph since the degree of connectivity between
the nodes is not reflected by the metrics. On the other hand,
though CCD weighs all paths, it is known that for large
graphs, it only takes the degree of the source and target
nodes into account (Nadler et al., 2009; Luxburg et al.,
2010).
We aim to combine the advantages and compensate for
the deficiencies of these metrics. To do so, we propose a
novel parametrized family of distances, dubbed log-norm
distances, that interpolate between the shortest path, CCD
and the minimax distances up to a constant factor. We base
our interpolation on the algebraic path problem. First, we
present a family of semirings whose associated APP yields
a metric which interpolates between the shortest and min-

