Optimization-Derived Learning with Essential Convergence Analysis
of Training and Hyper-training

Risheng Liu 1 2 3 Xuan Liu 1 2 Shangzhi Zeng 4 Jin Zhang 5 6 Yixuan Zhang 5

Abstract
Recently, Optimization-Derived Learning (ODL)
has attracted attention from learning and vision
areas, which designs learning models from the
perspective of optimization. However, previous
ODL approaches regard the training and hypertraining procedures as two separated stages, meaning that the hyper-training variables have to be
fixed during the training process, and thus it is also
impossible to simultaneously obtain the convergence of training and hyper-training variables. In
this work, we design a Generalized KrasnoselskiiMann (GKM) scheme based on fixed-point iterations as our fundamental ODL module, which
unifies existing ODL methods as special cases.
Under the GKM scheme, a Bilevel Meta Optimization (BMO) algorithmic framework is constructed to solve the optimal training and hypertraining variables together. We rigorously prove
the essential joint convergence of the fixed-point
iteration for training and the process of optimizing hyper-parameters for hyper-training, both on
the approximation quality, and on the stationary
analysis. Experiments demonstrate the efficiency
of BMO with competitive performance on sparse
coding and real-world applications such as image
deconvolution and rain streak removal.

1

DUT-RU International School of Information Science and
Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning,
China. 2 Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, Dalian, Liaoning, China. 3 Peng Cheng
Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China. 4 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Victoria, Victoria, British
Columbia, Canada. 5 Department of Mathematics, SUSTech International Center for Mathematics, Southern University of Science
and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China. 6 National Center
for Applied Mathematics Shenzhen, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
Correspondence to: Jin Zhang <zhangj9@sustech.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
There have been a number of methods to handle learning
and vision tasks, and conventional ones utilize either classic
optimization or machine learning schemes directly. Using earlier optimizers to solve manually designed objective
functions arises two problems: the task-related objective
functions might be hard to solve, and not able to accurately model actual tasks. In recent years, a series of approaches called Optimization-Derived Learning (ODL) have
emerged, combining the ideas of optimization and learning,
and leverage optimization techniques to establish learning
methods (Chen et al., 2021; Monga et al., 2021; Shlezinger
et al., 2020; He et al., 2021; Hutter et al., 2019; Yang et al.,
2022). The fundamental idea of ODL is to incorporate
trainable learning modules into an optimization process and
then learn the corresponding parameterized models from
collected training data. Therefore, ODL aims to not only
possess the convergence guarantee of optimization methods,
but also achieve satisfactory practical performance with the
help of neural networks. Overall speaking, ODL has two
goals in divergent directions, i.e., to train an algorithmic
scheme to minimize the given objective faster or to minimize the reconstruction error between the established model
and the actual task. These two goals correspond to two processes in ODL, called training and hyper-training. For training, we aim to solve the optimization model (minimize the
objective and find the optimal training variables), while for
hyper-training, we aim to find the optimal hyper-parameters
(hyper-training variables) to characterize the task.
1.1. Related Works
Over the past years, ODL approaches have been established
based on various numerical optimization schemes and parameterization strategies (e.g., numerical hyper-parameters
and network architectures) (Feurer & Hutter, 2019; Thornton et al., 2013; Schuler et al., 2015; Chen & Pock, 2016).
They have been widely applied to all kinds of learning and
vision tasks, based on classic optimization schemes like
Proximal Gradient or Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm (PG or ISTA) (Daubechies et al., 2004) and Alternating Direction Method of Multiplier (ADMM) (Boyd
et al., 2011). For example, Learned ISTA (LISTA) (Gre-

