AutoIP: A United Framework to Integrate Physics into Gaussian Processes

Da Long 1 Zheng Wang 1 Aditi S. Krishnapriyan 2 3 Robert M. Kirby 1 Shandian Zhe 1
Michael W. Mahoney 2 3 4

Abstract
Physical modeling is critical for many modern science and engineering applications. From a data
science or machine learning perspective, where
more domain-agnostic, data-driven models are
pervasive, physical knowledge — often expressed
as differential equations — is valuable in that it is
complementary to data, and it can potentially help
overcome issues such as data sparsity, noise, and
inaccuracy. In this work, we propose a simple, yet
powerful and general framework — AutoIP, for
Automatically Incorporating Physics — that can
integrate all kinds of differential equations into
Gaussian Processes (GPs) to enhance prediction
accuracy and uncertainty quantification. These
equations can be linear or nonlinear, spatial, temporal, or spatio-temporal, complete or incomplete
with unknown source terms, and so on. Based on
kernel differentiation, we construct a GP prior to
sample the values of the target function, equationrelated derivatives, and latent source functions,
which are all jointly from a multivariate Gaussian distribution. The sampled values are fed to
two likelihoods: one to fit the observations, and
the other to conform to the equation. We use
the whitening method to evade the strong dependency between the sampled function values and
kernel parameters, and we develop a stochastic
variational learning algorithm. AutoIP shows improvement upon vanilla GPs in both simulation
and several real-world applications, even using
rough, incomplete equations.

1
University of Utah 2 University of California, Berkeley
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 4 International Computer Science Institute. Correspondence to: Shandian Zhe
<zhe@cs.utah.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1

Introduction

Physical modeling is omnipresent and critical to many modern science and engineering applications, including weather
and climate forecasting, bridge design, etc. To model a physical system, one usually writes down a set of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) or partial differential equations
(PDEs) that characterize the system behavior according to
physical laws. One then identifies boundary and/or initial
conditions and solves the equations, typically via numerical
methods, to obtain the solution function on the domain of
interest. The solution is then used in the subsequent steps,
such as system evolution and design optimization.
Machine learning (ML) and data science use a different
paradigm. Methods from these areas estimate or reconstruct
target functions from observed data, rather than by solving
physical equations. To learn target functions, ML methods
typically optimize a data-dependent loss. Nonetheless, one
would hope that the knowledge reflected in physical models,
especially in ODEs and PDEs, is valuable to ML, in that this
knowledge characterizes the local behaviors or properties
of the target function, which then extrapolate to the entire
domain of interest. Hence, as a complementary information
source, physics knowledge can potentially help overcome
data sparsity, noise, and inaccuracy in measurements of
physical systems. These problems are ubiquitous in practice.
One example of an effort along these lines is provided by socalled physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi
et al., 2019), which use neural networks (NNs) to try to
solve physical differential equations. PINNs simultaneously
fit the boundary/initial conditions and minimize a residual
term to conform to the equation. That is, from an optimization perspective (Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004; Nocedal
and Wright, 2006), PINNs do not solve a constrained optimization problem, where physical knowledge is included as
a constraint. Instead, they adopt a penalty method approach
(as opposed to an augmented Lagrangian method), solving a
(related but non-equivalent) soft-constrained problem. Also,
PINNs demand that the form of the equation be fully specified. From the data science perspective, this might restrict
their capability to leverage physics knowledge in a broader
sense. That is, the knowledge within incomplete equations,
e.g., those including latent sources (functions), cannot be

