Residual-Based Sampling for Online Outlier-Robust PCA

Tianhao Zhu 1 Jie Shen 1

Abstract
Outlier-robust principal component analysis (ORPCA) has been broadly applied in scientific discovery in the last decades. In this paper, we
study online ORPCA, an important variant that addresses the practical challenge that the data points
arrive in a sequential manner and the goal is to
recover the underlying subspace of the clean data
with one pass of the data. Our main contribution
is the first provable algorithm that enjoys comparable recovery guarantee to the best known batch
algorithm, while significantly improving upon the
state-of-the-art online ORPCA algorithms. The
core technique is a robust version of the residual
norm which, informally speaking, leverages not
only the importance of a data point, but also how
likely it behaves as an outlier.

1. Introduction
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a fundamental tool
for analyzing high-dimensional data. The key idea is to
get the optimal subspace approximation. In the absence
of outliers, such subspace can be computed by the topk left singular vectors, or Principal Components, of the
sample covariance matrix. This is one of the most important
problems in machine learning that has been studied for a
long time. The PCA problem is well understood when the
data matrix is fully observed, and there is no noise. Thus,
a large body of recent works focus on the online setting or
when the data are corrupted.
Robust PCA. Many robust PCA algorithms have been proposed because the traditional PCA breaks down immediately in the presence of outliers. Some of them focused
on the robust PCA in the low-dimension regime. They either applied the standard PCA on the robust estimate of
the covariance matrix (Xu & Yuille, 1995; Yang & Wang,
1

Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to: Tianhao
Zhu <tzhu12@stevens.edu>, Jie Shen <jie.shen@stevens.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1999; la Torre & Black, 2001; Brubaker, 2009; Klivans et al.,
2009), or tried to find a low-dimension that has the maximum robust estimation of the projected distance, called
projection pursuit (Croux et al., 2007). A more challenging
work lies in the high-dimension regime where the ambient dimension is higher than the number of observed data.
In (Candès et al., 2011; Chandrasekaran et al., 2011), the
exact recovery of the low-rank and sparse component via
convex optimization was well established by minimizing a
weighted combination of a nuclear-norm of one component
and an ℓ1 -norm of another component. Specifically, Xu
et al. (2012) showed that matrix decomposition using nuclear norm minimization can recover the column space and
identify the outliers. The nearly optimal recovery guarantee
was also achieved by Cherapanamjeri et al. (2017) using the
threshold-based approaches, which reduced the computational cost significantly. However, these algorithms require
not only observing all the samples, but also inliers being
incoherent (thus inliers are not thresholded). Meanwhile,
another widely used convex surrogate is the max-norm regularization (Srebro et al., 2004), where the max-norm promoted the a low-rank structure. Srebro & Shraibman (2005)
studied collaborative filtering and showed a tighter generalization bound than the nuclear norm theoretically, and Lee
et al. (2010); Jalali & Srebro (2012) showed its appealing
performance in some practical applications empirically. The
very recent work Deshpande & Pratap (2021) extended the
outlier low-rank approximation problem under ℓp -metric,
and extended the analysis over M-estimator loss functions
and affine subspace approximation. Readers may refer to
Lerman & Maunu (2018) for a comprehensive survey of the
works on robust subspace recovery.
Online PCA. The online setting is more restricted than offline in that we can only observe the samples in a sequential
manner. Note that this is different from stochastic optimization where the algorithms can access an arbitrary sample in
each iteration (Ozawa et al., 2004; Nie et al., 2013; Arora
et al., 2013; Garber & Hazan, 2015; Hallgren & Northrop,
2018). The recent work Garber (2019) cast the online PCA
into the regret minimization framework. It proposed the
regularized Online Gradient Ascent model, and enjoyed the
poly-logarithmic regret bound, requiring only linear memory and run-time per iteration. Another way is to progressively expand the subspace of inliers. Boutsidis et al. (2015)

