Scalable Spike-and-Slab

Niloy Biswas 1 Lester Mackey 2 Xiao-Li Meng 1

Abstract
Spike-and-slab priors are commonly used for
Bayesian variable selection, due to their interpretability and favorable statistical properties.
However, existing samplers for spike-and-slab
posteriors incur prohibitive computational costs
when the number of variables is large. In this
article, we propose Scalable Spike-and-Slab (S3 ),
a scalable Gibbs sampling implementation for
high-dimensional Bayesian regression with the
continuous spike-and-slab prior of George & McCulloch (1993). For a dataset with n observations
and p covariates, S3 has order max{n2 pt , np}
computational cost at iteration t where pt never
exceeds the number of covariates switching spikeand-slab states between iterations t and t − 1 of
the Markov chain. This improves upon the order n2 p per-iteration cost of state-of-the-art implementations as, typically, pt is substantially
smaller than p. We apply S3 on synthetic and
real-world datasets, demonstrating orders of magnitude speed-ups over existing exact samplers and
significant gains in inferential quality over approximate samplers with comparable cost.

1. Introduction
1.1. Bayesian computation in high dimensions
We consider linear, logistic, and probit regression in high
dimensions, where the number of observations n is smaller
than the number of covariates p. This setting is common
in modern applications such as genome-wide association
studies (Guan & Stephens, 2011; Zhou et al., 2013) and astronomy (Kelly, 2007; Sereno, 2015). In the non-Bayesian
paradigm, sparse point estimates such as the LASSO (Tibshirani, 1996), Elastic Net (Zou & Hastie, 2005) and SLOPE
(Bogdan et al., 2015) offer a route to variable selection.
1

2

Department of Statistics, Harvard University Microsoft
Research New England. Correspondence to: Niloy Biswas
<niloy biswas@g.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

These estimates are based on optimization based approaches,
which are computationally efficient and scale to datasets
with hundreds of thousands of covariates.
In the Bayesian paradigm, which will be our focus, one
places a prior on the unknown parameters of interest and considers the corresponding posterior distribution. Sampling
algorithms such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
are then used to simulate from the posterior distribution. In
modern high dimensional settings, general-purpose MCMC
algorithms can have high computational cost per iteration.
This has kindled a line of work on tailored algorithms for
Bayesian regression (e.g., Polson et al., 2013; Yang et al.,
2016; Narisetty et al., 2019; Johndrow et al., 2020; Biswas
et al., 2022). Our manuscript participates in this wider effort to scale Bayesian inference to large data applications.
Specifically, we propose computationally efficient MCMC
algorithms for high-dimensional Bayesian linear, logistic
and probit regression with spike-and-slab priors.
1.2. Variable selection with spike-and-slab priors
Consider Gaussian linear regression, logistic regression, and probit regression with n observations and p
covariates. The respective likelihoodsP are given by
n
2
(yi −x⊤
i β)
Llin (β, σ 2 ; X, y) = (2πσ12 )n/2 exp − i=1 2σ
,
2
Qn exp(yi x⊤
β)
Llog (β; X, y) = i=1 1+exp(xi⊤ β) , and Lprob (β; X, y) =
i
Qn
⊤
yi
⊤
1−yi
. Here X ∈ Rn×p is
i=1 Φ(xi β) (1 − Φ(xi β))
⊤
the design matrix with rows xi , y ∈ Rn (for linear regression) or y ∈ {0, 1}n (for logistic and probit regression) is the response vector, β ∈ Rp is the unknown signal,
σ 2 ∈ (0, ∞) is the unknown Gaussian noise variance, and
Φ is the cumulative density function of N (0, 1).
We focus on the high-dimensional setting with n ≪ p,
where β ∈ Rp is assumed to be sparse. We use a continuous
spike-and-slab prior on β to capture sparsity:
σ 2 ∼ InvGamma
σ 2 = 1,
zj

i.i.d.

∼

j=1,...,p

βj |zj ,σ 2

a

b0 
,
(for linear regression)
2 2
(for logistic and probit regression)
0

,

Bernoulli(q),
ind

∼

j=1,...,p

(1−zj )N (0,σ 2 τ02 )+zj N (0,σ 2 τ12 ),

(1)

