Contextual Bandits with Smooth Regret: Efficient Learning in Continuous
Action Spaces

Yinglun Zhu 1 Paul Mineiro 2

Abstract
Designing efficient general-purpose contextual
bandit algorithms that work with large—or even
infinite—action spaces would facilitate application to important scenarios such as information
retrieval, recommendation systems, and continuous control. While obtaining standard regret
guarantees can be hopeless, alternative regret notions have been proposed to tackle the large action
setting. We propose a smooth regret notion for
contextual bandits, which dominates previously
proposed alternatives. We design a statistically
and computationally efficient algorithm—for the
proposed smooth regret—that works with general
function approximation under standard supervised
oracles. We also present an adaptive algorithm
that automatically adapts to any smoothness level.
Our algorithms can be used to recover the previous minimax/Pareto optimal guarantees under the
standard regret, e.g., in bandit problems with multiple best arms and Lipschitz/Hölder bandits. We
conduct large-scale empirical evaluations demonstrating the efficacy of our proposed algorithms.

1. Introduction
Contextual bandits concern the problem of sequential decision making with contextual information. Provably efficient
contextual bandit algorithms have been proposed over the
past decade (Langford & Zhang, 2007; Agarwal et al., 2014;
Foster & Rakhlin, 2020; Simchi-Levi & Xu, 2021; Foster &
Krishnamurthy, 2021). However, these developments only
work in setting with a small number of actions, and their
theoretical guarantees become vacuous when working with
a large action space (Agarwal et al., 2012). The hardness
result can be intuitively understood through a “needle in the
haystack” construction: When good actions are extremely
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Microsoft Research NYC.
Correspondence to: Yinglun Zhu <yinglun@cs.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

rare, identifying any good action demands trying almost
all alternatives. This prevents naive direct application of
contextual bandit algorithms to large action problems, e.g.,
in information retrieval, recommendation systems, and continuous control.
To bypass the hardness result, one approach is to assume
structure on the model class. For example, in the standard linear contextual bandit (Auer, 2002; Chu et al., 2011;
Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011), learning the d components
of the reward vector—rather than examining every single
action—effectively guides the learner to the optimal action. Additional structural assumptions have been studied in the literature, e.g., linearly structured actions and
general function approximation (Foster et al., 2020; Xu &
Zeevi, 2020), Lipschitz/Hölder regression functions (Kleinberg, 2004; Hadiji, 2019), and convex functions (Lattimore,
2020). While these assumptions are fruitful theoretically,
they might be violated in practice.
An alternative approach is to compete against a less demanding benchmark. Rather than competing against a policy that
always plays the best action, one can compete against a policy that plays the best smoothed distribution over the actions:
a smoothed distribution—by definition—cannot concentrate
on the best actions when they are in fact rare. Thus, for
the previously mentioned “needle in the haystack” construction, the benchmark is weak as well. This de-emphasizes
such constructions and focuses algorithm design on scenarios where intuition suggests good solutions can be found
without prohibitive statistical cost.
Contributions. We study large action space problems under an alternate notion of regret. Our first contribution is
to propose a novel benchmark—the smooth regret—that
formalizes the “no needle in the haystack” principle. We
also show that our smooth regret dominates previously proposed regret notions along this line of work (Chaudhuri &
Kalyanakrishnan, 2018; Krishnamurthy et al., 2020; Majzoubi et al., 2020), i.e., any regret guarantees with respect to
the smooth regret automatically holds for these previously
proposed regrets.
We design efficient algorithms that work with the smooth
regret and general function classes. Our first proposed

