Optimal Private Streaming SCO in `p -geometry with Applications in High
Dimensional Online Decision Making

Yuxuan Han * 1 Zhicong Liang * 1 Zhipeng Liang * 2 Yang Wang 1 2 Yuan Yao 1 Jiheng Zhang 1 2

Abstract
Differentially private (DP) stochastic convex optimization (SCO) is ubiquitous in trustworthy machine learning algorithm design. This paper studies the DP-SCO problem with streaming data
sampled from a distribution and arrives sequentially. We also consider the continual release
model where parameters related to private information are updated and released upon each new
data. Numerous algorithms have been developed
to achieve optimal excess risks in different `p
norm geometries, but none of the existing ones
can be adapted to the streaming and continual
release setting. We propose a private variant of
the Frank-Wolfe algorithm with recursive gradients for variance reduction to update and reveal
the parameters upon each data. Combined with
the adaptive DP analysis, our algorithm achieves
the first optimal excess risk in linear time in the
case 1 < p ≤ 2 and the state-of-the-art excess
risk meeting the non-private lower ones when
2 < p ≤ ∞. Our algorithm can also be extended
to the case p = 1 to achieve nearly dimensionindependent excess risk. While previous variance
reduction results on recursive gradient have theoretical guarantee only in the i.i.d. setting, we establish such a guarantee in a non-stationary setting.
To demonstrate the virtues of our method, we design the first DP algorithm for high-dimensional
generalized linear bandits with logarithmic regret.

1. Introduction
Stochastic convex optimization (SCO) is a fundamental
problem in machine learning, statistics, and operations research. The goal of SCO is to minimize a population loss
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematics 2 Department
of Industrial Engineering and Decision Analytics. Correspondence
to: Yuan Yao <yuany@ust.hk>, Jiheng Zhang <jiheng@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

function FP (θ) = Ex∼P [f (θ, x)] over a d-dimensional support set C, with only access to the i.i.d. samples {xt }nt=1
from some distribution P . The performance of an algorithm is measured in terms of the excess population risk
of its solution θ, i.e., FP (θ) − minv∈C FP (v). In practice,
samples related to users’ profiles might contain sensitive
information; thus, it is important to solve stochastic convex
optimization problems with differential privacy guarantees
(DP-SCO) (Bassily et al., 2014; 2019; 2021a).
In this paper, we consider the DP-SCO with streaming data,
where samples arrive sequentially and cannot be stored in
memory for long. Streaming data has been studied in the
context of online learning (Smale & Yao, 2006; Tarrès &
Yao, 2014), online statistical inference (Vovk, 2001; 2009;
Steinhardt et al., 2014; Fang et al., 2018), and online optimization (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Hazan, 2016; Hoi
et al., 2021). In addition, parameter release is concerned due
to privacy requirements. Our method can also accommodate
continual release (Jain et al., 2021; Dwork et al., 2010; Chan
et al., 2011), i.e., receives sensitive data as a stream of input
and releases an output of it immediately after processing
while satisfying DP requirements. A closely related setting
considered as an extension in this paper is so-called online
decision making (Slivkins, 2019; Lattimore & Szepesvári,
2020) where a decision needs to be made at each time, and
the performance is measured in terms of accumulative regret,
the gap between actual reward and the best possible reward,
over the time. Recent work starts introducing streaming
algorithms in (private) SCO into the solution of the online
decision-making (Ding et al., 2021; Han et al., 2021) to
enjoy high computational efficiency and flexibility to handle
different reward structures. In particular, Han et al. (2021)
proposes to solve private contextual bandits with stochastic
gradient descent (SGD). However, the extension of other
streaming algorithms, including the Frank-Wolfe and the
stochastic mirror descent, remains elusive in this setting.
Compared with non-private SCO, private SCO depends on
the dimension d inherently (Agarwal et al., 2012; Bassily
et al., 2021b). Therefore, in DP-SCO, the optimal excess
risk also has a crucial dependence on the space metric. Remarkable progress has been made in achieving optimal rate
in `p norm with 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞ as shown in Table 1. However,

