Variational On-the-Fly Personalization

Jangho Kim * 1 2 Jun-Tae Lee * 1 Simyung Chang 1 Nojun Kwak 2

Abstract
With the development of deep learning (DL) technologies, the demand for DL-based services on
personal devices, such as mobile phones, also
increases rapidly. In this paper, we propose a
novel personalization method, Variational Onthe-Fly Personalization. Compared to the conventional personalization methods that require additional fine-tuning with personal data, the proposed method only requires forwarding a handful of personal data on-the-fly. Assuming even a
single personal data can convey the characteristics of a target person, we develop the variational
hyper-personalizer to capture the weight distribution of layers that fits the target person. In the
testing phase, the hyper-personalizer estimates the
model’s weights on-the-fly based on personality
by forwarding only a small amount of (even a
single) personal enrollment data. Hence, the proposed method can perform the personalization
without any training software platform and additional cost in the edge device. In experiments,
we show our approach can effectively generate
reliable personalized models via forwarding (not
back-propagating) a handful of samples.

1. Introduction
In recent years, most of the deep learning researches have
paid attention to developing universal models with sophisticated architectures using a large-scale dataset covering
an entire target domain. However, in edge devices, such as
mobile phones and IoT sensors, deep models are required
to process (learn or infer) a personal domain where data
*

Equal contribution 1 Qualcomm AI Research, an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. Jangho Kim completed
the research in part during an internship at Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. 2 Seoul National University, South Korea. Correspondence to: Jangho Kim <kjh91@snu.ac.kr>, Jun-Tae
Lee <juntlee@qti.qualcomm.com>, Simyung Chang <simychan@qti.qualcomm.com>, Nojun Kwak <nojunk@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

<Data with labels>

Few-shot

Unsupervised

Source-free

2. Deploy to
edge devices
1. Train the universal
model with large
generic data
(source data)

Training-free
3. Adaptation with few target person’s data

Figure 1: Our personalization scenario on edge devices with
practically crucial constraints (few-shot target, unsupervised,
source-free, and training-free).
are generated in a specific environment (Wang et al., 2019b;
Chen & Ran, 2019). For example, data could be always
collected by a specific user, then the device may never confront other personal domains. In this case, using a universal
model is inefficient, and also its performance may degrade
in some personal domains. Hence, to successfully deploy
deep learning algorithms in edge devices, it is significant to
specialize a model to the data distribution of the personal
domain, i.e, personality, in question.
Despite the importance of personalization, there has been
little progress due to the following practical constraints of
edge devices, which are depicted in Fig. 1. First, it is hard
to access the source data (generic data) used for training
(source-free). Second, only a few user-specific target data
(personal data) can be available (few-shot). Third, for usability, personal data are preferable to be unlabeled since a service requiring user’s annotation drastically reduces usability
(unsupervised). Also, on-device training with user’s data suffers from some non-algorithmic constraints (training-free).
For example, collecting personal data to train the models
may cause privacy concerns. And model training requires
an on-device training platform and much more hardware
resources (memory and computational units) than inference.
Various existing works have tried to qualify a model to specified domains. Nevertheless, they do not completely meet the
aforementioned constraints, and are not directly applicable
to our personalization task. Fallah et al. (2020) localized
multiple models to different personal domains, federating to

