Fast Composite Optimization and Statistical Recovery in Federated Learning

Yajie Bao 1 Michael Crawshaw 2 Shan Luo 1 Mingrui Liu 2

Abstract
As a prevalent distributed learning paradigm, Federated Learning (FL) trains a global model on a
massive amount of devices with infrequent communication. This paper investigates a class of
composite optimization and statistical recovery
problems in the FL setting, whose loss function
consists of a data-dependent smooth loss and a
non-smooth regularizer. Examples include sparse
linear regression using Lasso, low-rank matrix
recovery using nuclear norm regularization, etc.
In the existing literature, federated composite optimization algorithms are designed only from an
optimization perspective without any statistical
guarantees. In addition, they do not consider commonly used (restricted) strong convexity in statistical recovery problems. We advance the frontiers
of this problem from both optimization and statistical perspectives. From optimization upfront, we
propose a new algorithm named Fast Federated
Dual Averaging for strongly convex and smooth
loss and establish state-of-the-art iteration and
communication complexity in the composite setting. In particular, we prove that it enjoys a fast
rate, linear speedup, and reduced communication
rounds. From statistical upfront, for restricted
strongly convex and smooth loss, we design another algorithm, namely Multi-stage Federated
Dual Averaging, and prove a high probability complexity bound with linear speedup up to optimal
statistical precision. Numerical experiments in
both synthetic and real data demonstrate that our
methods perform better than other baselines. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
providing fast optimization algorithms and statistical recovery guarantees for composite problems
in FL.
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Department of Computer Science, George
Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA. Correspondence to:
Mingrui Liu <mingruil@gmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a popular learning paradigm in
distributed learning that enables a large number of clients
to collaboratively learn a global model without sharing individual data (McMahan et al., 2017). The most well-known
algorithm in FL is called Federated Averaging (FedAvg). In
each round, FedAvg samples a subset of devices and runs
multiple steps of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) on
these devices in parallel, then the central server updates the
global model by aggregation at the end of the communication round and broadcasts the updated model to clients. It
has been verified that FedAvg achieves similar performance
with fewer communication rounds compared with parallel
SGD (Li et al., 2019; Stich, 2019; Woodworth et al., 2020a).
Most of the research in FL mainly focuses on unconstrained
smooth optimization problems without a regularizer and
assumes each client has access to its local population distribution. However, people usually want the learned model
to have some patterns, such as (group) sparsity and low
rank. These desired patterns are usually achieved by solving
composite optimization problems, e.g., LASSO (Tibshirani,
1996), Graphical LASSO (Friedman et al., 2008), Elastic
net (Zou & Hastie, 2005), matrix completion (Candès &
Recht, 2009). So it is crucial to study how to solve these
composite problems under the FL environment in the current big data era. This paper considers solving a composite
optimization problem in the FL paradigm where only infrequent communication is allowed. In particular, we aim to
solve
minp ϕ(w) :=

w∈R

K
X

πk Lk (w) + h(w),

(1)

k=1

PK
where πk is the weight of the k-th client, i=1 πk = 1,
Lk (w) = Eξ∼Pk [f (w; ξ)] is the loss function evaluated at
the k-th client, Pk denotes the population distribution on the
k-th client, and h(w) is a non-smooth regularizer. The most
related works which can solve this problem in FL setting are
Yuan et al. (2021) and Tran-Dinh et al. (2021). Yuan et al.
(2021) proposed an algorithm called Federated Dual Averaging (FedDA). In one round, each client in FedDA performs
dual averaging to update its primal and dual states for several
steps; then, the server aggregates the dual states and updates
the global primal state by a proximal step. However, they did

