Self-Supervised Representation Learning via Latent Graph Prediction

Yaochen Xie * 1 Zhao Xu * 1 Shuiwang Ji 1

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) of graph neural
networks is emerging as a promising way of leveraging unlabeled data. Currently, most methods are
based on contrastive learning adapted from the image domain, which requires view generation and a
sufficient number of negative samples. In contrast,
existing predictive models do not require negative
sampling, but lack theoretical guidance on the design of pretext training tasks. In this work, we
propose the LaGraph, a theoretically grounded
predictive SSL framework based on latent graph
prediction. Learning objectives of LaGraph are
derived as self-supervised upper bounds to objectives for predicting unobserved latent graphs. In
addition to its improved performance, LaGraph
provides explanations for recent successes of predictive models that include invariance-based objectives. We provide theoretical analysis comparing LaGraph to related methods in different
domains. Our experimental results demonstrate
the superiority of LaGraph in performance and
the robustness to the decreasing training sample
size on both graph-level and node-level tasks.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) methods seek to use supervisions provided by data itself and design effective pretext
learning tasks. These methods allow deep models to learn
from a massive amount of unlabeled data and have achieved
promising successes in natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019) and
image tasks (Batson & Royer, 2019; Xie et al., 2020; He
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020). To use unlabeled graph data,
earlier studies (Perozzi et al., 2014a; Grover & Leskovec,
2016) adapt sequence-based SSL methods (Mikolov et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA. Correspondence to: Yaochen Xie <ethanycx@tamu.edu>, Shuiwang Ji
<sji@tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2013b;a) to learn node representations. Inspired by the
recent success of SSL in the image domain, a variety of
SSL methods based on graph neural networks (GNNs) have
been proposed in different learning paradigms. In particular, recent studies (Veličković et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2020;
Thakoor et al., 2021; Hassani & Khasahmadi, 2020; You
et al., 2020) construct SSL tasks as unsupervised approaches
to learn representations from graph data at either node-level
or graph-level; Hu et al. (2020) propose SSL strategies to
pre-train GNNs for downstream tasks; and other studies (Jin
et al., 2020; Kim & Oh, 2021) employ SSL as auxiliary
tasks to boost the performance of main learning tasks.
Common taxonomies in recent survey works (Xie et al.,
2022; Liu et al., 2021b) consider two categories of SSL
methods to train GNNs; namely, contrastive methods and
predictive methods. Contrastive methods employ pair-wise
discrimination as their pretext learning tasks. It performs
transformations or augmentations to obtain multiple views
from a graph and trains GNNs to discriminate between
jointly sampled view pairs and independently sampled view
pairs. In contrast, predictive methods (Hamilton et al., 2017;
Hwang et al., 2020; Rong et al., 2020) train GNNs to predict
certain labels obtained from the input graph, such as node
reconstruction, connectivity reconstruction, graph statistical
properties, and domain knowledge-based targets.
Adapted from the image domain, current state-of-the-art
SSL methods for graphs are mostly contrastive. As a drawback, they usually depend on a large training sample size to
include a sufficient number of negative samples. With limited computing resources, contrastive methods may not be
applicable to large-scale graphs without suffering from performance loss. To address the drawback, BGRL (Thakoor
et al., 2021) adapts BYOL (Grill et al., 2020) to the graph
domain. BGRL still obtains different views from each given
graph, but it eliminates the requirement of negative samples
by replacing contrastive objectives with the prediction of
offline embedding. BGRL has achieved competitive performance to the contrastive methods. However, unlike contrastive methods grounded by mutual information estimation and maximization, BYOL and BGRL lack theoretical
guidance and require implementation measures to prevent
collapsing to trivial representations, such as stop gradient,
EMA, and normalization layers.

