Safe Exploration for Efficient Policy Evaluation and Comparison

Runzhe Wan 1 Branislav Kveton 2 Rui Song 1

Abstract
High-quality data plays a central role in ensuring the accuracy of policy evaluation. This paper
initiates the study of efficient and safe data collection for bandit policy evaluation. We formulate the problem and investigate its several representative variants. For each variant, we analyze
its statistical properties, derive the corresponding
exploration policy, and design an efficient algorithm for computing it. Both theoretical analysis and experiments support the usefulness of the
proposed methods.

1. Introduction
Bandit policies have been widely applied to areas including
advertising (Bottou et al., 2013), search (Li et al., 2011) and
healthcare (Zhou et al., 2017). Before deploying a target
policy, it is typically crucial to have an accurate evaluation
of its performance, which can subsequently provide valuable information for deployment decisions or model improvement. This is in general achieved by utilizing logged
data, known as the off-policy evaluation (OPE) problem.
Although OPE has been studied extensively (Dudı́k et al.,
2014; Li et al., 2015; Swaminathan et al., 2016; Wang et al.,
2017; Su et al., 2020; Kallus et al., 2021; Cai et al., 2021),
the existing works mainly focus on various estimators with
a fixed dataset. However, limited attention has been paid to
the dataset itself, which plays a vital role in estimation accuracy. For instance, inverse probability weighting (IPW,
Li et al., 2015), one popular OPE method, has a key requirement that the logging policy has “full support”. This
usually translates into requiring the logging policy to be
close enough to the target policy (Sachdeva et al., 2020;
Tran-The et al., 2021). For direct method (DM, Dudı́k
et al., 2014), it is also common that some feature directions
are less explored in the logged dataset, which impacts the
accuracy of this regression-based estimator.
2

1
Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University
Amazon. Correspondence to: Rui Song <rsong@ncsu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

To improve the accuracy of policy evaluation, a natural idea
is to actively collect high-quality data, and ideally, the data
collection rule should be tailored to the given evaluation
task. This problem is surprisingly unexplored. Moreover,
due to the common safety concerns (Wu et al., 2016; Zhu &
Kveton, 2022), it is of great practical importance to make
sure the data collection rule is safe.
In this paper, we initiate the study of Safe Exploration for
Policy Evaluation and Comparison (SEPEC), the design of
an efficient and safe exploration policy that collects a highquality dataset for the given evaluation task. We focus on
non-adaptive policies, as they are simple to implement logistically. Indeed, in practice, the challenge of requiring investments (e.g., in infrastructures) for adaptive algorithms
has been widely recognized (Zanette et al., 2021; Zhu &
Kveton, 2022), especially before the value is proved via
OPE. Our proposal is summarized in Figure 1.
Another possible approach to policy evaluation is being
on-policy (i.e., following the target policy). However, the
safety concern typically does not allow a direct deployment. In addition, perhaps surprisingly, the on-policy evaluation is not optimal under some setups (e.g., when the
variances of different arms differ) or for some evaluation
tasks (e.g., comparing the target policy with a baseline policy). See Section 3.1 for an example. Therefore, more careful analysis and design are required.
As expected and shown later, our proposed solutions vary
across different bandit setups, evaluation tasks, and value
estimators. To shed light on this novel problem, we study
its three representative variants, including multi-armed
bandits (MAB) with IPW, contextual MAB (CMAB) with
IPW, and linear bandit with DM. Our results can be extended to several other setups that are introduced as well.
Finally, although other evaluation problems (e.g., estimating the value of the target policy in Section 3.4) can be addressed similarly to our work, for concreteness, we focus
on policy comparison, where we estimate the value difference between the target and baseline policies. This task is
closely related to deployment decision making.
Contribution. Our contributions can be summarized as
follows. First, motivated by practical needs for improving policy evaluation accuracy and the common safety concerns, we propose and formulate the SEPEC framework. To

