Welfare Maximization in Competitive Equilibrium: Reinforcement Learning for
Markov Exchange Economy

Zhihan Liu * 1 Miao Lu * 2 Zhaoran Wang 1 Michael I. Jordan 3 Zhuoran Yang 4

Abstract
We study a bilevel economic system, which we
refer to as a Markov exchange economy (MEE),
from the point of view of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). An MEE involves a central planner and a group of self-interested agents.
The goal of the agents is to form a Competitive
Equilibrium (CE), where each agent myopically
maximizes her own utility at each step. The goal
of the central planner is to steer the system so as to
maximize social welfare, which is defined as the
sum of the utilities of all agents. Working in a setting in which the utility function and the system
dynamics are both unknown, we propose to find
the socially optimal policy and the CE from data
via both online and offline variants of MARL.
Concretely, we first devise a novel suboptimality metric specifically tailored to MEE, such that
minimizing such a metric certifies globally optimal policies for both the planner and the agents.
Second, in the online setting, we propose an algorithm, dubbed as MOLM, which combines the
optimism principle for exploration with subgame
CE seeking. Our algorithm can readily incorporate general function approximation tools for handling large state spaces and achieves a sublinear
regret. Finally, we adapt the algorithm to an offline setting based on the pessimism principle and
establish an upper bound on the suboptimality.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Industrial Engineering and
Management Sciences, Northwestern University 2 School of the
Gifted Young, University of Science and Technology of China
3
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
4
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University. Correspondence to: Zhihan Liu <zhihanliu2027@u.northwestern.edu>,
Miao Lu <lumiao@mail.ustc.edu.cn>, Zhaoran Wang <zhaoranwang@gmail.com>, Zhuoran Yang <zhuoran.yang@yale.edu>,
Michael I. Jordan <jordan@cs.berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Many real-world economic systems involve interactions
between a central planner and a group of self-interested
agents, where the planner aims to find a policy that steers
the agents to some ideal equilibrium that maximizes social
welfare. One widely studied instance is optimal tax policy
design (Mirrlees, 1976; Mankiw et al., 2009), where the tax
policy-maker aims at balancing equality and productivity
for tax-payers in the society. Less studied in the previous
literature, the design of learning mechanisms for a bilevel
economic system remains challenging due to the instability
and co-adaptation between agents and the planner, especially for sequential decision-making problems. Despite the
progress shown by several works (Kutschinski et al., 2003;
Mannion et al., 2016; Zheng et al., 2020; 2021; Lussange
et al., 2021) that apply multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) to instances of economic systems, it is still an
open theoretical challenge to design efficient mechanisms
for bilevel economic systems with provable guarantees.
Our approach brings MARL methods together with the classic model exchange economy (EE). The EE framework has
a wide range of applications, including ride-sharing, operations management, crowdsourcing, wireless networks,
and compute clusters (Cohen & Cyert, 1965; Hussain et al.,
2013; Dissanayake et al., 2015; Rauch & Schleicher, 2015).
In an exchange economy, a set of rational agents with individual initial endowments allocate and exchange a finite set
of valuable resources based on a common price system. The
target of EE is to achieve Competitive Equilibrium (CE),
where all agents maximize their own utility under their budget constraint. Adapted from EE, our proposed framework,
the Markov exchange economy (MEE), comprises a central
planner, multiple agents, and contextual states which follow
a Markov Decision Process (MDP). In MEE, the agents
follow the same procedure as in EE conditioned on a contextual state. The central planner’s action affects the evolution
of the endowments of the agents as well as the contextual
states. The goal of each agent is to myopically maximize
its own utility at each step, which leads to a Competitive
Equilibrium (CE) as the agents’ subproblem. The goal of
the central planner is to steer the system so as to achieve
social welfare maximization (SWM), where social welfare

