Multi Resolution Analysis (MRA) for Approximate Self-Attention

Zhanpeng Zeng 1 Sourav Pal 1 Jeffery Kline 2 Glenn Fung 2 Vikas Singh 1

Abstract
Transformers have emerged as a preferred model
for many tasks in natural langugage processing
and vision. Recent efforts on training and deploying Transformers more efficiently have identified
many strategies to approximate the self-attention
matrix, a key module in a Transformer architecture. Effective ideas include various prespecified
sparsity patterns, low-rank basis expansions and
combinations thereof. In this paper, we revisit
classical Multiresolution Analysis (MRA) concepts such as Wavelets, whose potential value
in this setting remains underexplored thus far.
We show that simple approximations based on
empirical feedback and design choices informed
by modern hardware and implementation challenges, eventually yield a MRA-based approach
for self-attention with an excellent performance
profile across most criteria of interest. We undertake an extensive set of experiments and demonstrate that this multi-resolution scheme outperforms most efficient self-attention proposals and
is favorable for both short and long sequences.
Code is available at https://github.com/
mlpen/mra-attention.
1
University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA 2 American Family
Insurance, Madison, USA. Correspondence to: Zhanpeng Zeng
<zzeng38@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The Transformer model proposed in (Vaswani et al., 2017)
is the architecture of choice for a number of tasks in natural
language processing (NLP) as well as vision. The “selfattention” mechanism within Transformers, and specifically,
its extension referred to as Multi-Head Self-Attention, enable modeling dynamic token dependencies, and play a key
role in the overall performance profile of the model. Despite
these advantages, the O(n2 ) complexity of the self-attention
(where n is the sequence length) is a bottleneck, especially
for longer sequences. Consequently, over the last year or
so, extensive effort has been devoted in deriving methods
that mitigate this quadratic cost – a wide choice of algorithms with linear (in the sequence length) complexity are
now available (Wang et al., 2020; Choromanski et al., 2021;
Zeng et al., 2021; Beltagy et al., 2020; Zaheer et al., 2020).
The aforementioned body of work on efficient transformers
leverages the observation that the self-attention matrix has a
parsimonious representation – the mechanics of how this is
modeled and exploited at the algorithm level, varies from
one method to the other. For instance, we may ask that selfattention has a pre-specified form of sparsity (for instance,
diagonal or banded), see (Beltagy et al., 2020; Zaheer et al.,
2020). Alternatively, we may model self-attention globally
as a low-rank matrix, successfully utilized in (Wang et al.,
2020; Xiong et al., 2021; Choromanski et al., 2021). Clearly,
each modeling choice entails its own form of approximation error, which we can measure empirically on existing
benchmarks. Progress has been brisk in improving these
approximations: recent proposals have investigated a hybrid
global+local strategy based on invoking a robust PCA style
model (Chen et al., 2021) and hierarchical (or H-) matrices
(Zhu & Soricut, 2021), which we will draw a contrast with.

Figure 1. The left plot is the histogram of wavelet coefficients in log scale for 2D Haar basis. More than 95% of coefficients have a
magnitude less than 0.005. The second plot is the true self-attention matrix A. The third and fourth plots are the approximation and
error by keeping top 5% of coefficients. The fifth and last plots are similar for keeping top 10% of coefficients. The errors ||Â − A||F
for {MRA, low rank, sparsity} by keeping 10% of {coefficients, ranks, nonzero entries}, are 0.30, 1.24, 0.39, respectively. This shows
performance benefits of MRA compared to low rank and sparsity. We discuss low rank and sparsity in more detail in §A.2.

