Pairwise Conditional Gradients without Swap Steps
and Sparser Kernel Herding

Kazuma Tsuji 1 Ken’ichiro Tanaka 2 3 Sebastian Pokutta 4

Abstract
The Pairwise Conditional Gradients (PCG) algorithm is a powerful extension of the Frank-Wolfe
algorithm leading to particularly sparse solutions,
which makes PCG very appealing for problems
such as sparse signal recovery, sparse regression,
and kernel herding. Unfortunately, PCG exhibits
so-called swap steps that might not provide sufficient primal progress. The number of these bad
steps is bounded by a function in the dimension
and as such known guarantees do not generalize
to the infinite-dimensional case, which would be
needed for kernel herding. We propose a new
variant of PCG, the so-called Blended Pairwise
Conditional Gradients (BPCG). This new algorithm does not exhibit any swap steps, is very easy
to implement, and does not require any internal
gradient alignment procedures. The convergence
rate of BPCG is basically that of PCG if no drop
steps would occur and as such is no worse than
PCG but improves and provides new rates in many
cases. Moreover, we observe in the numerical experiments that BPCG’s solutions are much sparser
than those of PCG. We apply BPCG to the kernel
herding setting, where we derive nice quadrature
rules and provide numerical results demonstrating
the performance of our method.

1. Introduction
Conditional Gradients (Levitin and Polyak, 1966) (also:
Frank-Wolfe algorithms (Frank and Wolfe, 1956)) are an
important class of first-order methods for constrained con1
MUFG Bank, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan 2 Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan 3 PRESTO Japan Science and Technological Agency (JST)
Tokyo, Japan 4 AISST, Zuse Institute Berlin and Institute of Mathematics, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Kazuma Tsuji <kazumatsuji.research@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

vex minimization, i.e., solving
min f (x),
x∈P

where P is a compact convex feasible region. These methods usually form their iterates as convex combinations of
feasible points and as such do not require (potentially expensive) projections onto the feasible region P . Moreover the access to the feasible region is solely realized by
means of a so-called Linear Minimization Oracle (LMO),
which upon presentation with a linear function c returns
arg minx∈P c| x. Another significant advantage is that the
iterates are typically formed as sparse convex combinations
of extremal points of the feasible region (sometimes also
called atoms) which makes this class of optimization algorithms particularly appealing for problems such as sparse
signal recovery, structured regression, SVM training, and
also kernel herding. Over the recent years there have been
significant advances in Frank-Wolfe algorithms providing
even faster convergence rates and higher sparsity (in terms
of the number of atoms participating in the convex combination) and in particular the Pairwise Conditional Gradients
(PCG) algorithm (Lacoste-Julien and Jaggi, 2015) provides
a very high convergence speed (both theoretically and in
computations) and sparsity. The PCG algorithm exhibits
so-called swap steps, which are steps in which weight is
shifting from one atom to another. These steps do not guarantee sufficient primal progress and hence usually convergence analyses bound their number in order to argue that
there is a sufficient number of steps with good progress.
Unfortunately, these bounds depend exponentially on the
dimension of the feasible region (Lacoste-Julien and Jaggi,
2015) and require P to be a polytope for this bound to hold
at all. This precludes application of PCG to the infinitedimensional setting and even in the polyhedral setting the
worst-case bound might be unappealing. Recently, several
works (Rinaldi and Zeffiro, 2020; Combettes and Pokutta,
2020; Mortagy et al., 2020) suggested ‘enhancement procedures’ to potentially overcome swap steps by improving the
descent directions, however at the cost of significantly more
complex algorithms and (still often dimension-dependent)
analysis. In contrast, we propose a much simpler modification of the PCG algorithm by combining it with the blending
criterion from the Blended Conditional Gradients Algorithm

