Sample and Communication-Efficient Decentralized Actor-Critic Algorithms
with Finite-Time Analysis

Ziyi Chen 1 Yi Zhou 1 Rong-Rong Chen 1 Shaofeng Zou 2

Abstract
Actor-critic (AC) algorithms have been widely
used in decentralized multi-agent systems to learn
the optimal joint control policy. However, existing decentralized AC algorithms either need
to share agents’ sensitive information or lack
communication-efficiency. In this work, we develop decentralized AC and natural AC (NAC)
algorithms that avoid sharing agents’ local information and are sample and communicationefficient. In both algorithms, agents share only
noisy rewards and use mini-batch local policy
gradient updates to ensure high sample and communication efficiency. Particularly for decentralized NAC, we develop a decentralized Markovian SGD algorithm with an adaptive mini-batch
size to efficiently compute the natural policy
gradient. Under Markovian sampling and linear function approximation, we prove that the
proposed decentralized AC and NAC algorithms
achieve the state-of-the-art sample complexities
O(ϵ−2 ln ϵ−1 ) and O(ϵ−3 ln ϵ−1 ), respectively,
and achieve an improved communication complexity O(ϵ−1 ln ϵ−1 ). Numerical experiments
demonstrate that the proposed algorithms achieve
lower sample and communication complexities
than the existing decentralized AC algorithms.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has achieved
great success in various application domains, including control (Yanmaz et al., 2017; Chalaki & Malikopoulos, 2020;
Venturini et al., 2021), robotics (Yan et al., 2013), wireless sensor networks (Krishnamurthy et al., 2008; Yuan
et al., 2020), intelligent systems (Zhang et al., 2021), etc.
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Utah. 2 Department of Electrical Engineering, University at
Buffalo. Correspondence to: Ziyi Chen <u1276972@utah.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In MARL, a set of fully decentralized agents interact with
a dynamic environment following their own policies and
collect local rewards, and their goal is to collaboratively
learn the optimal joint policy that achieves the maximum
expected accumulated reward.
Classical policy optimization algorithms have been well
developed and studied, e.g., policy gradient (PG) (Sutton
et al., 2000), actor-critic (AC) (Konda & Tsitsiklis, 2000)
and natural actor-critic (NAC) (Peters & Schaal, 2008; Bhatnagar et al., 2009). In particular, AC-type algorithms are
more computationally tractable and efficient as they take
advantages of both policy gradient and value-based updates.
However, in the multi-agent setting, decentralized AC is
more challenging to design compared with the centralized
AC, as the algorithm updates involve sensitive agent information, e.g., local actions, rewards and policies, which must
be kept locally in the decentralized learning process. In the
existing designs of decentralized AC, the agents need to
share either their local actions (Zhang et al., 2018b;a; Bono
et al., 2018; Perolat et al., 2018; Zhang & Zavlanos, 2019;
Lin et al., 2019b; Heredia & Mou, 2019; Lin et al., 2019a;
Chen et al., 2020) or local rewards (Foerster et al., 2018; Ma
et al., 2021; Lyu et al., 2021) with their neighbors, and hence
are not desired. This issue is addressed by Algorithm 2 of
(Zhang et al., 2018b) at the cost of learning a parameterized
model to estimate the averaged reward, yet this approach
requires extra learning effort and the reward estimation can
be inaccurate. Moreover, existing decentralized AC algorithms are not sample and communication-efficient, and do
not have finite-time convergence guarantee, especially under
the practical Markovian sampling setting. Therefore, we
aim to address the following important question.
• Q1: Can we develop a decentralized AC algorithm that
is convergent, sample and communication-efficient, and
avoids sharing agents’ local actions and policies?
On the other hand, as an important variant of the decentralized AC, decentralized NAC algorithm has not been
formally developed and rigorously analyzed in the existing literature. In particular, a major challenge is that we
need to develop a fully decentralized and computationally
tractable scheme to compute the inverse of the high dimensional Fisher information matrix, and this scheme must be

