DepthShrinker: A New Compression Paradigm Towards Boosting
Real-Hardware Efficiency of Compact Neural Networks

Yonggan Fu† 1 Haichuan Yang 2 Jiayi Yuan 1 Meng Li 2 Cheng Wan 1 Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi 2
Vikas Chandra 2 Yingyan Lin 1

Abstract
Efficient deep neural network (DNN) models
equipped with compact operators (e.g., depthwise
convolutions) have shown great potential in reducing DNNs’ theoretical complexity (e.g., the total
number of weights/operations) while maintaining
a decent model accuracy. However, existing
efficient DNNs are still limited in fulfilling their
promise in boosting real-hardware efficiency, due
to their commonly adopted compact operators’
low hardware utilization. In this work, we open
up a new compression paradigm for developing
real-hardware efficient DNNs, leading to boosted
hardware efficiency while maintaining model
accuracy. Interestingly, we observe that while
some DNN layers’ activation functions help
DNNs’ training optimization and achievable
accuracy, they can be properly removed after
training without compromising the model accuracy. Inspired by this observation, we propose
a framework dubbed DepthShrinker, which
develops hardware-friendly compact networks
via shrinking the basic building blocks of existing
efficient DNNs that feature irregular computation
patterns into dense ones with much improved
hardware utilization and thus real-hardware
efficiency.
Excitingly, our DepthShrinker
framework delivers hardware-friendly compact
networks that outperform both state-of-the-art
efficient DNNs and compression techniques, e.g.,
a 3.06% higher accuracy and 1.53× throughput
on Tesla V100 over SOTA channel-wise pruning
method MetaPruning. Our codes are available at:
https://github.com/facebookresearch/DepthShrinker.
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice
University 2 Meta Inc.
Correspondence to: Yingyan Lin
<yingyan.lin@rice.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Recent breakthroughs in deep neural networks (DNNs) have
fueled a growing demand for deploying DNNs in real-world
devices. However, the prohibitive complexity of DNNs
stands at odds with the often constrained on-device resources. As such, many techniques aiming to boost DNNs’
hardware efficiency have been developed, including pruning (Han et al., 2015a), quantization (Zhu et al., 2016; Zhou
et al., 2016), and efficient DNN models (Howard et al.,
2017; Google., 2020) leveraging compact operators (e.g.,
depthwise convolutions). Yet, the resulting DNN models
from the above techniques mostly require dedicated DNN
accelerators to achieve the desired hardware efficiency.
In parallel, there exists a dilemma between the trends of
efficient DNN design and modern computing platform advances: while modern computing platforms (e.g., GPUs and
TPUs) have consistently advanced to favor a higher degree
of parallel computing, existing efficient DNN models often
adopt light-weight operations that suffer from low hardware
utilization and thus inferior achievable hardware efficiency.
For instance, depthwise convolutions (Howard et al., 2017),
commonly adopted in compact DNNs such as MobileNetV2
and EfficientNet, feature much more irregular computation
patterns as compared to standard convolution layers, making
it difficult to make good use of on-device resources due to
their reduced data reuse opportunities and limiting existing
efficient DNNs to unleash their theoretical potential (Chen
et al., 2019). Therefore, there has been an increasing interest
in developing more hardware friendly DNNs with improved
hardware utilization to better leverage the power of parallelism in modern computing platforms (Chen & Zhao, 2018;
Elkerdawy et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021).
To tackle the aforementioned gap between (1) the low hardware utilization of existing efficient DNNs and (2) the continuously increasing degree of computing parallelism of
modern computing platforms, we ask an intriguing question: “How do we design efficient DNNs that can simultaneously enjoy both the powerful expressiveness of state-of-the†

Work done in collaboration between Meta Reality Labs and
Rice EIC lab during internship

