Neural Tangent Kernel Beyond the Infinite-Width Limit:
Effects of Depth and Initialization

Mariia Seleznova 1 Gitta Kutyniok 1

Abstract

ent Descent (GD) typically yields a good local minimum.

Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) is widely used to
analyze overparametrized neural networks due to
the famous result by Jacot et al. (2018): in the
infinite-width limit, the NTK is deterministic and
constant during training. However, this result cannot explain the behavior of deep networks, since
it generally does not hold if depth and width tend
to infinity simultaneously. In this paper, we study
the NTK of fully-connected ReLU networks with
depth comparable to width. We prove that the
NTK properties depend significantly on the depthto-width ratio and the distribution of parameters at
initialization. In fact, our results indicate the importance of the three phases in the hyperparameter
space identified in Poole et al. (2016): ordered,
chaotic and the edge of chaos (EOC). We derive
exact expressions for the NTK dispersion in the
infinite-depth-and-width limit in all three phases
and conclude that the NTK variability grows exponentially with depth at the EOC and in the chaotic
phase but not in the ordered phase. We also show
that the NTK of deep networks may stay constant
during training only in the ordered phase and discuss how the structure of the NTK matrix changes
during training.

Although training dynamics and generalization capabilities
of DNNs stand among the biggest open problems of deep
learning theory, it is possible to address these challenges
in the special case of infinitely-wide DNNs using the socalled Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK). This kernel captures
the first-order approximation of DNN’s evolution during
GD training. Consider the gradient flow dynamics of the
DNN’s parameters:

1. Introduction
Despite the widespread use of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs), the theory behind their success is still poorly understood. For instance, no present theory can explain why
highly overparametrized DNNs generalize very well in practice, contrary to classical statistical learning theory predictions. Likewise, it is surprising that optimizing a highly
non-convex loss function of a DNN with a variant of Gradi1

Department of Mathematics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Mariia Seleznova <selez@math.lmu.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ẇ = −∇w L(D) = −

X
(xi ,yi )∈D

∇w f (xi )

∂L(D)
,
∂f (xi )

(1)

where w is the vector of all the trainable parameters, f (·)
is the DNN’s output function (defined in Section 2), L(·) is
the loss function and D is the dataset. Then the dynamics
of the DNN’s output function is given by:
f˙(x) = ∇w f (x) · ẇ = −

X
(xi ,yi )∈D

Θ(x, xi )

∂L(D)
,
∂f (xi ) (2)

where the kernel Θ(xi , xj ) := ∇w f (xi ), ∇w f (xj ) is
called the NTK.
A famous result by Jacot et al. (2018) states that in the
infinite-width limit, the NTK is deterministic under proper
random initialization and stays constant during training.
Thereby, the dynamics in (2) is equivalent to kernel regression and has an analytical solution expressed in terms of
the kernel. It is then possible to derive properties of trained
infinitely-wide DNNs theoretically by means of their NTKs.
Hence, many recent works used the NTK to explain empirically known properties of DNNs (Huang et al., 2020;
Adlam & Pennington, 2020; Wang et al., 2022; Tirer et al.,
2021; Geiger et al., 2019). Numerous contributions also derived the infinite-width limit of the NTK for popular DNN
architectures (Yang, 2020; Du et al., 2019; Alemohammad
et al., 2021). Other papers established some non-asymptotic
results on the concentration of the NTK at initialization
(Arora et al., 2019; Buchanan et al., 2021) and stability of
the NTK during training (Huang & Yau, 2020; Lee et al.,
2019).
However, the extent to which the results in the infinitewidth limit extrapolate to realistic DNNs remains largely

