3PC: Three Point Compressors for Communication-Efficient Distributed
Training and a Better Theory for Lazy Aggregation

Peter Richtárik 1 Igor Sokolov 1 Ilyas Fatkhullin 2 3 Elnur Gasanov 1 Zhize Li 1 Eduard Gorbunov 4

Abstract
We propose and study a new class of gradient
communication mechanisms for communicationefficient training—three point compressors
(3PC)—as well as efficient distributed nonconvex
optimization algorithms that can take advantage
of them. Unlike most established approaches,
which rely on a static compressor choice (e.g.,
Top-𝐾), our class allows the compressors to
evolve throughout the training process, with the
aim of improving the theoretical communication
complexity and practical efficiency of the underlying methods. We show that our general approach
can recover the recently proposed state-of-the-art
error feedback mechanism EF21 (Richtárik
et al., 2021) and its theoretical properties as a
special case, but also leads to a number of new
efficient methods. Notably, our approach allows
us to improve upon the state of the art in the
algorithmic and theoretical foundations of the
lazy aggregation literature (Chen et al., 2018). As
a by-product that may be of independent interest,
we provide a new and fundamental link between
the lazy aggregation and error feedback literature.
A special feature of our work is that we do not
require the compressors to be unbiased.

1. Introduction
It has become apparent in the last decade that, other things
equal, the practical utility of modern machine learning models grows with their size and with the amount of data points
used in the training process. This big model and big data
approach, however, comes with increased demands on the

hardware, algorithms, systems and software involved in the
training process.
1.1. Big data and the need for distributed systems
In order to handle the large volumes of data involved in
training SOTA models, it is now absolutely necessary to
rely on (often massively) distributed computing systems
(Dean et al., 2012; Khirirat et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2018).
Indeed, due to storage and compute capacity limitations,
large-enough training data sets can no longer be stored on
a single machine, and instead need to be distributed across
and processed by an often large number of parallel workers.
In particular, in this work we consider distributed supervised
learning problems of the form
]︂
[︂
𝑛
∑︀
min 𝑓 (𝑥) := 𝑛1
𝑓𝑖 (𝑥) ,
(1)
𝑥∈R𝑑

𝑖=1

where 𝑛 is the number of parallel workers/devices/clients,
𝑥 is a vector representing the 𝑑 parameters of a machine
learning model (e.g., the weights in a neural network), and
𝑓𝑖 (𝑥) is the loss of model 𝑥 on the training data stored on
client 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] := {1, 2, . . . , 𝑛}.
In some applications, as in federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2016; Konečný et al., 2016b;a; McMahan et al.,
2017), the training data is captured in a distributed fashion in the first place, and there are reasons to process it in
this decentralized fashion as well, as opposed to first moving it to a centralized location, such as a datacenter, and
subsequently processing it there. Indeed, FL refers to machine learning in the environment where a large collection
of highly heterogeneous clients (e.g., mobile devices, smart
home appliances or corporations) tries to collaboratively
train a model using the diverse data stored on these devices,
but without compromising the clients’ data privacy.

1

Computer Science, King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia 2 ETH AI Center, Switzerland.
3
ETH Zurich, Switzerland. 4 Moscow Institute of Physics and
Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia.. Correspondence to: Peter
Richtárik <peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa>.
𝑡ℎ

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1.2. Big model and the need for communication
reduction
While distributing the data across several workers certainly
alleviates the per-client storage and compute bottlenecks,
the training task is obviously not fully decomposed this way.
Indeed, the 𝑛 clients still need to work together to train the

