Langevin Monte Carlo for Contextual Bandits

Pan Xu 1 Hongkai Zheng 1 Eric Mazumdar 1 Kamyar Azizzadenesheli 2 Anima Anandkumar 1

Abstract
We study the efficiency of Thompson sampling for
contextual bandits. Existing Thompson samplingbased algorithms need to construct a Laplace approximation (i.e., a Gaussian distribution) of the
posterior distribution, which is inefficient to sample in high dimensional applications for general
covariance matrices. Moreover, the Gaussian approximation may not be a good surrogate for the
posterior distribution for general reward generating functions. We propose an efficient posterior sampling algorithm, viz., Langevin Monte
Carlo Thompson Sampling (LMC-TS), that uses
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods
to directly sample from the posterior distribution
in contextual bandits. Our method is computationally efficient since it only needs to perform
noisy gradient descent updates without constructing the Laplace approximation of the posterior
distribution. We prove that the proposed algorithm achieves the same sublinear regret bound
as the best Thompson sampling algorithms for
a special case of contextual bandits, viz., linear
contextual bandits. We conduct experiments on
both synthetic data and real-world datasets on
different contextual bandit models, which demonstrates that directly sampling from the posterior is
both computationally efficient and competitive in
performance.

1. Introduction
A bandit problem is a sequential decision-making problem
wherein an agent, in each round, observes an action set,
chooses an action (or arm) from the set, and then observes a
reward from the environment. A bandit learning algorithm
aims to learn a policy for the agent to maximize its cumula1
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA 2 Department
of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.
Correspondence to: Pan Xu <pan.xu@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tive rewards based on its historical observations of actions
and rewards. In the vast majority of real-world applications,
each arm is usually associated with side information in the
form of a feature or context vector that describes the arm.
The mean reward for an arm is expressed as some unknown
function of the arm’s feature vector and an unknown weight
parameter that is shared across different arms. This setting—
known as the contextual bandit problem— has been extensively studied in the literature (Langford & Zhang, 2007;
Chu et al., 2011; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Agrawal &
Goyal, 2013; Filippi et al., 2010; Li et al., 2017; Lale et al.,
2019; Kveton et al., 2020).
The main challenge in contextual bandit problems is addressing the well known exploitation versus exploration trade-off,
which requires a careful balance between choosing the myopically better arm and choosing an under-sampled worse
arm. Existing algorithms for maximizing the cumulative
reward in bandit problems mainly follow either one of the
following two algorithmic frameworks. The first framework
follows the principle of optimism in the face of uncertainty
(OFU), and algorithms designed using such ideas have been
widely applied to both finite armed bandits, also known as
multi-armed bandits (MAB) (Auer et al., 2002; Ménard &
Garivier, 2017), and contextual bandits (Chu et al., 2011;
Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Li et al., 2017; Zhou et al.,
2020; Xu et al., 2022). The second dominant category of
bandit algorithm makes use of the idea of Thompson or
posterior sampling (Thompson, 1933). Such algorithms
have been widely used in practice due to their ease of implementation and impressive empirical performance, and have
only recently started to be well understood theoretically in
multi-armed bandits (Agrawal & Goyal, 2012; Kaufmann
et al., 2012; Russo & Van Roy, 2014; Jin et al., 2021) and
contextual bandits (Chapelle & Li, 2011; Agrawal & Goyal,
2013; Riquelme et al., 2018; Wang & Zhou, 2020; Zhang
et al., 2021).
One crucial area in which the two types of algorithms differ is in their ease of implementation. In contextual bandit
problems, algorithms based on the OFU principle usually
need to solve a bi-linear optimization problem, making them
computationally expensive to implement outside of simple
problems despite coming with stronger theoretical guarantees. In contrast, Thompson sampling algorithms only need
to solve a linear optimization problem over the arm set since

