Multi-Level Branched Regularization for Federated Learning

Jinkyu Kim * 1 Geeho Kim * 1 Bohyung Han 1 2
Main Pathway

Abstract
A critical challenge of federated learning is data
heterogeneity and imbalance across clients, which
leads to inconsistency between local networks and
unstable convergence of global models. To alleviate the limitations, we propose a novel architectural regularization technique that constructs
multiple auxiliary branches in each local model by
grafting local and global subnetworks at several
different levels and that learns the representations
of the main pathway in the local model congruent to the auxiliary hybrid pathways via online
knowledge distillation. The proposed technique is
effective to robustify the global model even in the
non-iid setting and is applicable to various federated learning frameworks conveniently without
incurring extra communication costs. We perform
comprehensive empirical studies and demonstrate
remarkable performance gains in terms of accuracy and efficiency compared to existing methods.
The source code is available in our project page1 .

1. Introduction
Training deep neural networks typically relies on centralized algorithms, where computing resources and training
data are located within a single server. Recently, to deal
with large-scale models and/or distributed data, the learning
frameworks based on multiple remote machines become
widespread in machine learning research and development.
Federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017) is a unique distributed learning framework that takes advantage of computing resources and training data in clients, typically edge
devices, which is helpful to secure data privacy but often
suffers from insufficient computing power, low communica*
Equal contribution 1 Computer Vision Laboratory, Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering & ASRI, Seoul National
University, Korea 2 Interdisciplinary Program of Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University, Korea. Correspondence to:
Bohyung Han <bhhan@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
http://cvlab.snu.ac.kr/research/FedMLB

Image

Label

Hybrid Pathway 2

Hybrid Pathway 1

Figure 1. Illustration of the local network for the proposed multilevel branched regularization framework. BL and BG denote
network blocks extracted from local and global networks, respectively, and their superscripts indicate block indices. qL and qH
indicate softmax outputs of the main pathway and hybrid pathways, respectively. Solid and dashed gray lines represent forward
and backpropagation flows, respectively. For training, the standard cross-entropy losses are applied to all branches and the KLdivergence losses between the main pathway and the rest of the
pathways are employed for regularization. Note that we update the
parameters in the main pathway only, which are illustrated in sky
blue color in this figure.

tion bandwidth, and extra battery consumption. As practical
solutions to handle the challenges, each edge device often
runs a small number of iterations and minimizes the communication rounds with the central server.
FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017), the standard optimization
method of federated learning, maintains the global model
in the server by aggregating the local models trained independently in multiple clients. Each client utilizes its own
dataset to update the local model instead of sharing the data
with the server or other clients, sends the locally optimized
model to the server for aggregation, and downloads the updated global model for the next stage. FedAvg works well
when the individual datasets of the clients are iid and the
participation rate of the clients is high, but it struggles with
low convergence speed otherwise. This is because, when
the data distributions of individual clients are different from

