Interactively Learning Preference Constraints in Linear Bandits

David Lindner 1 Sebastian Tschiatschek 2 Katja Hofmann 3 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract

function and unknown, expensive-to-evaluate constraints.

We study sequential decision-making with known
rewards and unknown constraints, motivated
by situations where the constraints represent
expensive-to-evaluate human preferences, such
as safe and comfortable driving behavior. We
formalize the challenge of interactively learning
about these constraints as a novel linear bandit
problem which we call constrained linear
best-arm identification. To solve this problem,
we propose the Adaptive Constraint Learning
(ACOL) algorithm. We provide an instancedependent lower bound for constrained linear
best-arm identification and show that ACOL’s
sample complexity matches the lower bound
in the worst-case. In the average case, ACOL’s
sample complexity bound is still significantly
tighter than bounds of simpler approaches. In
synthetic experiments, ACOL performs on
par with an oracle solution and outperforms
a range of baselines. As an application, we
consider learning constraints to represent human
preferences in a driving simulation. ACOL is
significantly more sample efficient than alternatives for this application. Further, we find that
learning preferences as constraints is more robust
to changes in the driving scenario than encoding
the preferences directly in the reward function.

For example, a cookie manufacturer might want to create
a low-calorie cookie.4 The cookie should have the lowest
amount of calories possible, but at least 95% of customers
should like it. To evaluate this constraint, the manufacturer
has to produce specific cookies and test them with customers.
The reward, i.e., the amount of calories for a recipe, is easy
to evaluate without producing a cookie. Because customer
trials are expensive, the cookie manufacturer wants to find
the best constrained solution with as few trials as possible.

1. Introduction
Often, (sequential) decision-making problems are formalized as maximizing an unknown reward function that captures an expensive-to-evaluate objective, for example, user
preferences (see Chapter 1 of Lattimore & Szepesvári (2020)
for examples). However, in many practical situations, it can
be more natural to model problems with a known reward
1

ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2 University of Vienna, Austria
Microsoft Research Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: David
Lindner <david.lindner@inf.ethz.ch>.
3

As a second example, consider finding safe control
parameters for an autonomous car. A car manufacturer
might have a set of controllers to choose from that perform
a specific task, such as reaching a target destination as
quickly as possible. The ideal controller achieves this
task well and drives safely and comfortably. Whereas the
objective – travel time – is easy to specify as a reward
function, the constraints – perceived safety and comfort –
may require feedback from human drivers and passengers.
Similarly as in the previous example, the manufacturer’s
goal is to find the best, safe controller with as few trials that
involve human feedback as possible. We assume that the
controllers are evaluated in a simulation, so it is acceptable
to evaluate an unsafe controller during training; however,
the constraints have to be satisfied during deployment.
In both examples, the decision-making problem is naturally
characterized by an easy-to-evaluate part (the reward) and
an expensive-to-evaluate part (the constraint). Additionally,
we observe that constraints are more robust to changes
in the environment and can be transferred to selecting
controllers for different goals, in contrast to encoding
the constraints as a penalty in the reward function (see
Figure 1). Hence, in this paper, we study learning about
unknown, expensive-to-evaluate constraints.
Specifically, we propose a two-phase approach to solving
problems with unknown constraints. In the first phase, we
learn to estimate the expensive-to-evaluate constraint function well enough for solving the constraint optimization
problem. In the second phase, we recommend a solution.
4

th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Example adapted from Gelbart et al. (2014).

