pathGCN: Learning General Graph Spatial Operators from Paths

Moshe Eliasof 1 Eldad Haber 2 Eran Treister 1

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs), similarly
to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), are
typically based on two main operations - spatial
and point-wise convolutions. In the context of
GCNs, differently from CNNs, a pre-determined
spatial operator based on the graph Laplacian is
often chosen, allowing only the point-wise operations to be learnt. However, learning a meaningful
spatial operator is critical for developing more expressive GCNs for improved performance. In this
paper we propose pathGCN, a novel approach to
learn the spatial operator from random paths on
the graph. We analyze the convergence of our
method and its difference from existing GCNs.
Furthermore, we discuss several options of combining our learnt spatial operator with point-wise
convolutions. Our extensive experiments on numerous datasets suggest that by properly learning
both the spatial and point-wise convolutions, phenomena like over-smoothing can be inherently
avoided, and new state-of-the-art performance is
achieved.

1. Introduction
The study of Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) has
gained large popularity in recent years (Bruna et al., 2013;
Defferrard et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2016; Bronstein
et al., 2017; Monti et al., 2017) in a wide variety of fields and
applications such as computer graphics and vision (Boscaini
et al., 2016; Monti et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018; Eliasof
& Treister, 2020), Bioinformatics (Strokach et al., 2020;
Jumper et al., 2021), node classification (Kipf & Welling,
2016; Chen et al., 2020; Chamberlain et al., 2021) and others. The common ingredient that most of the methods share
1

Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University,
Israel. 2 Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences, University of British Columbia, Canada.. Correspondence
to: Moshe Eliasof <eliasof@post.bgu.ac.il>, Eran Treister <erant@cs.bgu.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The spatial operator induced by a smoothing kernel on
different graphs. The vertex with dashed outline is the path origin.

is the use of a pre-determined spatial operator, often times
based on the graph Laplacian. While this choice is intuitive and effective, it induces limitations on the behaviour of
GCNs. First, it is limited in the aspect of the expressiveness
of the networks. Unlike CNNs (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He
et al., 2016; Howard et al., 2017), where both the spatial
filters (e.g., 3 × 3 depth-wise convolutions) and point-wise
(1 × 1) convolutions are learnt, here only the latter are left
to be determined. Secondly, it is well known (Wu et al.,
2019) that the Laplacian operator, when applied as in (Kipf
& Welling, 2016) smooths the input features, and therefore
a recurrent application of it may lead to over-smoothing,
resulting in typically shallow networks. This phenomenon
is well documented and studied in the field of GCNs (Wu
et al., 2019; Zhao & Akoglu, 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Chamberlain et al., 2021; Eliasof et al., 2021). In this work we
propose pathGCN – a novel approach that overcomes the
limitations above, based on aggregation from random paths
defined over the graph vertices. We show that using this
approach it is possible to define spatial operators similarly to
the ones used in 2D convolutions on images. Such operators
have variable aperture and coefficients that may increase the
expressiveness of GCNs. In addition, since the coefficients
of the operator are learnt, its eigenvalues can be rather different than those of the graph Laplacian. This implies that
the learnt kernels can take different roles, from smoothing
to edge-detecting (or sharpening) operators. An example
of the effective spatial operators that are induced by the
smoothing spatial kernel [0.8, 1.0, 0.6] is presented in Fig.
1, where we can see that the spatial operator is dependent
both on the graph topology and the spatial kernel.
We provide an analysis of our method to motivate our approach in Sec. 3, and present actual learnt kernels by our
network in Fig. 4, which suggests that greater spatial flexibility is required to obtain better performance and to avoid
over-smoothing, as reflected in our experiments in Sec. 4.

