Improving Out-of-Distribution Robustness via Selective Augmentation

Huaxiu Yao * 1 Yu Wang * 2 Sai Li 3 Linjun Zhang 4 Weixin Liang 1
James Zou 1 Chelsea Finn 1

Abstract
Machine learning algorithms typically assume
that training and test examples are drawn from the
same distribution. However, distribution shift is a
common problem in real-world applications and
can cause models to perform dramatically worse
at test time. In this paper, we specifically consider
the problems of subpopulation shifts (e.g., imbalanced data) and domain shifts. While prior works
often seek to explicitly regularize internal representations or predictors of the model to be domain
invariant, we instead aim to learn invariant predictors without restricting the model’s internal
representations or predictors. This leads to a simple mixup-based technique which learns invariant
predictors via selective augmentation called LISA.
LISA selectively interpolates samples either with
the same labels but different domains or with the
same domain but different labels. Empirically, we
study the effectiveness of LISA on nine benchmarks ranging from subpopulation shifts to domain shifts, and we find that LISA consistently
outperforms other state-of-the-art methods and
leads to more invariant predictors. We further analyze a linear setting and theoretically show how
LISA leads to a smaller worst-group error. Code
is released in https://github.com/huaxiuyao/LISA

1. Introduction
To deploy machine learning algorithms in real-world applications, we must pay attention to distribution shift, i.e. when
the test distribution is different from the training distribution,
which substantially degrades model performance. In this
*
Equal contribution . This work was done when Yu Wang was
mentored by Huaxiu Yao remotely. 1 Stanford University, CA,
USA 2 University of California San Diego, CA, USA 3 Renmin
University of China, Beijing, China 4 Rutgers University, NJ, USA.
Correspondence to: Huaxiu Yao <huaxiu@cs.stanford.edu>, Sai
Li <saili@ruc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

paper, we refer this problem as out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization and specifically consider performance gaps
caused by two kinds of distribution shifts: subpopulation
shifts and domain shifts. In subpopulation shifts, the test
domains (or subpopulations) are seen but underrepresented
in the training data. When subpopulation shift occurs, models may perform poorly when they falsely rely on spurious
correlations between the particular subpopulation and the
label. For example, in health risk prediction, a machine
learning model trained on the entire population may associate the labels with demographic features (e.g., gender and
age), making the model fail on the test set when such an
association does not hold in reality. In domain shifts, the
test data is from new domains, which requires the trained
model to generalize well to test domains without seeing the
data from those domains at training time. In the health risk
example, we may want to train a model on patients from
a few sampled hospitals and then deploy the model to a
broader set of hospitals (Koh et al., 2021).
To improve model robustness under these two kinds of distribution shifts, prior works have proposed various regularizers
to learn representations or predictors that are invariant to
different domains while still containing sufficient information to fulfill the task (Li et al., 2018; Sun & Saenko, 2016;
Arjovsky et al., 2019; Krueger et al., 2021; Rosenfeld et al.,
2021). However, designing regularizers that are widely suitable to datasets from diverse domains is challenging, and
unsuitable regularizers may adversely limit the model’s expressive power or yield a difficult optimization problem,
leading to inconsistent performance among various realworld datasets. For example, on the WILDS datasets, invariant risk minimization (IRM) (Arjovsky et al., 2019) with
reweighting – a representative method for learning invariant
predictor – outperforms empirical risk minimization (ERM)
on CivilComments, but fails to improve robustness on a
variety of other datasets like Camelyon17 and RxRx1 (Koh
et al., 2021).
Instead of explicitly imposing regularization, we propose to
learn invariant predictors through data interpolation, leading
to a simple algorithm called LISA (Learning Invariant Predictors with Selective Augmentation). Concretely, inspired
by mixup (Zhang et al., 2018), LISA linearly interpolates
the features for a pair of samples and applies the same

