Optimal and Efficient Dynamic Regret Algorithms for
Non-Stationary Dueling Bandits

Aadirupa Saha * 1 Shubham Gupta * 2

Abstract
We study the problem of dynamic regret minimization in K-armed Dueling Bandits under nonstationary or time-varying preferences. This is an
online learning setup where the agent chooses a
pair of items at each round and observes only a
relative binary ‘win-loss’ feedback for this pair
sampled from an underlying preference matrix
at that round. We first study the problem of
static-regret minimization for adversarial preference sequences
√ and design an efficient algorithm with Õ( KT ) regret bound. We next
use similar algorithmic ideas to propose an efficient and provably optimal algorithm for dynamicregret minimization under two notions√of nonstationarities. In particular, we show Õ( SKT )
1/3
and Õ(VT K 1/3 T 2/3 ) dynamic-regret guarantees, respectively, with S being the total number of ‘effective-switches’ in the underlying preference relations and VT being a measure of
‘continuous-variation’ non-stationarity. These
rates are provably optimal as justified with matching lower bound guarantees. Moreover, our proposed algorithms are flexible as they can be easily
‘blackboxed’ to yield dynamic regret guarantees
for other notions of dueling bandits regret, including condorcet regret, best-response bounds, and
Borda regret. The complexity of these problems
have not been studied prior to this work despite
the practicality of non-stationary environments.
Extensive simulations corroborate our results.

1. Introduction
The problem of Dueling-Bandits has gained much attention
in the machine learning community (Yue et al., 2012; Zoghi
*

Equal contribution 1 Microsoft Research, New York City,
United States. 2 IBM Research, Orsay, France.. Correspondence to:
Aadirupa Saha <aasa@microsoft.com>, Shubham Gupta <shubham.gupta1@ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2014b; 2015). This is an online learning framework
that generalizes the standard multi-armed bandit (MAB) setting (Auer et al., 2002a; Agrawal & Goyal, 2012; Lattimore
& Szepesvári, 2018; Audibert & Bubeck, 2010; Kalyanakrishnan et al., 2012) by querying relative preference feedback
of actively chosen item pairs instead of an absolute feedback for a single item. More formally, in dueling bandits,
the learning proceeds in rounds: At each round, the learner
selects a pair of arms and observes stochastic preference
feedback of the winner of a comparison (duel) between the
selected arms. The objective of the learner is to minimize the
regret with respect to a (or a set of) ‘best’ arm(s) in hindsight.
Towards this, several algorithms have been proposed (Ailon
et al., 2014; Zoghi et al., 2014a; Komiyama et al., 2015;
Gajane et al., 2015). Due to the inherent exploration-vsexploitation tradeoff of the learning framework and several
advantages of preference feedback (Bengs et al., 2021; Yue
& Joachims, 2009), many real-world applications can be
modeled as dueling bandits, including movie recommendations, retail management, search engine optimization, and
job scheduling, etc.
While most existing works have studied the dueling bandit problem in a stochastic setting where the underlying
preferences are assumed to be fixed over time, it is often
unjustified in reality. Specifically, depending on the time,
season, demographics, occasions, etc., the underlying preferences may often change over time. E.g., a recommendation
system must consider that a user’s preferred list of items
(videos) depends on factors such as the time of the day and
seasonal needs. Similarly, the relevance of a search query
changes with the location and market influence. It is therefore more reasonable to assume adversarial feedback models
for dueling bandits where, unlike the stochastic setting, the
underlying preference matrices can vary over time. This
naturally leads to the following question.
Q.1: Can we design an efficient algorithm that is competitive under adversarial changes in the preference model?
Unfortunately, except for some handful of attempts (Ailon
et al., 2014; Gajane et al., 2015), which are restricted to
a very special class of linear-score based preference structures (see details in Sec. 1.1), none of the existing dueling
√
bandits algorithms can guarantee an order optimal O( T )

