Penalizing Gradient Norm for Efficiently Improving
Generalization in Deep Learning

How to train deep neural networks (DNNs) to
generalize well is a central concern in deep learning, especially for severely overparameterized
networks nowadays. In this paper, we propose
an effective method to improve the model generalization by additionally penalizing the gradient norm of loss function during optimization.
We demonstrate that confining the gradient norm
of loss function could help lead the optimizers
towards finding flat minima. We leverage the
first-order approximation to efficiently implement
the corresponding gradient to fit well in the gradient descent framework. In our experiments,
we confirm that when using our methods, generalization performance of various models could
be improved on different datasets. Also, we
show that the recent sharpness-aware minimization method (Foret et al., 2021) is a special, but
not the best, case of our method, where the best
case of our method could give new state-of-art
performance on these tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/zhaoyang-0204/gnp.

1. Introduction
Today’s powerful computation hardwares make it possible for training large-scale deep neural networks (DNNs)
(Goyal et al., 2017; Han et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021). These DNNs typically have millions or even billions of parameters, completely far exceeding the amount
of training samples. Due to such heavy parametrization,
they are capable to provide larger hypothesis space with
normally better solutions. But in the meantime, such a huge
hypothesis space is also full of more minima with diverse
generalization ability (Neyshabur et al., 2017). This makes
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University.
Correspondence to: Hao Zhang <haozhang@tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Yang Zhao <zhao-yan18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

small gradient norm

large gradient norm

18
16
14
12
10

B

Abstract

L(θ)

Yang Zhao 1 Hao Zhang 1 Xiuyuan Hu 1

8
6
4
2
0

flat minimum

-2
0

200

sharp minimum
400

600

A

800

1000

θ

Figure 1. Toy example illustrating connections between the gradient norm of a function and the flatness of the function landscape.

it more challanging to train them to converge to optimal
minima at which models would generalize better. Therefore, how to guide optimizers to find such optimal minima
becomes a more salient concern than ever.
Generally, even if the given training datasets have been fully
utilized, minimizing only the training loss gauging the gap
between the true labels and predicted labels still could not
ensure convergence to satisfactory minima. Regarding this,
implementing regularization would play a critical role in
modern training paradigm (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015; Srivastava et al., 2014). Regularization techniques may contribute
in various ways beyond datasets. In particular, regularizing
models to have certain ”good” properties could be one of
the most commonly used techniques, typically implemented
through penalty function methods (Smith et al., 1997).
In this paper, in addition to optimizing the common loss
function, we would further impose an extra penalty on a
specific property, the gradient norm of the loss function. The
motivation of penalizing the gradient norm of loss function
is to encourage the optimizer to find a minimum that lies in
a relatively flat neighborhood region, since such flat minima
have been demonstrated to be able to lead to better model
generalization than sharp ones (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997). Figure 1 gives a toy example that illustrates the
association between gradient norm and flatness of minima
intuitively, and we would further demonstrate this from the
perspective of Lipschitz continuity in Section 3.2.

