Fast Convex Optimization for Two-Layer ReLU Networks: Equivalent Model
Classes and Cone Decompositions

Aaron Mishkin 1 Arda Sahiner 2 Mert Pilanci 2

Abstract
We develop fast algorithms and robust software
for convex optimization of two-layer neural networks with ReLU activation functions. Our work
leverages a convex reformulation of the standard
weight-decay penalized training problem as a
set of group-`1 -regularized data-local models,
where locality is enforced by polyhedral cone constraints. In the special case of zero-regularization,
we show that this problem is exactly equivalent to unconstrained optimization of a convex
“gated ReLU” network. For problems with nonzero regularization, we show that convex gated
ReLU models obtain data-dependent approximation bounds for the ReLU training problem. To optimize the convex reformulations, we develop an
accelerated proximal gradient method and a practical augmented Lagrangian solver. We show that
these approaches are faster than standard training
heuristics for the non-convex problem, such as
SGD, and outperform commercial interior-point
solvers. Experimentally, we verify our theoretical
results, explore the group-`1 regularization path,
and scale convex optimization for neural networks
to image classification on MNIST and CIFAR-10.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Convex (solid line) and non-convex (dashed) optimization of a two-layer ReLU network for a realizable synthetic classification problem. We plot only one run of the convex solver since
they are nearly identical and all reach perfect accuracy. In contrast, 4/10 runs of SGD on the non-convex problem converge to
sub-optimal stationary points.

even diverge depending on the choice of step-size. Parameters like the random seed complicate replications and can
produce model churn, where networks learned using the
same procedure give different predictions for the same inputs (Henderson et al., 2018; Bhojanapalli et al., 2021). See
Figure 1 for an example. For most applications, practitioners
use domain knowledge and costly hyper-parameter search
to cope with these challenges.

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Aaron Mishkin <amishkin@cs.stanford.edu>.

In contrast, we propose to optimize shallow models via
convex reformulations of the training objective. Recent
work by Pilanci & Ergen (2020) uses duality theory to
show two-layer neural networks with ReLU activations and
weight decay regularization may be re-expressed as a linear
model with a group-`1 penalty and polyhedral cone constraints. Subsequent research extends this model space, deriving convex formulations for convolutions (Sahiner et al.,
2021c; Ergen & Pilanci, 2021b; Gupta et al., 2021), vectoroutputs (Sahiner et al., 2021b), batch normalization (Ergen
et al., 2021), generative models (Sahiner et al., 2021a) and
deeper networks (Ergen & Pilanci, 2021a;c). However, existing work is largely focused on model classes, rather than
leveraging convexification to train neural networks.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

This paper develops fast optimization algorithms for twolayer ReLU models by carefully studying the space of equivalent models. We show that unregularized ReLU networks

It is well-known that global optimization of neural networks
is NP-Hard (Blum & Rivest, 1988). Despite the theoretical
difficulty, highly accurate models are trained in practice
using stochastic gradient methods (SGMs) (Bengio, 2012).
Unfortunately, SGMs cannot guarantee convergence to a
local optimum of the non-convex training loss (Ge et al.,
2015) and existing methods rarely certify convergence to a
stationary point of any type (Goodfellow et al., 2016). SGMs
are also sensitive to hyper-parameters; they converge slowly,
to different stationary points (Neyshabur et al., 2017), or
1

2

