A Model-Agnostic Randomized Learning Framework
based on Random Hypothesis Subspace Sampling

Yiting Cao 1 Chao Lan 1

Abstract
We propose a model-agnostic randomized learning framework based on Random Hypothesis
Subspace Sampling (RHSS). Given any hypothesis class, it randomly samples k hypotheses and
learns a near-optimal model from their span by
simply solving a linear least square problem in
O(nk 2 ) time, where n is the number of training instances. On the theory side, we derive the
performance guarantee of RHSS from a generic
subspace approximation perspective, leveraging
properties of metric entropy and random matrices. On the practical side, we apply the RHSS
framework to learn kernel, network and tree based
models. Experimental results show they converge efficiently as k increases and outperform
their model-specific counterparts including random fourier feature, random vector functional link
and extra tree on real-world data sets.

1. Introduction
Randomized machine learning is a research topic that studies how to randomize the learning process, often with an
aim of improving learning efficiency. Representative techniques range from random projection (Vempala, 2005) for
efficient dimensionality reduction to extremely randomized
decision tree (Geurts et al., 2006), and from random Fourier
feature (Rahimi & Recht, 2008) for efficient kernel methods
to random vector functional link (Needell et al., 2020) for
efficient network training. These techniques have received
adequate research interests over the past decades.
When inspecting the literature, we notice that most randomized learning techniques are model-specific. For example,
in (Geurts et al., 2006), tree generation is randomized by
using random features to split tree nodes; in (Rahimi &
1
School of Computer Science, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA. Correspondence to: Chao Lan <clan@ou.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Recht, 2008), a kernel machine is randomized by using random Fourier features to approximate kernel functions; in
(Needell et al., 2020), neural network training is randomized
by fixing all but the output weights to random values. While
these techniques have achieved promising results on their
designated models respecitvely, it remains unclear how they
could be applied on other models or guide the design of
randomized learners for them.
Random projection (Vempala, 2005) is a randomized dimensionality reduction technique, which projects data into a
lower dimensional feature space through random linear projections. It can be applied to speed up downstream learning
and considered as model-agnostic to the learner. However,
the speedup is often limited because the learner is not randomized and could remain inefficient especially if its time
complexity does not depend heavily on the original feature
dimension such as kernel methods.
The above observations reveal the lack of a model-agnostic
randomized learning framework that not only ties the existing techniques for certain models but also provides guidance
on designing randomized learners for other models. We believe such framework will help to significantly advance the
research and application of randomized machine learning.
This motivates the present study.
A major contribution of this paper is the design of a modelagnostic randomized learning framework based on Random
Hypothesis Subspace Sampling (RHSS). Given any hypothesis class, it randomly samples k hypotheses and learns a
model in their span that best approximates the target model
on a set of n training instances. Importantly, this learning
process can always be cast as a simple linear least square
problem and solvable in O(nk 2 ) time. In practice, small k
often suffices for good performance, which makes RHSSbased learning extremely efficient no matter how complex
the given hypothesis class is.
On the theory side, we derive the performance guarantee
of RHSS from a generic subspace approximation perspective, leveraging properties of metric entropy and random
matrices. Under proper conditions, we show the best model
learned from the span of k randomly sampled hypotheses
can approximate any target model on a fixed data set by up

