MemSR: Training Memory-efficient Lightweight Model for Image
Super-Resolution

Kailu Wu 1 Chung-Kuei Lee 2 Kaisheng Ma 1

Abstract

澧澦澢澬

Methods based on deep neural networks with a
massive number of layers and skip-connections
have made impressive improvements on single image super-resolution (SISR). The skipconnections in these complex models boost the
performance at the cost of a large amount of
memory. With the increase of camera resolution from 1 million pixels to 100 million pixels on mobile phones, the memory footprint of
these algorithms also increases hundreds of times,
which restricts the applicability of these models
on memory-limited devices. A plain model consisting of a stack of 3×3 convolutions with ReLU,
in contrast, has the highest memory efficiency
but poorly performs on super-resolution. This
paper aims at calculating a winning initialization from a complex teacher network for a plain
student network, which can provide performance
comparable to complex models. To this end, we
convert the teacher model to an equivalent large
plain model and derive the plain student’s initialization. We further improve the student’s performance through initialization-aware feature distillation. Extensive experiments suggest that the
proposed method results in a model with a competitive trade-off between accuracy and speed at
a much lower memory footprint than other stateof-the-art lightweight approaches.

澧澦澢澨

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) pursues reconstructing a high-resolution (HR) image from a low-resolution
(LR) counterpart, which has been widely applied in mobile
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 HiSilicon Technologies,
Shanghai, China .
Correspondence to: Kaisheng Ma
<kaisheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

濄濠濕濝濢澡濁澜濣濩濦濧澝

澶澥澤澤澔濄濇濂濆澔澜濘澶澝

澧澦澢澪

濄濠濕濝濢澡濌澜濣濩濦濧澝

澧澦澢澦
澧澦

澽澸濂

澧澥澢澬

濇濫濝濢澽濆澡濇

激濕濨濨濝濗濙濂濙濨
澽濁澸濂

澷澵濆濂

澼澵濂

澸濆濆濂

濆澺澸濂

澺濇濆澷濂濂 澹澸濇濆 濊澸濇濆

澧澥澢澪

濇濆澷濂濂

澧澥澢澨
澧澥澢澦
澧澥

澤

澥澤澤澤

澦澤濡濧

澥澤澤濡濧

澦澤澤澤

澧澤澤澤

澩澤澤濡濧

澨澤澤澤

澩澤澤澤

濁濙濡濣濦濭澔澺濣濣濨濤濦濝濢濨澜濁澶澝

Figure 1. Speed, accuracy, and memory trade-off. The maximum memory footprint and the average inference time for upscaling 2× on LR image of size 960 × 540 with full precision on
PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and Nvidia GTX 1080Ti are shown
above. Accuracy is estimated on B100 (Martin et al., 2001) ×2
dataset in terms of peak signal to-noise ratio (PSNR). The plain
model trained with our framework achieves performance comparable to existing light-weighted models while requiring memory
comparable to FSRCNN.

phones, televisions, and cameras. With the great success of
deep neural networks, the pioneering work SRCNN (Dong
et al., 2016a) first used a three-layer convolutional neural
network (CNN) for SISR and outperformed conventional
approaches by large margins. After that, CNN-based SR
methods (Mei et al., 2020; Tai et al., 2017a; Niu et al.,
2020; Muqeet et al., 2020) consisting of deep networks with
sparse and dense skip-connections achieved impressive performance. However, due to the high computational cost and
memory footprint, it is hard to utilize them for real applications such as mobile phones, televisions, and robots. Thus,
it is crucial to build lightweight SR models.
Conventional lightweight SR models generally focus on
reducing the computational cost or the number of parameters. Therefore, they use global residual learning (Kim et al.,
2016a), residual groups (Ledig et al., 2017), residual dense
blocks (Zhang et al., 2018b), residual in residual architecture (Zhang et al., 2018a), and channel splits (Hui et al.,
2019), which come at the cost of increased memory usage
or inference speed. Memory-efficient SR models use recursive layers to reduce parameter counts (Tai et al., 2017a;

