Sample-Efficient Reinforcement Learning with loglog(T) Switching Cost

Dan Qiao 1 Ming Yin 1 2 Ming Min 2 Yu-Xiang Wang 1

Abstract
We study the problem of reinforcement learning (RL) with low (policy) switching cost — a
problem well-motivated by real-life RL applications in which deployments of new policies are
costly and the number of policy updates must
be low. In this paper, we propose a new algorithm based on stage-wise exploration and adaptive√policy elimination that achieves a regret of
e H 4 S 2 AT ) while requiring a switching cost
O(
of O(HSA log log T ). This is an exponential improvement over the best-known switching cost
O(H 2 SA log T ) √
among existing methods with
e
O(poly(H, S, A) T ) regret. In the above, S, A
denotes the number of states and actions in an Hhorizon episodic Markov Decision Process model
with unknown transitions, and T is the number of
steps. As a byproduct of our new techniques, we
also derive a reward-free exploration algorithm
with a switching cost of O(HSA). Furthermore,
we prove a pair of information-theoretical lower
bounds which say that (1) Any no-regret algorithm must
√ have a switching cost of Ω(HSA); (2)
O( T ) regret algorithm must incur a switchAny e
ing cost of Ω(HSA log log T ). Both our algorithms are thus optimal in their switching costs.

1. Introduction
In many real-world reinforcement learning (RL) tasks, it
is costly to run fully adaptive algorithms that update the
exploration policy frequently. Instead, collecting data in
large batches using the current policy deployment is usually
cheaper. For instance, in recommendation systems (Afsar
et al., 2021), the system is able to collect millions of new
data points in minutes, while the deployment of a new policy
1
Department of Computer Science, UC Santa Barbara
Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, UC Santa Barbara. Correspondence to: Dan Qiao <danqiao@ucsb.edu>, YuXiang Wang <yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

often takes weeks, as it involves significant extra cost and
human effort. It is thus infeasible to change the policy after
collecting every new data point as a typical RL algorithm
would demand. A practical alternative is to schedule a large
batch of experiments in parallel and only decide whether to
change the policy after the whole batch is complete. Similar
constraints arise in other RL applications such as those in
healthcare (Yu et al., 2021), database optimization (Krishnan
et al., 2018), computer networking (Xu et al., 2018) and new
material design (Raccuglia et al., 2016).
In those scenarios, the agent needs to minimize the number
of policy switching while maintaining (nearly) the same regret bounds as its fully-adaptive counterparts. On the empirical side, Matsushima et al. (2020) cast this problem via the
notion deployment efficiency and designed algorithms with
high deployment efficiency for both online and offline tasks.
On the theoretical side, Bai et al. (2019) first brought up
the definition of switching cost that measures the number of
policy updates. They
√ designed Q learning-based algorithm
e ∗ ( T ) and switching cost of O∗ (log T )1 .
with regret of O
Later, Zhang et al. (2020c) improved both the regret bound
and switching cost bound. However, the switching cost remains order O∗ (log T ). In addition, both algorithms need
to monitor the data stream to decide whether the policy
should be switched at each episode. In contrast, for an
A-armed bandit problem, Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2013) created
√arm elimination algorithm that achieves the optimal
e AT ) regret and a near constant switching cost bound
O(
of O(A log log T ). Meanwhile, the arm elimination algorithm predefined when to change policy before the algorithm
starts, which could render parallel implementation. To adapt
this feature from multi-armed bandit to RL problem, one
straightforward way is to consider each deterministic policy (ASH policies in total) as an arm. Applying the same
algorithm for the RL setting, one ends up with the switching cost √
to be O(ASH log log T ) and the regret bound of
order O( ASH T ). Clearly, such an adaptation is far from
satisfactory as the exponential dependence on H, S makes
the algorithm inefficient. This motivates us to consider the
following question:
Question 1.1. Is it possible to design an algorithm for online RL problem with O∗ (log log T ) switching cost and
1
e ∗ omit a poly(H, S, A) terms, this will be
Here O∗ (·) and O
a notation we use throughout.

