Fenrir: Physics-Enhanced Regression for Initial Value Problems

Filip Tronarp * 1 Nathanael Bosch * 1 Philipp Hennig 1 2

Abstract
We show how probabilistic numerics can be used
to convert an initial value problem into a Gauss–
Markov process parametrised by the dynamics
of the initial value problem. Consequently, the
often difficult problem of parameter estimation
in ordinary differential equations is reduced to
hyperparameter estimation in Gauss–Markov regression, which tends to be considerably easier.
The method’s relation and benefits in comparison
to classical numerical integration and gradient
matching approaches is elucidated. In particular,
the method can, in contrast to gradient matching,
handle partial observations, and has certain routes
for escaping local optima not available to classical numerical integration. Experimental results
demonstrate that the method is on par or moderately better than competing approaches.

Consider the following initial value problem (IVP)

d
ϕθ (t) = fθ t, ϕθ (t) ,
t ∈ [0, T ],
(1)
dt
where the vector field fθ : [0, T ] × Rd → Rd and the initial
condition ϕθ (0) = y0 (θ) are both parametrised by θ. In
this article, the concern lies in estimating θ from noisy
measurements of the following form
u(t) = H ϕθ (t) + v(t),

v(t) ∼ N (0, Rθ ),

B

C

D

Figure 1. From an uninformed prior to a calibrated posterior.
Starting from a standard Gauss–Markov prior (A), Fenrir first
computes a physics-enhanced prior with probabilistic numerics
(B), and then a posterior via Gauss–Markov regression (C). By
maximizing the marginal likelihood, we obtain a calibrated posterior and parameter estimates for the underlying dynamical system
(D). The data generating model is the logistic equation, which
corresponds to the vector field f (t, y) = ry(1 − y).

1. Introduction

T

A

(2)

where t ∈ TD ⊂ [0, T ] is the finite set of measurement
nodes and H is a measurement matrix of appropriate dimension. This is a ubiquitous problem in science and engineering. Examples include ecology (Benson, 1979), pharmacokinetics (Gelman et al., 1996), process engineering (Åström
& Eykhoff, 1971), and brain imaging (Friston, 2002).
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany 2 Max–Planck Institute
for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence
to: Filip Tronarp <filip.tronarp@uni-tuebingen.de>, Nathanael
Bosch <nathanael.bosch@uni-tuebingen.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

The likelihood functional LD , evaluated at some function y,
is given by


Y
LD (Rθ , y) =
N u(t); H T y(t), Rθ ,
t∈TD

and the marginal likelihood M of some parameter θ can be
expressed by evaluating LD at the corresponding solution
ϕθ according to
M(θ) = LD (Rθ , ϕθ ) .
The parameter θ may be estimated by maximising M. A
persistent challenge in likelihood-based inference in initial
value problems is the fact that ϕθ , and therefore the likelihood, are intractable (Bard, 1974).
A standard appproach to approximating the likelihood is
based on solving the IVP numerically (Hairer et al., 1987).
However, in optimisation-based inference it has been observed that this leads to many local optima (Cao et al., 2011),
and can lead to divergence of the optimiser (Dass et al.,
2017). On the other hand, slow convergence and poor mixing has been observed for Monte Carlo-based inference

