Antibody-Antigen Docking and Design via Hierarchical Structure Refinement

Wengong Jin 1 Regina Barzilay 2 Tommi Jaakkola 2

Abstract
Computational antibody design seeks to automatically create an antibody that binds to an antigen.
The binding affinity is governed by the 3D binding interface where antibody residues (paratope)
closely interact with antigen residues (epitope).
Thus, the key question of antibody design is how
to predict the 3D paratope-epitope complex (i.e.,
docking) for paratope generation. In this paper,
we propose a new model called Hierarchical Structure Refinement Network (HSRN) for paratope
docking and design. During docking, HSRN employs a hierarchical message passing network to
predict atomic forces and use them to refine a
binding complex in an iterative, equivariant manner. During generation, its autoregressive decoder progressively docks generated paratopes
and builds a geometric representation of the binding interface to guide the next residue choice. Our
results show that HSRN significantly outperforms
prior state-of-the-art on paratope docking and design benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Recently, generative models (Saka et al., 2021; Jin et al.,
2021) have demonstrated the feasibility of de novo antibody
design to combat a pathogen of interest (i.e., antigen). In
this paper, we propose to further advance this generation
capacity by tailoring antibody design models for binding
a specific region of an antigen (an epitope). Figure 1 illustrates a binding interface consisting of an antigen epitope
and an antibody paratope. While a typical antigen has multiple epitopes, some of them may constitute more desirable
targets from a therapeutic perspective. For instance, binding
to a more conserved epitope decreases the chance of viral
escape and prolongs antibody efficacy (Yuan et al., 2020).
1

Eric and Wendy Schmidt Center, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard 2 CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Wengong Jin <wengong@csail.mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Gene

Epitope

rate

Dock

Paratope: RNTLTGDYFDY

Paratope
Antigen

Figure 1. Illustration of paratope docking and design. The docking
task assumes a paratope sequence is given and aims to predict the
3D coordinate of each atom. Paratope design assumes only the
epitope is given and seeks to generate a paratope sequence and its
3D structure for epitope binding.

Therefore, conditioning the generation process on a specific
epitope gives us more control in antibody design.
Antibody binding affinity relies on the quality of paratopeepitope match, similar to a lock and a key. Thus, predicting
the paratope-epitope complex (docking) is the key to antibody engineering. There are three modeling challenges for
paratope docking and design. The first is paratope flexibility.
Existing rigid-body docking models (Yan et al., 2020; Ganea
et al., 2021) assume the ligand 3D structure is given and
fixed, so they cannot be integrated into a generative model.
Since the paratope is being generated on the fly, we need to
adjust the inferred paratope structure as more information
arrives. The second is equivariance. Prior work on paratope
design (Jin et al., 2021) cannot model a two-body system
since it predicts the absolute coordinates while the epitope
can be rotated arbitrarily. The third is efficiency. It is computationally expensive to build an all-atom structure from
scratch because a binding interface usually involves hundreds of atoms. Previous methods (Ingraham et al., 2018)
model protein backbone only and ignore the side-chain conformation, but side-chain atom contacts play an important
role in binding.
In this paper, we propose a new architecture called Hierarchical Structure Refinement Network (HSRN) to address
the above challenges.1 As opposed to rigid-body docking,
HSRN simultaneously folds and docks a paratope sequence
and iteratively refines its 3D structure during generation.
1

The code is available at github.com/wengong-jin/abdockgen

