Topology-Aware Network Pruning using Multi-stage Graph Embedding and
Reinforcement Learning

Sixing Yu 1 Arya Mazaheri 2 Ali Jannesari 1

Abstract
Model compression is an essential technique for
deploying deep neural networks (DNNs) on power
and memory-constrained resources. However, existing model-compression methods often rely on
human expertise and focus on parameters’ local
importance, ignoring the rich topology information within DNNs. In this paper, we propose
a novel multi-stage graph embedding technique
based on graph neural networks (GNNs) to identify DNN topologies and use reinforcement learning (RL) to find a suitable compression policy.
We performed resource-constrained (i.e., FLOPs)
channel pruning and compared our approach with
state-of-the-art model compression methods. We
evaluated our method on various models from typical to mobile-friendly networks, such as ResNet
family, VGG-16, MobileNet-v1/v2, and ShuffleNet. Results show that our method can achieve
higher compression ratios with a minimal finetuning cost yet yields outstanding and competitive performance. The code is open-sourced
at https://github.com/yusx-swapp/
GNN-RL-Model-Compression.

1. Introduction
The demand for deploying DNN models on edge devices
(e.g., mobile phones, robots, and self-driving cars) is expanding rapidly. However, the increasing memory and computing power requirements of DNNs make their deployment on
edge devices a grand challenge. Thus, various custom-made
DNN models have been introduced by experts to accommodate a DNN model with reasonably high accuracy on mobile
1

Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University, Iowa,
US 2 Department of Computer Science, Technical University of
Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany. Correspondence to: Sixing
Yu <yusx@iastate.edu>, Arya Mazaheri <arya.mazaheri@tudarmstadt.de>, Ali Jannesari <jannesar@iastate.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

devices (Howard et al., 2019; Tan & Le, 2019; Zhang et al.,
2018b; Ma et al., 2018; Mehta et al., 2020; Huang et al.,
2018). In addition to mobile-friendly deep networks, model
compression methods such as network pruning, have been
considerably useful by introducing sparsity or eliminating
channels or filters. Nevertheless, it requires extensive knowledge and effort to find the perfect balance between accuracy
and model size.
The main challenge of network pruning is to find the best
pruning schedule or strategy. Furthermore, a pruning strategy for a given DNN is not transferable to a different
DNN, demanding a customized per-network pruning strategy. Recently, various pruning methods (He et al., 2018b;
Yu et al., 2021) have been proposed to automatically compress DNNs. However, they either use manually defined
rules/embeddings, ignoring rich topological information, or
do not consider topology changes while model compression.
Moreover, since RL-based methods (Liu et al., 2020; He
et al., 2018b; Yu et al., 2021) usually use the pruned model
accuracy as RL agent’s reward function, a negative correlation emerges between the compression ratio and reward.
Consequently, without any constraint, the RL agent tends
to search for a tiny compression ratio to get a better reward.
To address this problem and get the desired model size reduction, existing RL-based methods often need additional
heuristic algorithms to adjust the pruning ratio.
The computational representation of DNNs often contains
various patterns (a.k.a. motifs) repeated throughout the network topology. For instance, MobileNetV2 involves 17
blocks, each following a similar graph and operation structure. The topology of such blocks can represent their states,
allowing us to exploit their redundancy level and importance. Such structural information inspired us to model a
given DNN as hierarchical computational graphs and propose multi-stage graph neural networks (m-GNN) for DNN
embedding. Additionally, we equipped m-GNN with a reinforcement learning agent (GNN-RL) to automatically search
for the compression policy (i.e., pruning ratios). To avoid
tiny compression ratios due to the negative correlation between the compression ratio and the RL agent’s reward, we
created a DNN-Graph environment for the GNN-RL agent.
Such an environment allows the agent to continuously com-

