Neural Implicit Dictionary Learning via Mixture-of-Expert Training

Peihao Wang 1 Zhiwen Fan 1 Tianlong Chen 1 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract
Representing visual signals by coordinate-based
deep fully-connected networks has been shown
advantageous in fitting complex details and solving inverse problems than discrete grid-based representation. However, acquiring such a continuous Implicit Neural Representation (INR) requires tedious per-scene training on tons of signal measurements, which limits its practicality.
In this paper, we present a generic INR framework that achieves both data and training efficiency by learning a Neural Implicit Dictionary
(NID) from a data collection and representing
INR as a functional combination of basis sampled from the dictionary. Our NID assembles
a group of coordinate-based subnetworks which
are tuned to span the desired function space. After training, one can instantly and robustly acquire an unseen scene representation by solving
the coding coefficients. To parallelly optimize a
large group of networks, we borrow the idea from
Mixture-of-Expert (MoE) to design and train our
network with a sparse gating mechanism. Our
experiments show that, NID can improve reconstruction of 2D images or 3D scenes by 2 orders
of magnitude faster with up to 98% less input
data. We further demonstrate various applications of NID in image inpainting and occlusion
removal, which are considered to be challenging with vanilla INR. Our codes are available
in https://github.com/VITA-Group/
Neural-Implicit-Dict.

1. Introduction
Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) have recently
demonstrated remarkable performance in representing multimedia signals in computer vision and graphics (Park et al.,
2019; Mescheder et al., 2019; Saito et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Zhangyang Wang
<atlaswang@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2021c; Sitzmann et al., 2020b; Tancik et al., 2020; Mildenhall et al., 2020). In contrast to classical discrete representations, where real-world signals are sampled and vectorized
before processing, INR directly parameterizes the continuous mapping between coordinates and signal values using
deep fully-connected networks (also known as multi-layer
perceptron or MLP). This continuous parameterization enables to represent more complex and flexible scenes without
being limited by grid extents and resolution in a more compact and memory efficient way.
However, one significant drawback of this approach is that
acquiring an INR usually requires a tedious per-scene training of neural networks on dense measurements, which limits
the practicality. Yu et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2021); Chen
et al. (2021a) generalizes Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)
(Mildenhall et al., 2020) across various scenes by projecting
image features to a 3D volumetric proxy and then rendering
feature volume to generate novel views. To speed up INR
training, Sitzmann et al. (2020a); Tancik et al. (2021) apply
meta-learning algorithms to learn the initial weight parameters for the MLP based on the underlying class of signals
being represented. However, this line of works are either
hard to be extended beyond NeRF scenario or incapable of
producing high-fidelity results with insufficient supervision.
In this paper, we design a unified INR framework that simultaneously achieves optimization and data efficiency. We
think of reconstructing an INR from few-shot measurements
as solving an underdetermined system. Inspired by compressed sensing techniques (Donoho, 2006), we represent
every neural implicit function as a linear combination of
a function basis sampled from an over-complete Neural
Implicit Dictionary (NID). Unlike conventional basis representation as a wide matrix, an NID is parameterized by
a group of small neural networks that acts as continuous
function basis spanning the entire target function space. The
NID is shared across different scenes while the sparse codes
are specified by each scene. We first acquire the NID “offline” by jointly optimizing it with per-scene coding across
a class of instances in a training set. When transferring to
unseen scenarios, we re-use the NID and only solves the the
scene specific coding coefficients “online”.
To effectively scale to thousands of subnetworks inside our
dictionary, we employ the Mixture-of-Expert (MoE) training

