SCHA-VAE: Hierarchical Context Aggregation for Few-Shot Generation

Giorgio Giannone 1 Ole Winther 1 2

Abstract

Few-shot learning (Vinyals et al., 2016; Snell et al., 2017;
Finn et al., 2017) and related approaches aiming at learning
from little labelled data at test time (Schaul & Schmidhuber, 2010; Hospedales et al., 2020) have recently gained
new interest thanks to modeling advances, availability of
large diverse datasets and computational resources. Building efficient learning systems that can adapt at inference
time is a prerequisite to deploy such systems in realistic
settings. Much attention has been devoted to supervised
few-shot learning. The problem is typically cast in terms
of an adaptive conditional task, where a small support set
is used to condition explicitly (Garnelo et al., 2018a) or implicitly (Finn et al., 2017) a learner, with the goal to perform
well on a query set. The high-level idea is to train the model
with a large number of small sets, and inject in the model
the capacity to adapt to new concepts from few-samples at
test time.
86
88
90

vlb

A few-shot generative model should be able to
generate data from a novel distribution by only
observing a limited set of examples. In few-shot
learning the model is trained on data from many
sets from distributions sharing some underlying
properties such as sets of characters from different alphabets or objects from different categories.
We extend current latent variable models for sets
to a fully hierarchical approach with an attentionbased point to set-level aggregation and call our
method SCHA-VAE for Set-Context-HierarchicalAggregation Variational Autoencoder. We explore
likelihood-based model comparison, iterative data
sampling, and adaptation-free out-of-distribution
generalization. Our results show that the hierarchical formulation better captures the intrinsic variability within the sets in the small data
regime. This work generalizes deep latent variable approaches to few-shot learning, taking a
step toward large-scale few-shot generation with
a formulation that readily works with current stateof-the-art deep generative models.

and distinguished one-shot, i.e. when a letter is shown for
the first time.

1. Introduction

92
94
96

Humans are exceptional few-shot learners able to grasp
concepts and function of objects never encountered before (Lake et al., 2011). This is because we build internal
models of the world so we can combine our prior knowledge
about object appearance and function to make well educated
inferences from very little data (Tenenbaum, 1999; Lake
et al., 2017; Ullman & Tenenbaum, 2020). In contrast, traditional machine learning systems have to be trained tabula
rasa and therefore need orders of magnitude more data. In
the landmark paper on modern few-shot learning Lake et al.
(2015) demonstrated that with a strong prior hand-written
symbols from different alphabets can be generated few-shot
1
Technical University of Denmark 2 University of Copenhagen.
Correspondence to: Giorgio Giannone <gigi@dtu.dk>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

SCHA-VAELAG
SCHA-VAE
CNSLAG
CNS
NS

98
100
102

2

5

10

set size

15

20

Figure 1: Lower bounds for NS-style models trained with input
set size 5 varying the set cardinality from 2 to 20 on Omniglot
test set. The convolutional latent space (CNS) is fundamental
for performance improvement, increasing the expressivity of the
context representation. Hierarchical inference over c (SCHAVAE) and learnable aggregation (LAG) improve the generative
performance in a monotonic way, providing evidence that SCHAVAE can effectively adapt to different input set size outperforming
the NS baselines.

Comparatively less work has been developed on few-shot
adaptation in generative models (Edwards & Storkey, 2016;
Reed et al., 2017; Bartunov & Vetrov, 2018). This is partially because of the challenging nature of learning joint

