Thompson Sampling for Robust Transfer in Multi-Task Bandits

Zhi Wang 1 Chicheng Zhang 2 Kamalika Chaudhuri 1 3

Abstract
We study the problem of online multi-task learning where the tasks are performed within similar but not necessarily identical multi-armed bandit environments. In particular, we study how a
learner can improve its overall performance across
multiple related tasks through robust transfer of
knowledge. While an upper confidence bound
(UCB)-based algorithm has recently been shown
to achieve nearly-optimal performance guarantees
in a setting where all tasks are solved concurrently,
it remains unclear whether Thompson sampling
(TS) algorithms, which have superior empirical
performance in general, share similar theoretical
properties. In this work, we present a TS-type
algorithm for a more general online multi-task
learning protocol, which extends the concurrent
setting. We provide its frequentist analysis and
prove that it is also nearly-optimal using a novel
concentration inequality for multi-task data aggregation at random stopping times. Finally, we evaluate the algorithm on synthetic data and show that
the TS-type algorithm enjoys superior empirical
performance in comparison with the UCB-based
algorithm and a baseline algorithm that performs
TS for each individual task without transfer.

1. Introduction
We study multi-task transfer learning in a multi-armed bandit (MAB) setting. In practice, auxiliary data from different
but related sources are often available, although it is also
often less clear how they should be utilized. If properly
managed, such data can serve an important role in accelerating learning; in particular, in online learning, auxiliary
data may be used to avoid costs associated with unnecessary
exploration. In this work, we study how data collected from
similar sources can be robustly aggregated and utilized.
1

University of California San Diego 2 University of Arizona
Facebook AI Research. Correspondence to: Zhi Wang <zhiwang@ucsd.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

We consider a generalization of the -multi-player multiarmed bandit (-MPMAB) problem recently proposed by
Wang et al. (2021), which can be used to model multi-task
bandits. In the -MPMAB problem1 , a set of players sequentially and potentially concurrently interact with a common
set of arms that have player-dependent reward distributions.
Each player and its associated reward distributions (data
sources) are thereby regarded as a task. Furthermore, we
consider the reward distributions that the players face for
each arm to be similar but not necessarily identical, and the
level of (dis)similarity is specified by a parameter  ∈ [0, 1].
The -MPMAB problem can be used to model important
real-world applications. For example, in healthcare robotics,
a set of robots, which correspond to players, can be paired
with people with dementia to provide personalized cognitive training and wellness activities (Kubota et al., 2020).
Each training/wellness activity corresponds to an arm in the
-MPMAB problem, and people with similar preferences
or symptoms may exhibit similar interests or needs—this is
modeled via similarity in reward distributions of each arm
(Wang et al., 2021). Another example can be seen in recommendation systems where learning agents are assigned
to people within a social network, who may have similar
interests due to inter-network influence (Qian et al., 2013).
Despite the similarity in its reward distributions, the MPMAB problem is still challenging for two reasons: on
the one hand, misusing auxiliary data can lead to negative
transfer and substantially impair a player’s performance
(Rosenstein et al., 2005); on the other hand, while auxiliary
data are often immediately accessible in their entirety in
offline transfer learning settings, in the -MPMAB problem,
the available auxiliary data grow in time and depend on the
interactions between the players and the environments.
An upper confidence bound (UCB)-based algorithm,
ROBUSTAGG(), has been proposed for the -MPMAB
problem (Wang et al., 2021). It achieves strong, nearoptimal theoretical guarantees through robust data aggregation. Nevertheless, ROBUSTAGG()’s empirical performance can, unfortunately, be underwhelming.
Meanwhile, Thompson sampling (TS) algorithms (Thomp1

We shall still refer to the generalized problem as the MPMAB problem.

