Certified Robustness Against Natural Language Attacks
by Causal Intervention

Haiteng Zhao 1 * Chang Ma 1 * Xinshuai Dong 2 * Anh Tuan Luu 3 4 Zhi-Hong Deng 1 Hanwang Zhang 3

Abstract
Deep learning models have achieved great success in many fields, yet they are vulnerable to
adversarial examples. This paper follows a causal
perspective to look into the adversarial vulnerability and proposes Causal Intervention by Semantic
Smoothing (CISS), a novel framework towards robustness against natural language attacks. Instead
of merely fitting observational data, CISS learns
causal effects p(y|do(x)) by smoothing in the latent semantic space to make robust predictions,
which scales to deep architectures and avoids tedious construction of noise customized for specific attacks. CISS is provably robust against word
substitution attacks, as well as empirically robust
even when perturbations are strengthened by unknown attack algorithms. For example, on YELP,
CISS surpasses the runner-up by 6.8% in terms
of certified robustness against word substitutions,
and achieves 80.7% empirical robustness when
syntactic attacks are integrated.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved great success in many
fields such as computer vision, natural language processing,
and speech recognition (Goodfellow et al., 2016; Krizhevsky
et al., 2012; Ren et al., 2015; Sutskever et al., 2014; Hinton
et al., 2012). However, they are known to be vulnerable
to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow
et al., 2015; Jia & Liang, 2017), e.g., a BERT-based sentiment analysis model can be easily fooled by synonym
substitution attacks (Alzantot et al., 2018), and thus raise
severe security challenges to modern NLP systems.
In contrast to deep models, humans’ cognitive systems
*
1
2
Equal contribution
Peking University
Carnegie
Mellon University 3 Nanyang Technological University
4
Corresponding Author.
Correspondence to: Anh Tuan
Luu <anhtuan.luu@ntu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. N is a set of variables that can be manipulated under
attacks, e.g., style variables. (i): The proposed causal graph of
data. (ii): The red dashed lines represent the spurious correlation between X and Y , and it is the source of vulnerability (if a
model only fits the observational distribution p(y|x)). (iii): The
causal graph after removing the arrow from N to X. The postintervention conditional distribution pN ↛X (y|x) is robust as it
does not rely on any spurious correlation.

are robust against adversarial perturbations (Szegedy et al.,
2013; Goodfellow et al., 2015), as humans can perform
causal reasoning (Pearl, 2009; Peters et al., 2017) and are
more sensitive to causal relations than statistical correlations
(Gopnik et al., 2004). To enable machine learning models
with such abilities to predict robustly, it is therefore crucial
to understand the adversarial vulnerability from a causal
perspective (Zhang et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2021).
In this paper, we consider the source of adversarial vulnerability as the spurious correlations by the confounder effect.
We give an illustration in Fig. 1, where X denotes the textual input, Y is the class label, C represents the content
of X, and N is a set of confounder variables that can be
manipulated under attacks. For example, on IMDB dataset
(Maas et al., 2011), a professional reviewer may tend to use
many jargons (N ) in a movie review (X), while likely to be
strict and give negative comments (Y). Such correlations are
useful under the i.i.d. setting but harmful if the confounder
is manipulatable under attacks; e.g., adding more jargons to
a positive movie review might fool a machine model.
From that causal perspective, we draw a link between causal

