NysADMM: faster composite convex optimization via low-rank approximation

Shipu Zhao * 1 Zachary Frangella * 2 Madeleine Udell 2

Abstract

a solution to (1) exists. A canonical example of (1) is the
lasso problem,

This paper develops a scalable new algorithm,
called NysADMM, to minimize a smooth convex loss function with a convex regularizer.
NysADMM accelerates the inexact Alternating
Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) by constructing a preconditioner for the ADMM subproblem from a randomized low-rank Nyström
approximation. NysADMM comes with strong
theoretical guarantees: it solves the ADMM subproblem in a constant number of iterations when
the rank of the Nyström approximation is the effective dimension of the subproblem regularized
Gram matrix. In practice, ranks much smaller
than the effective dimension can succeed, so
NysADMM uses an adaptive strategy to choose
the rank that enjoys analogous guarantees. Numerical experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate that NysADMM can solve important applications, such as the lasso, logistic regression, and
support vector machines, in half the time (or less)
required by standard solvers. The breadth of problems on which NysADMM beats standard solvers
is a surprise: it suggests that ADMM is a dominant paradigm for numerical optimization across
a wide range of statistical learning problems that
are usually solved with bespoke methods.

minimize

(2)

where ℓ(Ax; b) = 12 ∥Ax − b∥22 and r(x) = γ∥x∥1 . We
discuss more applications of (1) in Section 3.
The alternating directions method of multipliers (ADMM)
is a popular algorithm to solve optimization problems of
the form (1). However, when the matrix A is large, each
iteration of ADMM requires solving a large subproblem.
For example, consider the lasso where the loss ℓ is quadratic.
At each iteration, ADMM solves a regularized least-squares
problem at a cost of O(nd2 ) flops. On the other hand, it is
not necessary to solve each subproblem exactly to ensure
convergence: ADMM strategies that solve the subproblems
inexactly are called inexact ADMM, and can be shown to
converge when the sequence of errors is summable (Eckstein
& Bertsekas, 1992). Unfortunately, it can be challenging
even to satisfy this relaxed criterion. Consider again the
lasso problem. At each iteration, inexact ADMM solves the
regularized least-squares subproblem (4) approximately, for
example, using the iterative method of conjugate gradients
(CG). We call this method inexact ADMM with CG. The
number of CG iterations required to achieve accuracy ϵ
increases with the square root of the condition
 number κ2
√
of the regularized Hessian, O κ2 log( κϵ2 ) . Alas, the
condition number of large-scale data matrices is generally
high, and later iterations of inexact ADMM require high
accuracy, so inexact ADMM with CG still converges too
slowly to be practical.

1. Introduction
Consider the composite convex optimization problem
minimizex∈Rd ℓ(Ax; b) + r(x).

1
∥Ax − b∥22 + γ∥x∥1 ,
2

(1)

We assume that ℓ and r are convex and ℓ is smooth. In
machine learning, generally ℓ is a loss function, r is a regularizer, A ∈ Rn×d is a feature matrix, and b ∈ Rn is the
label or response. Throughout the paper we assume that
*

Equal contribution 1 Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Shipu Zhao <sz533@cornell.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In this work we show how to speed up inexact ADMM
using preconditioned conjugate gradients (PCG) as a subproblem solver. We precondition with randomized Nyström
preconditioning (Frangella et al., 2021), a technique inspired by recent developments in randomized numerical
linear algebra (RandNLA). We call the resulting algorithm
NysADMM (“nice ADMM”): inexact ADMM with PCG
using randomized Nyström preconditioning. The Nyström
preconditioner reduces the number of iterations required

to solve the subproblem to ϵ-accuracy to O log( 1ϵ ) , independent of the condition number. For non-quadratic loss
functions, NysADMM uses linearized inexact ADMM and
accelerates the linear subproblem solve similarly.

