Training Characteristic Functions with Reinforcement Learning:
XAI-methods play Connect Four

Stephan Wäldchen * 1 Felix Huber * 1 Sebastian Pokutta 1

Abstract
Characteristic functions (from cooperative game
theory) are able to evaluate partial inputs and
form the basis for attribution methods like Shapley values. These attribution methods allow us
to measure how important each input component
is for the function output—one of the goals of
explainable AI (XAI). Given a standard classifier
function, it is unclear how partial input should be
realised. Instead, most XAI-methods for blackbox classifiers like neural networks consider counterfactual inputs that generally lie off-manifold,
which makes them hard to evaluate and easy to
manipulate. We propose a setup to directly train
characteristic functions in the form of neural networks to play simple two-player games. We apply
this to the game of Connect Four by randomly
hiding colour information from our agents during
training. This has three advantages for comparing
XAI-methods: It alleviates the ambiguity about
how to realise partial input, makes off-manifold
evaluation unnecessary and allows us to compare
the methods by letting them play against each
other.

1. Introduction
The safe deployment of AI-systems in high-stakes applications such as autonomous driving (Schraagen et al., 2020),
medical imaging (Holzinger et al., 2017) and criminal justice (Rudin & Ustun, 2018) requires that their decisions can
be subjected to human scrutiny. The most successful models, often based on machine learning (ML) and deep neural
networks (DNN), have instead grown increasingly complex
and are widely regarded to operate as black-boxes. This
spawned the field of explainable AI (XAI) with the explicit
aim to make ML models transparent in their reasoning.
*

1

Equal contribution TU Berlin & Zuse Institut Berlin. Correspondence to: Stephan Wäldchen <waeldchen@zib.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1.1. Explainable Artificial Intelligence
Though XAI had practical success, such as detecting biases
in established data sets (Lapuschkin et al., 2019), there
is currently no consensus among researchers about what
exactly constitutes an explainable model (Lipton, 2018).
For a good overview see (Adadi & Berrada, 2018).
Models such as k-nearest neighbours, succinct decision trees
or sparse linear models are deemed inherently interpretable
(Arrieta et al., 2020), which makes them preferable (Rudin,
2019). However, the most impressive breakthroughs in the
field of AI have only been possible with DNNs. In this
light, a second paradigm emerged: to apply these successful
models and explain them post-hoc.
In this work, we focus on saliency (or relevance) attribution
methods. Given a classifier and input, these methods rate
the importance of each feature for the classifier output, often
displayed visually as a heatmap, called a saliency map. We
give an overview over the proposed methods in Section 2.
1.2. Characteristic Functions
Cooperative game theory considers attribution problems
very similar to saliency attribution, where a common payoff is to be fairly distributed to a number of players. In
the context of ML, players correspond to features and the
pay-off is the classifier score. Let d ∈ N be the number
of features, and [d] = {1, . . . , d}. One key concept is the
characteristic function ν : 2[d] → R which assigns a value
to every possible subset of d, called a coalition. We refer the
reader to (Chalkiadakis et al., 2011) for a good introduction.
For binary classifiers this led to the concept of prime implicant explanations (PIE) that search for the smallest coalition
S ⊂ [d] that ensures a value of ν(S) = 1, see (Shih et al.,
2018). These explanations can be efficiently computed for
certain simple classifiers.
The Shapley values, an established method defined as
X d − 1−1
ϕν,i =
(ν(S ∪ {i}) − ν(S)),
|S|
S⊆[d]\{i}

are the unique attribution methods that satisfy certain desirable fairness criteria, see (Shapley, 2016) and Appendix E.1.

