Being Properly Improper

Tyler Sypherd 1 Richard Nock 2 Lalitha Sankar 1

Abstract
Properness for supervised losses stipulates that
the loss function shapes the learning algorithm
towards the true posterior of the data generating
distribution. Unfortunately, data in modern machine learning can be corrupted or twisted in many
ways. Hence, optimizing a proper loss function on
twisted data could perilously lead the learning algorithm towards the twisted posterior, rather than
to the desired clean posterior. Many papers cope
with specific twists (e.g., label/feature/adversarial
noise), but there is a growing need for a unified and actionable understanding atop properness. Our chief theoretical contribution is a generalization of the properness framework with a
notion called twist-properness, which delineates
loss functions with the ability to “untwist” the
twisted posterior into the clean posterior. Notably, we show that a nontrivial extension of a loss
function called α-loss, which was first introduced
in information theory, is twist-proper. We study
the twist-proper α-loss under a novel boosting
algorithm, called P IL B OOST, and provide formal
and experimental results for this algorithm. Our
overarching practical conclusion is that the twistproper α-loss outperforms the proper log-loss on
several variants of twisted data.

1. Introduction
The loss function is a cornerstone of machine learning (ML).
The founding theory of properness for supervised losses stipulates that the loss function shapes the learning algorithm
towards the true posterior (Reid & Williamson, 2011). Consequently, a model trained with a proper loss function will
try to closely approximate the Bayes rule of the data generating distribution. Historically, properness draws its roots
1

School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University; 2 Google Research. Correspondence to:
Tyler Sypherd <tsypherd@asu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

from classical work in normative economics for class probability estimation (CPE) (Reid & Williamson, 2011; Savage,
1971; Shuford et al., 1966) and Fisher consistency (Fisher,
1922); some of the most famous losses in supervised learning are proper, e.g., log, square, Matusita (Matusita, 1956),
to name a few. Unfortunately, in many modern applications
data can be corrupted or twisted in various ways (see Section 2); examples of twists include label noise, adversarial
noise, and feature noise. Thus, optimizing a proper loss
function on twisted data could perilously lead the learning
algorithm towards the Bayes rule of the twisted posterior,
rather than to the desired clean posterior. To ensure that a
model trained with a proper loss function on twisted data
properly generalizes to the clean distribution, a generalization of properness is clearly required.
To this end, we propose the notion of twist-properness. In
words, a loss function is twist-proper if and only if (iff), for
any twist, there exist hyperparameter(s) of the loss which allow its minimizer to “untwist” the twisted posterior into the
clean posterior. Thus, twist-properness certifies loss functions that allow general posterior corrections, which is analogous to how PAC learning certifies computationally efficient and accurate learning algorithms (Valiant, 1984). This
generalization of properness with twist-properness would
be less impactful without a solid contender loss, and we
show that a nontrivial extension of α-loss, which itself is
an information-theoretic hyperparameterization of the logloss (Arimoto, 1971; Liao et al., 2018; Sypherd et al., 2019),
is twist-proper and exhibits desirable properties for local
and global (namely, fixed hyperparameter) twist corrections.
Furthermore, twist-properness is not vacuous as we provide
a counterexample that another (popular) generalization of
the log-loss, the focal loss (Lin et al., 2017), which was originally designed to solve specific twists, i.e., class imbalance,
is not twist-proper. In addition, we provide a proof that a
loss which acts as a general “wrapper” of a loss, the Super
Loss (Castells et al., 2020), is also not twist-proper. One
of our key takeaways is that twist-properness necessitates a
certain nontrivial symmetry of the loss, rather than merely a
trivial extension of the hyperparameter(s).
Recently, α-loss was practically implemented in logistic
regression and in deep neural networks (Sypherd et al.,
2022). In both settings, it was shown to be more robust
to symmetric label noise for fixed α > 1 than the proper

