Interactive Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Cooperative Games

Thomas Kleine Büning 1 Anne-Marie George 1 Christos Dimitrakakis 1 2 3

Abstract
We study the problem of designing autonomous
agents that can learn to cooperate effectively with
a potentially suboptimal partner while having no
access to the joint reward function. This problem
is modeled as a cooperative episodic two-agent
Markov decision process. We assume control over
only the first of the two agents in a Stackelberg
formulation of the game, where the second agent
is acting so as to maximise expected utility given
the first agent’s policy. How should the first agent
act in order to learn the joint reward function as
quickly as possible and so that the joint policy
is as close to optimal as possible? We analyse
how knowledge about the reward function can be
gained in this interactive two-agent scenario. We
show that when the learning agent’s policies have
a significant effect on the transition function, the
reward function can be learned efficiently.

1. Introduction
Recent applications of autonomous systems in our daily
lives show that autonomous agents are no longer deployed
in isolation only, but in situations where they are in close
interaction with humans. To facilitate successful and safe
cooperation between autonomous systems and humans, we
need to design agents that can learn about human preferences as well as adapt to suboptimal human behaviour. We
focus on the situation where the autonomous agent and the
human simultaneously act in the same environment. As
a result, observed human behaviour, which could be used
to infer preferences, depends on the learning agent’s actions. This leads to the problem of learning preferences
and intentions from interactions. Learning in these interac1
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Neuchatel, Neuchatel, Switzerland 3 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. Correspondence to: Thomas Kleine Büning
<thomkl@ifi.uio.no>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tive scenarios brings its own challenges, but also significant
benefits as we will see in the following.
In this paper, we consider the problem of learning to cooperate with a potentially suboptimal partner while having no
access to the joint reward function. This problem is modeled as a cooperative episodic Markov Decision Process
(MDP) between two agents A1 and A2 . While agent A2
(the human) knows the joint reward function, we take the
perspective of agent A1 (the learner) that has to cooperate
with A2 without knowing or observing the rewards. As an
example, consider a maze in which the human tries to reach
a target while the learning agent can unlock doors to help
the human move, but without knowing the precise target
location. We focus on the Stackelberg formulation of the
game, in which at the beginning of each episode the learner
commits to a policy before the human does. This allows
us to view the learning agent as a designer of environments
that the human operates in. For instance, when the learning agent’s actions correspond to unlocking doors in a grid
world, then, in the Stackelberg game, we can interpret the
learner’s policy as choosing a maze layout, which is communicated to the human at the beginning of the episode and
in which she operates.
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) (Russell, 1998) can
be used to infer the reward function of an agent from observations of that agent’s behaviour, which is assumed to
be (near-)optimal. In our case, the learner also obtains observations of the human’s behaviour through interactions,
which could then be used to infer the joint reward function. However, the human’s actions, e.g. the path taken
in a maze, depend on the learner’s policy, e.g. the maze
layout, so that in contrast to the standard IRL formulation
the learner now actively influences the demonstrations of
the human expert. This leads to an interesting Interactive
IRL setting, where the learner can actively seek information
about the joint reward function by playing specific policies.
In this paper, we analyse how to infer the unknown (joint)
reward function from interactions with the expert and how
the learner should choose its policy so that the two agents
collaborate efficiently over both the short and long term. We
lay an emphasis on the role of the learner as the designer
of environments and investigate what environments allow
the learning agent to infer the reward function quickly while
achieving high levels of cooperation.

