Fairness Interventions as (Dis)Incentives for Strategic Manipulation

Xueru Zhang 1 Mohammad Mahdi Khalili 2 Kun Jin 3 Parinaz Naghizadeh 4 Mingyan Liu 3

Abstract

Although machine learning (ML) algorithms are
widely used to make decisions about individuals
in various domains, concerns have arisen that (1)
these algorithms are vulnerable to strategic manipulation and “gaming the algorithm”; and (2) ML
decisions may exhibit bias against certain social
groups. Existing works have largely examined
these as two separate issues, e.g., by focusing on
building ML algorithms robust to strategic manipulation, or on training a fair ML algorithm. In this
study, we set out to understand the impact they
each have on the other, and examine how to characterize fair policies in the presence of strategic
behavior. The strategic interaction between a decision maker and individuals (as decision takers) is
modeled as a two-stage (Stackelberg) game; when
designing an algorithm, the former anticipates the
latter may manipulate their features in order to
receive more favorable decisions. We analytically
characterize the equilibrium strategies of both,
and examine how the algorithms and their resulting fairness properties are affected when the decision maker is strategic (anticipates manipulation),
as well as the impact of fairness interventions on
equilibrium strategies. In particular, we identify
conditions under which anticipation of strategic
behavior may mitigate/exacerbate unfairness, and
conditions under which fairness interventions can
serve as (dis)incentives for strategic manipulation.

1. Introduction
As machine learning (ML) algorithms are increasingly being used to make high-stake decisions in domains such as
hiring, lending, criminal justice, and college admissions, the
need for transparency increases in terms of how decisions
are reached given input. However, given (partial) information about an algorithm, individuals subject to its decisions
can adapt their behavior by strategically manipulating their
data in order to obtain favorable decisions. This strategic
behavior in turn hurts the performance of ML models and diminishes their utility. Such a phenomenon has been widely
observed in real-world applications, and is known as Goodhart’s law, which states “once a measure becomes a target, it
ceases to be a good measure” (Strathern, 1997). For instance,
a hiring or admissions practice that heavily depends on GPA
might motivate students to cheat on exams; not accounting
for such manipulation may result in disproportionate hiring
of under-qualified individuals. A strategic decision maker is
one who anticipates such behavior and thus aims to make
its models robust to strategic manipulation.
A second challenge facing ML algorithms is the growing
concern over bias in their decisions, and various notions
of fairness (e.g., demographic parity (Barocas et al., 2019),
equal opportunity (Hardt et al., 2016b)) have been proposed
to measure and remedy biases. These measures typically
impose an (approximate) equality constraint over certain
statistical measures (e.g., positive rate, true positive rate,
etc.) across different groups when building ML algorithms.

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, USA. 2 Yahoo! Inc., the author
is also with The Ohio State University. 3 Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA. 4 Integrated Systems Engineering & Electrical and Computer
Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA..
Correspondence to: Xueru Zhang <zhang.12807@osu.edu>.

In this paper, we study (fair) machine learning in the presence of strategic manipulation. Specifically, we consider
a decision maker whose goal is to select individuals that
are qualified for certain tasks based on a given set of features. Given knowledge of the selection policy, individuals
can tailor their behavior and manipulate their features in
order to receive favorable decisions. We shall assume that
this feature manipulation does not affect an individual’s
true qualification state. We say the decision maker (and its
policy) is strategic if it anticipates such manipulation; it is
non-strategic if it does not take into account individuals’
manipulation in its policies.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

We adopt a two-stage (Stackelberg) game setting where the
decision maker commits to its policies, following which
individuals best-respond. A crucial difference between this

1

