A Study on the Ramanujan Graph Property of Winning Lottery Tickets

Bithika Pal 1 Arindam Biswas 2 Sudeshna Kolay 1 Pabitra Mitra 1 Biswajit Basu 3

Abstract
Winning lottery tickets refer to sparse subgraphs
of deep neural networks which have classification accuracy close to the original dense networks.
Resilient connectivity properties of such sparse
networks play an important role in their performance. The attempt is to identify a sparse and yet
well-connected network to guarantee unhindered
information flow. Connectivity in a graph is best
characterized by its spectral expansion property.
Ramanujan graphs are robust expanders which
lead to sparse but highly-connected networks, and
thus aid in studying the winning tickets. A feedforward neural network consists of a sequence
of bipartite graphs representing its layers. We
analyze the Ramanujan graph property of such
bipartite layers in terms of their spectral characteristics using the Cheeger’s inequality for irregular
graphs. It is empirically observed that the winning
ticket networks preserve the Ramanujan graph
property and achieve a high accuracy even when
the layers are sparse. Accuracy and robustness to
noise start declining as many of the layers lose the
property. Next we find a robust winning lottery
ticket by pruning individual layers while retaining
their respective Ramanujan graph property. This
strategy is observed to improve the performance
of existing network pruning algorithms.

1. Introduction
Neural Network (NN) and its recent advancements have
made a significant contribution to solve various machine
learning applications. The power of an over-parameterized
NN lies in its capability to learn simple patterns and mem*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India
2
Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark 3 School of Civil, Structural and Environmental Engineering, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland. Correspondence to: Bithika
Pal <bithika.pal2014@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

orize the noise in the data (Neyshabur et al., 2018). However, the training of such networks requires enormous computational resources, and often the deployment onto lowresource environments such as mobile devices, or embedded systems becomes difficult. Recent trend in research to
reduce training time of deep neural networks has shifted
towards pre-training following the introduction of a remarkable contribution, named the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis
(LTH), which hypothesize the existence of a highly sparse
subnetwork and weight initialization to reduce the training
resources as well (Frankle & Carbin, 2019). It uses a simple
iterative, magnitude-based pruning algorithm, and empirically shows that even after removing approximately 90%
of the weights, the subnetwork can preserve the original
generalization error. In the subsequent studies, the focus
goes on finding this lottery ticket for more competitive tasks
by pruning with weight rewinding(Frankle et al., 2019), fine
tuning the learning rates (Renda et al., 2020), more efficient
training (You et al., 2019; Brix et al., 2020; Girish et al.,
2021).
Various analysis for explaining the LTH have been attempted
in the past. Researchers (Evci et al., 2020b) explain empirically why the LTH works through gradient flow at different
stages of the training. Despite previous attempts to explain
why the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis works, the underlying
phenomenon associated with the hypothesis still remains
ill-understood. All of these studies related to LTH identify
that a sparse sub-network can be trained instead of a complete network and the network needs to be connected from
input to output layers. However, none of them try to explain
the LTH and the properties of the pruned network through
the lens of spectral graph theory. The network connectivity
can be described from the graph expansion point of view,
where any subset of vertices of size less than or equal to half
of the number of vertices in a graph, is adjacent to at least
a fraction of the number of vertices in that set; for details,
see (Lubotzky, 2010). Graphs satisfying this property are
known as expander graphs. The Ramanujan Graph is a
special graph in a bounded degree expander family, where
the eigenbound is maximal (Nilli, 1991). This leads to a
maximum possible sparsity of a network while preserving
the connectivity.
In this paper, we initiate a study to observe the characteristics of a pruned sub-network from the spectral properties

