The State of Sparse Training in Deep Reinforcement Learning

Laura Graesser * 1 2 Utku Evci * 2 Erich Elsen 3 Pablo Samuel Castro 2

Abstract
The use of sparse neural networks has seen rapid
growth in recent years, particularly in computer
vision. Their appeal stems largely from the reduced number of parameters required to train and
store, as well as in an increase in learning efficiency. Somewhat surprisingly, there have been
very few efforts exploring their use in Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). In this work we
perform a systematic investigation into applying a
number of existing sparse training techniques on
a variety of DRL agents and environments. Our
results corroborate the findings from sparse training in the computer vision domain – sparse networks perform better than dense networks for the
same parameter count – in the DRL domain. We
provide detailed analyses on how the various components in DRL are affected by the use of sparse
networks and conclude by suggesting promising
avenues for improving the effectiveness of sparse
training methods, as well as for advancing their
use in DRL1 .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are typically organized as a stack
of layers. Each layer consists of multiple neurons, where
each neuron is connected to all neurons in the next layer;
this is often referred to as a dense network. Alternatively,
each neuron can be wired to a subset of the neurons in
the next layer, resulting in a sparse, and smaller, network.
Such sparse neural networks have been shown to match
the performance of their dense counterparts while requiring
only 10%-to-20% of the connections in most cases (Han
et al., 2015; Gale et al., 2019; Blalock et al., 2020) providing
*

Equal contribution 1 Robotics at Google 2 Google Research,
Canada 3 Adept. Correspondence to: Laura Graesser <lauragraesser@google.com>, Utku Evci <evcu@google.com>, Pablo
Samuel Castro <psc@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Code for reproducing our results can be found at
github.com/google-research/rigl/tree/master/rigl/rl

significant memory, storage, and latency gains.
Deep networks have become a mainstay of scalable reinforcement learning (RL), key to recent successes such as
playing – at superhuman levels – Atari games (Mnih et al.,
2015), Go (Silver et al., 2016), Dota 2 (Berner et al., 2019)
and as well as controlling complex dynamical systems such
as stratospheric balloons (Bellemare et al., 2020) and plasma
in real-time (Degrave et al., 2022). Despite their importance,
most deep reinforcement learning (DRL) research focuses
on improving the algorithmic aspect of DRL, and less on
the architecture aspect. Sparse networks in particular have
received very little attention, likely due to the belief that network over-parameterization helps with learning. However,
recent work suggests that RL agents may suffer from implicit under-parameterization when training deep networks
with gradient descent (Kumar et al., 2021), suggesting that
the network’s expressivity is in fact underused. In addition
to this, Nikishin et al. (2022) suggests deep RL agents may
have a tendency to overfit to early training data. Given this,
one might expect there is substantial opportunity to compress RL agents. Further, sparse networks might benefit
DRL by reducing the cost of training or aid running them
in latency-constrained settings such as controlling plasma
(Degrave et al., 2022).
One limitation of current research on training sparse neural
networks is that it almost solely focuses on image classification benchmarks (Blalock et al., 2020; Hoefler et al., 2021)
creating the risk of over-fitting to a specific domain. Do advances observed in computer vision (CV) transfer to DRL?
A few recent works (Sokar et al., 2021; Arnob et al., 2021)
attempt to address this by applying individual sparse training algorithms to DRL agents. However, it is still unknown
if the key observation made in CV, that sparse models perform better than dense ones for the same parameter count,
transfers to DRL.
In this work we focus on answering that question and systematically explore the effectiveness of different sparse
learning algorithms in the online DRL setting. In order
to achieve this, we benchmark four different sparse training
algorithms using value-based (DQN (Mnih et al., 2015)) and
actor-critic, (SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) and PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)) agents. Our results also include a broad
analysis of various components that play a role in the train-

