Contrastive Mixture of Posteriors for Counterfactual Inference, Data
Integration and Fairness

Adam Foster 1 Árpi Vezér 2 Craig A. Glastonbury 2 3 Páidı́ Creed 2 Sam Abujudeh 2 Aaron Sim 2

Abstract
Learning meaningful representations of data that
can address challenges such as batch effect correction and counterfactual inference is a central problem in many domains including computational
biology. Adopting a Conditional VAE framework,
we show that marginal independence between the
representation and a condition variable plays a key
role in both of these challenges. We propose the
Contrastive Mixture of Posteriors (CoMP) method
that uses a novel misalignment penalty defined in
terms of mixtures of the variational posteriors to
enforce this independence in latent space. We
show that CoMP has attractive theoretical properties compared to previous approaches, and we
prove counterfactual identifiability of CoMP under additional assumptions. We demonstrate stateof-the-art performance on a set of challenging
tasks including aligning human tumour samples
with cancer cell-lines, predicting transcriptomelevel perturbation responses, and batch correction
on single-cell RNA sequencing data. We also
find parallels to fair representation learning and
demonstrate that CoMP is competitive on a common task in the field.

1. Introduction
Large scale datasets describing the molecular properties of
cells, tissues and organs in a state of health and disease are
commonplace in computational biology. Referred to collectively as ‘omics data, thousands of features are measured per
sample and, as single-cell methodologies have developed, it
1

Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK. This work was
completed when AF was an intern at BenevolentAI and
a DPhil student at the Department of Statistics, Univer2
sity of Oxford.
BenevolentAI, 4–8 Maple Street, London, UK 3 Human Technopole, V.le Rita Levi-Montalcini, 1,
20157 Milano, Italy.
Correspondence to: Adam Foster
<adam.e.foster@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

is now typical to measure such features across 105 –106 observations (Svensson et al., 2018; Regev et al., 2017). Given
these two properties of ‘omics data, the need for scalable
algorithms to learn meaningful low-dimensional representations that capture the variability of the data has grown. As
such, Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling,
2013; Rezende et al., 2014) have become an important tool
for solving a range of modelling problems in the biological
sciences (Lopez et al., 2018; Way & Greene, 2018; Wang &
Gu, 2018; Grønbech et al., 2020; Lotfollahi et al., 2019a;b).
One such problem is utilising representations for counterfactual inference, e.g. predicting how a certain cell or cell-type,
observed in the control group, would have behaved when
exposed to a drug (Lotfollahi et al., 2019a;b; Amodio et al.,
2018). Another key problem is removing batch effects—
spurious shifts in observations due to differing experimental
conditions—from data in order to integrate or compare multiple datasets (Lopez et al., 2018; Johnson et al., 2007; Leek
& Storey, 2007; Haghverdi et al., 2018; Warren et al., 2021).
Our approach to these problems is to learn a VAE representation that is marginally independent of a condition variable
(e.g. experimental batch, stimulated vs. control). Figure 1
[CoMP] illustrates what this looks like in practice: the complete overlap of the cell populations from different conditions in the latent space. For data integration, the resulting
representation perfectly integrates distinct batches, assuming there are no population-level differences between them.
To predict the effects of interventions, following Lotfollahi et al. (2019a), we encode control data to representation
space, and decode it back to the original space under the
stimulated condition. Alignment of control and stimulated
cells in representation space isolates the effects of interventions to the decoder network, and is a necessary condition
for the encode–swap–decode algorithm to provide correct
predictions. This same independence constraint also occurs
in fair representation learning, where we seek a representation that cannot be used to recover a sensitive attribute
(Zemel et al., 2013; Louizos et al., 2015).
Neither the standard VAE nor the conditional VAE
(CVAE) (Sohn et al., 2015) are typically successful at learning representations that achieve this desired independence,
as shown in Figure 1. Existing methods use a penalty to

