Combining Diverse Feature Priors

Saachi Jain * 1 Dimitris Tsipras * 1 Aleksander M ˛
adry 1

Abstract
To improve model generalization, model designers often restrict the features that their models
use, either implicitly or explicitly. In this work,
we explore the design space of leveraging such
feature priors by viewing them as distinct perspectives on the data. Specifically, we find that
models trained with diverse sets of feature priors
have less overlapping failure modes, and can thus
be combined more effectively. Moreover, we
demonstrate that jointly training such models on
additional (unlabeled) data allows them to correct each other’s mistakes, which, in turn, leads
to better generalization and resilience to spurious
correlations. 2

1. Introduction
The driving force behind deep learning’s success is its ability to automatically discover predictive features in complex
high-dimensional datasets. These features can generalize
beyond the specific task at hand, thus enabling models to
transfer to other (similar) tasks (Donahue et al., 2014). At
the same time, the set of features that the model learns has
a large impact on the model’s performance on unseen inputs, especially in the presence of distribution shift (Ponce
et al., 2006; Torralba & Efros, 2011; Sagawa et al., 2020) or
spurious correlations (Heinze-Deml & Meinshausen, 2017;
Beery et al., 2018; Meinshausen, 2018).
Motivated by this, recent work focuses on encouraging specific modes of behavior by preventing the models from relying on certain features. Examples include suppressing
texture features (Geirhos et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019),
avoiding `p -non-robust features (Tsipras et al., 2019; Engstrom et al., 2019), or utilizing different parts of the frequency spectrum (Yin et al., 2019).
*
Equal contribution 1 MIT. Correspondence to: Saachi Jain
<saachij@mit.edu>, Dimitris Tsipras <tsipras@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
2
Code available at https://github.com/MadryLab/
copriors.

At a high level, these methods can be thought of as ways
of imposing a feature prior on the learning process, so as
to bias the model towards acquiring features that generalize
better. This makes the choice of the feature prior to impose
a key design decision. The goal of this work is thus to
explore the underlying design space of feature priors and,
specifically, to understand:
How can we effectively harness the diversity of feature
priors?
Our contributions
In this paper, we cast diverse feature priors as different perspectives on the data and study how they can complement
each other. In particular, we aim to understand whether
training with distinct priors result in models with nonoverlapping failure modes and how such models can be
combined to improve generalization. This is particularly
relevant in settings where the data is unreliable—e.g, when
the training data contains a spurious correlation. From this
perspective, we focus our study on two priors that arise naturally in the context of image classification, shape and texture, and investigate the following:
Feature diversity. We demonstrate that training models
with diverse feature priors results in them making mistakes
on different parts of the data distribution, even if they perform similarly in terms of overall accuracy. Further, one
can harness this diversity to build model ensembles that
are more accurate than those based on combining models
which have the same feature prior.
Combining feature priors on unlabeled data. When
learning from unlabeled data, the choice of feature prior
can be especially important. For strategies such as selftraining, sub-optimal prediction rules learned from sparse
labeled data can be reinforced when pseudo-labeling the
unlabeled data. We show that, in such settings, we can
leverage the diversity of feature priors to address these issues. By jointly training models with different feature priors on the unlabeled data through the framework of cotraining (Blum & Mitchell, 1998), we find that the models
can correct each other’s mistakes to learn prediction rules
that generalize better.

