Pessimism meets VCG: Learning Dynamic Mechanism Design via Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Boxiang Lyu 1 Zhaoran Wang 2 Mladen Kolar 1 Zhuoran Yang 3

Abstract
Dynamic mechanism design has garnered significant attention from both computer scientists and
economists in recent years. By allowing agents
to interact with the seller over multiple rounds,
where agents’ reward functions may change with
time and are state-dependent, the framework is
able to model a rich class of real-world problems.
In these works, the interaction between agents
and sellers is often assumed to follow a Markov
Decision Process (MDP). We focus on the setting
where the reward and transition functions of such
an MDP are not known a priori, and we are attempting to recover the optimal mechanism using
an a priori collected data set. In the setting where
the function approximation is employed to handle
large state spaces, with only mild assumptions
on the expressiveness of the function class, we
are able to design a dynamic mechanism using
offline reinforcement learning algorithms. Moreover, learned mechanisms approximately have
three key desiderata: efficiency, individual rationality, and truthfulness. Our algorithm is based on
the pessimism principle and only requires a mild
assumption on the coverage of the offline data set.
To the best of our knowledge, our work provides
the first offline RL algorithm for dynamic mechanism design without assuming uniform coverage.

1. Introduction
Mechanism design studies how best to allocate goods among
rational agents (Maskin, 2008; Myerson, 2008; Roughgarden, 2010). Dynamic mechanism design focuses on ana1
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL,
USA 2 Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA 3 Department
of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Boxiang Lyu
<blyu@chicagobooth.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

lyzing optimal allocation rules in a changing environment,
where demands for goods, the amount of available goods,
and their valuations can vary over time (Bergemann &
Välimäki, 2019). Problems ranging from online commerce
and electric vehicle charging to pricing Wi-Fi access at Starbucks have been studied under the dynamic mechanism design framework (Gallien, 2006; Gerding et al., 2011; Friedman & Parkes, 2003). Existing approaches in the literature
require knowledge of the problem, such as the evaluation
of goods by agents (Bergemann & Välimäki, 2010; Pavan
et al., 2014), the transition dynamics of the system (Doepke
& Townsend, 2006), or the policy that maximizes social
welfare (Parkes & Singh, 2003; Parkes et al., 2004). Unfortunately, such knowledge is often not available in practice.
A practical approach we take in this paper is to learn a dynamic mechanism from data using offline Reinforcement
Learning (RL). Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) mechanism
provides a blueprint for the design of practical mechanisms
in many problems and satisfies crucial mechanisms design
desiderata in an extremely general setting (Vickrey, 1961;
Clarke, 1971; Groves, 1979). In this paper, we approximate the desired VCG mechanism using a priori collected
data (Jin et al., 2021b; Xie et al., 2021; Zanette et al., 2021).
We assume that the mechanism designer does not know the
utility of the agents or the transition kernel of the states,
but has access to an offline data set that contains observed
state transitions and utilities (Lange et al., 2012). The goal
of the mechanism designer is to recover the ideal mechanism purely from this data set, without requiring interaction
with the agents. We focus on an adaptation of the classic VCG mechanism to the dynamic setting (Parkes, 2007)
and assume that agents’ interactions with the seller follow
an episodic Markov Decision Process (MDP), where the
agents’ rewards are state-dependent and evolve over time
within each episode. To accommodate the rich class of
quasilinear utility functions considered in the economic literature (Bergemann & Välimäki, 2019), we use offline RL
with a general function approximation (Xie et al., 2021) to
approximate the dynamic VCG mechanism.
Related Works. Parkes & Singh (2003) and Parkes et al.
(2004) studied dynamic mechanism design from an MDP
perspective. The proposed mechanisms can implement so-

