Difference Advantage Estimation for Multi-Agent Policy Gradients

Yueheng Li 1 Guangming Xie 1 2 Zongqing Lu 3 2

Abstract
Multi-agent policy gradient methods in centralized training with decentralized execution recently witnessed many progresses. During centralized training, multi-agent credit assignment is
crucial, which can substantially promote learning
performance. However, explicit multi-agent credit
assignment in multi-agent policy gradient methods still receives less attention. In this paper, we
investigate multi-agent credit assignment induced
by reward shaping and provide a theoretical understanding in terms of its credit assignment and
policy bias. Based on this, we propose an exponentially weighted advantage estimator, which is
analogous to GAE, to enable multi-agent credit assignment while allowing the tradeoff with policy
bias. Empirical results show that our approach can
successfully perform effective multi-agent credit
assignment, and thus substantially outperforms
other advantage estimators.

1. Introduction
Many real-world problems can be naturally formulated as
cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL),
where agents learn to maximize the expected return shared
by all agents. Cooperative MARL has recently witnessed
great promise for solving various tasks, such as autonomous
driving (Zhou et al., 2020), traffic signal control (Xu et al.,
2021), and inventory management (Anonymous, 2022).
A popular learning paradigm in cooperative MARL is Centralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE)
(Oliehoek et al., 2008; Kraemer & Banerjee, 2016). To
resolve the non-stationarity in multi-agent settings, CTDE
allows each agent to take into account the global state and
other agents’ actions during centralized training, while learn1
College of Engineering, 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Computer Science, Peking University. Correspondence to: Guangming Xie <xiegming@pku.edu.cn>, Zongqing
Lu <zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ing its individual policy conditioned on only local information. Therefore, the question of how to best exploit the
opportunity of centralized training is important and still
remains open.
In centralized training, an important concept is called multiagent credit assignment (Chang et al., 2003). Unlike the
temporal credit assignment problem in single-agent RL (Sutton & Barto, 2018), multi-agent credit assignment describes
the difficulty for each agent to deduce its contribution to
the team through shared rewards. Although it is sometimes
possible to design individual rewards, these rewards are
rarely available in cooperative settings and frequently fail to
motivate individuals to sacrifice for the larger good (Foerster
et al., 2018). Without or with unsuitable credit assignment,
learning in challenging cooperative multi-agent tasks will
be substantially impeded and thus lead to poor performance.
On the contrary, as many previous studies pointed out
(Tumer & Agogino, 2007; Proper & Tumer, 2012; Wang
et al., 2020a), effective multi-agent credit assignment may
significantly benefit policy optimization and improve learning performance. However, multi-agent credit assignment
still receives much less attention from the community and
is rarely discussed explicitly. Among existing cooperative
MARL approaches, value-based methods (Sunehag et al.,
2018; Rashid et al., 2018; Son et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021)
perform credit assignment through value function factorization, which corresponds to an implicit reward redistribution
among agents (Sunehag et al., 2018). However, theoretical
understanding of the underlying credit assignment of these
approaches is still insufficient (Wang et al., 2020a). On
the other hand, besides using value decomposition (Wang
et al., 2020b; Zhang et al., 2021), policy-based methods perform credit assignment usually by counterfactual advantage,
as proposed in COMA (Foerster et al., 2018). However,
empirical results have shown large performance gap between COMA and state-of-the-art methods in challenging
tasks such as StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC)
(Samvelyan et al., 2019). This might be because its counterfactual advantage suffers high variance, as some previous
studies pointed out (Wang et al., 2020b; Papoudakis et al.,
2021).
Recently, MAPPO (Yu et al., 2021), a multi-agent variant of the popular on-policy reinforcement learning algo-

