A Functional Information Perspective on Model Interpretation

Itai Gat 1 Nitay Calderon 1 Roi Reichart 1 Tamir Hazan 1

Abstract
Contemporary predictive models are hard to interpret as their deep nets exploit numerous complex relations between input elements. This work
suggests a theoretical framework for model interpretability by measuring the contribution of
relevant features to the functional entropy of the
network with respect to the input. We rely on the
log-Sobolev inequality that bounds the functional
entropy by the functional Fisher information with
respect to the covariance of the data. This provides a principled way to measure the amount of
information contribution of a subset of features
to the decision function. Through extensive experiments, we show that our method surpasses
existing interpretability sampling-based methods
on various data signals such as image, text, and
audio.

1. Introduction
Machine learning is ubiquitous these days, and its impact
on everyday life is substantial. Supervised learning algorithms are instrumental to autonomous driving (Lavin &
Gray, 2016; Bojarski et al., 2016; Luss et al., 2019), serving
people with disabilities (Tadmor et al., 2016), improve hearing aids (Clauset & Post, 2019; Fedorov et al., 2020; Green
et al., 2022), and are being extensively used in medical diagnosis (Deo, 2015; Ophir et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021).
Unfortunately, since the models that are achieving these
advancements are complex, their decisions are usually not
well-understood by their operators. Consequently, model
interpretability is becoming an important goal in contemporary deep nets research. To facilitate interpretability, in this
work, we provide a theoretical framework that allows measuring the information of a decision function by considering
the expected ratio between its gradient norm and its value.
Gradient-based approaches are widely used to interpret the
1
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology. Correspondence to:
Itai Gat <itaigat@technion.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

model predictions since they bring forth an insight into the
internal mechanism of the model (Simonyan et al., 2013;
Gu et al., 2018; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Shrikumar et al.,
2017; Gat et al., 2021; Shrikumar et al., 2016; Springenberg
et al., 2014). These methods produce different explanation
maps using the gradient of a class-related output with respect to its input data. While gradient-based visualizations
excel at providing class-specific explanations, these explanations could be noisy in part due to local variations in partial
derivatives.
In order to overcome such variations, Smilkov et al. (2017);
Adebayo et al. (2018) propose to compute the expected output of gradient-based methods with respect to their input.
This practice is known as the sampling approach for interpretability methods. Existing sampling-based methods rely
on the assumption that the features are uncorrelated, while
real-world data such as pixels in images and words in texts
are in fact correlated.
We provide a theoretical framework that applies functional
entropy as a guiding concept to the amount of information
a given deep net holds for a given input with respect to
any of the possible labels. The functional entropy (Bakry
et al., 2013), originated from functional analysis, measures
the possibility of change that is encapsulated in any decision function with respect to its input. The functional
entropy contrasts the well-known Shannon’s entropy that
measures the capacity of probability distributions. We relate the functional entropy to the functional Fisher information that measures the amount of expansion in the decision
function through its gradient norm with respect to its distribution. The functional Fisher information is defined for
non-negative functions in contrast to the Fisher information,
which is defined over probability density functions.
With these mathematical concepts, we are able to construct
a sampling framework for gradient-based explanation methods. The connection between functional entropy and functional Fisher information signifies the importance of the
covariance encapsulated in the data. It also allows us to
seamlessly extract information of a subset of features from
their correlated distribution.
The remainder of the work is organized as follows: In Sec. 3
we present the notions of functional entropy and functional
Fisher information. Next, in Sec. 4, we present the role of

