Public Data-Assisted Mirror Descent for Private Model Training

Ehsan Amid 1 Arun Ganesh 2 3 Rajiv Mathews 1 Swaroop Ramaswamy 1 Shuang Song 1 Thomas Steinke 1
Vinith M. Suriyakumar 4 3 Om Thakkar 1 Abhradeep Thakurta 1

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit the problem of using
in-distribution public data to improve the privacy/utility trade-offs for differentially private
(DP) model training. (Here, public data refers to
auxiliary data sets that have no privacy concerns.)
We design a natural variant of DP mirror descent,
where the DP gradients of the private/sensitive
data act as the linear term, and the loss generated
by the public data as the mirror map.
We show that, for linear regression with feature
vectors drawn from a non-isotropic sub-Gaussian
distribution, our algorithm, PDA-DPMD (a variant of mirror descent), provides population risk
guarantees that are asymptotically better than the
best known guarantees under DP (without having
access to public data), when the number of public data samples is sufficiently large. We further
show that our algorithm has natural “noise stability” properties that control the variance due to
noise added to ensure DP.
We demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithm
by showing privacy/utility trade-offs on four
benchmark datasets (StackOverflow, WikiText-2,
CIFAR-10, and EMNIST). We show that our algorithm not only significantly improves over traditional DP-SGD, which does not have access to
public data, but to our knowledge is the first to
improve over DP-SGD on models that have been
pre-trained with public data.

1. Introduction
Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DPSGD) (Song et al., 2013; Bassily et al., 2014; Abadi et al.,
1
Google 2 UC Berkeley 3 Part of this work was done while
the author was an intern at Google. 4 MIT. Correspondence to:
Arun Ganesh <arunganesh@berkeley.edu>, Vinith M. Suriyakumar <vinithms@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2016), and its variants (Kairouz et al., 2021b) have become
the de facto standard algorithms for training machine learning models with differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al.,
2006). While DP-SGD is known to be optimal in terms of
obtaining both optimal excess empirical risk (Bassily et al.,
2014), and excess population risk (Bassily et al., 2020b)
for convex losses, the obtained error guarantees suffer from
an explicit polynomial dependence on the model dimension (p). This polynomial dependence significantly impacts
the privacy/utility trade-off when p ≥ npriv , where npriv is
the number of private training samples. Even empirically,
when DP-SGD is used to train large deep learning models, there is a significant drop in accuracy compared to the
non-private counterpart (Papernot et al., 2020).
In this paper, we revisit the problem of using public data
(i.e., data without privacy concerns) to improve the privacy/utility trade-offs for DP model training. Specifically,
we design central and federated DP variants of mirror descent (Nemirovsky & Yudin, 1983) that use the loss function generated by the public data as the mirror map and
DP gradients on the private data as the linear term. For
linear regression, we show that the excess population risk
asymptotically improves over the best known bounds under
DP (without access to public data samples) (Bassily et al.,
2014; 2019) when npub is sufficiently large (i.e., a small
polynomial in p), and the public and private feature vectors
are drawn from the same non-isotropic sub-Gaussian distribution. Here, npub is the number of public data samples.
Even if npub is small, our algorithm generalizes DP-SGD,
so it never performs worse than DP-SGD.
Furthermore, we show empirically that our DP variant of
mirror descent, assisted with public data, can improve the
privacy-utility trade-offs by effectively reducing the variance in the noise added to the gradients in DP model training. We show relative improvements up to 5.3% over DPSGD models, pre-trained with the same public data. To
our knowledge, this is the first work to demonstrate an increased benefit from public data over just pre-training. Our
empirical results are either on simulated linear regression
data, or on standard benchmark datasets like StackOverflow, CIFAR-10, EMNIST, and WikiText-2, and only consider 4% of the training data samples (0.03% for StackOverflow) as public.

