Channel Importance Matters in Few-Shot Image Classification

Xu Luo 1 Jing Xu 2 Zenglin Xu 2 3
Images

Abstract
Few-Shot Learning (FSL) requires vision models to quickly adapt to brand-new classification
tasks with a shift in task distribution. Understanding the difficulties posed by this task distribution
shift is central to FSL. In this paper, we show
that a simple channel-wise feature transformation
may be the key to unraveling this secret from a
channel perspective. When facing novel few-shot
tasks in the test-time datasets, this transformation
can greatly improve the generalization ability of
learned image representations, while being agnostic to the choice of datasets and training algorithms. Through an in-depth analysis of this
transformation, we find that the difficulty of representation transfer in FSL stems from the severe
channel bias problem of image representations:
channels may have different importance in different tasks, while convolutional neural networks are
likely to be insensitive, or respond incorrectly to
such a shift. This points out a core problem of the
generalization ability of modern vision systems
which needs further attention in the future.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; He et al., 2016) have revolutionized computer vision in the last decade, making it possible to automatically
learn representations from a large number of images. The
learned representations can generalize well to brand-new
images. As a result, image classification performance is
close to humans on most benchmarks. However, in addition to recognizing previously-seen categories, humans can
quickly change their focus of image patterns in changing
environments and recognize new categories given only a
few observations. This fast learning capability, known as
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen 3 Pengcheng Laboratory.
Correspondence to: Xu Luo <frank.luox@outlook.com>, Zenglin
Xu <xuzenglin@hit.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Discriminative Features

Animals in
miniImageNet

Plants in
iNaturalist

Plant Disease

Figure 1. Examples of task distribution shift. Different classification tasks may focus on distinct discriminative information. Top:
animals in miniImageNet with different plants as background. Middle: plants as the main categories in iNaturalist. Bottom: Different
types of plant diseases in the fine-grained Plant Disease dataset.

Few-Shot Learning (FSL), challenges current vision models
on the ability to quickly adapt to novel classification tasks
that are different from those in training. This task distribution shift means that categories, domains of images or
granularity of categories in new tasks deviate from those in
the training tasks.
Recent studies of few-shot image classification have highlighted the importance of the quality of learned image representations (Raghu et al., 2020; Doersch et al., 2020; Dhillon
et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2020; Rizve et al., 2021), and also
showed that representations learned by neural networks do
not generalize well to novel few-shot classification tasks
when there is task distribution shift (Chen et al., 2021; Doersch et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2021). Thus it is crucial to
understand how task distribution shift affects the generalization ability of image representations in few-shot learning.
As shown in Figure 1, task distribution shift may lead to
changes in discriminative image features that are critical to
the classification task at hand. For example, in the task of
recognizing animals, a convolutional neural network trained
on miniImageNet can successfully identify the discriminative information related to animals. Although the representations learned by the network may encode some plant
information (from image background), plants do not appear
as a main category in miniImageNet and it may be insufficient for the network to distinguish various plants in a
novel few-shot task sampled from the iNaturalist dataset.
Even when the network is well trained to recognize plants
on iNaturalist, it is difficult to be adapted to the novel task

