Controlling Conditional Language Models without Catastrophic Forgetting

Tomasz Korbak * 1 Hady Elsahar 2 Germán Kruszewski 2 Marc Dymetman 2

Abstract
Machine learning is shifting towards generalpurpose pretrained generative models, trained in
a self-supervised manner on large amounts of
data, which can then be applied to solve a large
number of tasks. However, due to their generic
training methodology, these models often fail
to meet some of the downstream requirements
(e.g., hallucinations in abstractive summarization or style violations in code generation). This
raises the important question of how to adapt
pre-trained generative models to meet all requirements without destroying their general capabilities (“catastrophic forgetting”). Recent work has
proposed to solve this problem by representing
task-specific requirements through energy-based
models (EBMs) and approximating these EBMs
using distributional policy gradients (DPG). Despite its effectiveness, this approach is however
limited to unconditional distributions. In this
paper, we extend DPG to conditional tasks by
proposing Conditional DPG (CDPG). We evaluate CDPG on four different control objectives
across three tasks (translation, summarization
and code generation) and two pretrained models
(T5 and GPT-Neo). Our results show that finetuning using CDPG robustly moves these pretrained models closer towards meeting control
objectives and — in contrast with baseline approaches — does not result in catastrophic forgetting.

1. Introduction
Pretrained generative models are shifting the landscape of
machine learning research and practice. General purpose
models such as the GPT family (Radford et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020; Black et al., 2021), T5 (Raffel et al.,
*Work done during an internship at Naver Labs Europe.
University of Sussex 2 Naver Labs Europe. Correspondence to:
Tomasz Korbak <tomasz.korbak@gmail.com>.
1

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Step 1: Sample a context c

Two cats are sitting on a mat

Step 2: Define a target distribution for context c
(a) probabilities given by the original model

0.20
Deux chats sont assis sur un tapis
0.10
Deux chats s'assoient sur une natte
2 chats sont assis sur un tapis 0.002
2 chats s'assoient sur une natte 0.001

(b) constraint satisfaction scores

Deux chats sont assis sur un tapis 0
Deux chats s'assoient sur une natte 0
2 chats sont assis sur un tapis 1
2 chats s'assoient sur une natte 1

(a+b) probabilities given by the target distribution
Deux chats sont assis sur un tapis 0
Deux chats s'assoient sur une natte 0
2 chats sont assis sur un tapis
2 chats s'assoient sur une natte

0.40

0.20

Step 3: Update current model to approximate
the target distribution when conditioned on c


*

0.001
0.001
0.19

0.41

Figure 1: An overview of our algorithm for fine-tuning
conditional language models, illustrated on the terminologyconstrained translation task (see Section 3.2 for details).

2020), CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and Codex (Chen et al.,
2021) are trained in a self-supervised manner on large
amounts of uncurated data and can then be adapted to specific downstream tasks (e.g. generating Python code) or
control objectives (e.g. controlling the style of generated
code). Frequently, control objectives are motivated by the
desire to address the shortcomings of certain pretrained
models. These can be due to the uncurated nature of the
original training data (e.g. a large portion of Python source
code on the Internet violates PEP8 (van Rossum et al.,
2001), the Python Style Guide) or the difficulty of learning
a desired behaviour by purely self-supervised training (e.g.

