MetAug: Contrastive Learning via Meta Feature Augmentation

Jiangmeng Li * 1 2 3 Wenwen Qiang * 1 2 3 Changwen Zheng 1 3 Bing Su 4 5 Hui Xiong 6 7

Abstract
What matters for contrastive learning? We argue
that contrastive learning heavily relies on informative features, or “hard” (positive or negative)
features. Early works include more informative
features by applying complex data augmentations
and large batch size or memory bank, and recent
works design elaborate sampling approaches to
explore informative features. The key challenge
toward exploring such features is that the source
multi-view data is generated by applying random
data augmentations, making it infeasible to always add useful information in the augmented
data. Consequently, the informativeness of features learned from such augmented data is limited.
In response, we propose to directly augment the
features in latent space, thereby learning discriminative representations without a large amount
of input data. We perform a meta learning technique to build the augmentation generator that
updates its network parameters by considering
the performance of the encoder. However, insufficient input data may lead the encoder to learn
collapsed features and therefore malfunction the
augmentation generator. A new margin-injected
regularization is further added in the objective
function to avoid the encoder learning a degenerate mapping. To contrast all features in one
gradient back-propagation step, we adopt the proposed optimization-driven unified contrastive loss
*

Equal contribution 1 Science & Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory, Institute of Software Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China 3 Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou), Guangdong, China.
4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of
China, Beijing, China 5 Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China 6 Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China 7 Department of Computer Science Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China. Correspondence to:
Bing Su <subingats@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

instead of the conventional contrastive loss. Empirically, our method achieves state-of-the-art results on several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Contrastive learning methods have achieved empirical success in computer vision (Chopra et al., 2005; Hadsell et al.,
2006). Under the setting of self-supervised learning (SSL),
recent researches demonstrate the superiority of contrastive
methods (Hjelm et al., 2018; Tian et al., 2019; Chuang et al.,
2020; Robinson et al., 2020). Typically, these approaches
learn features by contrasting different views (e.g., different
random data augmentations) of the image in hidden space.
We recap the preliminaries of the conventional contrastive
learning paradigm: every two views of the same image are
considered to be a positive pair, and every two views of
the different images are considered to be a negative pair;
the contrastive loss (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010; Oord
et al., 2018) guides the learned features to bring positive
pairs together and push negative pairs farther apart.
However, this learning paradigm suffers from the need for
a large number of pairs to contrast, e.g., large batch size or
memory bank size, because many pairs are not informative
to the model, i.e., positive pairs are pretty close and negative pairs are already very apart in hidden space. These
pairs have few contributions to the optimization. Contrastive
methods need numerous pairs and expect to collect informative ones, and therefore complex data augmentations (e.g.,
jittering, random cropping, separating color channels, etc.)
(Bachman et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020) and large-scale
memory banks (Tian et al., 2019; He et al., 2020) are effective in improving the performance of contrastive models on
downstream tasks.
The success of the recent works depends on the elaborate
selection of informative negative pairs (Chuang et al., 2020;
Robinson et al., 2020). These methods focus on designing
sampling strategies to assign larger weights to informative
pairs, which rely on enough and informative positive pairs
and do not need large amounts of negative pairs. When the
number of pairs to contrast is limited, the contrastive loss
may cause conventional contrastive learning approaches to
learn collapsed features (Zbontar et al., 2021; Grill et al.,

