Efficient Learning of CNNs using Patch Based Features

Alon Brutzkus* 1 Amir Globerson* 1 Eran Malach* 2 Alon Regev Netser* 2 Shai Shalev-Shwartz* 2

Abstract
Recent work has demonstrated the effectiveness
of using patch based representations when learning from image data. Here we provide theoretical
support for this observation, by showing that a
simple semi-supervised algorithm that uses patch
statistics can efficiently learn labels produced by a
one-hidden-layer Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN). Since CNNs are known to be computationally hard to learn in the worst case, our analysis holds under some distributional assumptions.
We show that these assumptions are necessary
and sufficient for our results to hold. We verify
that the distributional assumptions hold on realworld data by experimenting on the CIFAR-10
dataset, and find that the analyzed algorithm outperforms a vanilla one-hidden-layer CNN. Finally,
we demonstrate that by running the algorithm in a
layer-by-layer fashion we can build a deep model
which gives further improvements, hinting that
this method provides insights about the behavior
of deep CNNs.

1. Introduction
Recently, learning with patch-based representations has become increasingly popular for solving visual tasks. A notable example is the vision transformer (ViT, Dosovitskiy
et al. (2020)) which breaks the input image into 16x16
patches, and then applies a transformer architecture on an
embedding of the patches. Some follow-up works show
that using simple MLPs (Tolstikhin et al., 2021) or Convolutions (Trockman & Kolter, 2022) on top of the patch-based
embedding does similarly well.
In fact, an older work by Coates et al. (2011) already intro*

Authors ordered alphabetically. 1 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Israel 2 School of Computer
Science, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel. Correspondence to: Eran Malach <eran.malach@mail.huji.ac.il>, Alon
Regev Netser <alon.netser@mail.huji.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

duced a very simple variant of such patch-based learning
that achieved state-of-the-art results on CIFAR-10 when
published. In that work, an embedding of the image patches
is learned in an unsupervised fashion, and then a linear
predictor is trained using the patch-based features. This
algorithm has been recently improved by Thiry et al. (2021),
showing that it can compete with simple Convolutional networks. While these works provide a simple “baseline” for
patch-based learning, their theoretical properties have yet to
be explored.
In this work we provide a theoretical analysis of the aforementioned learning algorithm. We show that, under some
assumptions, this algorithm finds a predictor with small error when the data is labeled by a shallow CNN. The sample
complexity and run-time of the algorithm depend on the covering number of the distribution of patches, therefore showing that when the patches lie in a low-dimensional space, the
algorithm can achieve low error. Our analysis leads to a new
and improved variant of the original algorithm. We analyze
this new variant, and show that it performs well assuming
that the distribution of patches respects some geometrical
properties of the target function.
We complement our theoretical results with a thorough empirical study, comparing the original algorithm of Coates
et al. (2011) against our new version and against a standard
shallow CNN, showing that our version outperforms both.
Finally, we show that our algorithm can scale to deeper
models, by running it repeatedly in a layer-by-layer fashion,
which improves the performance of the shallow model. We
show that the ability to scale to deeper models is a unique
property of our approach, while the original algorithm does
not improve when applied layerwise.

2. Related Work
Learning with Data-Dependent Representation. Learning linear classifiers over fixed representations of the input
is a well-studied approach. Specifically, kernel methods
(Shawe-Taylor et al., 2004) and random features (Rahimi
et al., 2007; Rahimi & Recht, 2008) are some prominent
examples of such methods. Recently, the study of the kernel
derived from the neural network architecture, known as the
Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK), has become a main theme
in many theoretical works (Du et al., 2019; 2018b; Arora

