Structure Preserving Neural Networks: A Case Study in the Entropy Closure of
the Boltzmann Equation

Steffen Schotthöfer 1 Tianbai Xiao 1 Martin Frank 1 Cory D. Hauck 2 3

Abstract

hierarchy of the Boltzmann equation
∂t u + ∇x · ⟨vmf ⟩ = ⟨mQ(f )⟩ ,

In this paper, we explore applications of deep
learning in statistical physics. We choose the
Boltzmann equation as a typical example, where
neural networks serve as a closure to its moment
system. We present two types of neural networks
to embed the convexity of entropy and to preserve
the minimum entropy principle and intrinsic mathematical structures of the moment system of the
Boltzmann equation. We derive an error bound
for the generalization gap of convex neural networks which are trained in Sobolev norm and use
the results to construct data sampling methods for
neural network training. Numerical experiments
demonstrate that the neural entropy closure is significantly faster than classical optimizers while
maintaining sufficient accuracy.

where u(t, x) is the moment vector and m(v) is a vector of
velocity dependent basis functions. The bracket
R operator ⟨·⟩
denotes the integral over the velocity space V ·dv.
The moment system (2) usually requires a closure due to
the existence of high-order unclosed terms in the advection
operator. The so called MN moment closure preserves entropy dissipation, hyperbolicity, positivity of the solution,
conservation of mass and Boltzmann’s H-Theorem, which
are important for the stability and physical accuracy of numerical solvers. The MN closure is constructed by solving
a convex constrained optimization problem based on the
entropy minimization principle (Levermore, 1997),
h(u) = min ⟨η(g)⟩
g∈Fm

1. Introduction
The Boltzmann equation laid the foundation for statistical
physics, and describes the evolution of one-particle probability density function f (t, x, v), where {x ∈ R3 , v ∈ R3 } are
the coordinates in phase space, in a many-particle system
∂t f + v · ∇x f = Q(f ).

(2)

(1)

The linear collision operator Q(f ) describes interactions
between particles and with the background medium. The
high dimensionality and nonlinearity brings tremendous
challenge for large scale numerical solutions.
Moment methods eliminate the dependency of the phase
space on the velocity variable by computing the moment
1
Department of Applied and Numerical Mathematics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany 2 Computer Science and Mathematics Division,Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
Oak Ridge, TN, USA 3 Department of Mathematics (Joint Faculty),
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA. Correspondence to:
Steffen Schotthöfer <steffen.schotthoefer@kit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

s.t. u = ⟨mg⟩ .

(3)

The minimizer fu of Eq. (3) closes the moment system (2).
The minimal entropy closure gives a nonlinear reconstruction of f differs form Grad-type moment closures, that reconstruct f as a linear combination of the basis m. The set
of all moments u for which the above problem is solvable
is is called the realizable set R and h is the minimal entropy corresponding to the moment u. The entropy density
is denoted by η : R+ → R. Although the MN closure is
methodically superior simple truncation closures, it is by
far more expensive to compute. The authors of (Garrett &
Hauck, 2013) have demonstrated, that in a high performance
implementation, more than 80% of the computational time
of the whole simulation is required for the solution of the
entropy minimization problem, since the optimization problem needs to be solved in each grid cell at each time step of
the simulation. This motivates the development of a neural
network surrogate model to accelerate the MN closure.
1.1. Previous Work
In (Alldredge et al., 2019), the authors have shown, that any
convex approximation to the minimal entropy functional
preserves the intrinsic structure of the Boltzmann moment
system. Previously, convex splines and feed forward neural
networks have been used in (Porteous et al., 2021) to build a
data driven surrogate model for the minimal entropy closure.

