Neural Inverse Transform Sampler

Henry Li 1 Yuval Kluger 1

Abstract
Any explicit functional representation f of a density is hampered by two main obstacles when
we wish to use it as a generative model: designing f Rso that sampling is fast, and estimating
Z = f so that Z −1 f integrates to 1. This
becomes increasingly complicated as f itself becomes complicated. In this paper, we show that
when modeling one-dimensional conditional densities with a neural network, Z can be exactly and
efficiently computed by letting the network represent the cumulative distribution function of a
target density, and applying a generalized fundamental theorem of calculus. We also derive a fast
algorithm for sampling from the resulting representation by the inverse transform method. By extending these principles to higher dimensions, we
introduce the Neural Inverse Transform Sampler (NITS), a novel deep learning framework for
modeling and sampling from general, multidimensional, compactly-supported probability densities.
NITS is a highly expressive density estimator that
boasts end-to-end differentiability, fast sampling,
and exact and cheap likelihood evaluation. We
demonstrate the applicability of NITS by applying
it to realistic, high-dimensional density estimation
tasks: likelihood-based generative modeling on
the CIFAR-10 dataset, and density estimation on
the UCI suite of benchmark datasets, where NITS
produces compelling results rivaling or surpassing
the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Building efficient, highly expressive generative density estimators has been a long-standing challenge in machine
learning. A sufficiently powerful estimator will have far
reaching effects on a bevy of inference tasks, ranging from
1
Department of Applied Mathematics, Yale University, New
Haven, CT. Correspondence to: Henry Li <henry.li@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

classification to generative modeling to missing value imputation.
Density estimation of continuous random variables revolves
around a fundamental trade off between expressivity and
tractability, which is most concretely related
to the compuR
tation of the partition function Zθ = Ω fθ for a positive
function fθ : Ω → R+ . The general rule of thumb: the more
flexible the underlying fθ , the more difficult the estimation
of Zθ .
For instance, the most general model is perhaps the energybased model (EBM), where the desired density ν is approximated via an energy landscape — for example, the
Boltzmann (or Gibbs) distribution
e−fθ (x)
,
e−fθ (x) dx
Ω

νθ = R

(1)

where fθ may be an arbitrary function. The problem with
this formulation is that analytic integration of functions of
general form is unknown, and the cost of numerical integration techniques scales exponentially with the dimension of
Ω. Thus there are few, if any, approaches that represent an
arbitrary fθ in high dimension, though some methods may
estimate fθ via a variational lower bound (Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Du & Mordatch, 2019).
On the other hand, one may obtain Zθ through direct analytic derivation — but this is only applicable for a small
handful of distributions. (Theis et al., 2012) and (Uria et al.,
2016), for example, perform density estimation via Gaussian mixture and Gaussian scale mixture models, which
both have well-known partition functions.
Ultimately, most approaches avoid explicit estimation of
the density. Normalizing flows (Dinh et al., 2014; Rezende
& Mohamed, 2015) learn the transform between the desired density and a reference density (usually Gaussian),
and compute ν via the probabilistic change-of-variables formula, which does not require Z, while score-based (Song
et al., 2020) models work with the gradient of the loglikelihood, which again does not depend on the partition
function. These techniques for sidestepping the computation of Z each have drawbacks, which we will explore in
Section 4.
Directly approximating a pdf ν with a parametric function

