Augment with Care: Contrastive Learning for Combinatorial Problems

Haonan Duan * 1 2 Pashootan Vaezipoor * 1 2 Max B. Paulus 3 Yangjun Ruan 1 2 Chris J. Maddison 1 2

Abstract
Supervised learning can improve the design
of state-of-the-art solvers for combinatorial
problems, but labelling large numbers of
combinatorial instances is often impractical due
to exponential worst-case complexity. Inspired
by the recent success of contrastive pre-training
for images, we conduct a scientific study of the
effect of augmentation design on contrastive pretraining for the Boolean satisfiability problem.
While typical graph contrastive pre-training
uses label-agnostic augmentations, our key
insight is that many combinatorial problems
have well-studied invariances, which allow for
the design of label-preserving augmentations.
We find that label-preserving augmentations
are critical for the success of contrastive pretraining. We show that our representations
are able to achieve comparable test accuracy
to fully-supervised learning while using only
1% of the labels. We also demonstrate that
our representations are more transferable to
larger problems from unseen domains. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
h4duan/contrastive-sat.

1. Introduction
Combinatorial problems, e.g., Boolean satisfiability (SAT)
or mixed-integer linear programming (MILP), have many
applications in the industry and can encode many
fundamental computational tasks. These problems are NPcomplete, so solvers that perform efficiently in the worst
case are not within reach. However, learning can be used to
improve the average complexity of solvers on the population
of combinatorial problems found in the wild (Nair et al.,
2020).
*

1
Equal contribution
University of Toronto 2 Vector
3
Institute ETH Zürich. Correspondence to: Haonan Duan
<haonand@cs.toronto.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022.
Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Supervised learning is a promising approach to
combinatorial solver design (e.g., Selsam & Bjørner,
2019; Nair et al., 2020). Unfortunately, the need for labels
is a severe limitation. Many read-world problems, such as
cryptography SAT instances, are extremely hard or, in some
cases, even impossible to solve (Nejati & Ganesh, 2019).
Computing expert branching labels for large-scale MILPs
requires sophisticated parallel solvers (Nair et al., 2020).
In order to scale learning for combinatorial problems, we
ask: how much can we learn from unlabelled combinatorial
instances? In this work, we consider a contrastive learning
approach, which begins by creating multiple “views” of
every unlabelled instance, a process called augmentation.
An encoder is trained to maximize the similarity between the
representations of augmentations that come from the same
instance, while minimizing the similarity between those of
distinct ones (Chen et al., 2020a). This has been successful
in computer vision: contrastive representations can be used
with linear predictors to achieve competitive accuracies on
ImageNet using a fraction of the labelled instances (Chen
et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b).
Our key insight is that combinatorial problems have
well-studied invariances that can be used to design
extremely effective augmentations for contrastive learning.
Contrastive learning theory indicates that augmentations
should be (roughly) label-preserving in order to confer
guarantees on downstream prediction (Arora et al., 2019;
Tosh et al., 2021; HaoChen et al., 2021). This is in
contrast to the majority of label-agnostic graph contrastive
frameworks (e.g., You et al., 2020; Hassani & Khasahmadi,
2020). For some combinatorial problems, label-preserving
transformations are available from subroutines of existing
solvers, e.g., variable elimination modifies SAT formulas
while preserving their satisfiability. Our augmentations
produce new formulas by randomly applying such
satisfiability-preserving transformations. Crucially, our
augmentations do not require full solves and are much
cheaper to compute than the labels.
We study data augmentations for contrastive learning for
Boolean satisfiability. We demonstrate that:
• Augmentation design is critical for contrastive pretraining on combinatorial problems. In particular, our

