Optimal Algorithms for Mean Estimation under Local Differential Privacy

Hilal Asi * 1 Vitaly Feldman * 2 Kunal Talwar * 2

Abstract

standard algorithms for this task may leak sensitive information about users’ data and compromise their privacy. This
had led to the development of numerous algorithms for estimating the mean while preserving the privacy of users.
The most common models for privacy are either the central
model where there exists a trusted curator or the local model
where such trusted curator does not exist.

We study the problem of mean estimation of `2 bounded vectors under the constraint of local differential privacy. While the literature has a variety of algorithms that achieve the asymptotically
optimal rates for this problem, the performance
of these algorithms in practice can vary significantly due to varying (and often large) hidden
constants. In this work, we investigate the question of designing the protocol with the smallest
variance. We show that PrivUnit (Bhowmick et al.,
2018) with optimized parameters achieves the optimal variance among a large family of locally
private randomizers. To prove this result, we establish some properties of local randomizers, and
use symmetrization arguments that allow us to
write the optimal randomizer as the optimizer of
a certain linear program. These structural results,
which should extend to other problems, then allow
us to show that the optimal randomizer belongs
to the PrivUnit family.

In this work, we study the problem of mean estimation in
the local privacy model. More specifically, we have n users
each with a vector vi in the Euclidean unit ball in Rd . Each
user will use a randomizer R : Rd → Z to privatize their
data where R must satisfy ε-differential privacy, namely, for
any v1 and v2 , P (R(v1 ) = u)/P (R(v2 ) = u) ≤ eε . Then,
we run an aggregation method A : Z n → Rd such
Pn that
A(R(v1 ), . . . , R(vn )) provides an estimate of n1 i=1 vi .
Our goal in this work is to characterize the optimal protocol
(pair of randomizer R and aggregation method A) for this
problem and study the resulting optimal error.
Due to its importance and many applications, the problem
of private mean estimation in the local model has been studied by numerous papers (Bhowmick et al., 2018; Feldman
& Talwar, 2021; Chen et al., 2020). As a result, a clear
understanding of the asymptotic optimal rates has emerged,
showing that the optimal squared error is proportional to
d
Θ( n min(ε,ε
2 ) ): Duchi et al. (2018); Bhowmick et al. (2018)
developed algorithms that obtain this rate and (Duchi &
Rogers, 2019) proved corresponding lower bounds. Subsequent papers (Feldman & Talwar, 2021; Chen et al., 2020)
have developed several other algorithms that achieve the
same rates.

We also develop a new variant of PrivUnit
based on the Gaussian distribution which is more
amenable to mathematical analysis and enjoys
the same optimality guarantees. This allows us
to establish several useful properties on the exact constants of the optimal error as well as to
numerically estimate these constants.

1. Introduction

However, these optimality results do not give a clear characterization of which algorithm will enjoy better performance
in practice. Constant factors here matter more than they do
in run time or memory, as ε is typically limited by privacy
constraints, and increasing the sample size by collecting
data for more individuals is often infeasible or expensive.
The question of finding the randomizer with the smallest
error is therefore of great interest.

Mean estimation is one of the most fundamental problems
in machine learning and is the building block of a countless
number of algorithms and applications including stochastic
optimization (Duchi, 2018), federated learning (Bonawitz
et al., 2017) and others. However, it is now evident that
*
Equal contribution 1 Stanford University, part of this work
performed while interning at Apple 2 Apple, USA.. Correspondence to: Hilal Asi <asi@stanford.edu>, Vitaly Feldman <vitaly.edu@gmail.com>, Kunal Talwar <ktalwar@apple.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1.1. Our contributions

1

Motivated by these limitations, we investigate strict optimality for the problem of mean estimation with local privacy.
We study the family of non-interactive and unbiased proto-

