Diffusion bridges vector quantized variational autoencoders

Max Cohen 1 2 Guillaume Quispe 3 Sylvain Le Corff 1 Charles Ollion 3 Éric Moulines 3

Abstract
Vector Quantized-Variational AutoEncoders (VQVAE) are generative models based on discrete latent representations of the data, where inputs are
mapped to a finite set of learned embeddings. To
generate new samples, an autoregressive prior distribution over the discrete states must be trained
separately. This prior is generally very complex
and leads to slow generation. In this work, we
propose a new model to train the prior and the
encoder/decoder networks simultaneously. We
build a diffusion bridge between a continuous
coded vector and a non-informative prior distribution. The latent discrete states are then given
as random functions of these continuous vectors.
We show that our model is competitive with the
autoregressive prior on the mini-Imagenet and CIFAR dataset and is efficient in both optimization
and sampling. Our framework also extends the
standard VQ-VAE and enables end-to-end training.

1. Introduction
Variational AutoEncoders (VAE) have emerged as important generative models based on latent representations of
the data. While the latent states are usually continuous vectors, Vector Quantized Variational AutoEncoders (VQ-VAE)
have demonstrated the usefulness of discrete latent spaces
and have been successfully applied in image and speech
generation (Oord et al., 2017; Esser et al., 2021; Ramesh
et al., 2021).
In a VQ-VAE, the distribution of the inputs is assumed
to depend on a hidden discrete state. Large scale image
1

Samovar, Télécom SudParis, Département CITI, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France. 2 Oze Énergies, Charenton3
Le-Pont, France.
Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées,
École polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau,
France. Correspondence to: Max Cohen <max.cohen@telecomsudparis.eu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

generation VQ-VAEs use for instance multiple discrete latent states, typically organized as 2-dimensional lattices.
In the original VQ-VAE, the authors propose a variational
approach to approximate the posterior distribution of the
discrete states given the observations. The variational distribution takes as input the observation, which is passed
through an encoder. The discrete latent variable is then
computed by a nearest neighbour procedure that maps the
encoded vector to the nearest discrete embedding.
It has been argued that the success of VQ-VAEs lies in the
fact that they do not suffer from the usual posterior collapse
of VAEs (Oord et al., 2017). However, the implementation
of VQ-VAE involves many practical tricks and still suffers
from several limitations. First, the quantization step leads
the authors to propose a rough approximation of the gradient of the loss function by copying gradients from the
decoder input to the encoder output. Second, the prior distribution of the discrete variables is initially assumed to be
uniform when training the VQ-VAE. In a second training
step, high-dimensional autoregressive models such as PixelCNN (van den Oord et al., 2016; Salimans et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2018) and WaveNet (Oord et al., 2016) are estimated
to obtain a complex prior distribution. Joint training of the
prior and the VQ-VAE is a challenging task for which no
satisfactory solutions exist yet. Our work addresses both
problems by introducing a new mathematical framework
that extends and generalizes the standard VQ-VAE. Our
method enables end-to-end training and, in particular, bypasses the separate training of an autoregressive prior.
An autoregressive pixelCNN prior model has several drawbacks, which are the same in the pixel space or in the latent
space. The data is assumed to have a fixed sequential order, which forces the generation to start at a certain point,
typically in the upper left corner, and span the image or the 2dimensional latent lattice in an arbitrary way. At each step, a
new latent variable is sampled using the previously sampled
pixels or latent variables. Inference may then accumulate
prediction errors, while training provides ground truth at
each step. The runtime process, which depends mainly on
the number of network evaluations, is sequential and depends on the size of the image or the 2-dimensional latent
lattice, which can become very large for high-dimensional
objects.

