FEDformer: Frequency Enhanced Decomposed Transformer for Long-term
Series Forecasting

Tian Zhou * 1 Ziqing Ma * 1 Qingsong Wen 2 Xue Wang 2 Liang Sun 2 Rong Jin 2

Abstract
Although Transformer-based methods have significantly improved state-of-the-art results for
long-term series forecasting, they are not only
computationally expensive but more importantly,
are unable to capture the global view of time
series (e.g. overall trend). To address these
problems, we propose to combine Transformer
with the seasonal-trend decomposition method,
in which the decomposition method captures the
global profile of time series while Transformers capture more detailed structures. To further enhance the performance of Transformer
for long-term prediction, we exploit the fact that
most time series tend to have a sparse representation in well-known basis such as Fourier transform, and develop a frequency enhanced Transformer. Besides being more effective, the proposed method, termed as Frequency Enhanced
Decomposed Transformer (FEDformer), is more
efficient than standard Transformer with a linear
complexity to the sequence length. Our empirical studies with six benchmark datasets show
that compared with state-of-the-art methods, FEDformer can reduce prediction error by 14.8% and
22.6% for multivariate and univariate time series, respectively . Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/MAZiqing/FEDformer.

1. Introduction
Long-term time series forecasting is a long-standing challenge in various applications (e.g., energy, weather, traffic,
economics). Despite the impressive results achieved by
RNN-type methods (Rangapuram et al., 2018; Flunkert
*
Equal contribution 1 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group,
Hangzhou, China 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Bellevue,
USA. Correspondence to: Tian Zhou <tian.zt@alibaba-inc.com>,
Rong Jin <jinrong.jr@alibaba-inc.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

et al., 2017), they often suffer from the problem of gradient
vanishing or exploding (Pascanu et al., 2013), significantly
limiting their performance. Following the recent success
in NLP and CV community (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin
et al., 2019; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Rao et al., 2021),
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) has been introduced
to capture long-term dependencies in time series forecasting and shows promising results (Wen et al., 2022; Zhou
et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021). Since high computational
complexity and memory requirement make it difficult for
Transformer to be applied to long sequence modeling, numerous studies are devoted to reduce the computational cost
of Transformer (Li et al., 2019; Kitaev et al., 2020; Zhou
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020; Xiong et al., 2021; Ma et al.,
2021).
Despite the progress made by Transformer-based methods for time series forecasting, they tend to fail in capturing the overall characteristics/distribution of time series
in some cases. In Figure 1, we compare the time series
of ground truth with that predicted by the vanilla Transformer method (Vaswani et al., 2017) in a real-world ETTm1
dataset (Zhou et al., 2021). It is clear that the predicted time
series shared a different distribution from that of ground
truth. The discrepancy between ground truth and prediction
could be explained by the point-wise attention and prediction in Transformer. Since prediction for each timestep is
made individually and independently, it is likely that the
model fails to maintain the global property and statistics of
time series as a whole. To address this problem, we exploit
two ideas in this work. The first idea is to incorporate a
seasonal-trend decomposition approach (Cleveland et al.,
1990; Wen et al., 2019), which is widely used in time series
analysis, into the Transformer-based method. Although this
idea has been exploited before (Oreshkin et al., 2019; Wu
et al., 2021), we present a special design of network that is
effective in bringing the distribution of prediction close to
that of ground truth, according to Kologrov-Smirnov distribution test. Our second idea is to combine Fourier analysis
with the Transformer-based method. Instead of applying
Transformer to the time domain, we apply it to the frequency
domain which helps Transformer better capture global properties of time series. Combining both ideas, we propose
a Frequency Enhanced Decomposition Transformer, or,

