Improving Mini-batch Optimal Transport via Partial Transportation

Khai Nguyen 1 * Dang Nguyen 2 * The-Anh Vu-Le 2 Tung Pham 2 Nhat Ho 1

Abstract
Mini-batch optimal transport (m-OT) has been
widely used recently to deal with the memory issue of OT in large-scale applications. Despite
their practicality, m-OT suffers from misspecified
mappings, namely, mappings that are optimal on
the mini-batch level but are partially wrong in
the comparison with the optimal transportation
plan between the original measures. Motivated
by the misspecified mappings issue, we propose
a novel mini-batch method by using partial optimal transport (POT) between mini-batch empirical measures, which we refer to as mini-batch
partial optimal transport (m-POT). Leveraging
the insight from the partial transportation, we explain the source of misspecified mappings from
the m-OT and motivate why limiting the amount
of transported masses among mini-batches via
POT can alleviate the incorrect mappings. Finally,
we carry out extensive experiments on various
applications such as deep domain adaptation, partial domain adaptation, deep generative model,
color transfer, and gradient flow to demonstrate
the favorable performance of m-POT compared
to current mini-batch methods.

1. Introduction
From its origin in mathematics and economics, optimal
transport (OT) has recently become a useful and popular
tool in machine learning applications, such as (deep) generative models (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Tolstikhin et al., 2018),
computer vision/ graphics (Solomon et al., 2016; Nguyen
et al., 2021d), clustering problem (Ho et al., 2017; 2019),
and domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2016; Damodaran
et al., 2018; Le et al., 2021). An important impetus for
such popularity is the recent advance in the computation
of OT. In particular, the works of (Altschuler et al., 2017;
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin 2 VinAI Research. Correspondence to: Khai Nguyen <khainb@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Dvurechensky et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2019) demonstrate
that we can approximate optimal transport with a computational complexity of the order O(n2 /ε2 ) where n is the
maximum number of supports of probability measures and
ε > 0 is the desired tolerance. It is a major improvement
over the standard computational complexity O(n3 log n) of
computing OT via interior point methods (Pele & Werman,
2009). Another approach named sliced OT in (Bonneel
et al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2021a;c; Deshpande et al., 2019)
is able to reduce greatly the computational cost to the order
of O(n log n) by exploiting the closed-form of one dimensional OT on the projected data. However, due to the projection step, sliced optimal transport is not able to keep all
the main differences between high dimensional measures,
which leads to a decline in practical performance.
Despite these major improvements on computation, it is
still impractical to use optimal transport and its variants in
large-scale applications when n can be as large as a few
million, such as deep domain adaptation and deep generative model. The bottleneck mainly comes from the memory
issue, namely, it is impossible for us to store n × n cost
matrix when n is extremely large. To deal with this issue,
practitioners often replace the original large-scale computation of OT with cheaper computation on subsets of the
whole dataset, which is widely referred to as mini-batch
approaches (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Genevay et al., 2018;
Sommerfeld et al., 2019). In more detail, instead of computing the original large-scale optimal transport problem, the
mini-batch approach splits it into smaller transport problems
(sub-problems). Each sub-problem is to solve optimal transport between subsets of supports (or mini-batches), which
belong to the original measures. After solving all the subproblems, the final transportation cost (plan) is obtained
by aggregating evaluated mini-batch transportation costs
(plans) from these sub-problems. Due to the small number of samples in each mini-batch, computing OT between
mini-batch empirical measures is doable when memory constraints and computational constraints exist. This mini-batch
approach is formulated rigorously under the name of minibatch OT (m-OT) and some of its statistical properties are
investigated in (Fatras et al., 2020; 2021b).
Despite its computational practicality, the trade-off of the
m-OT approach is the misspecified mappings in comparison with the full OT transportation plan. In particular, a

