ProgFed: Effective, Communication, and
Computation Efficient Federated Learning by Progressive Training

Hui-Po Wang 1 Sebastian U. Stich 1 Yang He 1 Mario Fritz 1

Abstract
Federated learning is a powerful distributed learning scheme that allows numerous edge devices to
collaboratively train a model without sharing their
data. However, training is resource-intensive for
edge devices, and limited network bandwidth is
often the main bottleneck. Prior work often overcomes the constraints by condensing the models
or messages into compact formats, e.g., by gradient compression or distillation. In contrast, we
propose ProgFed, the first progressive training
framework for efficient and effective federated
learning. It inherently reduces computation and
two-way communication costs while maintaining the strong performance of the final models.
We theoretically prove that ProgFed converges at
the same asymptotic rate as standard training on
full models. Extensive results on a broad range
of architectures, including CNNs (VGG, ResNet,
ConvNets) and U-nets, and diverse tasks from simple classification to medical image segmentation
show that our highly effective training approach
saves up to 20% computation and up to 63% communication costs for converged models. As our
approach is also complimentary to prior work on
compression, we can achieve a wide range of
trade-offs by combining these techniques, showing reduced communication of up to 50× at only
0.1% loss in utility. Code is available at https:
//github.com/a514514772/ProgFed.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) has led to remarkable advances
in the development of extremely large machine learning
systems (McMahan et al., 2017). Federated training methods allow multiple clients (edge devices) to jointly train a
1

CISPA Helmholz Center for Information Security, Germany.
Correspondence to: Hui-Po Wang <hui.wang@cispa.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

global model without sharing their private data with others.
Training methods in FL suffer from high communication
and computational costs, as edge devices are often equipped
with limited hardware resources and limited network bandwidth.
Prior literature has studied various compression techniques
to address the computation and communication bottlenecks.
These methods can be divided into three main categories
(see also Table 1): (i) Compression techniques that represent gradients (or parameters) with fewer bits to reduce
communication costs. Prominent examples are quantization (Alistarh et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2020)
or sparsification (Stich et al., 2018; Konečnỳ et al., 2016).
(ii) Model pruning techniques that identify (much smaller)
sub-networks within the original models to reduce computational cost at inference (Li & Wang, 2019; Lin et al., 2020).
And (iii) knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015) techniques that allow the server to distill the knowledge from the
clients with hold-out datasets (Li & Wang, 2019; Lin et al.,
2020). Despite the significant progress, most of them rarely
leverage learning dynamics to reduce resource demands.
Prior work has observed that neural networks tend to stabilize from shallower to deeper layers during training (Raghu
et al., 2017). This behavior provides additional scope to
improve resource demands. We take advantage of this
opportunity by leveraging progressive learning (Karras
et al., 2018), a well-known technique in image generation.
It first trains the shallower layers on simpler tasks (e.g.,
images with lower resolution) and gradually grows the
network to tackle more complicated tasks (e.g., images with
higher resolution). The growing process inherently reduces
computation and communication costs when the models are
shallower. Despite the appealing features, current success
mainly focuses on centralized training, and no previous
study has systematically investigated exploiting progressive
learning to reduce the costs in federated learning.
We propose ProgFed, the first federated progressive learning
framework that reduces both communication and computation costs while preserving model utility. Our approach
divides the model into several overlapping partitions and
introduces lightweight local supervision heads to guide the
training of the sub-models. The model capacity is gradu-

