Distributionally-Aware Kernelized Bandit Problems for Risk Aversion

Sho Takemori 1

Abstract
The kernelized bandit problem is a theoretically
justified framework and has solid applications to
various fields. Recently, there is a growing interest
in generalizing the problem to the optimization of
risk-averse metrics such as Conditional Value-atRisk (CVaR) or Mean-Variance (MV). However,
due to the model assumption, most existing methods need explicit design of environment random
variables and can incur large regret because of
possible high dimensionality of them. To address
the issues, in this paper, we model the environment using a family of the output distributions
(or more precisely, probability kernel) and Kernel Mean Embeddings (KME), and provide novel
UCB-type algorithms for CVaR and MV. Moreover, we provide algorithm-independent lower
bounds for CVaR in the case of Matérn kernels,
and propose a nearly optimal algorithm. Furthermore, we empirically verify our theoretical result
in synthetic environments, and demonstrate that
our proposed method significantly outperforms a
baseline in many cases.

1. Introduction
The kernelized bandit problem, or Bayesian optimization
problem (Srinivas et al., 2010; Chowdhury & Gopalan,
2017) is an online black-box optimization problem and
has solid applications to various fields including material
design, drug discovery, hyperparameter optimization, and
recommender system (Frazier, 2018; Shahriari et al., 2015).
Although, in the conventional kernelized bandit setting, the
objective is to maximize the mean function, it may not be
appropriate to optimize it in high-stake settings. For example, to optimize hyperparameters of a machine learning
algorithm for medical domain, healthcare, or finance, one
might optimize the mean performance with small variance
(Mean-Variance optimization), or want to optimize more
1
Fujitsu Ltd., Kawasaki, Japan. Correspondence to: Sho Takemori <takemori.sho@fujitsu.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

sophisticated risk averse metrics such as Conditional Valueat-Risk (CVaR). Recently, there is a growing interest in
generalizing the optimization of the mean function to that
of risk-averse metrics such as CVaR, Value-at-Risk (VaR),
and Mean-Variance (MV) (Cakmak et al., 2020; Nguyen
et al., 2021b;a; Iwazaki et al., 2021; Makarova et al., 2021).
Here, for a distribution ρ, the Mean-Variance is defined as
E [ρ] − cV [ρ], where c > 0 is a parameter of the metric.
CVaR is a metric for risk-aversion established in finance
(Rockafellar et al., 2000) and given as the conditional expectation Ey∼ρ [y | y ≤ yα ], where yα is the α-quantile and
α ∈ (0, 1] is a parameter called the risk level. In this paper, we consider kernelized bandit problems for risk-averse
metrics. We mainly focus on CVaR and MV, especially on
CVaR, because CVaR has nice theoretical properties such
as coherency or continuity on α (Acerbi & Tasche, 2002).
In most existing work on kernelized bandit problems for
risk-averse metrics, the authors model the output y using a
function y = f (x, W ) with two kinds of variables, where
x is the input variable that can be controlled by algorithms,
and W is a random variable called the environment random variable that accounts for randomness of the output y
and cannot be controlled by the algorithms (Marzat et al.,
2013). In this paper, we call such a model the environmentvariable-function (EVF) model. However, the EVF model
assumption can cause some restrictions and drawbacks. For
instance, recently, Nguyen et al. (2021a) considered kernelized bandit problems for CVaR under the conditions that
the distribution of W is known, the leaner can select W in
the optimization procedure. If the environment is the real
world or a complicated simulator, these conditions are too
restrictive, since it is necessary to design the environment
random variable that affects the output y, and it is assumed
that the leaner can control/observe it during the optimization procedure. Moreover, since the regret upper bound in
Nguyen et al. (2021a) is provided by using the maximum
information gain (Srinivas et al., 2010) of a function with
respect to (x, W ), the regret upper bound increases if the
dimension of W increases even if that of x is moderate.
Contributions
In this paper, by embedding the output distribution ρ(x) at
a point x via Kernel Mean Embedding (KME) (Muandet
et al., 2017) and motivated by the regression interpretation of

