Training Discrete Deep Generative Models via
Gapped Straight-Through Estimator

Ting-Han Fan * 1 Ta-Chung Chi * 2 Alexander I. Rudnicky 2 Peter J. Ramadge 1

Abstract
While deep generative models have succeeded in
image processing, natural language processing,
and reinforcement learning, training that involves
discrete random variables remains challenging
due to the high variance of its gradient estimation
process. Monte Carlo is a common solution used
in most variance reduction approaches. However,
this involves time-consuming resampling and multiple function evaluations. We propose a Gapped
Straight-Through (GST) estimator to reduce the
variance without incurring resampling overhead.
This estimator is inspired by the essential properties of Straight-Through Gumbel-Softmax. We
determine these properties and show via an ablation study that they are essential. Experiments
demonstrate that the proposed GST estimator enjoys better performance compared to strong baselines on two discrete deep generative modeling
tasks, MNIST-VAE and ListOps.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models (DGM) (Ruthotto & Haber, 2021;
Kingma & Welling, 2019; Goodfellow et al., 2020; Rezende
& Mohamed, 2015) are deep neural networks that are capable of high-dimensional probability distributions modeling
and random samples generation. These properties are especially useful in applications such as image processing
(Korshunov & Marcel, 2018; Song et al., 2021), speech
processing (Oord et al., 2016), natural language processing
(Radford et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2021), and reinforcement
learning (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Li et al., 2017). Among these
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ,
USA 2 Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to:
Ting-Han Fan <tinghanf@princeton.edu>, Ta-Chung Chi
<tachungc@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

tasks, some of which involve inherently discrete components hence necessitating the need of modeling discrete
random variables. For example, structure learning (Nangia
& Bowman, 2018), generative text modeling (Yang et al.,
2017), multi-agent control (Lowe et al., 2017), and control
with discrete/integer variables (Tang & Agrawal, 2020; Fan
& Wang, 2021). Training these discrete DGMs remains
challenging mainly due to the discrete sampling process,
which impedes the direct use of gradient backpropagation.
Consequently, designing a high-quality gradient estimation
technique for the discrete component becomes the key to
success.
Existing gradient estimation techniques for discrete DGMs
bifurcate into two paradigms: the REINFORCE estimator
(Glynn, 1990; Williams, 1992) and the Straight-Through
Gumbel-Softmax (STGS) (Maddison et al., 2017; Jang et al.,
2017). The former is unbiased but with high variance, while
the latter is of low variance but requires a continuous relaxation during the gradient computation (i.e., h in Eq. (6)).
Despite the differences, the Monte Carlo variance reduction technique has been used in both methods; for example,
Mnih & Gregor (2014); Mnih & Rezende (2016); Gu et al.
(2016) for REINFORCE and Paulus et al. (2021) for STGS.
While the variance is reduced, side-effects such as multiple
resampling and function evaluations emerge, which are also
the main drawbacks that we address.
In this paper, we introduce the Gapped Straight-Through
(GST) estimator, a variant of the Straight-Through estimator
(Bengio et al., 2013), that adds a careful logit perturbation
process. We decide to improve upon the STGS paradigm
since it is believed to have low variance and can leave the
loss function unmodified (Eq. (2) vs. (5)). First, we show
that STGS has a number of properties (§3) essential for
good performance (see ablation study in §5.1.1). To our best
knowledge, this is a new determination of the key properties
that support STGS.
Second, the Gumbel randomness introduced in STGS is sufficient but not necessary for these properties. We show GST
satisfies these properties with less randomness. In particular,
GST first samples a random category D and then computes
the deterministic perturbation given D. This has the advantage of variance reduction while avoiding any resampling

