Transformers are Meta-Reinforcement Learners
Luckeciano C. Melo 1 2

Abstract
The transformer architecture and variants presented a remarkable success across many machine learning tasks in recent years. This success
is intrinsically related to the capability of handling long sequences and the presence of contextdependent weights from the attention mechanism.
We argue that these capabilities suit the central role of a Meta-Reinforcement Learning algorithm. Indeed, a meta-RL agent needs to infer the task from a sequence of trajectories. Furthermore, it requires a fast adaptation strategy to
adapt its policy for a new task - which can be
achieved using the self-attention mechanism. In
this work, we present TrMRL (Transformers for
Meta-Reinforcement Learning), a meta-RL agent
that mimics the memory reinstatement mechanism using the transformer architecture. It associates the recent past of working memories to
build an episodic memory recursively through
the transformer layers. We show that the selfattention computes a consensus representation
that minimizes the Bayes Risk at each layer
and provides meaningful features to compute the
best actions. We conducted experiments in highdimensional continuous control environments for
locomotion and dexterous manipulation. Results
show that TrMRL presents comparable or superior asymptotic performance, sample efficiency,
and out-of-distribution generalization compared
to the baselines in these environments.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017) achieved exceptional performance on many machine
learning applications, especially for text (Devlin et al., 2019;
Raffel et al., 2020) and image processing (Dosovitskiy et al.,
1

Microsoft, USA 2 Center of Excellence in Artificial Intelligence
(Deep Learning Brazil), Brazil. Correspondence to: Luckeciano C.
Melo <luckeciano@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2021b; Caron et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2021). This intrinsically relates to its few-shot learning nature (Brown et al.,
2020b): the attention weights work as context-dependent parameters, inducing better generalization. Furthermore, this
architecture parallelizes token processing by design. This
property avoids backpropagation through time, making it
less prone to vanishing/exploding gradients, a very common
problem for recurrent models. As a result, they can handle
longer sequences more efficiently.
This work argues that these two capabilities are essential
for a Meta-Reinforcement Learning (meta-RL) agent. We
propose TrMRL (Transformers for Meta-Reinforcement
Learning), a memory-based meta-Reinforcement Learner
which uses the transformer architecture to formulate the
learning process. It works as a memory reinstatement mechanism (Rovee-Collier, 2012) during learning, associating
recent working memories to create an episodic memory
which is used to contextualize the policy.
Figure 1 illustrates the process. We formulated each task as
a distribution over working memories. TrMRL associates
these memories using self-attention blocks to create a task
representation in each head. These task representations are
combined in the position-wise MLP to create an episodic
output (which we identify as episodic memory). We recursively apply this procedure through layers to refine the
episodic memory. In the end, we select the memory associated with the current timestep and feed it into the policy
head.
Nonetheless, transformer optimization is often unstable,
especially in the RL setting. Past attempts either fail to
stabilize (Mishra et al., 2018) or required architectural additions (Parisotto et al., 2019) or restrictions on the observations space (Loynd et al., 2020). We hypothesize that
this challenge is because the instability of early stages of
transformer optimization harms initial exploration, which is
crucial for environments where the learned behaviors must
guide exploration to prevent poor policies. We argue that
this challenge can be mitigated through a proper weight
initialization scheme. For this matter, we applied T-Fixup
initialization (Huang et al., 2020).
We conducted a series of experiments to evaluate metatraining, fast adaptation, and out-of-distribution generalization in continuous control environments for locomotion and

