Connect, Not Collapse: Explaining Contrastive Learning for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Kendrick Shen * 1 Robbie Jones * 1 Ananya Kumar * 1 Sang Michael Xie * 1 Jeff Z. HaoChen 1
Tengyu Ma 1 Percy Liang 1

Abstract
We consider unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA), where labeled data from a source domain
(e.g., photos) and unlabeled data from a target
domain (e.g., sketches) are used to learn a classifier for the target domain. Conventional UDA
methods (e.g., domain adversarial training) learn
domain-invariant features to generalize from the
source domain to the target domain. In this paper,
we show that contrastive pre-training, which
learns features on unlabeled source and target
data and then fine-tunes on labeled source data, is
competitive with strong UDA methods. However,
we find that contrastive pre-training does not learn
domain-invariant features, diverging from conventional UDA intuitions. We show theoretically
that contrastive pre-training can learn features
that vary subtantially across domains but still
generalize to the target domain, by disentangling
domain and class information. We empirically
validate our theory on benchmark vision datasets.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models can perform poorly when the
train and test data are drawn from different distributions,
which is especially troublesome for performance-critical
applications such as image recognition for self-driving
cars (Yu et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020) or medical image
diagnosis (AlBadawy et al., 2018; Dai & Gool, 2018). In this
work, we study the unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
setting where we have access to labeled data from a source
domain and unlabeled data from a target domain, and the
goal is to get high accuracy on the target domain.
Conventional algorithms for UDA aim to learn domaininvariant features (Tzeng et al., 2014; Ganin et al., 2016;
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford
University. Correspondence to: Kendrick Shen, Robbie Jones,
Ananya Kumar, Sang Michael Xie <{kshen6, rmjones, ananya,
xie}@cs.stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright
2022 by the author(s).

Tzeng et al., 2017; Shu et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2019)—
intuitively, if the distributions over features for the source
and target domains are indistinguishable and the accuracy
is high on the source, then the accuracy should be high on the
target as well. This is supported by theoretical notions such
as H∆H-divergence, which measures the distinguishability
of source and target feature spaces (Ben-David et al., 2010).
In this paper, we find that a surprisingly simple and
effective method for UDA is out-of-the-box contrastive
pre-training on source and target unlabeled data, followed
by fine-tuning on source labeled data. In our experiments,
contrastive pre-training obtains comparable or better results
to strong UDA methods based on domain adversarial
neural networks (Ganin et al., 2016; Shu et al., 2018) and
self-training (Prabhu et al., 2021) on visual adaptation benchmarks including DomainNet, BREEDS Living-17, BREEDS
Entity-30, and STL-10→CIFAR-10 (results in Table 2).
However, we show that contrastive pre-training diverges
from conventional UDA intuitions and learns features that
are easily separable between domains; for example in the
learned feature space in DomainNet, we can predict the
domain of an image with only 8% error, which is much lower
than in the DANN feature space (14%) or in the input space
(27%)—see Table 1 in Section 4. In fact, in the contrastive
pre-trained feature space for DomainNet, it is as easy to
distinguish betweeen two domains as it is to distinguish
between two classes.
How does contrastive pre-training learn features that generalize to the target domain without domain invariance? To
theoretically analyze contrastive pre-training, we consider a
graph (see Figure 1) where input examples are nodes and the
edge weight between two inputs is the probability that they
are generated by sampling two augmentations of the same
original input. By considering the total edge weight between
two class-domain pairs (e.g., all edges connecting a clock
photo to a butterfly sketch), we can define class-domain connectivities. These connectivities describe how much overlap
to expect amongst the randomly augmented inputs from two
class-domain pairs. Our key assumption intuitively states
that augmentations of clock photos should be more similar to
clock sketches and butterfly photos than to butterfly sketches.

