Training OOD Detectors in their Natural Habitats

Julian Katz-Samuels * 1 Julia Nakhleh * 2 Robert Nowak 3 Yixuan Li 2

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is important
for machine learning models deployed in the wild.
Recent methods use auxiliary outlier data to regularize the model for improved OOD detection.
However, these approaches make a strong distributional assumption that the auxiliary outlier data
is completely separable from the in-distribution
(ID) data. In this paper, we propose a novel
framework that leverages wild mixture data—that
naturally consists of both ID and OOD samples.
Such wild data is abundant and arises freely upon
deploying a machine learning classifier in their
natural habitats. Our key idea is to formulate
a constrained optimization problem and to show
how to tractably solve it. Our learning objective maximizes the OOD detection rate, subject
to constraints on the classification error of ID
data and on the OOD error rate of ID examples.
We extensively evaluate our approach on common OOD detection tasks and demonstrate superior performance. Code is available at https:
//github.com/jkatzsam/woods_ood.

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection has become a central
challenge in safely deploying machine learning models in
the wild, where test-time data can naturally arise from a mixture distribution of both knowns and unknowns (Bendale &
Boult, 2015). Concerningly, modern neural networks are
shown to produce overconfident and therefore untrustworthy
predictions for unknown OOD inputs (Nguyen et al., 2015).
To mitigate the issue, recent works have explored training
with an auxiliary outlier dataset, where the model is regular*
Equal contribution 1 Institute for Foundations of Data Science, University of Wisconsin, Madison 2 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison 3 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison. Correspondence to: Julian Katz-Samuels
<katzsamuels@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ized to produce lower confidence (Hendrycks et al., 2019) or
higher energies (Liu et al., 2020) on the outlier data. These
methods have demonstrated encouraging OOD detection
performance over the counterpart without auxiliary data.
Despite this promise, there are two primary limitations to
the existing methods. First, the auxiliary data distribution
collected offline may not be a good match for the true distribution of unknown data in the wild, thus the learned model
may fail to detect deployment-time OOD data. Second, collecting such data can be very labor-intensive and inflexible,
and necessitates careful data cleaning to ensure the auxiliary
outlier data does not overlap with the ID data. We address
these challenges by leveraging unlabeled “in-the-wild” data
— which can be collected almost for free upon deploying
a machine learning classifier in the open world, and has
been largely overlooked for OOD learning purposes. Such
data is available in abundance, does not require any human
annotation, and is often a much better match to the true
test time distribution than data collected offline. While this
setting naturally suits many real-world applications, it also
poses unique challenges since the wild data distribution is
not pure and consists of both ID data and OOD data.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework that
enables effectively exploiting unlabeled in-the-wild
data for OOD detection. Unlabeled wild data is frequently available since it is produced essentially
whenever deploying an existing classifier in a realworld system. This setting can be viewed as training OOD detectors in their natural habitats.
Our learning framework revolves around building the OOD
classifier using only labeled ID data from Pin and unlabeled
wild data from Pwild , which can be considered to be a mixture of Pin and an unknown (OOD) distribution. To deal
with the lack of a “clean” set of OOD examples, our key
idea is to formulate a constrained optimization problem.
In a nutshell, our learning objective aims to minimize the
error of classifying data from Pwild as ID, subject to two
constraints: (i) the error of declaring an ID data from Pin
as OOD must be low, and (ii) the multi-class classification
model must maintain the best-achievable accuracy (or close
to it) of a baseline classifier designed without an OOD detection requirement. Even though our framework does not have
access to a “clean” OOD dataset, we show both empirically

