Boosting Graph Structure Learning with Dummy Nodes

Xin Liu 1 Jiayang Cheng 1 Yangqiu Song 1 Xin Jiang 2

Abstract
With the development of graph kernels and graph
representation learning, many superior methods
have been proposed to handle scalability and
oversmoothing issues on graph structure learning.
However, most of those strategies are designed
based on practical experience rather than theoretical analysis. In this paper, we use a particular
dummy node connecting to all existing vertices
without affecting original vertex and edge properties. We further prove that such the dummy
node can help build an efficient monomorphic
edge-to-vertex transform and an epimorphic inverse to recover the original graph back. It also
indicates that adding dummy nodes can preserve
local and global structures for better graph representation learning. We extend graph kernels and
graph neural networks with dummy nodes and
conduct experiments on graph classification and
subgraph isomorphism matching tasks. Empirical results demonstrate that taking graphs with
dummy nodes as input significantly boosts graph
structure learning, and using their edge-to-vertex
graphs can also achieve similar results. We also
discuss the gain of expressive power from the
dummy in neural networks.

1. Introduction
Graph structures have been widely used in modeling the
interactions and connections in complex systems, such as biological networks, chemical molecules, and social networks.
In fact, these data contain rich information in their graph
structure beyond vertex and edge attributes. For example,
atoms are held together by covalent bonds, and different
molecular compounds (usually named isomers) with similar
This work was done when Xin Liu was an intern at Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab. 1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong
Kong SAR, China 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Hong Kong SAR,
China. Correspondence to: Xin Liu <xliucr@cse.ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

atoms may have distinct properties due to different structures. Thus, there has been a surge of interest in graph
similarity, graph comparison, and subgraph matching. In recent years, numerous approaches have been proposed in machine learning and deep learning, among which algorithms
based on graph kernels (GKs) (Borgwardt et al., 2005; Shervashidze et al., 2011; Morris et al., 2020) and graph neural
networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Vashishth et al.,
2020) are most notable. GKs tackle the graph comparison
by exploring and capturing the semantics inherent in graphstructured data. The main idea behind graph kernels is that
graphs with similar properties are highly likely to have similar distributions of substructures. However, most GKs focus
on vertex-centric substructures while ignoring the edge similarities. Instead, inductive GNNs automatically extract
higher-order information of graphs, sometimes leading to
more powerful features compared to hand-crafted features
used by GKs (Xu et al., 2019). Nevertheless, there are also
disadvantages of GKs and GNNs. The runtime complexity
of GKs when considering subgraphs of size up to k ≥ 2
is usually Ω(k · |V|2 ) at least and O(k · |V|k+1 ) at worst,
where |V| is the number of vertices in the smaller graph for
comparison (Kriege et al., 2020). The objective of GNNs
is highly non-convex, requiring careful hyper-parameter
tuning to stabilize the training procedure and avoid oversmoothing. Besides, message passing in GNNs still faces
the limitation of the expressive power and the information
vanish upon 0-outdegree vertices in deeper networks.
To address the aforementioned problems, many strategies
have been designed. Morris et al. (2020) proposed the local
variants of Weisfeiler-Lehman Subtree Kernels (k-WL) to
vastly reduce the computation time without performance
decline. k-IGNs (Maron et al., 2019), k-GNNs (Morris
et al., 2019), and EASN (Bevilacqua et al., 2021) involve
high-order tensors in representing high-order substructures
with the expressive power as k-WL. Some kernels quantify the similarity based on random walks to reduce the
complexity (Zhang et al., 2018). Li et al. (2018) and Rong
et al. (2019) addressed the GNNs’ oversmoothing by randomly removing edges from graphs to make GNNs robust to
various structures. On the other hand, adding reversed edges
in heterogeneous graphs is popular in practice (Vashishth
et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2020). Some strategies are based on
experimental experience rather than theoretical analysis.

