Lazy Estimation of Variable Importance for Large Neural Networks

Yue Gao * 1 Abby Stevens * 2 Garvesh Raskutti 1 Rebecca Willett 2 3

Abstract
As opaque predictive models increasingly impact
many areas of modern life, interest in quantifying the importance of a given input variable for
making a specific prediction has grown. Recently,
there has been a proliferation of model-agnostic
methods to measure variable importance (VI) that
analyze the difference in predictive power between a full model trained on all variables and
a reduced model that excludes the variable(s) of
interest. A bottleneck common to these methods
is the estimation of the reduced model for each
variable (or subset of variables), which is an expensive process that often does not come with
theoretical guarantees. In this work, we propose
a fast and flexible method for approximating the
reduced model with important inferential guarantees. We replace the need for fully retraining
a wide neural network by a linearization initialized at the full model parameters. By adding a
ridge-like penalty to make the problem convex,
we prove that when the ridge penalty parameter is sufficiently large, our method estimates the
variable importance measure with an error rate of
O( √1n ) where n is the number of training samples.
We also show that our estimator is asymptotically
normal, enabling us to provide confidence bounds
for the VI estimates. We demonstrate through simulations that our method is fast and accurate under
several data-generating regimes, and we demonstrate its real-world applicability on a seasonal
climate forecasting example.

1. Introduction
As predictive modeling becomes ubiquitous across a wide
swath of application areas, it is especially critical to under*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of
Wisconsin, Madison 2 Department of Statistics, University of
Chicago 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago.
Correspondence to: Rebecca Willett <willett@uchicago.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

stand which variables contribute most to making a particular
prediction. Black-box machine learning methods are insufficient in the face of algorithmic decision-making about things
like sentencing, healthcare, and education, and working toward developing more interpretable methods is becoming
more and more relevant (Rudin & Radin, 2019; Guidotti
et al., 2018).
Traditional statistical tools based on parametric models (e.g.
p-values, ANOVA) for VI inference are dissatisfying due
to restrictive assumptions often violated in modern datasets.
Non-parametric extensions thus have been explored (Doksum & Samarov, 1995). In recent decades, many VI methods designed for modern deep learning models have been
investigated; most of these methods are gradient-based and
depend on the structure and the weights of nodes in a given
specific neural network (Shrikumar et al., 2019; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Smilkov et al., 2017; Bach et al., 2015).
Few statistically rigorous properties are provided for these
methods, and the VI definition is always intimately attached
to the network itself, making it hard to interpret in a modelagnostic setting.
In a model-agnostic setting, a natural definition of VI that
is independent of the estimation procedure is to measure
the loss of predictive power when the variables of interest
are deleted. To estimate such model-agnostic VI, retraining
is the most widely used type of method, which involves
training separate models on the reduced data with the variables of interest deleted and assessing the predictive skill
difference (Williamson et al., 2021; Lei et al., 2018; Sapp
et al., 2014). Retraining often acts as the best benchmark to
evaluate other VI estimation methods (Hooker et al., 2019)
due to its accuracy, yet it is computationally infeasible in
high-dimensional settings. Other methods for VI estimation
include knockoff methods (Barber & Candes, 2018; Candes
et al., 2017) and Floodgate (Zhang & Janson, 2021), which
require the co-variate distribution to be known. An alternative approach is to use a dropout-type method (Chang et al.,
2017). Dropout is best-suited for assessing how much a
variable affects a predictive model, as opposed to our goal
of assessing how much a variable affects the response. Despite the resulting issues with VI estimation accuracy, it is
still widely used in practice as a proxy for VI due to its
computational tractability.

