Surrogate Likelihoods for Variational Annealed Importance Sampling

Martin Jankowiak 1 Du Phan 2

Abstract
Variational inference is a powerful paradigm for
approximate Bayesian inference with a number
of appealing properties, including support for
model learning and data subsampling. By contrast
MCMC methods like Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
do not share these properties but remain attractive
since, contrary to parametric methods, MCMC
is asymptotically unbiased. For these reasons researchers have sought to combine the strengths of
both classes of algorithms, with recent approaches
coming closer to realizing this vision in practice.
However, supporting data subsampling in these
hybrid methods can be a challenge, a shortcoming
that we address by introducing a surrogate likelihood that can be learned jointly with other variational parameters. We argue theoretically that
the resulting algorithm allows an intuitive tradeoff between inference fidelity and computational
cost. In an extensive empirical comparison we
show that our method performs well in practice
and that it is well-suited for black-box inference
in probabilistic programming frameworks.

1. Introduction
Bayesian modeling and inference is a powerful approach
to making sense of complex datasets. This is especially
the case in scientific applications, where accounting for
prior knowledge and uncertainty is essential. For motivating examples we need only look to recent efforts to study
COVID-19, including e.g. epidemiological models that incorporate mobility data (Miller et al., 2020; Monod et al.,
2021) or link differentiable transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2
lineages to viral mutations (Obermeyer et al., 2022).
Unfortunately for many application areas the broader use
of Bayesian models is hampered by the difficulty of for1

Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Google Research,
Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Martin Jankowiak
<mjankowi@broadinstitute.org>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

mulating scalable inference algorithms. One regime that
has proven particularly challenging is the large data regime.
This is essentially because powerful MCMC methods like
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (Duane et al., 1987; Neal
et al., 2011) are, at least on the face of it, incompatible with
data subsampling (i.e. mini-batching) (Betancourt, 2015).
While considerable effort has gone into developing MCMC
methods that accommodate data subsampling,1 developing
generic MCMC methods that yield high fidelity posterior
approximations while scaling to very large datasets remains
challenging.
For this reason, among others, recent years have seen extensive development of approximate inference methods based
on variational inference (Jordan et al., 1999; Blei et al.,
2017). Besides ‘automatic’ support for data subsampling
(Hoffman et al., 2013; Ranganath et al., 2014), at least for
suitable model classes, variational inference has several additional favorable properties, including support for amortization (Dayan et al., 1995), log evidence estimates, and model
learning, motivating researchers to combine the strengths
of MCMC and variational inference (Salimans et al., 2015;
Hoffman, 2017; Caterini et al., 2018; Ruiz & Titsias, 2019).
Recent work from Geffner & Domke (2021) and Zhang et al.
(2021) offers a particularly elegant formulation of a variational inference method that leverages (unadjusted) HMC as
well as annealed importance sampling (AIS) (Neal, 2001).
Although these are fundamentally variational methods, since
they make use of HMC, which does not itself readily accommodate data subsampling, these methods likewise do
not automatically inherit support for data subsampling. This
is unfortunate because these methods do automatically inherit many of the other nice features of variational inference,
including support for amortization and model learning.
In this work we set out to extend the approach in Geffner &
Domke (2021) and Zhang et al. (2021) to support data subsampling, thus making it applicable to the large data regime.
Our basic strategy is simple and revolves around introducing a surrogate log likelihood that is cheap to evaluate. The
surrogate log likelihood is used to guide HMC dynamics, resulting in a flexible variational distribution that is implicitly
defined via the gradient of the surrogate log likelihood. The
1

See e.g. Dang et al. (2019) and Zhang et al. (2020) for recent
work.

