Individual Preference Stability for Clustering
Saba Ahmadi 1 Pranjal Awasthi 2 Samir Khuller 3 Matthäus Kleindessner 4 Jamie Morgenstern 5
Pattara Sukprasert 3 Ali Vakilian 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a natural notion of individual preference (IP) stability for clustering,
which asks that every data point, on average, is
closer to the points in its own cluster than to the
points in any other cluster. Our notion can be
motivated from several perspectives, including
game theory and algorithmic fairness. We study
several questions related to our proposed notion.
We first show that deciding whether a given data
set allows for an IP-stable clustering in general is
NP-hard. As a result, we explore the design of efficient algorithms for finding IP-stable clusterings
in some restricted metric spaces. We present a
polytime algorithm to find a clustering satisfying
exact IP-stability on the real line, and an efficient
algorithm to find an IP-stable 2-clustering for a
tree metric. We also consider relaxing the stability constraint, i.e., every data point should not
be too far from its own cluster compared to any
other cluster. For this case, we provide polytime
algorithms with different guarantees. We evaluate some of our algorithms and several standard
clustering approaches on real data sets.

1. Introduction
Clustering, a foundational topic in unsupervised learning,
aims to find a partition of a dataset into sets where the intraset similarity is higher than the inter-set similarity. The problem of clustering can be formalized in numerous ways with
different ways of measuring similarity within and between
1
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, USA 2 Google, USA
Northwestern University, USA 4 Amazon Web Services, Germany
5
University of Washington, USA. Correspondence to: S. Ahmadi
<saba@ttic.edu>, P. Awasthi <pranjalawasthi@google.com>,
S.
Khuller
<samir.khuller@northwestern.edu>,
M.
Kleindessner
<matkle@amazon.de>,
J.
Morgenstern
<jamiemmt@cs.washington.edu>,
P. Sukprasert <pattara@u.northwestern.edu>, A. Vakilian <vakilian@ttic.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

sets, such as centroid-based formulations like k-means, kmedian and k-center (e.g., Arthur and Vassilvitskii, 2007),
hierarchical partitionings (e.g., Dasgupta, 2002), or spectral
clustering (e.g., von Luxburg, 2007). All these formulations
have also been considered under additional constraints (e.g.,
Wagstaff et al., 2001); in particular, a recent line of work
studies clustering under various fairness constraints (e.g.,
Chierichetti et al., 2017). Most formulations of clustering
are NP-hard, which has led to both the understanding of approximation algorithms and conditions under which (nearly)
optimal clusterings can be found in computationally efficient ways. Such conditions that have been studied in recent
years are variants of perturbation stability, i.e., small perturbations to the distances do not affect the optimal clustering
(Ackerman and Ben-David, 2009; Awasthi et al., 2012; Bilu
and Linial, 2012), or are variants of approximation stability,
i.e., approximately optimal clusterings according to some
objective are all close to each other (Balcan et al., 2013;
Ostrovsky et al., 2013). In this work, we introduce a distinct
notion of stability in clustering, individual preference stability of a clustering, which measures whether data points can
reduce their individual objective by reassigning themselves
to another cluster.
The study of individual preference (IP) stability, and clusterings which are IP-stable, has a number of motivations
behind it, both in applications and connections to other concepts in computing. For example, clustering can be used
to design curricula for a collection of students, with the
goal that each student is assigned to a cluster with the most
similar learning needs. One might also design personalized
marketing campaigns where customers are first clustered–
the campaign’s personalization will be more effective if
customers have most affinity to the clusters to which they
are assigned. More generally, if one first partitions a dataset
and then designs a collection of interventions or treatments
for each subset, IP stability ensures individuals are best
represented by the cluster they belong to.
This notion has connections to several other concepts studied in computing, both for clustering and for other algorithmic problems. Suppose each data point “belongs” to an
individual, and that individual chooses which cluster she
wants to join to minimize her average distance to points in
that cluster. If her features are fixed (and she cannot change

