Unified Scaling Laws for Routed Language Models

Aidan Clark * 1 Diego de las Casas * 1 Aurelia Guy * 1 Arthur Mensch * 1 Michela Paganini 1 Jordan Hoffmann 1
Bogdan Damoc 1 Blake Hechtman 2 Trevor Cai 1 Sebastian Borgeaud 1 George van den Driessche 1
Eliza Rutherford 1 Tom Hennigan 1 Matthew Johnson 2 Katie Millican 1 Albin Cassirer 1 Chris Jones 1
Chris Jones 1 Elena Buchatskaya 1 David Budden 1 Laurent Sifre 1 Simon Osindero 1 Oriol Vinyals 1
Jack Rae 1 Erich Elsen 1 Koray Kavukcuoglu 1 Karen Simonyan 1

Abstract
The performance of a language model has been
shown to be effectively modeled as a power-law
in its parameter count. Here we study the scaling
behaviors of Routing Networks: architectures that
conditionally use only a subset of their parameters while processing an input. For these models,
parameter count and computational requirement
form two independent axes along which an increase leads to better performance. In this work
we derive and justify scaling laws defined on these
two variables which generalize those known for
standard language models and describe the performance of a wide range of routing architectures
trained via three different techniques. Afterwards
we provide two applications of these laws: first deriving an Effective Parameter Count along which
all models scale at the same rate, and then using
the scaling coefficients to give a quantitative comparison of the three routing techniques considered.
Our analysis derives from an extensive evaluation
of Routing Networks across five orders of magnitude of size, including models with hundreds of
experts and hundreds of billions of parameters.

1. Introduction
It is a commonly held belief that increasing the size of
a neural network leads to better performance, especially
when training on large and diverse real-world datasets. This
vague and debated notion has become increasingly justified
as large empirical studies have shown that the performance
of models on many interesting classes of problems are well
understood as power-laws; where a multiplicative increase
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Aidan Clark <aidan.b.clark@gmail.com>, Diego de las
Cases <diegolascasas@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

in model size leads to an additive reduction in the model’s
loss (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hernandez et al., 2021; Henighan
et al., 2020; Rosenfeld et al., 2019). These relationships are
not well understood, but a key implication is that a sequence
of small1 models can be used both to infer the performance
of models many times more powerful, but also to provide
global information about the scalability of an architecture.
Enter Routing Networks: models with the unusual property that each input interacts with only a subset of the network’s parameters — chosen independently for each datapoint (Bengio et al., 2016; 2013; Denoyer & Gallinari,
2014). For a Routing Network, the number of parameters
is nearly independent from the computational cost of processing a datapoint. This bifurcates the definition of size
and prevents a scaling law in parameters alone from fully
describing the model class. Specific Routing Networks have
been trained successfully at large scales (Fedus et al., 2021;
Du et al., 2021; Artetxe et al., 2021), but the general scaling
behavior is not well understood. In this work we analyze
the behavior of routed language models so that we might
infer the scaling laws that describe their performance.
Key contributions. We analyze three different techniques for training Routing Networks, detailed in §3:
Sinkhorn-BASE, a sparse mixture-of-experts (SMOE) approach modifying BASE (Lewis et al., 2021); non-parametric
HASH Layers (Roller et al., 2021); and routing via Reinforcement Learning (RL - R). With models up to 200 billion
parameters, we observe the following:
1. Routing improves the performance of language models
across all sizes and variants attempted (see Fig. 1).
2. Training a Routing Network with RL (§3.3), a technique used in early routing work (Bengio et al., 2013), is of
comparable effectiveness to state-of-the-art techniques.
3. The performance of all Routing Networks is accurately
described by scaling laws in the number of experts and in
the underlying dense model size (§4) which generalize those
1
Measured as training or inference floating point operations,
devices or time required, financial cost, carbon emissions, etc.

