The dynamics of representation learning in shallow, non-linear autoencoders

Maria Refinetti 1 2 Sebastian Goldt 3

Abstract
Autoencoders are the simplest neural network for
unsupervised learning, and thus an ideal framework for studying feature learning. While a detailed understanding of the dynamics of linear autoencoders has recently been obtained, the study
of non-linear autoencoders has been hindered by
the technical difficulty of handling training data
with non-trivial correlations – a fundamental prerequisite for feature extraction. Here, we study
the dynamics of feature learning in non-linear,
shallow autoencoders. We derive a set of asymptotically exact equations that describe the generalisation dynamics of autoencoders trained with
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in the limit of
high-dimensional inputs. These equations reveal
that autoencoders learn the leading principal components of their inputs sequentially. An analysis
of the long-time dynamics explains the failure of
sigmoidal autoencoders to learn with tied weights,
and highlights the importance of training the bias
in ReLU autoencoders. Building on previous results for linear networks, we analyse a modification of the vanilla SGD algorithm which allows
learning of the exact principal components. Finally, we show that our equations accurately describe the generalisation dynamics of non-linear
autoencoders trained on realistic datasets such
as CIFAR10, thus establishing shallow autoencoders as an instance of the recently observed
Gaussian universality.

1. Introduction
Autoencoders are a class of neural networks trained to reconstruct their inputs by minimising the distance between
an input x ∈ X , and the network output x̂ ∈ X . The key
1
Department of Physics, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris,
France 2 IdePHICS laboratory, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
3
International School of Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy.
Correspondence to: Sebastian Goldt <sgoldt@sissa.it>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

idea for learning good features with autoencoders is to make
the intermediate layer in the middle of the network (significantly) smaller than the input dimension. This “bottleneck”
forces the network to develop a compressed representation
of its inputs, together with an encoder and a decoder. Autoencoders of this type are called undercomplete, see fig. 1,
and provide an ideal framework to study feature learning,
which appears to be a key property of deep learning, yet
remains poorly understood from a theoretical point of view.
How well can shallow autoencoders with a single hidden
layer of neurons perform on a reconstruction task? For linear autoencoders, Eckart & Young (1936) established that
the optimal reconstruction error is obtained by a network
whose weights are given by (a rotation of) the K leading
principal components of the data, i.e. the K leading eigenvectors of the input covariance matrix. The reconstruction error of such a network is therefore called the PCA error. How
linear autoencoders learn these components when trained
using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) was first studied
by Bourlard & Kamp (1988) and Baldi & Hornik (1989). A
series of recent work analysed linear autoencoders in more
detail, focusing on the loss landscape (Kunin et al., 2019),
the convergence and implicit bias of SGD dynamics (Pretorius et al., 2018; Saxe et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2019), and
on recovering the exact principal components (Gidel et al.,
2019; Bao et al., 2020; Oftadeh et al., 2020).
Adding a non-linearity to autoencoders is a key step on the
way to more realistic models of neural networks, which crucially rely on non-linearities in their hidden layers to extract
good features from data. On the other hand, non-linearities
pose a challenge for theoretical analysis. In the context of
high-dimensional models of learning, an additional complication arises from analysing non-linear models trained on
inputs with non-trivial correlations, which are a fundamental
prerequisite for unsupervised learning. The first step in this
direction was taken by Nguyen (2021), who analysed overcomplete autoencoders where the number of hidden neurons
grows polynomially with the input dimension, focusing on
the special case of weight-tied autoencoders, where encoder
and decoder have the same weights.
Here, we leverage recent developments in the analysis
of supervised learning on complex input distributions to
study the learning dynamics of undercomplete, non-linear

