Rich Feature Construction for the Optimization-Generalization Dilemma

Jianyu Zhang 1 David Lopez-Paz 2 Léon Bottou 3 1

Abstract
There often is a dilemma between ease of optimization and robust out-of-distribution (OoD)
generalization. For instance, many OoD methods rely on penalty terms whose optimization is
challenging. They are either too strong to optimize reliably or too weak to achieve their goals.
We propose to initialize the networks with a rich
representation containing a palette of potentially
useful features, ready to be used by even simple models. On the one hand, a rich representation provides a good initialization for the optimizer. On the other hand, it also provides an inductive bias that helps OoD generalization. Such
a representation is constructed with the Rich Feature Construction (RFC) algorithm, also called
the Bonsai algorithm,1 which consists of a succession of training episodes. During discovery
episodes, we craft a multi-objective optimization
criterion and its associated datasets in a manner
that prevents the network from using the features
constructed in the previous iterations. During synthesis episodes, we use knowledge distillation to
force the network to simultaneously represent all
the previously discovered features. Initializing the
networks with Bonsai representations consistently
helps six OoD methods achieve top performance
on C OLORED MNIST benchmark (Arjovsky et al.,
2020). The same technique substantially outperforms comparable results on the Wilds C AME LYON 17 task (Koh et al., 2021), eliminates the
high result variance that plagues other methods,
and makes hyperparameter tuning and model selection more reliable.

1
New York University, New York, NY, USA. 2 Facebook AI
Research, Paris, France. 3 Facebook AI Research, New York, NY,
USA.. Correspondence to: Jianyu Zhang <jianyu@nyu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Bonsai, also known as penjing (tray planting), refers to the art

1. Introduction
The interplay of optimization and generalization plays a
crucial role in deep learning. It also changes nature when
we focus on out-of-distribution (OoD) generalization, that
is when training and testing sets are no longer assumed to
follow the same distribution.
Simple optimization algorithms are surprisingly able to find
uneventful descent paths in the non-convex cost landscape
of deep learning networks (Gu et al., 2021; Sagun et al.,
2017). However they also tend to construct features that
capture spurious correlations (Szegedy et al., 2014; Beery
et al., 2018; Arjovsky et al., 2020; Ilyas et al., 2019). Several recent papers propose to work around this problem by
leveraging multiple training sets that illustrate the possible
changes in distribution. The training algorithm must then
satisfy certain constraints across training sets, usually enforced with additional penalty terms (Arjovsky et al., 2020;
Koyama & Yamaguchi, 2020; Krueger et al., 2020; Pezeshki
et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2021; Rame et al., 2021; Wald et al.,
2021). The resulting optimization problem often turns substantially more challenging than the simple empirical risk
minimization (ERM). In practice, it is often necessary to
schedule the penalty hyper-parameters in a manner that
weakens them so much that they no longer enforce the intended constraints. As a result, when one initializes such
a method with the correct solution, the training process deviates from the constraint set and finds inferior solutions
(Figure 2).
We propose in this paper to work around the difficulties of
the optimization problem by first obtaining a representation
of the input patterns that contains a broad diversity of potentially useful features. Both the ERM and OoD methods can
then easily pick the most useful features, according to the
chosen training cost and constraints, in a much easier way.
The Rich Feature Construction (RFC) algorithm, informally
called the Bonsai algorithm, (Section 4) consists of a succession of training episodes. During the discovery episodes, we
craft a multi-objective optimization criterion that prevents
the network from using the features constructed in the previof growing small trees in trays using obsessive trimming techniques
to impede their growth and produce miniature versions of real-life
trees. Likewise, the RFC algorithm impedes the learning process
in order to obtain diverse representations.

