Online Learning for Min Sum Set Cover and Pandora’s Box

Evangelia Gergatsouli 1 Christos Tzamos 1

Abstract
Two central problems in Stochastic Optimization
are M IN S UM S ET C OVER and PANDORA’ S B OX.
In PANDORA’ S B OX, we are presented with n
boxes, each containing an unknown value and the
goal is to open the boxes in some order to minimize the sum of the search cost and the smallest value found. Given a distribution of value
vectors, we are asked to identify a near-optimal
search order. M IN S UM S ET C OVER corresponds
to the case where values are either 0 or infinity. In this work, we study the case where the
value vectors are not drawn from a distribution
but are presented to a learner in an online fashion.
We present a computationally efficient algorithm
that is constant-competitive against the cost of
the optimal search order. We extend our results
to a bandit setting where only the values of the
boxes opened are revealed to the learner after every round. We also generalize our results to other
commonly studied variants of PANDORA’ S B OX
and M IN S UM S ET C OVER that involve selecting more than a single value subject to a matroid
constraint.

1. Introduction
One of the fundamental problems in stochastic optimization
is PANDORA’ S B OX problem, first introduced by Weitzman
in (Weitzman, 1979). The problem asks to select among
n alternatives, called boxes, one with a low value. In the
stochastic version of the problem, it is assumed that values
in the boxes are drawn from a known distribution and the
actual realization of any box can be revealed at a cost after
inspection.
The goal is to design an algorithm that efficiently searches
1
Department of Computer Sciences, University of WisconsinMadison, Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence to: Evangelia Gergatsouli <evagerg@cs.wisc.edu>, Christos Tzamos
<tzamos@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

among the n alternatives to find a low value while also
paying a low inspection cost. We thus aim to minimize the
sum of the search costs the algorithm pays and the value
of the alternative(s) it chooses in the end. In the standard
version of PANDORA’ S B OX a single value must be chosen,
but we also consider common generalizations that require k
distinct alternatives to be chosen, or alternatives that form a
matroid basis.
While most of the literature has focused on the stochastic
case, where there is a known distribution of values given in
advance, we instead consider an online version of the problem played over T rounds, where in each round a different
realization of values in the boxes is adversarially chosen.
The goal of the learner is to pick a good strategy of opening
boxes in every round that guarantees low regret compared
to choosing in hindsight the optimal policy for the T rounds
from a restricted family of policies.
In this work, we mainly consider policies that fix the order
in which boxes are explored but have free arbitrary stopping
rules. Such policies are called partially-adaptive and are
known to be optimal in many cases, most notably in the
stochastic version where the values of the boxes are drawn
independently. Such policies are also optimal in the special
case of the PANDORA’ S B OX problem where the values in
the boxes are either 0 or ∞. This case is known as the M IN
S UM S ET C OVER problem (MSSC) and is a commonly
studied problem in the area of approximation algorithms.
1.1. Our Results
Our work presents a simple but powerful framework for
designing online learning algorithms for PANDORA’ S B OX,
MSSC and other related problems. Our framework yields
approximately low-regret algorithms for these problems
through a three step process:
1. We first obtain convex relaxations of the instances of
every round.
2. We then apply online-convex optimization to obtain
good fractional solutions to the relaxed instances
achieving low regret.
3. We finally round the fractional solutions to integral
solutions for the original instances at a small multi-

