Meta-Learning Hypothesis Spaces for Sequential Decision-making

Parnian Kassraie 1 Jonas Rothfuss 1 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract
Obtaining reliable, adaptive confidence sets for
prediction functions (hypotheses) is a central
challenge in sequential decision-making tasks,
such as bandits and model-based reinforcement
learning. These confidence sets typically rely on
prior assumptions on the hypothesis space, e.g.,
the known kernel of a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Space (RKHS). Hand-designing such kernels is
error prone, and misspecification may lead to
poor or unsafe performance. In this work, we
propose to meta-learn a kernel from offline data
(M ETA -K E L). For the case where the unknown
kernel is a combination of known base kernels,
we develop an estimator based on structured
sparsity. Under mild conditions, we guarantee
that our estimated RKHS yields valid confidence
sets that, with increasing amounts of offline
data, become as tight as those given the true
unknown kernel. We demonstrate our approach
on the kernelized bandit problem (a.k.a. Bayesian
optimization), where we establish regret bounds
competitive with those given the true kernel. We
also empirically evaluate the effectiveness of our
approach on a Bayesian optimization task.

1. Introduction
A number of well-studied machine learning problems such
as bandits, Bayesian optimization (BO) and model-based
reinforcement learning are characterized by an agent that
sequentially interacts with an unknown, responsive system.
Throughout the interaction, the agent’s goal is to maximize
the cumulative reward based on an unknown underlying
function f . Common to such sequential decision-making
problems is an exploration-exploitation trade-off. That is,
the agent needs to optimize its reward while, at the same
time, learns more about the unknown function f . Confidence sets capture and quantify the uncertainty of the learner
1
ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Parnian Kassraie <pkassraie@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Algorithm (k̂)
Meta-KeL

Agent
Sequential
Decision-making
Task

Offline
Meta-learning
Meta-data

Environment

Oracle (k ∗)

Figure 1. Overview of the described framework with k∗ as the true
kernel function and k̂ as the solution to M ETA -K E L.

about f . Thus, they are an integral tool for directing exploration towards areas of high uncertainty and balancing it
against exploitation. Moreover, in safety-critical applications, confidence sets are used to reason about the safety of
actions. Thus, they are central to efficiency and safety of
exploration. In theoretical analysis of sequential decisionmaking algorithms, a common assumption is that f resides
in an RKHS with a known kernel function. This assumption
allows for the construction of the confidence sets.
In practice, however, the true kernel is unknown and needs
to be hand-crafted based on the problem instance. This is
a delicate task, since the hand-crafted hypothesis space has
to contain the unknown target function f . If this is not the
case, the learner may be over-confident and converge to a
sub-optimal policy, or incorrectly classify actions as safe.
At the same time, we want the chosen hypothesis space to
be as small so that the variance of the associated learner
is low and the agent converges quickly. This constitutes
a dilemma, where we need to trade off efficiency with a
potential loss in consistency.
We approach this dilemma in a data-driven manner. Many
applications of sequential decision-making, such as hyperparameter tuning with BO or online nonlinear control, are
of repetitive nature. Often, there is available data from
similar but not identical tasks which have been solved before.
Therefore, we propose to meta-learn the kernel function,
and thus the RKHS, from offline meta-data. Our method,
Meta-Kernel Learning (M ETA -K E L), works with a generic
(i.e., not necessarily i.i.d.) data model and may be applied
to a variety of sequential decision-making tasks.

