Understanding the Unstable Convergence of Gradient Descent

Kwangjun Ahn 1 2 Jingzhao Zhang 3 Suvrit Sra 1

Abstract
Most existing analyses of (stochastic) gradient
descent rely on the condition that for L-smooth
costs, the step size is less than 2/L. However,
many works have observed that in machine learning applications step sizes often do not fulfill this
condition, yet (stochastic) gradient descent still
converges, albeit in an unstable manner. We investigate this unstable convergence phenomenon
from first principles, and discuss key causes behind it. We also identify its main characteristics,
and how they interrelate based on both theory and
experiments, offering a principled view toward
understanding the phenomenon.

1. Introduction
Gradient descent (GD) runs the iteration
θ t+1 = θ t − η∇f (θ t ) ,
seeking to optimize a cost function f . It also provides
a conceptual foundation for stochastic gradient descent
(SGD), one of the key algorithms in modern machine learning. A vast body of literature that analyzes (S)GD assumes that the cost f is L-smooth (we say f is L-smooth
′
′
′
if ∥∇f (θ) − ∇f (θ )∥ ≤ L∥θ − θ ∥ for all θ, θ ), and
subsequently exploits the associated “descent lemma”:
η
2
∇f (θ t ) .
(1.1)
f (θ t+1 ) ≤ f (θ t ) − η 1 − L
2
To ensure descent via inequality (1.1), the condition
L<

2
,
η

(1.2)

is imposed. This condition ensure that GD decreases the
cost f at each iteration. Whenever condition (1.2) holds, we
call it the “stable” regime in this paper.
1

Department of EECS, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Part
of this work was done while Kwangjun Ahn was visiting the
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, Berkeley, CA, USA.
3
IIIS, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Kwangjun Ahn <kjahn@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2

150
100

1
50

500

1000

1500

500

1000

1500

Figure 1: Example of unstable convergence for training
CIFAR-10 with GD. We follow the experimental setup of
(Cohen et al., 2021); see Experiment 1 for details. We use a
ReLU network. Here, condition (1.2) fails, but the training
loss still (non-monotonically) decreases in the long run.

When the cost is quadratic, condition (1.2) is in fact necessary for stablility: if η > L2 , then GD diverges (see Fact 1).
This observation carries over to most convex optimization
settings and also neural networks when using the neural
tangent kernel approximations (Jacot et al., 2018; Li and
Liang, 2018; Lee et al., 2019). Thus, it is reasonable to
assume condition (1.2) for those analyses. However, for
general nonconvex costs, it is not clear whether the stable
regime condition (1.2) is required or even reasonable.
Recently, it has been observed that GD on neural networks
often violates condition (1.2). More specifically, Cohen
et al. (2021) observe that when we run GD to train a neural
network, the condition (1.2) fails, but contrary to the common wisdom from convex optimization, the training loss
still (non-monotonically) decreases in the long run. See
Figure 1 for an example of this phenomenon. We call this
phenomenon “unstable” convergence.
Unfortunately, very little is known about unstable convergence. The causes and implications of this phenomenon
have not been explored in the literature. More importantly,
the main features as well as the scope of this phenomenon
have not been discussed. Characterizing the main features is
important because it not only furnishes better understanding
of this bizarre phenomenon, but also lays a foundation for
future theoretical studies; especially, the main characteristics of this phenomenon will help build a more practical
theory of the neural network optimization.
Contributions. In light of the above motivation, the main
contributions of this paper are as follows:

