How Tempering Fixes Data Augmentation in Bayesian Neural Networks

Gregor Bachmann * 1 Lorenzo Noci * 1 Thomas Hofmann 1

Abstract

While Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) provide
a sound and principled alternative to standard
neural networks, an artificial sharpening of the
posterior usually needs to be applied to reach
comparable performance. This is in stark contrast to theory, dictating that given an adequate
prior and a well-specified model, the untempered
Bayesian posterior should achieve optimal performance. Despite the community’s extensive efforts,
the observed gains in performance still remain disputed with several plausible causes pointing at its
origin. While data augmentation has been empirically recognized as one of the main drivers of
this effect, a theoretical account of its role, on
the other hand, is largely missing. In this work
we identify two interlaced factors concurrently
influencing the strength of the cold posterior effect, namely the correlated nature of augmentations and the degree of invariance of the employed
model to such transformations. By theoretically
analyzing simplified settings, we prove that tempering implicitly reduces the misspecification arising from modeling augmentations as i.i.d. data.
The temperature mimics the role of the effective
sample size, reflecting the gain in information
provided by the augmentations. We corroborate
our theoretical findings with extensive empirical
evaluations, scaling to realistic BNNs. By relying on the framework of group convolutions, we
experiment with models of varying inherent degree of invariance, confirming its hypothesized
relationship with the optimal temperature.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Gregor Bachmann <gregor.bachmann@inf.ethz.ch>, Lorenzo Noci
<lorenzo.noci@inf.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Deep learning has lead to tremendous advances in a variety
of tasks such as computer vision (He et al., 2016), natural
language processing (Devlin et al., 2019) and reinforcement
learning (Silver et al., 2016) to name but a few. While
such deep models exhibit astonishing predictive power, their
black-box nature renders uncertainty estimation very difficult and often leads to over-confident decisions (Nguyen
et al., 2015; Szegedy et al., 2013). To overcome this difficulty, Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) have been introduced, combining the functional form of deep models with
the framework of Bayesian inference (Graves, 2011b; Blundell et al., 2015; Hernández-Lobato & Adams, 2015). By
forming a posterior distribution over the model parameters
instead of a point estimate, uncertainty estimations become
significantly better calibrated, leading to more informed decisions in safety-critical applications. Moreover, due to the
multi-modal nature of neural loss landscapes (Garipov et al.,
2018; Draxler et al., 2018), Bayesian models are particularly
well-suited as they naturally form an ensemble of models
(Wilson, 2020).
Recently however, Wenzel et al. (2020) observed that BNNs
evaluated on standard benchmarks yield suboptimal performance, even being outperformed significantly by a simple SGD baseline. They noticed on the other hand that
an artificial sharpening of the posterior distribution (socalled cold posteriors) leads to very strong performance.
The sub-optimality of Bayesian models is worrisome as the
Bayesian framework is equipped with theoretical guarantees
regarding its optimality (Kolmogorov, 1960; Savage, 1954;
Jaynes, 2003). As a consequence, a multitude of works
have been put forth, exploring different potential causes
of this so-called cold posterior effect (CPE), including the
curated nature of standard datasets (Aitchison, 2021), the
non-Bayesian nature of data augmentation (Izmailov et al.,
2021) as well as possibly poorly chosen priors (Noci et al.,
2021; Fortuin et al., 2021). Data augmentation has been
observed to play a particularly pronounced role, being instrumental in causing the cold posterior effect in a variety of
settings (Izmailov et al., 2021; Noci et al., 2021). Nabarro
et al. (2021) develop a formalism to incorporate data augmentation into the model but unfortunately the CPE still
persists. In this work we aim to bridge this gap by mathematically analyzing the effect of data augmentation on the

