A DAG RAD Avoids Saddle Points
Kimon Antonakopoulos 1 2 Panayotis Mertikopoulos 3 4 Georgios Piliouras 5 Xiao Wang 6

Abstract
Adaptive first-order methods in optimization are
prominent in machine learning and data science
owing to their ability to automatically adapt to the
landscape of the function being optimized. However, their convergence guarantees are typically
stated in terms of vanishing gradient norms, which
leaves open the issue of converging to undesirable
saddle points (or even local maximizers). In this
paper, we focus on the A DAG RAD family of algorithms – with scalar, diagonal or full-matrix
preconditioning – and we examine the question
of whether the method’s trajectories avoid saddle
points. A major challenge that arises here is that
A DAG RAD’s step-size (or, more accurately, the
method’s preconditioner) evolves over time in a
filtration-dependent way, i.e., as a function of all
gradients observed in earlier iterations; as a result,
avoidance results for methods with a constant or
vanishing step-size do not apply. We resolve this
challenge by combining a series of step-size stabilization arguments with a recursive representation
of the A DAG RAD preconditioner that allows us to
employ stable manifold techniques and ultimately
show that the induced trajectories avoid saddle
points from almost any initial condition.

1

Introduction

Deep learning architectures have brought forth a revolution
in numerous application areas, from computer vision and
recommender systems, to speech recognition and natural
language processing [6, 19]. Although gradient descent (and
its variants) is the mainstay training tool for such models,
Authors in alphabetical order. 1 Laboratory for Information and
Inference Systems, IEM, STI, EPFL, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
2
This work was done when KA was with Univ. Grenoble Alpes,
CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France. 3 Univ.
Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France 4 Criteo AI Lab 5 Singapore University of Technology
and Design 6 Shanghai University of Finance and Economics. Correspondence to: Xiao Wang <wangxiao@sufe.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

it comes with a significant inherent drawback: the gradient
steps taken at each iteration are essentially “Markovian”,
in the sense that information gained about the model’s loss
landscape over time is not taken into account when performing an update. For this reason, adaptive gradient algorithms
have emerged as an essential ingredient of contemporary
machine learning models and architectures: by incorporating data and knowledge from gradients observed in earlier
iterations, adaptive methods perform more informed gradient steps in later iterations, and they are able to adapt
efficiently to the landscape of the function being optimized.
The blueprint for most adaptive first-order methods – including A DAM [17], A DAM NC [32], AMSG RAD [32], and
RMSP ROP – is the A DAG RAD family of algorithms that
was introduced concurrently by Duchi et al. [10] and McMahan & Streeter [24]. In the unconstrained case (which is
the playground of choice for most adaptive methods of
this type), the A DAG RAD algorithm proceeds as a gradient
descent method with a matrix-valued step-size – typically
referred to as a preconditioner – which is defined recursively by taking the square root of the sum of squares of
past gradients (possibly tensored, depending on the specific
variant of the method). Owing to this clever preconditioning
mechanism, A DAG RAD excels in solving convex-structured
problems with sparse gradients, while remaining competitive in environments with full (dense) gradients.
Specifically, in convex problems with Lipschitz
continuous
√
objectives, A DAG RAD attains an O(1/ T ) value convergence rate after T queries to a first-order oracle (stochastic
or deterministic). This rate improves to O(log T /T ) if the
problem’s objective is strongly convex [10],1 and to O(1/T )
if the problem’s objective is Lipschitz smooth [1, 2, 22].2 In
this regard, A DAG RAD is not order-optimal because it does
not attain the iconic O(1/T 2 ) accelerated convergence rate
of Nesterov [26]; however, other adaptive methods based on
the A DAG RAD template do achieve this – like the ACCELE G RAD proposal of [22], or the more recent U NIX G RAD and
U NDER G RAD algorithms by [16] and [4, 34] respectively.
In the non-convex world (which is of greater interest to
1
Or if the noise in the method’s gradient oracle is a relative
percentage of the gradient norm, cf. the recent paper [3].
2
Importantly, the first of these rates continues to hold in the
stochastic case, but the second does not.

