Disentangling Disease-related Representation from Obscure
for Disease Prediction
Churan Wang 1 2 Fei Gao 3 Fandong Zhang 1 Fangwei Zhong 4 Yizhou Yu 5 6 Yizhou Wang 2 7

Abstract
Disease-related representations play a crucial role
in image-based disease prediction such as cancer
diagnosis, due to its considerable generalization
capacity. However, it is still a challenge to identify lesion characteristics in obscured images, as
many lesions are obscured by other tissues. In this
paper, to learn the representations for identifying
obscured lesions, we propose a disentanglement
learning strategy under the guidance of alpha
blending generation in an encoder-decoder framework (DAB-Net). Specifically, we take mammogram mass benign/malignant classification as an
example. In our framework, composite obscured
mass images are generated by alpha blending and
then explicitly disentangled into disease-related
mass features and interference glands features.
To achieve disentanglement learning, features of
these two parts are decoded to reconstruct the
mass and the glands with corresponding reconstruction losses, and only disease-related mass features are fed into the classifier for disease prediction. Experimental results on one public dataset
DDSM and three in-house datasets demonstrate
that the proposed strategy can achieve state-of-theart performance. DAB-Net achieves substantial
improvements of 3.9%∼4.4% AUC in obscured
cases. Besides, the visualization analysis shows
the model can better disentangle the mass and
glands in the obscured image, suggesting the effectiveness of our solution in exploring the hidden
characteristics in this challenging problem.
1

Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer
Science, Peking University, Beijing,China 3 School of Computer
Science, Peking University, Beijing, China 4 School of Artificial
Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China 5 AI lab, Deepwise
Healthcare, Beijing, China 6 Department of Computer Science,
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 7 Inst. for Artificial
Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Fangwei Zhong <zfw1226@gmail.com>.

2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Clear Mass

Obscured Mass

Normal Glands

Figure 1. Masses with different obscured degrees. Column1: the
mass is clearer when overlaid by fatty tissues; Column2: masses
(marked by the red rectangles) are hidden in glands due to that
the dense glands and the mass both look white on mammograms;
Column3: the normal glands with diverse appearances and density,
which can make masses with various obscured degrees.

1. Introduction
For disease benign/malignant diagnosis, exploring the
disease-related representations is essential to the clinical
practice. It can not only help to promote trustworthiness
from patients but also to provide interpretability for clinicians (Wang et al., 2021a). However, in clinical practice, a
considerable proportion of lesions are obscured by other
normal tissues (Gassert et al., 2021; Diekmann & Bick,
2007) such as glandular and fibrous tissues, especially in the
imaging modality of X-ray with the principle of projection
overlay imaging as shown in the 2nd column in Fig. 1. As a
result, for the task of image-based lesions (Dai et al., 2018;
Liu et al., 2019) or disease characteristics identification (Li
et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020), a common
obstacle is formed, which makes lesion attributes more difficult to be recognized. For this problem, the key is to find a
way to eliminate the effect of redundant content (interference of other tissues) and mine the essential content
(disease-related features) hidden in the image.

