Parametric Visual Program Induction with Function Modularization

Xuguang Duan 1 Xin Wang 1 Ziwei Zhang 1 Wenwu Zhu 1

Abstract
Generating programs to describe visual observations has gained much research attention recently.
However, most of the existing approaches are
based on non-parametric primitive functions, making them unable to handle complex visual scenes
involving many attributes and details. In this paper, we propose the concept of parametric visual
program induction. Learning to generate parametric programs for visual scenes is challenging
due to the huge number of function variants and
the complex function correlations. To solve these
challenges, we propose the method of function
modularization, capable of dealing with numerous function variants and complex correlations.
Specifically, we model each parametric function
as a multi-head self-contained neural module to
cover different function variants. Moreover, to
eliminate the complex correlations between functions, we propose the hierarchical heterogeneous
Monto-Carlo tree search (H2MCTS) algorithm
which can provide high-quality uncorrelated supervision during training, and serve as an efficient
searching technique during testing. We demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method on
three visual program induction datasets involving parametric primitive functions. Experimental
results show that our proposed model is able to
significantly outperform the state-of-the-art baseline methods in terms of generating accurate programs.

1. Introduction
Studying how to generate computer-executable programs is
one of the core interests of the AI community (Waldinger
& Lee, 1969; Manna & Waldinger, 1975), and has drawn
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to:
Xin Wang <xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wenwu Zhu
<wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

while(noMarkersPresent){
putMarker()
move()
turnLeft()
}

(a) non-parametric function, no parameter, no variant.
line(lx=1,ty=8,rx=9,by=8,arrow=‘LEFT’)
line(lx=9,ty=1,rx=9,by=8,arrow=‘LEFT’)
for (i = [1, 2, 3]){
rectangle(
lx=2i+1,ty=6-i,rx=2i+2,by=8
)
}

(b) parametric function, many parameters, more than 104 variants.

Figure 1. (a): An example of the visual program induction task
that only generates non-parametric programs, within which, each
function has only one variant, and could be modeled as a symbolic
token. (b): An example of the parametric visual program induction
task studied in this paper, where parametric primitive functions
with many more variants are needed to describe the complex visual
scene. However, it is hard to tackle such many function variants.

lots of recent interests in the visual domain thanks to deep
learning (Ellis et al., 2020). By leveraging powerful deep
models, these works can successfully describe the logic
behind visual games (Sun et al., 2018), learn spatial patterns
hidden in images (Young et al., 2019), or conduct neuralsymbolic reasoning (Yi et al., 2018).
Despite their enormous success, most of the existing approaches are based on non-parametric primitive functions,
failing to meet the requirement of the increasing complexity
of visual observations, as well as the increasing elaboration
of programs. In this paper, we are the first to propose the
concept of Parametric Visual Program Induction, i.e.,
generating programs with parametric primitive functions
for complex visual observations, to the best of our knowledge. By leveraging parametric primitive functions, we can
generate much more detailed programs to describe both the
hidden logic and visual details.
However, the challenges for solving parametric program
induction are two folds. First, the action space for a
single function can be huge. Compared with basic nonparametric primitive functions, the parametric primitive
functions always have several heterogeneous parameters,
resulting in a huge number of function variants. For example, in Figure 1(a), a basic visual program induction task
may contain simple primitive functions such as move(),

