Nonparametric Embeddings of Sparse High-Order Interaction Events

Zheng Wang * 1 Yiming Xu * 2 Conor Tillinghast 2 Shibo Li 1 Akil Narayan 2 3 Shandian Zhe 1

Abstract
High-order interaction events are common in realworld applications. Learning embeddings that encode the complex relationships of the participants
from these events is of great importance in knowledge mining and predictive tasks. Despite the
success of existing approaches, e.g., Poisson tensor factorization, they ignore the sparse structure
underlying the data, namely the occurred interactions are far less than the possible interactions
among all the participants. In this paper, we propose Nonparametric Embeddings of Sparse Highorder interaction events (NESH). We hybridize
a sparse hypergraph (tensor) process and a matrix Gaussian process to capture both the asymptotic structural sparsity within the interactions and
nonlinear temporal relationships between the participants. We prove strong asymptotic bounds
(including both a lower and an upper bound) of
the sparsity ratio, which reveals the asymptotic
properties of the sampled structure. We use batchnormalization, stick-breaking construction and
sparse variational GP approximations to develop
an efficient, scalable model inference algorithm.
We demonstrate the advantage of our approach in
several real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Many real-world applications are filled with interaction
events between multiple entities or objects, e.g., the purchases happened among customers, products and shopping
pages at Amazon.com, and tweeting between twitter users
and messages. Embedding these events, namely, learning
a representation of the participant objects to encode their
complex relationships, is of great importance and interest,
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computing, University of Utah
Department of Mathematics, University of Utah 3 Scientific Computing and Imaging (SCI) Institute, University of Utah. Correspondence to: Shandian Zhe <zhe@cs.utah.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

in discovering hidden patterns from data, e.g., clusters and
outliers, and performing downstream tasks, such as recommendation and online advertising.
While Poisson tensor factorization is a popular framework
for the representation learning of those events, current methods, e.g., (Chi and Kolda, 2012; Hansen et al., 2015; Hu
et al., 2015b; Schein et al., 2015; 2016; 2019), are mostly
based on a multilinear factorization form, e.g., (Tucker,
1966; Harshman, 1970), and therefore might be inadequate
to estimate complex, nonlinear temporal relationships in
data. More important, existing methods overlook the structural sparsity underlying these events. That is, the observed
interactions are far less than all the possible interactions
among the participants (e.g., 0.01%). Many factorization
models rely on tensor algebras and demand all the tensor
entries (i.e., interactions) should be observed (Kolda and
Bader, 2009; Kang et al., 2012; Choi and Vishwanathan,
2014). Even for those entry-wise factorization models (Rai
et al., 2014; Zhao et al., 2015; Du et al., 2018), from the
Bayesian viewpoint, they are equivalent to first generating
the entire tensor and then marginalizing out the unobserved
entries. In practice, however, the observed interactions are
often very sparse, and their proportion can get even smaller
with the increase of objects. For example, in online shopping, with the growth of users and items, the number of
actual purchases (while growing) takes a smaller percentage
of all possible purchases, i.e., all (user, item, shopping-page)
combinations, because the latter grows much faster.
In this paper, we propose NESH, a novel nonparametric
Poisson factorization approach for high-order interaction
events embedding. Not only does NESH flexibly estimate
various nonlinear temporal relationships of the participants,
it also can capture structural sparsity within the present
interactions, absorbing both the structural traits and hidden
relationships into the embeddings. Our major contributions
are the following:
• Model. We hybridize the recent sparse tensor (hypergraph) processes (STP) (Tillinghast and Zhe, 2021) and
matrix Gaussian processes (MGP) to develop a sparse
event model, where the embeddings are in charge of
both generating the interactions and modulating the
event rates, hence can jointly encode the temporal relationships and sparse structure knowledge.

