Approximately Equivariant Networks for Imperfectly Symmetric Dynamics

Rui Wang * 1 Robin Walters * 2 Rose Yu 1

Abstract
Incorporating symmetry as an inductive bias into
neural network architecture has led to improvements in generalization, data efficiency, and physical consistency in dynamics modeling. Methods such as CNNs or equivariant neural networks
use weight tying to enforce symmetries such as
shift invariance or rotational equivariance. However, despite the fact that physical laws obey many
symmetries, real-world dynamical data rarely conforms to strict mathematical symmetry either due
to noisy or incomplete data or to symmetry breaking features in the underlying dynamical system.
We explore approximately equivariant networks
which are biased towards preserving symmetry
but are not strictly constrained to do so. By relaxing equivariance constraints, we find that our
models can outperform both baselines with no
symmetry bias and baselines with overly strict
symmetry in both simulated turbulence domains
and real-world multi-stream jet flow.

Figure 1: Left: When symmetry is a good inductive bias,
prediction performance increases as equivariance or invariance is imposed in the model. But real-world data is very
rarely perfectly symmetric, and so relaxing the strict constraint in equivariant networks to balance inductive bias and
expressivity can further improve predictive performance.
Right: Highly flexible models have trouble achieving zero
equivariance error without the guide of appropriate symmetry biases when the data is symmetric. Perfectly equivariant
models maintain zero equivariance error, which is overly
restricted when data is not perfectly symmetric. An ideal
model for real world dynamics should be approximately
equivariant and automatically learn the correct amount of
symmetry in the data.

1. Introduction
Symmetry and equivariance are fundamental to the success of deep learning (Bronstein et al., 2021). The canonical examples are translation invariance in convolutional
layers (Fukushima & Miyake, 1982; LeCun et al., 1989;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012), and permutation invariance in
graph neural networks (Bruna et al., 2013; Battaglia et al.,
2018; Maron et al., 2018). Recently, equivariant networks,
which encode symmetry information in network architectures, have gained significant attention for modeling structured and complex data (Ravanbakhsh et al., 2017; Zaheer
et al., 2017; Kondor & Trivedi, 2018; Cohen & Welling,
2016a; Worrall et al., 2017; Thomas et al., 2018; Cohen
et al., 2018; Maron et al., 2020; Walters et al., 2021).
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California San Diego
Northeastern University. Correspondence to: Rui Wang
<ruw020@ucsd.edu>.
2

th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

However, existing equivariant networks assume perfect symmetry in the data. The network is approximating a function that is strictly invariant or equivariant under a given
group action. However, real-world data are very rarely perfectly symmetric. For example, in turbulence modeling,
even though the governing equations of turbulence satisfy
many different symmetries such as scale invariance (Holmes
et al., 2012), effects such as varying external forces, certain boundary conditions, or the presence of missing values
would break these symmetries to varying degrees. This
significantly hinders the potential applications of equivariant networks. Approximately equivariant networks could
outperform both strictly equivariant networks and highly
flexible models in learning many dynamics in the real world,
as shown in Figure 1.
Relaxing the rigid assumption in equivariant networks to
balance inductive bias and expressivity in deep learning
has been the pursuit of a few recent works. For example,
Elsayed et al. (2020) showed that spatial invariance can be

