Continual Repeated Annealed Flow Transport Monte Carlo

Alexander G. D. G. Matthews 1 Michael Arbel 2 Danilo J. Rezende 1 Arnaud Doucet 1

Abstract
We propose Continual Repeated Annealed Flow
Transport Monte Carlo (CRAFT), a method that
combines a sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) sampler (itself a generalization of Annealed Importance Sampling) with variational inference using normalizing flows. The normalizing flows
are directly trained to transport between annealing temperatures using a KL divergence for each
transition. This optimization objective is itself
estimated using the normalizing flow/SMC approximation. We show conceptually and using multiple empirical examples that CRAFT
improves on Annealed Flow Transport Monte
Carlo (Arbel et al., 2021), on which it builds
and also on Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
based Stochastic Normalizing Flows (Wu et al.,
2020). By incorporating CRAFT within particle
MCMC, we show that such learnt samplers can
achieve impressively accurate results on a challenging lattice field theory example.

1. Introduction
There are few algorithmic problems richer or more fundamental than the task of drawing samples from an unnormalized distribution and approximating its normalizing constant. In this paper we combine two important methods
for this task specifically Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC)
(Del Moral et al., 2006) and variational inference with Normalizing flows (NFs) (Rezende and Mohamed, 2015).
The first of these components, SMC samplers, are an importance sampling based algorithm. They are a principled
way to combine annealing, resampling and Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) and as such enjoy continuing popularity (Dai et al., 2020). One potential disadvantage of
1
DeepMind 2 Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS.
Correspondence to:
Alexander G. D. G. Matthews
<alexmatthews@google.com>, Arnaud Doucet <arnauddoucet@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

SMC samplers is that at each successive temperature step
in a SMC sampler there is importance sampling- albeit between adjacent distributions. For high dimensional target
distributions this can lead either to estimators with high error or require many temperatures. Another potential disadvantage is that for finite particle numbers, SMC estimates
of expectation w.r.t. the target distribution are biased. This
can be mitigated by using the SMC sampler inside a Particle MCMC outer loop (Andrieu et al., 2010) at the cost
of adding repeated SMC sampler calls. It is particularly
desirable in this Particle MCMC context for the base SMC
sampler to be fast and output low variance estimates of the
normalizing constant.
The other component of our method is variational inference
with NFs. Flow methods learn a differentiable invertible
transformation (diffeomorphism) typically with a tractable
Jacobian (Papamakarios et al., 2021). The learnt mappings
are both flexible and fast to evaluate but there are still some
challenges around using flows. The tractability of training
with reverse Kullback–Leibler divergence comes at the cost
of its well known mode seeking behaviour. Further placing
the full burden of modelling on a parameterized flow can
lead to high memory usage in contrast to non-parametric
sampling algorithms. Finally, as diffeomorphisms, flows
preserve topological properties of their input. This property can represent a challenge whenever there is topological
mismatch between the, typically, simple base distribution
and the complex target (Cornish et al., 2020).
Methods combining annealed samplers with normalizing
flows have the potential to fix the limitations of each component part. The use of flows can reduce the variance
from importance sampling. The MCMC steps can reduce
the topological and representational burden on the flows.
Used correctly, annealing can reduce the mode seeking behaviour of the variational objective. Resampling can be
used to focus computation on promising samples. The idea
of combining fixed transformations with annealing goes
back as far as (Vaikuntanathan and Jarzynski, 2011). It
is the training of the flows that still presents a challenge
and the reason that such combined approaches have not met
their full potential. Two recent papers target this problem
(Wu et al., 2020; Arbel et al., 2021), but as we shall relate,
neither is entirely satisfactory or as well suited to the task
as the algorithm we propose.

