3D Infomax improves GNNs for Molecular Property Prediction

Hannes Stärk * 1 Dominique Beaini 2 Gabriele Corso 1 Prudencio Tossou 2 Christian Dallago 3
Stephan Günnemann 3 Pietro Liò 4

Abstract
Molecular property prediction is one of the fastestgrowing applications of deep learning with critical real-world impacts. However, although the 3D
molecular graph structure is necessary for models
to achieve strong performance on many tasks, it is
infeasible to obtain 3D structures at the scale required by many real-world applications. To tackle
this issue, we propose to use existing 3D molecular datasets to pre-train a model to reason about
the geometry of molecules given only their 2D
molecular graphs. Our method, called 3D Infomax, maximizes the mutual information between
learned 3D summary vectors and the representations of a graph neural network (GNN). During
fine-tuning on molecules with unknown geometry, the GNN is still able to produce implicit 3D
information and uses it for downstream tasks. We
show that 3D Infomax provides significant improvements for a wide range of properties, including a 22% average MAE reduction on QM9 quantum mechanical properties. Moreover, the learned
representations can be effectively transferred between datasets in different molecular spaces.

1. Introduction
The understanding of molecular and quantum chemistry is a
rapidly growing area for deep learning, with models having
direct real-world impacts in quantum chemistry (Dral, 2020),
protein structure prediction (Jumper et al., 2021), materials
science (Schmidt et al., 2019), and drug discovery (Stokes
et al., 2020). In particular, for the task of molecular property
prediction, GNNs have had great success (Yang et al., 2019).
*
Equal contribution 1 EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA, USA 2 Valence Discovery, Montreal,
CA 3 Department of Informatics, Technical University of Munich, DE 4 Department of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: Hannes Stärk
<hstark@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

GNNs operate on the molecular graph by updating each
atom’s representation based on the atoms connected to it
via covalent bonds. However, these models reason poorly
about other important interatomic forces that depend on the
atoms’ relative positions in space. Previous works showed
that using the atoms’ 3D positions improves the accuracy of
molecular property prediction (Schütt et al., 2017; Klicpera
et al., 2020b; Liu et al., 2021; Klicpera et al., 2021).
However, using classical molecular dynamics simulations
to explicitly compute a molecule’s geometry before predicting its properties is computationally intractable for many
real-world applications. Even recent ML methods for conformation generation (Xu et al., 2021a; Shi et al., 2021;
Ganea et al., 2021) are still too slow for large-scale applications. This issue, as it is summarized in Figure 1, is the
motivation for our method.
Our Solution: 3D Infomax. We propose to pre-train a
GNN to encode implicit 3D information in its latent vectors
using publicly available molecular structures. In particular,
our method, 3D Infomax, pretrains a GNN by maximizing
the mutual information (MI) between its embedding of a
2D molecular graph and a learned representation of the
3D graph. This way, the GNN learns to embed latent 3D
information using only the information given by the 2D
molecular graphs. After pre-training, the weights can be
transferred and fine-tuned on molecular tasks where no 3D
information is available. For those molecules, the GNN is
still able to produce implicit 3D information that can be
used to inform property predictions.
Several other self-supervised learning (SSL) methods that
do not use 3D information have been proposed and evaluated
to pre-train GNNs and obtain better property predictions
after fine-tuning (Hu et al., 2020b; You et al., 2020; Xu
et al., 2021b). These often rely on augmentations (such
as removing atoms) that significantly alter the molecules
while assuming that their properties do not change. Meanwhile, 3D Infomax pre-training teaches the model to reason
about how atoms interact in space, which is a principled and
generalizable form of information.
We analyze our method’s performance by pre-training with
multiple 3D datasets before fine-tuning on quantum mechanical properties and evaluating the generalization abilities of

