Active Nearest Neighbor Regression Through Delaunay Refinement

Alexander Kravberg * 1 Giovanni Luca Marchetti * 1 Vladislav Polianskii * 1 Anastasiia Varava 2
Florian T. Pokorny 1 Danica Kragic 1

Abstract
We introduce an algorithm for active function approximation based on nearest neighbor regression.
Our Active Nearest Neighbor Regressor (ANNR)
relies on the Voronoi-Delaunay framework from
computational geometry to subdivide the space
into cells with constant estimated function value
and select novel query points in a way that takes
the geometry of the function graph into account.
We consider the recent state-of-the-art active function approximator called DEFER, which is based
on incremental rectangular partitioning of the
space, as the main baseline. The ANNR addresses
a number of limitations that arise from the space
subdivision strategy used in DEFER. We provide
a computationally efficient implementation of our
method, as well as theoretical halting guarantees.
Empirical results show that ANNR outperforms
the baseline for both closed-form functions and
real-world examples, such as gravitational wave
parameter inference and exploration of the latent
space of a generative model.

1. Introduction
The need to actively approximate a function by iteratively
querying novel points from its domain appears in a variety of
theoretical and experimental areas, such as modern physics
and astronomy (Ashton et al., 2019; Thrane & Talbot, 2019),
chemistry (Gubaev et al., 2018; Ramakrishnan et al., 2015)
and density estimation (Sung & Niyogi, 1995; Järvenpää
et al., 2019; Kandasamy et al., 2015). Typically, the function to be approximated is not explicitly known, but can be
evaluated at arbitrary points from its domain. Such formulation poses two intertwined problems: selecting points for
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm,
Sweden. 2 No affiliation. Correspondence to: Giovanni Luca
Marchetti <glma@kth.se>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: The ANNR progressively approximating a Gaussian function. The approximation is depicted in blue-scale,
with the ground-truth function plotted in the lower-right
corner. The Delaunay triangulation is depicted in black as
well.

evaluation (queries), and performing interpolation given a
dataset with known function values. For the former, naive
approaches such as sampling uniformly from the domain
are computationally infeasible, especially for sparse and
high-dimensional functions. Function evaluation is often
expensive in real-life applications, as querying a single data
point might require running a time- or resource-consuming
experiment. It is thus crucial to design efficient strategies
for selecting points to evaluate the function upon.
Recently, a scalable function approximator employing active
querying has been proposed under the name DEFER (Bodin
et al., 2021). It relies on a rectangular partitioning of the
ambient space with the datapoints being the centers of the
partitions, and approximates the (density) function piecewise constantly on each rectangle. DEFER outperforms
state-of-the-art sampling methods in parameter inference
tasks as well as in arbitrary function approximation. It is
worth noting that despite Bodin et al. (2021) generally address density estimation problems, DEFER is effectively an
active function approximator and differs from traditional
density estimators (Altman, 1992) that are designed for

