Tranception: Protein Fitness Prediction with Autoregressive
Transformers and Inference-time Retrieval
Pascal Notin 1 Mafalda Dias 2 Jonathan Frazer 2 Javier Marchena-Hurtado 2 Aidan Gomez 1 3
Debora S. Marks 2 Yarin Gal 1

Abstract
The ability to accurately model the fitness landscape of protein sequences is critical to a wide
range of applications, from quantifying the effects
of human variants on disease likelihood, to predicting immune-escape mutations in viruses and
designing novel biotherapeutic proteins. Deep
generative models of protein sequences trained on
multiple sequence alignments have been the most
successful approaches so far to address these tasks.
The performance of these methods is however
contingent on the availability of sufficiently deep
and diverse alignments for reliable training. Their
potential scope is thus limited by the fact many
protein families are hard, if not impossible, to
align. Large language models trained on massive
quantities of non-aligned protein sequences from
diverse families address these problems and show
potential to eventually bridge the performance
gap. We introduce Tranception, a novel transformer architecture leveraging autoregressive predictions and retrieval of homologous sequences
at inference to achieve state-of-the-art fitness prediction performance. Given its markedly higher
performance on multiple mutants, robustness to
shallow alignments and ability to score indels, our
approach offers significant gain of scope over existing approaches. To enable more rigorous model
testing across a broader range of protein families,
we develop ProteinGym – an extensive set of multiplexed assays of variant effects, substantially
increasing both the number and diversity of assays compared to existing benchmarks.
Equal senior authorship 1 OATML Group, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 Marks Group,
Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA 3 Cohere, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to: Pascal
Notin <pascal.notin@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Unsupervised models predicting the effects of mutations
in protein sequences are emerging as central tools in drug
design, pathogen forecasting, identification of disease causing variants and more. Several modeling approaches have
been introduced in recent years, offering various trade-offs
in terms of performance, diversity of proteins which can
be modelled and types of sequence variation which can be
scored. Current state-of-the-art methods for predicting the
effect of single amino acid substitutions are trained on a
multiple sequence alignment (MSA) for each protein sequence or domain of interest. In this context, MSAs serve
two purposes. First, they act as a data acquisition tool by
identifying sequences related to the target in a large protein database, in order to then train a model on a relevant
set of sequences. Second, they align sequences by modelling insertions, deletions and substitutions, resulting in a
coordinate system which enables the amino acid at a given
position to be compared across the training set. While training models on protein-specific alignments has been shown
to be an effective approach for thousands of proteins (Frazer
et al., 2021) it nevertheless brings severe limitations. For instance, such models can not make predictions for sequences
which are incompatible with the coordinate system of the
MSA used in training (eg., insertions and deletions), thereby
limiting scope. Additionally, a large fraction of the proteome corresponds to regions that can not be aligned such
as so-called disordered regions – around half of all human
proteins contain regions of at least 40 amino acids classified
as disordered (Radivojac et al., 2004; Toth-Petroczy et al.,
2016). Even when alignments are accessible, the protein
function might be taxa specific, and the MSA algorithm may
not retrieve a large enough set of homologous sequences
for model training. Alignment-based models may be relatively sensitive to the characteristics of the MSAs they are
trained on – including the choice of hyperparameters used
to retrieve these MSAs. Lastly, there is a lack of information sharing across models that are independently trained on
different data subsets. Recently, language models trained
on large quantities of non-aligned (Meier et al., 2021) or
aligned (Rao et al., 2021) protein sequences have made
first steps towards addressing these issues. However, mod-

