Domain Adaptation for Time Series Forecasting via Attention Sharing

Xiaoyong Jin 1 Youngsuk Park 2 Danielle C. Maddix 2 Hao Wang 3 Yuyang Wang 2

Abstract

Recently, deep neural networks have gained increasing popularity in the field of time series forecasting. A primary reason for their success is
their ability to effectively capture complex temporal dynamics across multiple related time series. The advantages of these deep forecasters
only start to emerge in the presence of a sufficient amount of data. This poses a challenge for
typical forecasting problems in practice, where
there is a limited number of time series or observations per time series, or both. To cope with this
data scarcity issue, we propose a novel domain
adaptation framework, Domain Adaptation Forecaster (DAF). DAF leverages statistical strengths
from a relevant domain with abundant data samples (source) to improve the performance on the
domain of interest with limited data (target). In
particular, we use an attention-based shared module with a domain discriminator across domains
and private modules for individual domains. We
induce domain-invariant latent features (queries
and keys) and retrain domain-specific features
(values) simultaneously to enable joint training of
forecasters on source and target domains. A main
insight is that our design of aligning keys allows
the target domain to leverage source time series
even with different characteristics. Extensive experiments on various domains demonstrate that
our proposed method outperforms state-of-theart baselines on synthetic and real-world datasets,
and ablation studies verify the effectiveness of our
design choices.

1
Department of Computer Science, University of California
Santa Barbara, California, USA (work done during internship at
Amazon AWS AI) 2 Amazon AWS AI 3 Rutgers University. Correspondence to: Xiaoyong Jin <x jin@cs.ucsb.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Similar to other fields with predictive tasks, time series
forecasting has recently benefited from the development
of deep neural networks (Flunkert et al., 2020; Borovykh
et al., 2017; Oreshkin et al., 2020b), ultimately toward final
decision making systems like retail (Böse et al., 2017), resource planning for cloud computing (Park et al., 2019), and
optimal control vehicles (Kim et al., 2020; Park et al., 2022).
In particular, based on the success of Transformer models in
natural language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017), attention
models have also been effectively applied to forecasting (Li
et al., 2019; Lim et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2021; Xu et al.,
2021). While these deep forecasting models excel at capturing complex temporal dynamics from a sufficiently large
time series dataset, it is often challenging in practice to
collect enough data.
A common solution to the data scarcity problem is to introduce another dataset with abundant data samples from
a so-called source domain related to the dataset of interest,
referred to as the target domain. For example, traffic data
from an area with an abundant number of sensors (source
domain) can be used to train a model to forecast the traffic flow in an area with insufficient monitoring recordings
(target domain). However, deep neural networks trained on
one domain can be poor at generalizing to another domain
due to the issue of domain shift, that is, the distributional
discrepancy between domains (Wang et al., 2021).
Domain adaptation (DA) methods attempt to mitigate the
harmful effect of domain shift by aligning features extracted
across source and target domains (Ganin et al., 2016; Bousmalis et al., 2016; Hoffman et al., 2018; Bartunov & Vetrov,
2018; Wang et al., 2020). Existing approaches mainly focus
on classification tasks, where a classifier learns a mapping
from a learned domain-invariant latent space to a fixed label space using source data. Consequently, the classifier
depends only on common features across domains, and can
be applied to the target domain (Wilson & Cook, 2020).
There are two main challenges in directly applying existing
DA methods to time series forecasting. First, due to the
temporal nature of time series, evolving patterns within time
series are not likely to be captured by a representation of
the entire history. Future predictions may depend on local
patterns within different time periods, and a sequence of

