Bayesian Nonparametrics for Offline Skill Discovery

Valentin Villecroze 1 2 Harry J. Braviner 1 Panteha Naderian 1 Chris J. Maddison 2 3 Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem 1

Abstract
Skills or low-level policies in reinforcement learning are temporally extended actions that can
speed up learning and enable complex behaviours.
Recent work in offline reinforcement learning
and imitation learning has proposed several techniques for skill discovery from a set of expert
trajectories. While these methods are promising, the number K of skills to discover is always a fixed hyperparameter, which requires either prior knowledge about the environment or
an additional parameter search to tune it. We
first propose a method for offline learning of options (a particular skill framework) exploiting advances in variational inference and continuous
relaxations. We then highlight an unexplored connection between Bayesian nonparametrics and
offline skill discovery, and show how to obtain
a nonparametric version of our model. This
version is tractable thanks to a carefully structured approximate posterior with a dynamicallychanging number of options, removing the need
to specify K. We also show how our nonparametric extension can be applied in other skill
frameworks, and empirically demonstrate that
our method can outperform state-of-the-art offline skill learning algorithms across a variety of
environments. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/layer6ai-labs/BNPO.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical policies have been studied in reinforcement
learning for decades (Dietterich et al., 1998; Vezhnevets
et al., 2017). Low-level policies in hierarchical frameworks
1
Layer 6 AI, Toronto, Canada 2 University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada 3 Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada. Correspondence to:
Valentin Villecroze <valentin.v@layer6.ai>, Harry J. Braviner
<harry@layer6.ai>, Panteha Naderian <panteha@layer6.ai>,
Chris J. Maddison <cmaddis@cs.toronto.edu>, Gabriel LoaizaGanem <gabriel@layer6.ai>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

can be interpreted as skills endowing agents with temporal
abstraction. These skills also offer a divide-and-conquer
approach to complex reinforcement learning environments,
and learning them is therefore a relevant problem.
One of the most commonly used skills frameworks is options (Sutton et al., 1999). Methods for online learning of
options have been proposed (Bacon et al., 2017; Khetarpal
et al., 2020), but cannot leverage data from expert trajectories. To the best of our knowledge, the only method
allowing offline option discovery is that of Fox et al. (2017)
(deep discovery of options, DDO), which forgoes the use of
highly successful variational inference advances (Kingma
& Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014) for discrete latent
variables (Maddison et al., 2016; Jang et al., 2016) which
in this case correspond to the options to be inferred. Our
first contribution is proposing a method for offline learning
of options combining these previously neglected advances
along with a judiciously constructed approximate posterior,
which we show empirically outperforms not only DDO, but
also other offline skill discovery algorithms.
Additionally, all (discrete) skill learning approaches we are
aware of – including options – require specifying the number
of skills K as a hyperparameter, rather than learning it. This
is a significant practical limitation, as K cannot realistically
be known in advance for complex environments. Our second
contributions is highlighting a similarity between mixture
models and inferring skills from expert trajectories: both are
a form of soft clustering where observed data (state-action
pairs) are probabilistically assigned to their corresponding
cluster (skill). Bayesian nonparametric approaches such as
Dirichlet process mixture models (Neal, 2000) are not only
mathematically elegant, but also circumvent the practical
need to prespecify the number of clusters. We therefore
argue that Bayesian nonparametrics should be more heavily
used for option and skill discovery.
Our third contribution is proposing a scheme allowing for
our option discovery method to accommodate a nonparametric prior over options (thus modelling K as infinite), which
can also be applied in other skill learning frameworks. By
further adding structure to the variational posterior, allowing
it to dynamically change the number of options/skills being
assigned positive probability, we recover a method that is
not only tractable, but also retains the nonparametric aspect

