LIMO: Latent Inceptionism for Targeted Molecule Generation

Peter Eckmann 1 Kunyang Sun 2 Bo Zhao 1 Mudong Feng 2 Michael K. Gilson 2 3 Rose Yu 1

Abstract
Generation of drug-like molecules with high binding affinity to target proteins remains a difficult
and resource-intensive task in drug discovery.
Existing approaches primarily employ reinforcement learning, Markov sampling, or deep generative models guided by Gaussian processes,
which can be prohibitively slow when generating molecules with high binding affinity calculated by computationally-expensive physicsbased methods. We present Latent Inceptionism
on Molecules (LIMO), which significantly accelerates molecule generation with an inceptionismlike technique. LIMO employs a variational
autoencoder-generated latent space and property
prediction by two neural networks in sequence to
enable faster gradient-based reverse-optimization
of molecular properties. Comprehensive experiments show that LIMO performs competitively on
benchmark tasks and markedly outperforms stateof-the-art techniques on the novel task of generating drug-like compounds with high binding affinity, reaching nanomolar range against two protein targets. We corroborate these docking-based
results with more accurate molecular dynamicsbased calculations of absolute binding free energy and show that one of our generated drug-like
compounds has a predicted KD (a measure of
binding affinity) of 6 · 10−14 M against the human estrogen receptor, well beyond the affinities
of typical early-stage drug candidates and most
FDA-approved drugs to their respective targets.
Code is available at https://github.com/
Rose-STL-Lab/LIMO.

1. Introduction
Modern drug discovery is a long and expensive process, often requiring billions of dollars and years of effort (Hughes
et al., 2011). Accelerating the process and reducing its cost
would have clear economic and human benefits. A central
goal of the first stages of drug discovery, which comprise
a significant fraction and cost of the entire drug discovery
pipeline (Paul et al., 2010), is to find a compound that has
high binding affinity to a designated protein target, while
retaining favorable pharmacologic and chemical properties
(Hughes et al., 2011). This task is difficult because there are
on the order of 1033 chemically feasible molecules in the
drug-like size range (Polishchuk et al., 2013), and only a
tiny fraction of these bind to any given target with an affinity high enough to make them candidate drugs. Currently,
this is done with large experimental compound screens and
iterative synthesis and testing by medicinal chemists.
Recently, deep generative models have been proposed to
identify promising drug candidates (Guimaraes et al., 2017;
Goḿez-Bombarelli et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2018; Ma et al.,
2018; You et al., 2018; Popova et al., 2019; Zhou et al.,
2019; Jin et al., 2020b; Xie et al., 2021; Luo et al., 2021b),
potentially circumventing much of the customary experimental work. However, even the best generative methods
are prohibitively slow when optimizing for molecular properties that are computationally expensive to evaluate, such
as binding affinity.
Here, we present a novel approach called Latent Inceptionism on Molecules (LIMO), a generative modeling framework for fast de novo molecule design that
• builds on the variational autoencoder (VAE) framework, combined with a novel property predictor network architecture;

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC San
Diego, La Jolla, California, United States 2 Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, UC San Diego, La Jolla, California, United
States 3 Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
UC San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States. Correspondence to: Michael Gilson <mgilson@health.ucsd.edu>, Rose Yu
<roseyu@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

• employs an inceptionism-like reverse optimization
technique on a latent space to generate drug-like
molecules with desirable properties;
• is much faster than existing reinforcement learningbased methods (6 − 8× faster) and sampling-based approaches (12× faster), while maintaining or exceeding
baseline performances on the generation of molecules
with desired properties;

