Quantum-Inspired Algorithms from Randomized Numerical
Linear Algebra

Nadiia Chepurko 1 Kenneth L. Clarkson 2 Lior Horesh 2 Honghao Lin 3 David P. Woodruff 3

Abstract
We create classical (non-quantum) dynamic data
structures supporting queries for recommender
systems and least-squares regression that are
comparable to their quantum analogues. Dequantizing such algorithms has received a flurry
of attention in recent years; we obtain sharper
bounds for these problems. More significantly, we
achieve these improvements by arguing that the
previous quantum-inspired algorithms for these
problems are doing leverage or ridge-leverage
score sampling in disguise; these are powerful
and standard techniques in randomized numerical
linear algebra. With this recognition, we are able
to employ the large body of work in numerical
linear algebra to obtain algorithms for these problems that are simpler or faster (or both) than existing approaches. Our experiments demonstrate
that the proposed data structures also work well
on real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
In recent years, quantum algorithms for various problems in
numerical linear algebra have been proposed, with applications including least-squares regression and recommender
systems (Harrow et al., 2009; Lloyd et al., 2016; Rebentrost
et al., 2014; Gilyén et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2019; Brandão
et al., 2019; van Apeldoorn & Gilyén, 2019; Lloyd et al.,
2014; Cong & Duan, 2016; Berry et al., 2015). Some of
these algorithms have the striking property that their running times do not depend on the input size. That is, for a
given matrix A ∈ Rn×d with nnz(A) nonzero entries, the
1

Department of Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 IBM Research, USA 3 Department of Computer Science, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence
to:
Kenneth Clarkson <klclarks@us.ibm.com>, Honghao Lin <honghaol@andrew.cmu.edu>, David Woodruff
<dwoodruf@andrew.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

running times for these proposed quantum algorithms are at
most polylogarithmic in n and d, and polynomial in other
parameters of A, such as rank(A), the condition number
κ(A), or Frobenius norm kAkF .
However, as observed by Tang (Tang, 2019) and others,
there is a catch: these quantum algorithms depend on a
particular input representation of A, which is a simple data
structure that allows A to be employed for quick preparation
of a quantum state suitable for further quantum computations. This data structure, which is a collection of weighted
complete binary trees, also supports rapid weighted random
sampling of A, for example, sampling the rows of A with
probability proportional to their squared Euclidean lengths.
So, if an “apples to apples” comparison of quantum to classical computation is to be made, it is reasonable to ask
what can be accomplished in the classical realm using the
sampling that the given data structure supports.
A recent line of work analyzes the speedups of these quantum algorithms by developing classical counterparts that
exploit these restrictive input and output assumptions, and
shows that previous quantum algorithms do not give an
exponential speedup. In this setting, it has recently been
shown that sublinear time is sufficient for least-squares regression using a low-rank design matrix A (Gilyén et al.,
2018; Chia et al., 2018), for computing a low-rank approximation to input matrix A (Tang, 2019), and for solving
ridge regression problems (Gilyén et al., 2020), using classical (non-quantum) methods, assuming the data structure
of trees has already been constructed. Further, the results
obtained in (Tang, 2019; Gilyén et al., 2018; 2020) serve as
appropriate comparisons of the power of quantum to classical computing, due to their novel input-output model: data
structures are input, then sublinear-time computations are
done, yielding data structures as output.
The simple weighted-sampling data structure used in these
works to represent the input can be efficiently constructed
and stored: it uses O(nnz(A)) space, with a small constant overhead, and requires O(nnz(A)) time to construct,
in the static case where the matrix A is given in its entirety, and can support updates and queries to individual
entries of A in O(log(nd)) time. However, the existing
reported sublinear bounds are high-degree polynomials in

