Anytime Information Cascade Popularity Prediction via Self-Exciting Processes

Xi Zhang 1 Akshay Aravamudan 1 Georgios C. Anagnostopoulos 1

Abstract
One important aspect of understanding behaviors
of information cascades is to be able to accurately
predict their popularity, that is, their message
counts at any future time. Self-exciting Hawkes
processes have been widely adopted for such
tasks due to their success in describing cascading behaviors. In this paper, for general, marked
Hawkes point processes, we present closed-form
expressions for the mean and variance of future
event counts, conditioned on observed events.
Furthermore, these expressions allow us to develop a predictive approach, namely, Cascade
Anytime Size Prediction via self-Exciting Regression model (CASPER), which is specifically tailored to popularity prediction, unlike existing generative approaches – based on point processes –
for the same task. We showcase CASPER’s merits via experiments entailing both synthetic and
real-world data, and demonstrate that it considerably improves upon prior works in terms of
accuracy, especially for early-stage prediction.

1. Introduction
Information cascades form, when people influence each
others’ perceptions and behaviors while partaking in a communication network. A prominent setting, where such influencing occurs, is social media, where online users propagate
each others’ contents and worldviews. Given an information cascade, whose initial progression has been observed,
accurately predicting its total number of messages at any
future time – a task commonly referred to as anytime popularity prediction – is particularly useful in applications
such as marketing, spread of news and rumor control among
other; for indicative examples, refer to (Yu et al., 2011;
Wu et al., 2018; Singh & Chand, 2020; Gupta et al., 2020)
respectively.
1

Department of Computer Engineering & Sciences, Florida
Institute of Technology, Melbourne, FL, USA. Correspondence to:
Xi Zhang <zhang2012@my.fit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

A large body of research has been devoted to popularity
prediction; such works are surveyed in (Gao et al., 2019;
Zhou et al., 2021). Generally speaking, relevant models and
approaches can be categorized into three groups: featurebased models, deep learning models, and generative models.
Feature-based models, as the ones proposed by (Szabo &
Huberman, 2010; Bao et al., 2013; Yuan et al., 2016), extract various types of hand-crafted features, which are then
utilized in conjunction with various techniques to make predictions. While such models can be quite explainable, their
performance heavily depends on the quality of these feature
sets, whose extraction is often laborious and requires domain expertise. On the other hand, deep learning models,
like the ones put forward by (Li et al., 2017; Liao et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2021), aspire to learn effective features, but are often opaque to interpretation and/or
explanation.
Moreover, both feature-based and deep learning approaches
almost always require an abundance of data and computing
effort to support model training and hyper-parameter tuning
in order to achieve satisfactory prediction performances.
For anytime prediction, i.e., accurately predicting for any
combination of observation duration tc ≥ 0 and forecast
horizon ∆t ≥ 0, such approaches require training a distinct
model for every desired (tc , ∆t) pair, which exacerbates
their computational burden even further.
Generative models, on the other hand, instead of directly
tackling the prediction task, focus first on estimating cascade densities in order to characterize and describe cascade
dynamics in the continuous temporal domain. Among them,
models based on Hawkes (self-exciting) point processes,
like the ones proposed in (Zhao et al., 2015; Kobayashi &
Lambiotte, 2016; Tan & Chen, 2021), are particular advantageous since they exhibit emergent “rich-get-richer” phenomena, which explain well the heavy-tailed distributions
of cascade sizes in empirical data.
In general, such models start by specifying a parameterized conditional intensity function, which attempts to capture the underlying characteristics of the observed information diffusion. For example, Chen & Tan (2018) choose a
power-law function to model “aging” effect of influences
and Kobayashi & Lambiotte (2016) use a sinusoidal function to model the circadian rhythm of Twitter users. Then, a

