Feature Learning and Signal Propagation in Deep Neural Networks

Yizhang Lou 1 Chris Mingard 2 3 Soufiane Hayou 4

Abstract
Recent work by Baratin et al. (2021) sheds light
on an intriguing pattern that occurs during the
training of deep neural networks: some layers
align much more with data compared to other
layers (where the alignment is defined as the euclidean product of the tangent features matrix and
the data labels matrix). The curve of the alignment
as a function of layer index (generally) exhibits
an ascent-descent pattern where the maximum is
reached for some hidden layer. In this work, we
provide the first explanation for this phenomenon.
We introduce the Equilibrium Hypothesis which
connects this alignment pattern to signal propagation in deep neural networks. Our experiments
demonstrate an excellent match with the theoretical predictions.

1. Introduction
The empirical success of modern Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) has sparked a growing interest in the theoretical
understanding of these models. An important development
in this direction was the introduction of the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) framework by Jacot et al. (2018), which
provides a dual view of Gradient Descent (GD) in function space. The NTK is the dot product kernel of Tangent
Features (gradient features), given by
K(x, x′ ) = ∇θ f (x)∇θ f (x′ )T ,
where f is the network output and θ is the vector of model
parameters. The NTK has been the subject of an extensive body of literature, both in the NTK regime where the
NTK remains constant during training, e.g. (Jacot et al.,
2018; Jacot et al., 2020; Hayou et al., 2020; Ghorbani et al.,
1
St John’s College, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
PTCL, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 3 Department of
Physics, University of Oxford, UK 4 Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore. Correspondence
to: Yizhang Lou <yizhang.lou@sjc.ox.ac.uk>, Soufiane Hayou
<hayou@nus.edu.sg>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Example Alignment Hierarchies for 20 layer FFNNs
trained on Fashion MNIST (L) and CIFAR10 (R).

2019; Yang, 2020, 2019a), and when the NTK changes during training, e.g (Baratin et al., 2021; Yang and Hu, 2021).
The latter is called the feature learning regime since the
tangent features ∇θ f (x)T evolve during training in some
data-dependent directions; we say that tangent features and
the NTK adapt to the data. A simple way to quantify how
much these features adapt to data is by measuring the alignment between the tangent features and data labels (Baratin
et al., 2021), which is given by the normalized euclidean
product between the tangent kernel matrix K̂ and data labels
matrix Y Y T (see Section 2).
Role of hidden layers. In the context of DNNs, hidden
layers act as successive embeddings that evolve in datadependent directions during training. However, it is still
unclear how different layers contribute to model performance. A possible approach in this direction is the study
of feature learning in each layer, i.e. how features adapt
to data as we train the model. A simple way to do this is
by measuring the change in the values of pre-activations
as we train the network; this was used by Yang and Hu
(2021) to engineer a network parameterization that maximizes feature learning. To capture the dynamics of GD,
Baratin et al. (2021) studied the change in tangent features
instead of pre-activations. For each layer l, they measured
the alignment between the layer tangent kernel matrix K̂l
(where Kl (x, x′ ) = ∇θl f (x)∇θl f (x′ )T , θl being the vector of parameters in the lth layer). The kernel K̂l can be
seen as the NTK of the network if only the parameters of the
lth layer are allowed to change (other layers are frozen, see
Section 2.1 for a detailed discussion). The authors demonstrated the existence of an alignment pattern in which the
tangent features of some hidden layers are significantly more
aligned with data labels compared to other layers. We call
this pattern the Alignment Hierarchy (illustrated in Fig. 1).

