Path-Aware and Structure-Preserving Generation of
Synthetically Accessible Molecules

Juhwan Noh 1 Dae-Woong Jeong 2 Kiyoung Kim 2 Se-Hui Han 2 Moontae Lee 2 3 Honglak Lee 2
Yousung Jung 1 4

Abstract
Computational chemistry aims to autonomously
design specific molecules with target functionality. Generative frameworks provide useful tools
to learn continuous representations of molecules
in a latent space. While modelers could optimize
chemical properties, many generated molecules
are not synthesizable. To design synthetically accessible molecules that preserve main structural
motifs of target molecules, we propose a reactionembedded and structure-conditioned variational
autoencoder. As the latent space jointly encodes
molecular structures and their reaction routes, our
new sampling method that measures the pathinformed structural similarity allows us to effectively generate structurally analogous synthesizable molecules. When targeting out-of-domain
as well as in-domain seed structures, our model
generates structurally and property-wisely similar molecules equipped with well-defined reaction paths. By focusing on the important region
in chemical space, we also demonstrate that our
model can design new molecules with even higher
activity than the seed molecules.

1. Introduction
Discovering new molecules with desired properties is the
ultimate task in a wide range of industrial applications including pharmaceutical as well as chemical industry, but
the conventional trial-and-error type of processes are generally slow and resource-demanding. The main challenge
1

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
(BK21 four), Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea 2 LG AI Research, Republic of Korea
3
Department of Information and Decision Sciences, University of
Illinois Chicago, USA 4 Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of
Korea. Correspondence to: Yousung Jung <ysjn@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

here is the nearly infinite chemical space to explore, making
it practically infeasible to exhaustively search through the
all relevant molecular space. While expert intuitions have
been successful to guide the search traditionally, automating
and further accelerating these processes is critical to meet
different industrial needs in a timely manner.
Data-driven approaches can dramatically facilitate the
molecular discovery by utilizing available chemical knowledge extracted from data, enabling automated and fast exploration of the chemical space (Pollice et al., 2021). Indeed,
there have been a significant surge in using machine learning for molecular design in recent years, and there are many
excellent reviews that offer extensive summaries and perspectives on the subject (Zunger, 2018; Sanchez-Lengeling
& Aspuru-Guzik, 2018; Elton et al., 2019). Among different such approaches, generative model is particularly
promising strategy of molecular design which can generate new molecules with desired properties leveraging the
learned chemical distribution (Putin et al., 2018; GómezBombarelli et al., 2018; Hong et al., 2019; Méndez-Lucio
et al., 2020; Maziarka et al., 2020). Many successful proofof-concept demonstrations have been reported for molecular
property optimizations, however, as discussed in Gottipati
et al. (2020), many of the newly generated molecules have
practical challenges in actual lab synthesis, posing a large
gap between the theoretical predictions and experimental
validations.
To overcome this synthesizability bottleneck, several methods have been proposed mainly in two different directions:
synthesizability metric-based heuristics or retrosynthesis
reaction planning. The first approach utilizes synthesizability metrics either designed by analyzing the occurrence of
molecular fragments (Ertl & Schuffenhauer, 2009; Voršilák
et al., 2020) or learned from reactions (Boda et al., 2007;
Huang et al., 2011; Gao & Coley, 2020; Thakkar et al.,
2021). But, these metric-based approaches suggest the
synthesizability based on the correlation analyses without
considering the actual routes to synthesis or are inherently
limited by the underlying dataset or models used for learning metrics. Thus, high synthesizability scores could not
directly transfer to practical use. The second retrosynthetic

