Linear-Time Gromov Wasserstein Distances
using Low Rank Couplings and Costs

Meyer Scetbon 1 Gabriel Peyré 2 Marco Cuturi 3

Abstract
The ability to align points across two related yet
incomparable point clouds (e.g. living in different
spaces) plays an important role in machine learning. The Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) framework
provides an increasingly popular answer to such
problems, by seeking a low-distortion, geometrypreserving assignment between these points. As
a non-convex, quadratic generalization of optimal
transport (OT), GW is NP-hard. While practitioners often resort to solving GW approximately
as a nested sequence of entropy-regularized OT
problems, the cubic complexity (in the number n
of samples) of that approach is a roadblock. We
show in this work how a recent variant of the OT
problem that restricts the set of admissible couplings to those having a low-rank factorization is
remarkably well suited to the resolution of GW:
when applied to GW, we show that this approach
is not only able to compute a stationary point of
the GW problem in time O(n2 ), but also uniquely
positioned to benefit from the knowledge that the
initial cost matrices are low-rank, to yield a linear time O(n) GW approximation. Our approach
yields similar results, yet orders of magnitude
faster computation than the SoTA entropic GW
approaches, on both simulated and real data.

1. Introduction
Increasing interest for Gromov-Wasserstein... Several
problems in machine learning require comparing datasets
that live in heterogeneous spaces. This situation arises typically when realigning two distinct views (or features) from
points sampled from similar sources. Recent applications
to single-cell genomics (Demetci et al., 2020; Blumberg

Entropic GW loss: 0.28864

Low-Rank GW loss: 0.28823

Figure 1: Top row: Two curves in 2D and 3D, with n =
5000 points. Bottom row: coupling and GW loss obtained
with the SoTA O(n3 ) entropic approach (Peyré et al., 2016)
(left) and with our linear O(n) method (right) when using
the squared Euclidean distances as the ground costs.
et al., 2020) provide a case in point: Thousands of cells
taken from the same tissue are split in two groups, each processed with a different experimental protocol, resulting in
two distinct sets of heterogeneous feature vectors; Despite
this heterogeneity, one expects to find a mapping registering
points from the first to the second set, since they contain
similar overall information. That realignment is usually
carried out using the Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) machinery
proposed by Mémoli (2011) and Sturm (2012). GW seeks a
relaxed assignment matrix that is as close to an isometry as
possible, as quantified by a quadratic score. GW has practical appeal: It has been used in supervised learning (Xu
et al., 2019b), generative modeling (Bunne et al., 2019), domain adaptation (Chapel et al., 2020), structured prediction
(Vayer et al., 2018), quantum chemistry (Peyré et al., 2016)
and alignment layers (Ezuz et al., 2017).

CREST-ENSAE 2 CNRS and ENS, PSL 3 CREST-ENSAE,
work partly done at Google, currently at Apple. Correspondence
to: meyer scetbon <meyer.scetbon@ensae.fr>.

...despite being hard to solve. Since GW is an NP-hard
problem, all applications above rely on heuristics, the most
popular being the sequential resolution of nested entropyregularized OT problems. That approximation remains
costly, requiring O(n3 ) operations when dealing with two
datasets of n samples. Our goal is to reduce that complexity,
by exploiting and/or enforcing low-rank properties of matrices arising both in data and variables of the GW problem.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

OT: from cubic to linear complexity. Compared to GW,
aligning two populations embedded in the same space is
far simpler, and corresponds to the usual optimal transport

1

