Analyzing and Mitigating Interference in Neural Architecture Search

Jin Xu 1 Xu Tan 2 Kaitao Song 2 Renqian Luo 1 Yichong Leng 2 3 Tao Qin 2 Tie-Yan Liu 2 Jian Li 1

Abstract
Weight sharing is a popular approach to reduce
the cost of neural architecture search (NAS) by
reusing the weights of shared operators from previously trained child models. However, the rank
correlation between the estimated accuracy and
ground truth accuracy of those child models is low
due to the interference among different child models caused by weight sharing. In this paper, we investigate the interference issue by sampling different child models and calculating the gradient similarity of shared operators, and observe: 1) the interference on a shared operator between two child
models is positively correlated with the number of
different operators; 2) the interference is smaller
when the inputs and outputs of the shared operator
are more similar. Inspired by these two observations, we propose two approaches to mitigate the
interference: 1) MAGIC-T: rather than randomly
sampling child models for optimization, we propose a gradual modification scheme by modifying
one operator between adjacent optimization steps
to minimize the interference on the shared operators; 2) MAGIC-A: forcing the inputs and outputs
of the operator across all child models to be similar to reduce the interference. Experiments on a
BERT search space verify that mitigating interference via each of our proposed methods improves
the rank correlation of super-net and combining
both methods can achieve better results. Our discovered architecture outperforms RoBERTabase
by 1.1 and 0.6 points and ELECTRAbase by 1.6
and 1.1 points on the dev and test set of GLUE
benchmark. Extensive results on the BERT compression, reading comprehension and ImageNet
task demonstrate the effectiveness and generality
of our proposed methods.
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences (IIIS), Tsinghua University 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 University of Science and Technology of China. Correspondence to: Xu Tan
<xuta@microsoft.com>, Jian Li <lijian83@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) (Zoph & Le, 2017; Zoph
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018) aims to automatize the process
of discovering high-performance architectures. Conventional NAS (Zoph & Le, 2017; Zoph et al., 2018; Real et al.,
2017) obtains the accuracy of an architecture by training it
from scratch, which requires huge computational resources
(e.g., hundreds of GPU days). To speed up the training
process, an important technique, called weight sharing, is
proposed by Pham et al. (2018). Briefly speaking, weight
sharing is to maintain a single copy of weights on a super-net
that contains all the architectures in the search space. Rather
than stand-alone training from scratch for each architecture,
the weight sharing method samples an architecture at each
training step as a child model or a sub-graph of the super-net,
and continues the training on the weights of shared operators
from previously trained architectures in the super-net. Due
to low computational cost and competitive performance,
weight sharing has drawn wide attention (Pham et al., 2018;
Bender et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2019; Cai
et al., 2018; 2019; Li & Talwalkar, 2020; Guo et al., 2020;
Peng et al., 2020; Chu et al., 2021; Ning et al., 2021).
Although a number of NAS methods based on weight sharing have been proposed and achieved impressive results,
many works (Ning et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2020; Zela et al.,
2019; Yu et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020a;b) find that the
rank correlation between the estimated accuracy and ground
truth accuracy of child models is low due to the interference
among different child models on shared weights. The shared
operators receive different gradient directions from child
models with different architecture topologies for optimization even with the same batch of training data, which seriously affects the rank of the child models since interference
can cause insufficient training and inaccurate performance
evaluation. This phenomenon is especially severe for the
complex search space that contains different types of candidate operators (e.g., convolutions and multi-head attention)
and numerous child models.
While previous research works have noticed the interference
issue and empirically found that the interference is correlated with factors such as the size of a search space (Shu
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020a), little has been discussed
about the causes of the interference and how to mitigate it.

