Utilizing Expert Features for Contrastive Learning
of Time-Series Representations

Manuel Nonnenmacher * 1 2 Lukas Oldenburg 1 Ingo Steinwart 2 David Reeb 1

Abstract
We present an approach that incorporates expert
knowledge for time-series representation learning.
Our method employs expert features to replace the
commonly used data transformations in previous
contrastive learning approaches. We do this since
time-series data frequently stems from the industrial or medical field where expert features are
often available from domain experts, while transformations are generally elusive for time-series
data. We start by proposing two properties that
useful time-series representations should fulfill
and show that current representation learning approaches do not ensure these properties. We therefore devise ExpCLR, a novel contrastive learning approach built on an objective that utilizes
expert features to encourage both properties for
the learned representation. Finally, we demonstrate on three real-world time-series datasets that
ExpCLR surpasses several state-of-the-art methods for both unsupervised and semi-supervised
representation learning.

1. Introduction
Contrastive learning (CL) has led to significant advances in
the field of representation learning (Bromley et al., 1993;
Hadsell et al., 2006). Recently, the introduction of the NCEloss (Gutmann & Hyvärinen, 2010) and its variants (Oord
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Grill et al.,
2020; Zbontar et al., 2021) pushed the sate-of-the-art for
representation learning forward. These loss functions make
use of different views of the data, which are transformations
of the data that leave the individual label of each sample
1

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI), Robert
Bosch GmbH, Renningen, Germany 2 Institute for Stochastics and Applications, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart,
Germany.
Correspondence to: Manuel Nonnenmacher
<manuel.nonnenmacher@de.bosch.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

invariant. During training, by minimizing the loss function,
the different views of the same sample are then pushed
towards the same representations. The aim is often to learn
representations where samples with the same label are close
and samples with different labels are well separated.
Such an approach is particularly successful in the vision
domain, where different views (or transformations) of the
data are readily available. Contrary to that, in other data
domains such as time-series data, these transformations
are not as easily found or requiring deep task and domain
knowledge. Further, purely relying on the different views
of the data does not generally lead to good representations
of the data for time-series (Iwana & Uchida, 2021; Eldele
et al., 2021). On the other hand, time-series datasets often
stem from an industrial or medical domain, where domain
experts can usually provide expert features. Expert features
are therefore often readily available while access to good
data transformations is generally not.
Therefore, the goal of this work is to make use of these
expert features in order to find good embeddings or representations of time-series datasets utilizing expert features
instead of data transformations. The use of expert features introduces several new challenges such as, which
loss-function one should use and how to define good expert features. Apart from these challenges the use of expert
features also circumvents several problems present in transformation based CL approaches such as the sampling bias
for negative samples and the challenge of finding good transformations of the data, which can be critical for CL (Tian
et al., 2020; Tamkin et al., 2020).
While expert features can usually be provided by domain
experts, it remains open to find a new loss function to train
using these expert features. One major challenge is that
these expert features are usually not discrete class labels but
continuous features, such as temperature, speed or energy
values. These expert features could stem from additional
measurements, (potentially expensive) simulations, or be
calculated from expert mappings that use domain knowledge, directly. Therefore, using existing loss functions such
as the NCE-loss or the pair-loss is not straightforwardly
possible. To guide the design of a loss function, we will
first establish two properties that a representations based

