Structural Entropy Guided Graph Hierarchical Pooling

Junran Wu 1 * Xueyuan Chen 1 * Ke Xu 1 Shangzhe Li 1 2

Abstract
Following the success of convolution on nonEuclidean space, the corresponding pooling approaches have also been validated on various tasks
regarding graphs. However, because of the fixed
compression quota and stepwise pooling design,
these hierarchical pooling methods still suffer
from local structure damage and suboptimal problem. In this work, inspired by structural entropy,
we propose a hierarchical pooling approach, SEP,
to tackle the two issues. Specifically, without assigning the layer-specific compression quota, a
global optimization algorithm is designed to generate the cluster assignment matrices for pooling
at once. Then, we present an illustration of the
local structure damage from previous methods
in the reconstruction of ring and grid synthetic
graphs. In addition to SEP, we further design
two classification models, SEP-G and SEP-N for
graph classification and node classification, respectively. The results show that SEP outperforms
state-of-the-art graph pooling methods on graph
classification benchmarks and obtains superior
performance on node classifications.

1. Introduction
Chasing the great success of deep learning in natural language processing and images, plenty of research efforts have
been devoted to the adoption of neural networks in tasks
without data on the Euclidean domain, i.e., in graphs (Kipf
& Welling, 2017; Veličković et al., 2018). Thus, recent
years, graph neural networks (GNNs) become ubiquitous
within deep learning for graphs, and have obtained great
accomplishments in various domains, such as node classification (Kipf & Welling, 2017), link prediction (Zhang &
*

Equal contribution 1 State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191,
China 2 School of Mathematical Science, Beihang University,
Beijing, 100191, China. Correspondence to: Shangzhe Li
<shangzheli@buaa.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

SEP
Cluster Assignments
0 ⋯ 1
⋮ ⋱ ⋮
1 ⋯ 0

Pool

Label

Pool

Readout
Conv

Conv

Conv

Figure 1: Architecture of proposed SEP operator combined with graph neural network. The graph neural network consists of message passing layers and hierarchical
pooling layers. A separate algorithm is proposed for cluster
assignments generation.

Chen, 2018) and graph classification (Xu et al., 2019). In
these works, a key direction is the convolutional mechanism
of GNNs (Wu et al., 2019; Zhu & Koniusz, 2020; Wu et al.,
2022), which aims to learn the structural information in
graphs. Meanwhile, another research direction in GNNs
is the pooling mechanism, which follows the customs in
CNN models that compress a set of nodes into a compact
representation (Lee et al., 2019; Bianchi et al., 2020).
Besides the simplest pooling methods, that sum or average all nodes, various well-designed pooling approaches
have been proposed to aggregate the node information in
a hierarchical manner. However, despite the effectiveness
of these methods on various tasks, there are still many issues that hinder the development of GNNs. First, pooling
methods based on node drop, like TopKPool (Gao & Ji,
2019), SAGPool (Lee et al., 2019) and ASAP (Ranjan et al.,
2020), unnecessarily cut nodes based on designed ranking
strategy in each pooling layer, resulting in information loss
(Baek et al., 2021). Although other methods based on node
clustering avoid this issue (Ying et al., 2018; Bianchi et al.,
2020), the damage on the graph local structure still can not
be prevented due to the artificially specified node compression quota (Gao & Ji, 2019; Ranjan et al., 2020), which also

