PINs: Progressive Implicit Networks for Multi-Scale Neural Representations

Zoe Landgraf 1
Alexander Sorkine Hornung 2 Ricardo Silveira Cabral 2

Abstract
Multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) have proven to
be effective scene encoders when combined with
higher-dimensional projections of the input, commonly referred to as positional encoding. However, scenes with a wide frequency spectrum remain a challenge: choosing high frequencies for
positional encoding introduces noise in low structure areas, while low frequencies result in poor
fitting of detailed regions. To address this, we
propose a progressive positional encoding, exposing a hierarchical MLP structure to incremental
sets of frequency encodings. Our model accurately reconstructs scenes with wide frequency
bands and learns a scene representation at progressive level of detail without explicit per-level
supervision. The architecture is modular: each
level encodes a continuous implicit representation
that can be leveraged separately for its respective
resolution, meaning a smaller network for coarser
reconstructions. Experiments on several 2D and
3D datasets show improvements in reconstruction
accuracy, representational capacity and training
speed compared to baselines.

1. Introduction
Neural Implicit Functions are gaining popularity as alternative 2D image and 3D shape representations. Using a
simple MLP encoder, these networks approximate a function mapping between spatial coordinates and a quantity of
interest such as colour, occupancy or SDF values. They have
proven to be very effective at fitting natural images (Tancik
et al., 2020; Martel et al., 2021) and 3D shapes (Mescheder
et al., 2019; Park et al., 2019; Chabra et al., 2020) and have
been applied to various computer vision tasks, including
1
Department of Computing, Imperial College of London, London, UK. Research done during an internship at Meta, Zuerich
2
Meta, Zuerich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Zoe Landgraf
<zoelandgraf@fb.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Method overview. The input coordinates are projected by
incremental sets of frequency encodings (top row) and processed
by a hierarchical MLP structure which produces reconstructions in
2D (row 2) and 3D (row 3 and 4) at progressive level of detail.

novel view synthesis (Niemeyer et al., 2020b; Mildenhall
et al., 2020) and generative shape modelling (Chen & Zhang,
2019).
However, as simple MLP encoders, Neural Implicit Functions suffer from spectral bias (Rahaman et al., 2019; Basri
et al., 2020), which prevents them from learning high frequency detail in signals. Projecting the input onto a manifold containing high frequency components however, reduces the spectral bias (Rahaman et al., 2019). Recent works
(Mildenhall et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2020) have demonstrated this experimentally, mapping the input through a set
of sinusoidal functions (positional encodings). In a parallel
approach, (Sitzmann et al., 2020) use periodic activation
functions instead of ReLUs to enable MLPs to learn high frequency content. (Tancik et al., 2020) propose an improved
positional encoding based on Fourier Features (Rahimi &
Recht, 2007) and show that one can essentially tune the
range of frequencies that can be learnt by an MLP through

