Certifying Out-of-Domain Generalization for Blackbox Functions

Maurice Weber 1 Linyi Li 2 Boxin Wang 2 Zhikuan Zhao 1 Bo Li 2 Ce Zhang 1

Abstract
Certifying the robustness of model performance
under bounded data distribution drifts has recently
attracted intensive interest under the umbrella of
distributional robustness. However, existing techniques either make strong assumptions on the
model class and loss functions that can be certified, such as smoothness expressed via Lipschitz
continuity of gradients, or require to solve complex optimization problems. As a result, the wider
application of these techniques is currently limited by its scalability and flexibility — these techniques often do not scale to large-scale datasets
with modern deep neural networks or cannot handle loss functions which may be non-smooth such
as the 0-1 loss. In this paper, we focus on the
problem of certifying distributional robustness for
blackbox models and bounded loss functions, and
propose a novel certification framework based on
the Hellinger distance. Our certification technique
scales to ImageNet-scale datasets, complex models, and a diverse set of loss functions. We then
focus on one specific application enabled by such
scalability and flexibility, i.e., certifying out-ofdomain generalization for large neural networks
and loss functions such as accuracy and AUC. We
experimentally validate our certification method
on a number of datasets, ranging from ImageNet,
where we provide the first non-vacuous certified
out-of-domain generalization, to smaller classification tasks where we are able to compare with
the state-of-the-art and show that our method performs considerably better.

1. Introduction
The wide application of machine learning models in the real
world brings an emerging challenge of understanding the
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
UIUC, USA. Correspondence to: Maurice Weber <maurice.weber@inf.ethz.ch>, Ce Zhang <ce.zhang@inf.ethz.ch>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

performance of a machine learning model under different
data distributions — ML systems operating autonomous
vehicles which are trained based on data collected in the
northern hemisphere might fail when deployed in desert-like
environments or under different weather conditions (Volk
et al., 2019; Dai & Van Gool, 2018), while recognition
systems have been shown to fail when deployed in new
environments (Beery et al., 2018). Similar concerns also
apply to many mission-critical applications such as medicine
and cyber-security (Koh et al., 2021; AlBadawy et al., 2018;
Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021). In all these applications, it
is imperative to have a sound understanding of the model’s
robustness and possible failure cases in the presence of a
shift in the data distribution, and to have corresponding
guarantees on the performance.
Recently, this problem has attracted intensive interest under
the umbrella of distributional robustness (Scarf, 1958; BenTal et al., 2013; Gao & Kleywegt, 2016; Kuhn et al., 2019;
Blanchet & Murthy, 2019; Duchi et al., 2021). Specifically,
let P be a joint data distribution over features X ∈ X
and labels Y ∈ Y, and let hθ : X → Y be a machine
learning model parameterized by θ. For a loss function
` : Y × Y → R, we hope to compute
Rθ (UP ) := sup E(X,Y )∼Q [`(hθ (X), Y )]

(1)

Q∈UP

where UP ⊆ P(Z) is a set of probability distributions on
Z, called the uncertainty set. Intuitively, this measures the
worst-case risk of hθ when the data distribution drifts from
P to another distribution in UP .
Providing a technical solution to this problem has gained
increased attention over the years, as summarized in Table 1.
However, most — if not all — existing approaches, impose
strong constraints such as bounded Lipschitz gradients on
both h and ` and rely on expensive certification methods
such as direct minimax optimization. As a result, these
methods have been applied only to small-scale datasets and
ML models.
In this paper, we consider the case that both h and ` can be
non-convex and non-smooth — h can be a full-fledged neural network, e.g., ImageNet-scale EfficientNet-B7 (Tan &
Le, 2019), and ` can be a general non-smooth loss function
such as the 0-1 loss. We provide, to our best knowledge, the
first practical method for blackbox functions that scales to

