NISPA: Neuro-Inspired Stability-Plasticity Adaptation
for Continual Learning in Sparse Networks

Mustafa Burak Gurbuz 1 Constantine Dovrolis 1 2

Abstract
The goal of continual learning (CL) is to learn
different tasks over time. The main desiderata associated with CL are to maintain performance on
older tasks, leverage the latter to improve learning
of future tasks, and to introduce minimal overhead
in the training process (for instance, to not require a growing model or retraining). We propose
the Neuro-Inspired Stability-Plasticity Adaptation
(NISPA) architecture that addresses these desiderata through a sparse neural network with fixed
density. NISPA forms stable paths to preserve
learned knowledge from older tasks. Also, NISPA
uses connection rewiring to create new plastic
paths that reuse existing knowledge on novel tasks.
Our extensive evaluation on EMNIST, FashionMNIST, CIFAR10, and CIFAR100 datasets shows
that NISPA significantly outperforms representative state-of-the-art continual learning baselines,
and it uses up to ten times fewer learnable parameters compared to baselines. We also make
the case that sparsity is an essential ingredient for
continual learning. The NISPA code is available
at https://github.com/BurakGurbuz97/NISPA

1. Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive performance on a wide variety of tasks, and they
often exceed human-level ability. However, they rely on
shuffled, balanced, fixed datasets and stationary environments (LeCun et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; Guo et al.,
2016). As a result, they lack a critical characteristic of general intelligence, which is to continually learn over time in a
dynamic environment. Under this Continual Learning (CL)
1
School of Computer Science, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA. 2 KIOS Research and Innovation Center of Excellence,
Cyprus. Correspondence to: Constantine Dovrolis <constantine@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

scenario, DNNs forget what was learned in earlier tasks
when learning new tasks, leading to a daunting phenomenon
known as Catastrophic Forgetting (CF) (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989).
In stark contrast, animals excel at learning and remembering
many different tasks they encounter over time. At least so
far, the brain is the only existing system for successful CL
in complex environments. This highlights the importance
of reviewing basic facts about the brain’s structure and function, and suggests the design of neuro-inspired mechanisms
to mitigate CF (Hadsell et al., 2020; Hassabis et al., 2017).
We summarize next some insights that provide hints for
successful CL models.
Sparse connectivity: In contrast to DNNs’ dense and highly
entangled connectivity that is prone to interference (French,
1999), the brain relies on sparse connectivity in which only
few neurons respond to any given stimulus (Babadi & Sompolinsky, 2014). After extensive synaptic pruning during
childhood (Chechik et al., 1998), the connection density
of the brain stays roughly constant (in healthy adults). In
other words, the brain does not compromise sparsity to accumulate knowledge – instead it rewires existing neurons to
create more effective neural pathways. This suggests a first
mechanism we can transfer in DNNs: persistent sparsity
over the course of continual learning (Hadsell et al., 2020).
Functional and structural plasticity: The brain learns
through two forms of plasticity. First, functional or Hebbian
plasticity adjusts the strength of synaptic transmission. A
specific instance of Hebbian plasticity is Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity (STDP), which controls the strength of a
synapse based on the relative timing of the corresponding
neurons’ activity (Park et al., 2014; Cooke & Bliss, 2006).
Second, structural plasticity changes the brain’s circuitry
by forming new, or removing existing, synapses. While the
underlying mechanisms are not fully understood yet, recent
studies have shown that synapse rewiring occurs rapidly
during learning (Fu & Zuo, 2011; Kasai et al., 2010; Deger
et al., 2012). This implies that learning takes place in the
brain by simultaneously changing both connection weights
and network architecture. This suggests a second mechanism we can transfer to DNNs: connection rewiring to
create new, and prune existing, paths in the network when

