A Multi-objective / Multi-task Learning Framework Induced by
Pareto Stationarity

Michinari Momma 1 Chaosheng Dong 1 Jia Liu 2

Abstract
Multi-objective optimization (MOO) and multitask learning (MTL) have gained much popularity
with prevalent use cases such as production model
development of regression / classification / ranking models with MOO, and training deep learning models with MTL. Despite the long history
of research in MOO, its application to machine
learning requires development of solution strategy, and algorithms have recently been developed
to solve specific problems such as discovery of
any Pareto optimal (PO) solution, and that with a
particular form of preference. In this paper, we develop a novel and generic framework to discover
a PO solution with multiple forms of preferences.
It allows us to formulate a generic MOO / MTL
problem to express a preference, which is solved
to achieve both alignment with the preference and
PO, at the same time. Specifically, we apply the
framework to solve the weighted Chebyshev problem and an extension of that. The former is known
as a method to discover the Pareto front, the latter
helps to find a model that outperforms an existing
model with only one run. Experimental results
demonstrate not only the method achieves competitive performance with existing methods, but
also it allows us to achieve the performance from
different forms of preferences.

1. Introduction
Multi-objective optimization (MOO) (Kaisa, 1999; Zhang
& Li, 2007) and multi-task learning (MTL) (Caruana, 1997)
have gained much popularity in machine learning (ML)
applications. For example, MOO has been used in production system in search ranking (Momma et al., 2019; 2020;
1

Amazon.com Inc. 2 The Ohio State University. Correspondence to: Michinari Momma <michi@amazon.com>, Chaosheng
Dong <chaosd@amazon.com>, Jia Liu <liu@ece.osu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Carmel et al., 2020) and recommendation (Lin et al., 2019a).
MTL is one of the common methods to train a deep learning model (Ruder, 2017). Since the two areas share some
similarity in its core: trade-off among tasks / objectives, key
concepts such as Pareto optimality (PO) and methodologies
developed in MOO can also be applicable to MTL. One
prominent example is multiple gradient descent algorithm
(MGDA) (Désidéri, 2012). MGDA casts the Pareto stationarity (PS) problem that is a necessary condition of PO as
a norm minimization problem of convex combination of
gradient vectors over all objectives. The resulting gradient
is the steepest-descent direction toward PS. This framework
is well suited for ML problems where functional optimization via gradient methods is prevalent. The first adaptation
of MGDA to MTL (Sener & Koltun, 2018) demonstrates
it is able to generate MTL model that outperforms single
task baselines. However, although expected by design, the
MGDA based solution is found not being able to generate
diversified models, or models that meet user preference (e.g.,
ratio between objective values). Several works address the
issue by imposing additional constraints into the MGDA
optimization problem (Lin et al., 2019b; Ma et al., 2020;
Lin et al., 2019a).
In this paper, we propose a different approach to incorporate
preferences. Instead of starting from MGDA and modify
it, we start from formulating an optimization problem to
incorporate preference, then derive MGDA-like component
in the problem. The rationale of this approach is based on
the fact that what MGDA is solving for is only a portion of
some optimization problem. This is analogous to the more
general Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions where the
stationarity condition is only a partial component of the full
optimality conditions, which consists of primal / dual feasibility and complementarity in addition to the stationarity.
We apply this analogy to the PS problems in this paper.
As applications in our framework, we formulate the
weighted Chebyshev (WC) problem (Kaisa, 1999). This
problem is popular in the traditional MOO literature and
can be solved to discover the Pareto front (PF), a set of
PO points, by minimizing the `∞ norm between the ideal
point – infimum of each objective, and a PO point on PF.
The weight in WC represents preference in terms of ratio

