Streaming Algorithms for Support-Aware Histograms

Justin Y. Chen 1 Piotr Indyk 1 Tal Wagner 2

Abstract
Histograms, i.e., piece-wise constant approximations, are a popular tool used to represent data distributions. Traditionally, the difference between
the histogram and the underlying distribution (i.e.,
the approximation error) is measured using the
Lp norm, which sums the differences between the
two functions over all items in the domain. Although useful in many applications, the drawback
of this error measure is that it treats approximation errors of all items in the same way, irrespective of whether the mass of an item is important
for the downstream application that uses the approximation. As a result, even relatively simple
distributions cannot be approximated by succinct
histograms without incurring large error.
In this paper, we address this issue by adapting
the definition of approximation so that only the errors of the items that belong to the support of the
distribution are considered. Under this definition,
we develop efficient 1-pass and 2-pass streaming
algorithms that compute near-optimal histograms
in sub-linear space. We also present lower bounds
on the space complexity of this problem. Surprisingly, under this notion of error, there is an exponential gap in the space complexity of 1-pass and
2-pass streaming algorithms. Finally, we demonstrate the utility of our algorithms on a collection
of real and synthetic data sets.

1. Introduction
The exponential growth of massive data sets over the recent
years necessitated the development of methods for computing succinct summaries of data. Such summaries should
accurately preserve the desired data properties, while being
succinct enough to be stored or communicated efficiently.
A popular approach to representing data succinctly is to
1
MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond,
WA, USA. Correspondence to: Justin Chen <justc@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

compute their histograms. For a data set whose elements
come from the universe [n] = {1 . . . n}, a k-histogram approximation is a piece-wise constant function defined over
[n] consisting of k pieces (see Section 2 for a formal definition). Thanks to its compact representation (which requires
storing only O(k) numbers), such histograms are often used
to approximate the distribution of data attributes, and have
applications to a variety of tasks such as approximate query
processing, data visualization and density estimation.
Traditionally, the problem of finding a good histogram approximation to a given data set is formalized as follows.
The algorithm is given an empirical distribution
P over [n],
P
i.e., a sequence p1 . . . pn ≥ 0 such that i pi = 1. The
goal is to find a k-histogram f that minimizes the approximation error kP − f k, where k · k is some norm (typically
`1 or `2 ). Multiple exact and approximate algorithms for
computing such histograms given input P are known (Cormode et al., 2012). The problem has been also studied
extensively in settings where the distribution P is given
implicitly. In particular, there has been a significant body
of work in the streaming setting, where the algorithm has
limited storage, and is allowed only one (or a small number
of) passes over the data. Two streaming models have been
considered: (i) the time-series model, where the probabilities p1 , p2 , . . . , pn are given explicitly (Guha et al., 2001;
2004; Guha, 2005; Buragohain et al., 2007; Halim et al.,
2009; Terzi & Tsaparas, 2006), or (ii) the turnstile model,
where the algorithm is given a sequence of data elements
i ∈ [n], and each pi is defined implicitly as the fraction of
times i occurs in the input sequences (Gilbert et al., 2001;
2002; Guha et al., 2002; Muthukrishnan et al., 2005; Cormode et al., 2006; Hegde et al., 2016). Other implicit input
models, e.g., allowing the algorithm to sample elements
from the distribution P , has been studied as well, see e.g.,
(Indyk et al., 2012; Chan et al., 2014b;a; Acharya et al.,
2015), or a recent survey (Canonne, 2020). The aforementioned streaming results typically offer multiplicative error
guarantees, while the sampling algorithms offer an additive
error guarantee.
Although useful, the histogram approximation problem as
formulated above suffers from a fundamental issue, which is
that the approximation error is measured over all elements i
in [n], regardless of whether the density of i is important for
the downstream application that uses the estimation. This

