Partial Identifiability for Domain Adaptation

Lingjing Kong 1 Shaoan Xie 1 Weiran Yao 1 Yujia Zheng 1 Guangyi Chen 2 1 Petar Stojanov 3
Victor Akinwande 1 Kun Zhang 2 1

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation is critical to
many real-world applications where label information is unavailable in the target domain. In general,
without further assumptions, the joint distribution
of the features and the label is not identifiable
in the target domain. To address this issue, we
rely on a property of minimal changes of causal
mechanisms across domains to minimize unnecessary influences of domain shift. To encode this
property, we first formulate the data generating
process using a latent variable model with two partitioned latent subspaces: invariant components
whose distributions stay the same across domains,
and sparse changing components that vary across
domains. We further constrain the domain shift to
have a restrictive influence on the changing components. Under mild conditions, we show that
the latent variables are partially identifiable, from
which it follows that the joint distribution of data
and labels in the target domain is also identifiable.
Given the theoretical insights, we propose a practical domain adaptation framework, called iMSDA.
Extensive experimental results reveal that iMSDA
outperforms state-of-the-art domain adaptation algorithms on benchmark datasets, demonstrating
the effectiveness of our framework.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is a form of prediction setting in which the labeled training data, and the unlabeled test data follow different distributions. UDA can frequently be done in settings where multiple labeled training
datasets are available, and this is termed as multiple-source
UDA. Formally, given features x, target variables y, and
1
Carnegie Mellon University, USA 2 Mohamed bin Zayed
University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE 3 Broad Institute of
MIT and Harvard, USA. Correspondence to: Kun Zhang
<kunz1@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

domain indices u, the training (source domain) data follows
multiple joint distributions px,y|u1 , px,y|u2 , ..., px,y|uM ,1
and the test (target domain) data follows the joint distribution px,y|uT , where px,y|u may vary across u1 , u2 , ...,
uM . During training, for each i-th source domain, we are
(i)
(i)
i
given labeled observations (xk , yk )m
k=1 from px,y|ui , and
T mT
target domain unlabeled instances (xk )k=1 from px,y|uT .
The main goal of domain adaptation is to make use of the
available observed information, to construct a predictor that
will have optimal performance in the target domain.
It is apparent that without further assumptions, this objective
is ill-posed. Namely, since the only available observations in
the target domain are from the marginal distribution px|uT ,
the data may correspond to infinitely many joint distributions px,y|uT . This mandates making additional assumptions on the relationship between the source and the target
domain distributions, with the hope to be able to reconstruct
(identify) the joint distribution in the target domain px,y|uT .
Typically, these assumptions entail some measure of similarity across all of the joint distributions. One classical
assumption is that each joint distribution shares the same
conditional distribution py|x , whereas px|u changes, more
widely known as the covariate shift setting (Shimodaira,
2000; Sugiyama et al., 2008; Zadrozny, 2004; Huang et al.,
2007; Cortes et al., 2010). In addition, assumptions can be
made that the source and the target domain distributions
are related via the changes in py|u or one or more linear
transformations of the features x (Zhang et al., 2013; 2015;
Gong et al., 2016).
In order to drop any parametric assumptions regarding the
relationship between the domains, one may want to consider
a more abstract assumption of minimal change. To make
reasoning about this notion easier, it is often useful to consider the data-generating process (Schölkopf et al., 2012;
Zhang et al., 2013). For example, if the data generating process is Y → X, then py|u and px|y,u change independently
across domains, and factoring the joint distribution in terms
of these factors makes it possible to represent its changes
in the most parsimonious way. Furthermore the changes
1
With a slight abuse of notation, we use px,y|u0 to represent the conditional distribution for a specific domain u0 , i.e.
px,y|u (x, y|u0 ).

