Knowledge-Grounded Self-Rationalization via
Extractive and Natural Language Explanations

Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder 1 Oana-Maria Camburu 2 Thomas Lukasiewicz 3 2 Julian McAuley 1

Abstract
Models that generate extractive rationales (i.e.,
subsets of features) or natural language explanations (NLEs) for their predictions are important
for explainable AI. While an extractive rationale
provides a quick view of the features most responsible for a prediction, an NLE allows for a comprehensive description of the decision-making
process behind a prediction. However, current
models that generate the best extractive rationales or NLEs often fall behind the state-of-theart (SOTA) in terms of task performance. In this
work, we bridge this gap by introducing RE X C,
a self-rationalizing framework that grounds its
predictions and two complementary types of explanations (NLEs and extractive rationales) in
background knowledge. Our framework improves
over previous methods by: (i) reaching SOTA task
performance while also providing explanations,
(ii) providing two types of explanations, while
existing models usually provide only one type,
and (iii) beating by a large margin the previous
SOTA in terms of quality of both types of explanations. Furthermore, a perturbation analysis
in RE X C shows a high degree of association between explanations and predictions, a necessary
property of faithful explanations.

1. Introduction
Two approaches that currently predominate for building
self-explainable neural models are (i) selecting a subset of
input features responsible for a prediction, known as an
extractive rationale (ER) (Zaidan & Eisner, 2008; Bast1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC San
Diego, USA. 2 Department of Computer Science, University of
Oxford, UK. 3 Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria. Correspondence to: Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder <bmajumde@eng.ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

ings et al., 2019; Sha et al., 2021), and (ii) generating a
natural language explanation (NLE) for a prediction (Park
et al., 2018; Hendricks et al., 2016; Camburu et al., 2018;
Kayser et al., 2021). For an explanation (ER or NLE), one
is interested in two characteristics: quality (or plausibility)
and faithfulness. Quality measures the degree of matching
between the model’s explanations and some ground truth;
models with low-quality explanations would be undeployable. Faithfulness measures how well the explanations reflect the decision-making processes behind the predictions;
unfaithful explanations would be misleading.
ERs are concise and provide quick explanations, which may
sometimes be enough for users to assess the trustworthiness of the model. However, ERs may not have the means
to provide important details of the reasoning of a model
(e.g., relations between features) (Wiegreffe et al., 2021).
In such cases, NLEs can be complementary, as they allow
for detailed justification in a form that is most accessible to
humans (natural language). However, machine-generated
NLEs, like other generated text, are prone to lacking background knowledge (e.g., commonsense) (Camburu et al.,
2020; Mao et al., 2019). This could be because the NLEs
are unfaithful or the model did not use the necessary knowledge in its decision-making process. Despite the complementary nature of ERs and NLEs, self-rationalizing models
usually provide only one of them, with a few exceptions
(Park et al., 2018; Wu & Mooney, 2019). Moreover, while
knowledge grounding has been done for black-box models
(Bauer et al., 2018; Chandu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2020a),
we are not aware of any work on knowledge grounding
for self-rationalizing models. Furthermore, existing selfrationalizing models are often outperformed by black-box
models at solving the task at hand, leading to an undesirable
performance-explainability trade-off.
To ground both decision-making and rationalization in background knowledge, as well as to reap the benefits of both
ERs and NLEs, we combine these three ingredients in a unified self-rationalization framework. Our framework, which
we call RE X C (Extractive Rationales, Natural Language
Explanations, and (here) Commonsense)1 , performs five
1
Code is available
majumderb/rexc

at

https://github.com/

