Set Norm and Equivariant Skip Connections: Putting the Deep in Deep Sets

Lily H. Zhang * 1 Veronica Tozzo * 2 3 John M. Higgins 2 3 Rajesh Ranganath 1 4

Abstract
Permutation invariant neural networks are a
promising tool for making predictions from sets.
However, we show that existing permutation invariant architectures, Deep Sets and Set Transformer, can suffer from vanishing or exploding
gradients when they are deep. Additionally, layer
norm, the normalization of choice in Set Transformer, can hurt performance by removing information useful for prediction. To address these
issues, we introduce the “clean path principle”
for equivariant residual connections and develop
set norm (SN), a normalization tailored for sets.
With these, we build Deep Sets++ and Set Transformer++, models that reach high depths with
better or comparable performance than their original counterparts on a diverse suite of tasks. We
additionally introduce Flow-RBC, a new singlecell dataset and real-world application of permutation invariant prediction. We open-source
our data and code here: https://github.com/rajeshlab/deep permutation invariant.

1. Introduction
Many real-world tasks involve predictions on sets as inputs,
from point cloud classification (Guo et al., 2020; Wu et al.,
2015; Qi et al., 2017a) to the prediction of health outcomes
from single-cell data (Regev et al., 2017; Lähnemann et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2017).
Models applied to input sets should satisfy permutation
invariance: for any permutation of the elements in the input
set, the model prediction stays the same. Deep Sets (Zaheer
et al., 2017) and Set Transformer (Lee et al., 2019) are
*

Equal contribution 1 Center for Data Science, New York University, New York, NY 2 Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA 3 Department of Systems
Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 4 Department of
Computer Science, New York University, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Lily H. Zhang <lily.h.zhang@nyu.edu>, Veronica
Tozzo <vtozzo@mgh.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

two general-purpose permutation-invariant neural networks
that have been proven to be universal approximators of
permutation-invariant functions under the right conditions
(Zaheer et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2019; Wagstaff et al., 2019).
In practice, however, these architectures are often tailored
to specific tasks to achieve good performance (Zaheer et al.,
2017; Lee et al., 2019).
In this work, we pursue a general approach to achieve
improved performance: making permutation-invariant networks deeper. Whether deeper models benefit performance
is often task-dependent, but the strategy of building deeper
networks has yielded benefit for a variety of architectures
and tasks (He et al., 2016b; Wang et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2019). Motivated by these previous results, we investigate
whether similar gains can be made of permutation-invariant
architectures and prediction tasks on sets.
However, naively increasing layers in Deep Sets and Set
Transformer can hurt performance (see Figure 1). We show
empirical evidence, supported by a gradient analysis, that
both models can suffer from vanishing or exploding gradients (Section 3.1, Section 3.2). Moreover, we observe
that layer norm, the normalization layer discussed in Set
Transformer, can actually hurt performance on tasks with
real-valued sets, as its standardization forces potentially unwanted invariance to scalar transformations in set elements
(Section 3.3).
To address these failures, we introduce Deep Sets++ and Set
Transformer++, new versions of Deep Sets and Set Transformer with carefully designed residual connections and
normalization layers (Section 4). First, we propose skip
connections that adhere to what we call the “clean path”
principle to address potential gradient issues. Next, we propose set norm (SN), an easy-to-implement normalization
layer for sets which standardizes each set over the minimal
number of dimensions. We consider both residual connections and normalization layers since either alone can still
suffer from gradient problems (Zhang et al., 2018; Yang
et al., 2019; De & Smith, 2020).
Deep Sets++ and Set Transformer++ are able to train at high
depths without suffering from the issues seen in the original
models (Section 7). Furthermore, deep versions of these
architectures improve upon their shallow counterparts on
many tasks, avoiding issues such as exploding or vanishing

