Bitwidth Heterogeneous Federated Learning with
Progressive Weight Dequantization

Jaehong Yoon 1 * Geon Park 1 * Wonyong Jeong 1 Sung Ju Hwang 1 2

Abstract
In practical federated learning scenarios, the participating devices may have different bitwidths
for computation and memory storage by design.
However, despite the progress made in deviceheterogeneous federated learning scenarios, the
heterogeneity in the bitwidth specifications in the
hardware has been mostly overlooked. We introduce a pragmatic FL scenario with bitwidth
heterogeneity across the participating devices,
dubbed as Bitwidth Heterogeneous Federated
Learning (BHFL). BHFL brings in a new challenge, that the aggregation of model parameters
with different bitwidths could result in severe
performance degeneration, especially for highbitwidth models. To tackle this problem, we propose ProWD framework, which has a trainable
weight dequantizer at the central server that progressively reconstructs the low-bitwidth weights
into higher bitwidth weights, and finally into fullprecision weights. ProWD further selectively aggregates the model parameters to maximize the
compatibility across bit-heterogeneous weights.
We validate ProWD against relevant FL baselines
on the benchmark datasets, using clients with
varying bitwidths. Our ProWD largely outperforms the baseline FL algorithms as well as naive
approaches (e.g. grouped averaging) under the
proposed BHFL scenario.

1. Introduction
In recent decades, the drastic evolution of hardware technologies for edge devices has changed our lives from the
*

Equal contribution 1 Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST), South Korea 2 AITRICS, South Korea.
Correspondence to: Jaehong Yoon <jaehong.yoon@kaist.ac.kr>,
Geon Park <geon.park@kaist.ac.kr>, Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

root. Smart edge devices, which have the ability to process sensory inputs and communicate, such as embedded
sensors, drones, phones, smart watches, and augmented
reality glasses, are now being used in our everyday lives.
Such accessibility of edge devices has led to the emergence
of Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017; Zhao
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019), a learning framework in
which multiple clients collaboratively train on private local
data while periodically communicating the trained models across them, often through a server which aggregates
and broadcasts the local models. Many previous works
have investigated the potential and applicability of FL in
various learning frameworks, such as semi-supervised learning (Jeong et al., 2021), bayesian learning (Wang et al.,
2020), graph neural networks (Mei et al., 2019; Wu et al.,
2021), meta-learning (Jiang et al., 2019; Fallah et al., 2020),
and continual learning (Yoon et al., 2021).
A crucial challenge in FL is that there could be a large discrepancy among participants, in their data distribution, tasks,
model architectures, and devices which often leads to incompatibility of the models that are being aggregated. This
problem is often referred to as Heterogeneous Federated
Learning (Jiang et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2020; He et al., 2020;
Diao et al., 2021) problem. Many existing works have successfully alleviated the adverse effect of data-, model-, and
device-heterogeneity. However, the most basic assumption
even in such heterogeneous FL scenarios, is that all models
have the same bitwidths.
Yet, in real-world FL scenarios, participating devices may
have heterogeneous bitwidth specifications. Suppose that
we are building a federated network of various health care
providers, such as hospitals, community health centers, and
clinics, as well as end-users, and even wearable devices, i.e.
smart watches. Each client has a health disorder prediction
model for the users themselves or their patients that continuously learns to perform a diagnosis given the heart rates
or bioelectric signals. The scenario allows the participation
of local clients with various hardware infrastructures, some
of them using models built under lightweight devices based
on low-bitwidth hardware operations using FPGA, ASIC,
Raspberry Pi, or Edge GPUs. Here, BHFL enables local
devices with different hardware specifications to participate

