(Non-)Convergence Results for
Predictive Coding Networks

Simon Frieder 1 Thomas Lukasiewicz 2 1

Abstract
Predictive coding networks (PCNs) are (un)supervised learning models, coming from neuroscience,
that approximate how the brain works. One major
open problem around PCNs is their convergence
behavior. In this paper, we use dynamical systems
theory to formally investigate the convergence of
PCNs as they are used in machine learning. Doing
so, we put their theory on a firm, rigorous basis,
by developing a precise mathematical framework
for PCN and show that for sufficiently small
weights and initializations, PCNs converge for
any input. Thereby, we provide the theoretical
assurance that previous implementations, whose
convergence was assessed solely by numerical
experiments, can indeed capture the correct
behavior of PCNs. Outside of the identified
regime of small weights and small initializations,
we show via a counterexample that PCNs can
diverge, countering common beliefs held in the
community. This is achieved by identifying a
Neimark-Sacker bifurcation in a PCN of small
size, which gives rise to an unstable fixed point
and an invariant curve around it.

1. Introduction
Predictive coding networks (PCNs) (Rao & Ballard, 1999;
Friston, 2003) have been proposed as unsupervised learning
models, approximating to how the brain works. Recent
interest in these models has led to an increased number
of publications, which can be split into two main lines
of investigation: One line is concerned with neuroscience
aspects and variations of PCN models, and how they can be
embedded in a unified “theory of the brain”, e.g., (Kadmon
et al., 2020; Friston, 2018; 2010); the other line is concerned
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford,
UK. 2 Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria.
Correspondence to: Simon Frieder <simon.frieder@cs.ac.ox.uk>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022.
Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

with integrating PCNs tightly into mainstream machine
learning by building models that can be trained and used
in practice; see, e.g., (Bartunov et al., 2018; Kriegeskorte,
2015; Hassabis et al., 2017; Song et al., 2020).
Within this latter context, supervised learning variants of
PCN models have been proposed recently whose training
is closely aligned with that of fully-connected feedforward
networks (FCFNs), which use stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) and backpropagation (Whittington & Bogacz, 2017;
Bogacz, 2017; Song et al., 2020; Salvatori et al., 2021b).
The PCN models outlined in these articles are our objects
of study. They are, similarly to FCFNs, specified by a fullyconnected architecture with weights but, crucially, their
training (learning) stage as well as their prediction stage,
uses a gradient-based iteration procedure. By prediction
stage, we mean those computational steps that need to be
performed to obtain an output for a network whose weights
are (e.g., by training) already fixed; see Figure 4. For
(trained) FCFNs, in contrast, one obtains the output after a
finite number of steps.
While the PCNs outlined in the four articles referenced
above are conceptually highly similar, they are not identical
on a formal level, and multiple variants of PCNs are
discussed in (Song et al., 2020). Appendix B contains
a short comparison of the models across these articles.
Because most of the differences between the models pertain
to their training stage, and our results that are focused on
the prediction stage the persist across all model variations.
To have a fixed reference, we describe a specific PCN
(Sections 2 and Appendix B, respectively) relative to which
we prove our results of (non-)convergence; our description
of PCNs is different from the referenced articles, as we
introduce new mathematical objects and new notation for
various parts of PCNs to achieve a fully rigorous setup that
is also notationally easier to handle.
PCNs can be trained in a way that not only approximates
backpropagation but provides an exact realization of
it (Lillicrap et al., 2020; Whittington & Bogacz, 2017; Song
et al., 2020). This has the advantage that certain biological
principles of how the brain works are satisfied during the
training of PCNs—unlike for FCFNs trained with SGD and
backpropagation. For example, PCNs (even beyond the

