Near-optimal rate of consistency for linear models with missing values

Alexis Ayme 1 Claire Boyer 1 2 Aymeric Dieuleveut 3 Erwan Scornet 3

Abstract
Missing values arise in most real-world data sets
due to the aggregation of multiple sources and
intrinsically missing information (sensor failure,
unanswered questions in surveys...). In fact, the
very nature of missing values usually prevents us
from running standard learning algorithms. In
this paper, we focus on the extensively-studied
linear models, but in presence of missing values,
which turns out to be quite a challenging task. Indeed, the Bayes predictor can be decomposed as
a sum of predictors corresponding to each missing pattern. This eventually requires to solve a
number of learning tasks, exponential in the number of input features, which makes predictions
impossible for current real-world datasets. First,
we propose a rigorous setting to analyze a leastsquare type estimator and establish a bound on
the excess risk which increases exponentially in
the dimension. Consequently, we leverage the
missing data distribution to propose a new algorithm, and derive associated adaptive risk bounds
that turn out to be minimax optimal. Numerical
experiments highlight the benefits of our method
compared to state-of-the-art algorithms used for
predictions with missing values.

1. Introduction
Missing values are more and more present as the size of
datasets increases. These missing values can occur for a
variety of reasons, such as sensor failures, refusals to answer
poll questions, or aggregations of data coming from different
sources (with different methods of data collection). There
may be different processes of missing value generation on
the same dataset, which makes the task of data cleaning
1

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Laboratoire de Probabilités,
Statistique et Modélisation (LPSM), F-75005 Paris, France
2
MOKAPLAN, INRIA Paris 3 CMAP, UMR7641, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris, 91128 Palaiseau, France. Correspondence to:
Alexis Ayme <alexis.ayme@sorbonne-universite.fr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

difficult or impossible without creating large biases. In
his leading work, Rubin (1976) distinguishes three missing
values scenarios: Missing Completely At Random (MCAR),
Missing At Random (MAR), and Missing Not At Random
(MNAR), depending on the links between the observed
variables, the missing ones, and the missing pattern.
In the linear regression framework, most of the literature
focuses on parameter estimation (Little, 1992; Jones, 1996;
Robins et al., 1994), using sometimes a sparse prior leading
to the Lasso estimator (Loh & Wainwright, 2012) or the
Dantzig selector (Rosenbaum & Tsybakov, 2010). Note
that the robust estimation literature (Dalalyan & Thompson,
2019; Chen & Caramanis, 2013) could be also used to handle missing values, as the latter can be reinterpreted as a multiplicative noise in linear models. Besides, Sportisse et al.
(2020) adapt and theoretically study the famous stochastic
gradient algorithm for model estimation in online linear
regression.
On the other hand, prediction with missing values in a parametric framework -even under a linear model- is in fact not
an easy task. Indeed, the prediction task is distinct from
model estimation: estimated model parameters cannot be
directly used to predict on a test sample containing missing values as well. As a matter of fact, the occurrence of
missing data turns the linear regression problem into a semidiscrete one of very high complexity. Finally, establishing
risk bounds -even without missing values- for random designs is already a challenge as studied in papers (Györfi
et al., 2006; Audibert & Catoni, 2011; Dieuleveut et al.,
2017) and more recently in (Mourtada, 2019).
Related work. There is actually little work on prediction
with missing values. Pelckmans et al. (2005) adapt the
SVM classifier to the case of missing values. Josse et al.
(2019) study the consistency of imputation strategies prior
to non-parametric learning methods. Prediction under linear
models has been studied in (Le Morvan et al., 2020a;b), by
exploiting the peculiar pattern-by-pattern structure of the
Bayes predictor (i.e. decomposable into predictors specific
to each missing pattern), and estimating it when the input
variables are assumed to be Gaussian. Le Morvan et al.
(2020b) obtain risk bounds, that suffer from the curse of
dimensionality, and are actually not compatible with their
Gaussian assumption. Agarwal et al. (2019) investigates

