Collaboration of Experts: Achieving 80%
Top-1 Accuracy on ImageNet with 100M FLOPs

Yikang Zhang 1 Zhuo Chen 1 Zhao Zhong 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Collaboration of Experts (CoE) framework to assemble the expertise of multiple networks towards a common goal.
Each expert is an individual network with expertise on a unique portion of the dataset, contributing to the collective capacity. Given a sample,
delegator selects an expert and simultaneously
outputs a rough prediction to trigger potential
early termination. For each model in CoE, we
propose a novel training algorithm with two major
components: weight generation module (WGM)
and label generation module (LGM). It fulfills
the co-adaptation of experts and delegator. WGM
partitions the training data into portions based on
delegator via solving a balanced transportation
problem, then impels each expert to focus on one
portion by reweighting the losses. LGM generates the label to constitute the loss of delegator for
expert selection. CoE achieves the state-of-the-art
performance on ImageNet, 80.7% top-1 accuracy
with 194M FLOPs. Combined with PWLU and
CondConv, CoE further boosts the accuracy to
80.0% with only 100M FLOPs for the first time.
Furthermore, experiment results on the translation task also demonstrate the strong generalizability of CoE. CoE is hardware-friendly, yielding
a 3∼6x acceleration compared with existing conditional computation approaches.

1. Introduction
From simple systems to complicated ones, the accomplishment of various tasks relies on the collaboration of multiple
individuals. Similarly, a wise combination of models with
different properties could yield improved performance on
a specific task compared to only deploying one individual
1
Huawei, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yikang Zhang
<zhangyikang7@huawei.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

model. There are many approaches for model collaboration, among which ensemble learning (Hansen & Salamon,
1990; Wen et al., 2020; Wenzel et al., 2020) is a popular
one. Ensemble learning uses a consensus scheme to decide
the collective result by vote. However, it requires multiple forward passes, leading to a significant runtime cost.
MIMO (Havasi et al., 2021) draws inspiration from model
sparsity (Frankle & Carbin, 2019) and tries to ensemble
several subnetworks within one regular network. It only
needs one single forward pass of the regular network but is
incompatible with compact models. Conditional computation methods (Cheng et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2015) adopt the
delegation scheme for model collaboration, conditionally
assigning one or several, rather than all models, to make the
prediction. Some recently proposed conditional computation methods (Yang et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021) have
achieved remarkable performance based on dynamic convolution. Nonetheless, they usually have high memory access
cost (MAC) and a low degree of parallelism, increasing the
real latency (Ma et al., 2018).
Motivated by this, we propose the Collaboration of Experts
(CoE) framework to both eliminate the need for multiple
forward passes and keep hardware-friendly. CoE consists of
one delegator and multiple experts. Firstly, delegator gives
a rough prediction and makes the expert selection. If the
rough prediction is unreliable, the selected expert will make
the refined prediction. Otherwise, the procedure will be
early terminated to save FLOPs. Moreover, we only need
to load the selected expert into memory, thus keeping the
ratio of MAC to FLOPs as a constant. By contrast, dynamic
convolution methods (Zhang et al., 2020; 2021) need to
load a large number of parameters, namely basis models or
experts, to synthesize the input-dependent ones. It enlarges
MAC and reduces the degree of parallelism, resulting in a
significant deceleration.
To make each model in CoE play its role, we propose a novel
training algorithm (as shown in Fig.1) which consists of two
major components: weight generation module (WGM) and
label generation module (LGM). LGM generates the label
(selection label) to constitute the loss of delegator for expert
selection. Selection label is a one-hot vector, indicating the
suitable expert for each given input. It is obtained by solv-

