Active Learning on a Budget: Opposite Strategies Suit High and Low Budgets

Guy Hacohen 1 2 * Avihu Dekel 1 * Daphna Weinshall 1

Abstract
Investigating active learning, we focus on the relation between the number of labeled examples
(budget size), and suitable querying strategies.
Our theoretical analysis shows a behavior reminiscent of phase transition: typical examples are
best queried when the budget is low, while unrepresentative examples are best queried when
the budget is large. Combined evidence shows
that a similar phenomenon occurs in common
classification models. Accordingly, we propose
TypiClust – a deep active learning strategy suited
for low budgets. In a comparative empirical investigation of supervised learning, using a variety of
architectures and image datasets, TypiClust outperforms all other active learning strategies in the
low-budget regime. Using TypiClust in the semisupervised framework, performance gets an even
more significant boost. In particular, state-of-theart semi-supervised methods trained on CIFAR10 with 10 labeled examples selected by TypiClust, reach 93.2% accuracy – an improvement of
39.4% over random selection. Code is available
at https://github.com/avihu111/TypiClust.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the emergence of deep learning
as the dominant force in advancing machine learning and
its applications. But this development is data-hungry – to a
large extent, deep learning owes its success to the growing
availability of annotated data. This is problematic even in
our era of Big Data, as the annotation of data remains costly.
Active Learning (AL) aims to alleviate this problem (see
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel 2 Edmond & Lily Safra Center for Brain Sciences, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. Correspondence to: Guy Hacohen <guy.hacohen@mail.huji.ac.il>,
Avihu Dekel <avihu.dekel@mail.huji.ac.il>, Daphna Weinshall
<daphna@cs.huji.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(a) Theoretical results

(b) Empirical results

Figure 1. Visualization of phase transition in deep active learning,
as revealed by plotting the difference in accuracy between different
AL strategies to a random baseline as a function of budget size (the
number of labeled examples). We see similar behavior both theoretically and empirically: when the budget is low, oversampling
typical examples is more beneficial, whereas when the budget is
high, oversampling atypical examples is more beneficial. (a) The
behavior of an idealized model (see Section 2). (b) The behavior of
TypiClust, contrasted with 2 basic uncertainty-based strategies, as
seen in deep neural models trained on CIFAR-10 (see Section 4).

surveys in Settles, 2009; Schröder & Niekler, 2020). Given
a large pool of unlabeled data, and possibly a small set of
labeled examples, learning is done iteratively: the learner
employs the labeled examples (if any), then queries an oracle
by submitting examples to be annotated. This may be done
repeatedly, often until a fixed budget is exhausted.
Many traditional active learning approaches are based on uncertainty sampling (e.g., Lewis & Gale, 1994; Ranganathan
et al., 2017; Gissin & Shalev-Shwartz, 2019; Sinha et al.,
2019). In uncertainty sampling, the learner queries examples about which it is least certain, presumably because
such labels contain the most information about the problem.
Another principle guiding deep AL approaches is diversity
sampling (e.g., Hu et al., 2010; Elhamifar et al., 2013; Sener
& Savarese, 2018; Shui et al., 2020). Here, queries are chosen to minimize the correlation between samples, in order
to avoid redundancy in the annotations. Sensibly, diversity
sampling is often combined with uncertainty sampling (see
App. A for further discussion of related work).
At present, effective deep active learning strategies are
known to require a large initial set of labeled examples to
work properly (Yuan et al., 2020; Pourahmadi et al., 2021).
We call this the high budget regime. In the low budget
regime, where the initial labeled set is small or absent, it has
been shown that random selection outperforms most deep
AL strategies (see Attenberg & Provost, 2010; Mittal et al.,

