Asking for Knowledge
:
Training RL Agents to Query External Knowledge Using Language

Iou-Jen Liu

*†1

Xingdi Yuan

*2

Marc-Alexandre Côté

*2

Pierre-Yves Oudeyer

Abstract
To solve difficult tasks, humans ask questions to
acquire knowledge from external sources. In contrast, classical reinforcement learning agents lack
such an ability and often resort to exploratory behavior. This is exacerbated as few present-day environments support querying for knowledge. In order to study how agents can be taught to query external knowledge via language, we first introduce
two new environments: the grid-world-based QBabyAI and the text-based Q-TextWorld. In addition to physical interactions, an agent can query an
external knowledge source specialized for these
environments to gather information. Second, we
propose the ‘Asking for Knowledge’ (AFK) agent,
which learns to generate language commands to
query for meaningful knowledge that helps solve
the tasks. AFK leverages a non-parametric memory, a pointer mechanism and an episodic exploration bonus to tackle (1) irrelevant information,
(2) a large query language space, (3) delayed reward for making meaningful queries. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that the AFK agent outperforms recent baselines on the challenging QBabyAI and Q-TextWorld environments. The code
of the environments and agents are available at
https://ioujenliu.github.io/AFK.

1. Introduction
To solve challenging tasks, humans query external knowledge sources, i.e., we ask for help. We also constantly create
knowledge sources (e.g., manuals), as it is often more economical in the long term than users exploring via trial and
*

Equal contribution †Work partially done while visiting
1
MSR University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, U.S.A.
2
3
Microsoft Research, Montréal, Canada Inria, France. Correspondence to: Iou-Jen Liu <iliu3@illinois.edu>, Xingdi Yuan
<eric.yuan@microsoft.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2. Where’s
green ball?

1. What’s
Mary’s toy?

†23

Alexander G. Schwing

1. Mary’s toy is
a green ball.

1

2. The green ball is
in the blue chest.

3. I don’t know.

3. Where’s
yellow star?

4. The green key.

4. What’s
the key?

Task: Find the key to the door, and find Mary's toy.

Figure 1. Proposed Q-BabyAI. Here the agent has to query the
knowledge source to succeed.

error. Moreover, cognitive science research (Maratsos, 2007;
Mills et al., 2010; Ronfard et al., 2018) showed that learning
to ask questions and to interpret answers is key in a child’s
development of problem-solving skills. Consequently, we
hypothesize that autonomous agents can address more complicated tasks if they can successfully learn to query external
knowledge sources. For querying, it seems desirable to use
some form of language. Not only does this allow to leverage
existing knowledge sources built for humans, but also does
it enable us to interpret the queries.
However, the literature to teach agents to query external
knowledge sources via language is scarce. Nguyen &
Daume (2019) consider agents that can request help in visual
navigation tasks. The agent can issue a ‘help’ signal, and
expects the environment to provide an instruction leading
it to a place towards the goal. Hence, agents learn when to
query, but do not have control of what to query. Zhong et al.
(2020) show that agents can better address novel tasks when
a manual is available. However, the manual contains all
relevant information and agents don’t need to learn to query.
Kovac et al. (2021) discuss the open challenge of building
agents that learn social interaction skills mixing physical
action and language. They show that state-of-the-art deep
reinforcement learning systems cannot learn several kinds
of social interaction skills. Instead of social skills, we focus on the open challenge of learning to ask for knowledge
using language and propose an effective approach.
To deliberately study how agents can be taught to

