Robust Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization Under Input Noise

Samuel Daulton * 1 2 Sait Cakmak * 1 3 Maximilian Balandat 1 Michael A. Osborne 2 Enlu Zhou 3
Eytan Bakshy 1

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a sample-efficient
approach for tuning design parameters to optimize expensive-to-evaluate, black-box performance metrics. In many manufacturing processes,
the design parameters are subject to random input noise, resulting in a product that is often less
performant than expected. Although BO methods have been proposed for optimizing a single
objective under input noise, no existing method
addresses the practical scenario where there are
multiple objectives that are sensitive to input perturbations. In this work, we propose the first
multi-objective BO method that is robust to input noise. We formalize our goal as optimizing the multivariate value-at-risk (MVA R), a risk
measure of the uncertain objectives. Since directly optimizing MVA R is computationally infeasible in many settings, we propose a scalable,
theoretically-grounded approach for optimizing
MVA R using random scalarizations. Empirically,
we find that our approach significantly outperforms alternative methods and efficiently identifies optimal robust designs that will satisfy specifications across multiple metrics with high probability.

1. Introduction
Scientists and engineers frequently face optimization problems where the goal is to tune a set of parameters to optimize
multiple competing black-box objective functions. Typically, no single design is best with respect to every objective.
Hence, the goal in multi-objective (MO) optimization is
to identify the Pareto frontier (PF) of optimal trade-offs
between the objectives and the corresponding optimal designs. These problems are ubiquitous in a variety of domains
including manufacturing (Liao et al., 2008), materials design (Ashby, 2000), robotics (Calandra and Peters, 2014),
*
Equal contribution 1 Meta 2 University of Oxford 3 Georgia
Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Samuel Daulton
<sdaulton@fb.com>, Sait Cakmak <saitcakmak@fb.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

and machine learning (Izquierdo et al., 2021; Eriksson et al.,
2021). Obtaining measurements of the objectives often
requires resource-intensive simulation or experimentation.
Therefore, any practical routine for optimizing such functions must be highly sample-efficient; that is, the method
must identify optimal design parameters while only querying the objective functions at a small number of designs.
Bayesian optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al., 2016) is a
popular technique for addressing this class of problems.
In many real-world applications, the final implementation
of the selected design parameters are subject to input noise,
resulting from uncontrollable perturbations of the input parameters (Beyer and Sendhoff, 2007). For example, many
vaccine production processes involve freeze-drying procedures to stabilize active pharmaceutical ingredients to increase storage lifetime (Mortier et al., 2016; Xie and Schenkendorf, 2019). Tuning the operating parameters, such as
shelf temperature and chamber pressure, can significantly
improve the efficiency of the drying step with little reduction in product quality. However, shelf temperature and
chamber pressure are subject to uncontrollable random input noise around the nominal1 input parameters. Robustness
with respect to this input noise is critical. Higher temperatures lead to greater efficiency, but also make the process
more sensitive to perturbations in the temperature because if
temperature exceeds the critical collapse threshold, there is
irreversible product damage. A more conservative temperature that is robust to input noise may be a better choice than a
higher temperature that is worse with respect to the nominal
objectives. In such high-stakes and high-throughput production pipelines, decision-makers seek to identify robust
design parameters that ensure the manufactured products
will have high objective quality with high probability.
Optimization without consideration of input noise can lead
to solutions that are catastrophic when subjected to input
noise at the implementation stage (Doltsinis and Kang,
2004). The toy problem that is illustrated in left plot of
Figure 1 demonstrates a scenario where a non-robust design
(depicted as a purple square) is better than the robust design
1

We call the design as specified by the decision maker the nominal design, and the corresponding value without any perturbations
as the nominal values for the nominal objectives.

