Adaptive Model Design for Markov Decision Process

Siyu Chen * 1 Donglin Yang * 1 Jiayang Li 2 Senmiao Wang 2 Zhuoran Yang 3 Zhaoran Wang 2

Abstract
In a Markov decision process (MDP), an agent interacts with the environment via perceptions and
actions. During this process, the agent aims to
maximize its own gain. Hence, appropriate regulations are often required, if we hope to take the
external costs/benefits of its actions into consideration. In this paper, we study how to regulate such
an agent by redesigning model parameters that
can affect the rewards and/or the transition kernels.
We formulate this problem as a bilevel program,
in which the lower-level MDP is regulated by the
upper-level model designer. To solve the resulting
problem, we develop a scheme that allows the
designer to iteratively predict the agent’s reaction
by solving the MDP and then adaptively update
model parameters based on the predicted reaction.
The algorithm is first theoretically analyzed and
then empirically tested on several MDP models
arising in economics and robotics.

1. Introduction
Markov decision process (MDP) is a powerful tool for modeling various dynamic planning problems arising in economic, social, and engineering systems. It has found applications in such diverse fields as financial investment (Derman
et al., 1975), repair and maintenance (Golabi et al., 1982;
Ouyang, 2007), resource management (Little, 1955; Russell,
1972), inventory and production (Onstad & Rabbinge, 1985;
Symonds, 1971), as well as robotic control (Koenig et al.,
1998). In an MDP, an agent interacts with the environment
via perceptions and actions, seeking to find a policy that
maximizes its total reward. However, during this process, it
usually does not bear the external costs (Maskin, 1994) of
its actions. Although these externalities are not received by
the agent, they may be detrimental to other individuals in
the system or the system’s overall performance.
*

Equal contribution 1 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA 3 Yale University,
New Haven, CT, USA. Correspondence to: Zhaoran Wang <zhaoranwang@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Take a small economy with one manufacturer as an example.
At each decision epoch, the manufacturer determines the
number of raw materials to purchase as well as the number
of products to produce based on system states including the
inventory levels, the prices of the materials, and its cash
balance (the amount of money on hand), etc. In such an
economy, the social welfare is affected by not only the profit
of the manufacturer but also the pollution caused by the
production. Unfortunately, the primary goal of the manufacturer is only to maximize its own profit. The environmental
impact, however, is not under its consideration. Therefore,
when the manufacturer’s profit is maximized, the environment may have already been damaged by the pollution.
To mitigate the potential environmental impact, appropriate
regulation is often necessary to guide the self-interests of
the manufacturer towards a systemically optimal state. For
example, the government can impose pollution taxes on
high-emission products, which would not only reshape the
manufacturer’s reward function and affect the transition
of system states (e.g., the cash balance). To maximize the
profit under the existence of the taxes, the manufacturer
then needs to change its production plan. With such power
to influence the manufacturer’s decision, the government
then can adaptively design the pollution taxes such that the
resulting production plan maximizes the social welfare.
The above discussion has led us to the following question
that motivates our study: how can we adaptively design the
reward function/transition kernel in an MDP to induce a
desirable outcome that fulfills the designer’s objective?
The resulting problem may be cast the resulting problem as
a Stackelberg game (Stackelberg, 1952) in which the leader
designs parameters in the MDP while the follower solves the
parameterized MDP accordingly. To solve this Stackelberg
game, we adaptively improve the designer’s decision based
on the MDP agent’s best response. To this end, we first
predict that response by solving the parameterized MDP and
then search for a direction to improve the designer’s decision
by examining the sensitivity of that response with respect
to the parameters, which in turn requires differentiating
through the parameterized MDP.
Over the past decades, numerous algorithms have been proposed for solving MDPs. Particularly, the rapid development
of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms (Sutton & Barto,
2018) has become one of the keys to the recent success

