Nesterov Accelerated Shuffling Gradient Method for Convex Optimization

Trang H. Tran 1 Katya Scheinberg 1 Lam M. Nguyen 2

Abstract

SGD and Shuffling SGD. Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) (Robbins & Monro, 1951) and its stochastic firstorder variants have been widely used to solve (1) thanks
to its scalability and efficiency in dealing with large-scale
problems (Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma & Ba, 2014; Bottou
et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2018).

In this paper, we propose Nesterov Accelerated
Shuffling Gradient (NASG), a new algorithm
for the convex finite-sum minimization problems.
Our method integrates the traditional Nesterov’s
acceleration momentum with different shuffling
sampling schemes. We show that our algorithm
has an improved rate of O(1/T ) using unified
shuffling schemes, where T is the number of
epochs. This rate is better than that of any other
shuffling gradient methods in convex regime. Our
convergence analysis does not require an assumption on bounded domain or a bounded gradient
condition. For randomized shuffling schemes, we
improve the convergence bound further. When
employing some initial condition, we show that
our method converges faster near the small neighborhood of the solution. Numerical simulations
demonstrate the efficiency of our algorithm.

At each iteration SGD samples an index i uniformly from
the set {1, . . . , n}, and uses the stochastic gradient ∇fi
to update the weight. While the uniformly independent
sampling of i plays an important role in our theoretical understanding of SGD, practical heuristics often use withoutreplacement sampling schemes (also known as shuffling
sampling schemes). These methods depend on some random
or deterministic permutations of the index set {1, 2, . . . , n}
and apply incremental gradient updates using these permutation order. A collection of such n individual updates is
called an epoch, or a pass over all the data. The most popular
method in this class is Random Reshuffling, which creates
a new random permutation at the beginning of each epoch.
Other important methods include Single Shuffling (which
uses the same (random) permutation for each epoch) and
Incremental Gradient (which uses a deterministic order of
indices). In this paper, the term Shuffling SGD refers to
SGD method using any data permutations, which includes
the three special schemes described above.

1. Introduction
We consider the finite-sum optimization problem:
)
(
n
1X
f (w; i) ,
min F (w) :=
n i=1
w∈Rd

(1)

where the objective function F : Rd → R is smooth and
convex, and each individual functions fi is smooth. This
standard problem arises in most machine learning tasks, including logistic regression, multi-kernel learning, and some
neural networks. The major challenge in solving (1) often
comes from the high dimension space and a large number
of components n. Therefore, deterministic methods relying
on full gradients are usually inefficient to solve this problem
(Sra et al., 2012; Bottou et al., 2018).
1
School of Operations Research and Information Engineering,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. 2 IBM Research, Thomas J.
Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Lam M. Nguyen <LamNguyen.MLTD@ibm.com>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Empirical studies show that shuffling sampling schemes
usually provide a faster convergence than SGD (Bottou,
2009). However, due to the lack of statistical independence,
analyzing these shuffling variants is often more challenging than the identically distributed version. Recent works
have shown theoretical improvement for shuffling schemes
over SGD in terms of the number of epochs needed to converge to an ϵ-accurate solution1 (Gürbüzbalaban et al., 2019;
Haochen & Sra, 2019; Safran & Shamir, 2020; Nagaraj et al.,
2019; Rajput et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2021; Mishchenko
et al., 2020; Ahn et al., 2020). In particular, in a general
convex setting, shuffling sampling √
schemes improve the
convergence rate of SGD from O(1/ T ) to O(1/T 2/3 ) in
terms of the number of effective data passes T (Nguyen
et al., 2021; Mishchenko et al., 2020). Thanks to their
We define an ϵ-accurate solution as a point x ∈ Rd that
satisfies F (x) − F (x∗ ) ≤ ϵ for convex settings (where x∗ is a
minimizer of F and the statement may hold in expectation).
1

