Robust Group Synchronization via Quadratic Programming

Yunpeng Shi * 1 Cole Wyeth * 2 Gilad Lerman 2

Abstract
We propose a novel quadratic programming
formulation for estimating the corruption levels in
group synchronization, and use these estimates to
solve this problem. Our objective function exploits
the cycle consistency of the group and we thus
refer to our method as detection and estimation
of structural consistency (DESC). This general
framework can be extended to other algebraic and
geometric structures. Our formulation has the
following advantages: it can tolerate corruption
as high as the information-theoretic bound, it does
not require a good initialization for the estimates of
group elements, it has a simple interpretation, and
under some mild conditions the global minimum
of our objective function exactly recovers the
corruption levels. We demonstrate the competitive
accuracy of our approach on both synthetic and
real data experiments of rotation averaging.

1. Introduction
Group synchronization (GS) is a critical mathematical
problem that has broad applications in statistics and
computer science. It assumes a mathematical group G
and a graph G([n], E) where [n] = {1, 2, . . . , n} and E
is the set of edges. Each node i of the graph is assigned
an unknown group element gi∗ , where the star superscript
designates ground-truth information. At each edge ij ∈ E,
one observes noisy and corrupted measurements gij of the
∗
ground-truth group ratio gij
= gi∗ gj∗−1 . The GS problem
asks to recover the unknown group elements, {gi∗ }i∈[n] , from
the observed group ratios, {gij }ij∈E . The most well-known
group synchronization problem is rotation averaging in 3D
computer vision, where G is SO(3). It asks to recover the
absolute rotations of objects from the possibly corrupted
*

Equal contribution 1 Program in Applied and Computational
Mathematics, Princeton University 2 School of Mathematics,
University of Minnesota. Correspondence to: Yunpeng Shi <yunpengs@princeton.edu>, Cole Wyeth <wyeth008@umn.edu>,
Gilad Lerman <lerman@umn.edu>.

and noisy relative rotations between pairs of objects. The
rotation averaging problem plays a central role in many
3D computer vision tasks such as structure from motion
(SfM) and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM).
Other examples of group synchronization include phase
synchronization (G = SO(2)) with applications to cryoelectron microscopy imaging, permutation synchronization
(G = Sn ) with applications to multi-object matching,
and Z2 -synchronization (G = Z2 ) with applications to
correlation clustering and community detection.
In many real scenarios, the observed group ratios are highly
corrupted. In order to handle the high corruption, it is critical
to estimate the corruption levels. In order to quantify them we
assume a predefined bi-invariant metric on G, which we denote by d. The bi-invariance property of d means that for any
g1 , g2 , g3 ∈ G, d(g1 , g2 ) = d(g3 g1 , g3 g2 ) = d(g1 g3 , g2 g3 ).
Using d, the corruption level of edge ij ∈ E is
∗
s∗ij = d(gij , gij
).
(1)
The primary goal of this work is to develop a principled
and interpretable framework to estimate {s∗ij }ij∈E without
requiring a good initialization, and to robustly estimate the
group elements using the estimated {s∗ij }ij∈E .
For this purpose we exploit the cycle-consistency constraint.
It uses the group identity e as follows:
∗ ∗ ∗
gij
gjk gki = e for any ij, jk, ki ∈ E,
(2)
In principle, one can utilize the cycle-consistency constraints
for longer cycles, whereas we focus on 3-cycles for
simplicity and for computational efficiency.
We propose a general solution for GS, which we refer to as
Detection and Estimation of Structural Consistency (DESC).
The terminology “structural consistency” refers to the induced cycle consistency constraint. We believe that this
framework can also be generalized to other algebraic or geometric structure constraints in other application areas, such as
low-rankness, low dimensionality, coplanarity of points in a
Euclidean space, transitivity of ordering in the ranking problem, etc. Nevertheless, in order to keep this presentation focused and clear, we restrict it to GS. Similarly, we discuss the
most refined procedures of DESC for the group SO(3) only.
1.1. Previous Works

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright
2022 by the author(s).

Group synchronization was commonly applied to the
discrete groups Z2 and Sn (Bandeira, 2018; Cucuringu,

