EqR: Equivariant Representations for
Data-Efficient Reinforcement Learning

Arnab Kumar Mondal 1 2 3 Vineet Jain 1 2 Kaleem Siddiqi 1 2 3 Siamak Ravanbakhsh 1 2

Abstract

𝔸
𝕊￼

1. Introduction
The recent success of deep reinforcement learning (FrançoisLavet et al., 2018) in applications ranging from games such
as Atari (Mnih et al., 2015), Go (Silver et al., 2016) and
Poker (Brown & Sandholm, 2019), to robotics (Levine et al.,
2016) and autonomous navigation (Bellemare et al., 2020)
has demonstrated its promise as a powerful framework for
sequential decision making. However, using a reward as the
only signal for representation learning in contexts with high
dimensional states and actions leads to tremendous data
inefficiency. Notably, almost all success stories of RL rely
on vast amounts of data or simulations with a substantial

Latent Embedding

m
m
Sy
ion
Tra
ns
it

We study a variety of notions of equivariance as an
inductive bias in Reinforcement Learning (RL). In
particular, we propose new mechanisms for learning representations that are equivariant to both the
agent’s action, as well as symmetry transformations of the state-action pairs. Whereas prior work
on exploiting symmetries in deep RL can only incorporate predefined linear transformations, our
approach allows non-linear symmetry transformations of state-action pairs to be learned from
the data. This is achieved through 1) equivariant Lie algebraic parameterization of state and
action encodings, 2) equivariant latent transition
models, and 3) the incorporation of symmetrybased losses. We demonstrate the advantages
of our method, which we call Equivariant representations for RL (EqR), for Atari games in
a data-efficient setting limited to 100K steps of
interactions with the environment.

et

ry

State transition

Action
equivariant
transition

Group
equivariant
transition

s ,a
h

s′

T

hs

s̄ , ā

h

T̄

s̄′

τg κ s
g

s̃ , ã

τg
T̄

s̃′

Figure 1. This figure demonstrates the relationship between two
types of equivariance in latent variable modeling for an MDP with
a symmetric transition function. Green arrows (vertical plane) identify a diagram for transition models in an MDP homomorphism.
A model T̄ and state embedding function hS that are equivariant
under an agent’s action makes this diagram commute. Red arrows
(horizontal plane) identify the commutativity diagram for a symmetric transition function of an MDP in the latent space. Here the
state-action embedding ⟨s̃, ã⟩ is produced through the symmetry
transformation of another state-action embedding ⟨s̄, ā⟩.

computational overload.

School of Computer Science, McGill University, Montréal,
Canada 2 Mila- Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute, Montréal,
Canada 3 Centre for Intelligent Machines, McGill University,
Montréal, Canada. Correspondence to: Arnab Kumar Mondal
<arnab.mondal@mila.quebec>.

More data-efficient representation learning (Bengio et al.,
2013) requires the construction of stronger inductive biases, which is a challenging problem in its own right. One
general approach is to place a central emphasis on a set of
transformations of the data, such that invariance and equivariance to them impose strong conditions on the learned
representations. Intuitively, equivariance leads to better
sample efficiency because by observing a specific trajectory
or triplet (s, a, s′ ), the agent has effectively observed all of
its transformations. This transformation-based viewpoint is
particularly appealing in RL, where the agent is in control
of some of these transformations through its actions.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

In addition, transformations naturally lead to a notion of disentanglement in the representations (Higgins et al., 2018),
potentially enabling better out-of-distribution generalization

1

