Variational Sparse Coding with Learned Thresholding

Kion Fallah 1 Christopher J. Rozell 1

Abstract
Sparse coding strategies have been lauded for
their parsimonious representations of data that
leverage low dimensional structure. However,
inference of these codes typically relies on an
optimization procedure with poor computational
scaling in high-dimensional problems. For example, sparse inference in the representations
learned in the high-dimensional intermediary layers of deep neural networks (DNNs) requires an
iterative minimization to be performed at each
training step. As such, recent, quick methods in
variational inference have been proposed to infer
sparse codes by learning a distribution over the
codes with a DNN. In this work, we propose a new
approach to variational sparse coding that allows
us to learn sparse distributions by thresholding
samples, avoiding the use of problematic relaxations. We first evaluate and analyze our method
by training a linear generator, showing that it has
superior performance, statistical efficiency, and
gradient estimation compared to other sparse distributions. We then compare to a standard variational autoencoder using a DNN generator on the
Fashion MNIST and CelebA datasets.

1. Introduction
Variational inference has become a ubiquitous tool in unsupervised learning of a distribution of latent features. These
variational distributions can offer approximations in cases
where inference over a true distribution is computationally
expensive. Once inference is performed, latent features can
be used for a variety of machine learning tasks, such as
summarizing a dataset or training a generative model. The
structure and statistical properties of latent features depend
on the practitioner’s choice of a prior distribution. Sparse
distributions, in which only a few features are non-zero for
1
ML@GT, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia.
Correspondence to: Kion Fallah <kion@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Comparison of standard black-box variational inference
and our proposed approach for variational sparse coding. Orange
arrows depict a forward pass, blue arrows depict automatic differentiation. Top: Sampling from standard variational inference
approaches result in all features non-zero. Bottom: Our approach
incorporates sparsity via a shifted soft-threshold function. We
utilize a straight-through estimator, skipping the gradient of the
shifted soft-threshold, for exact sparsity without numerical instability during training.

each input data sample, have been favored for encouraging
statistically efficient representations, especially when input data has low-dimensional structure (Olshausen & Field,
2004; Elad, 2010).
To perform inference in sparse models with low computational cost, recent black-box variational inference (BBVI)
(Ranganath et al., 2013) methods have been proposed to
learn distribution parameters with DNNs using automatic
differentiation (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al.,
2014). Unfortunately, these approaches either do not explicitly learn sparse features (Barello et al., 2018) or rely on
relaxations that can lead to poor gradient estimation during
training (Tonolini et al., 2020).
Motivated by the success of soft-thresholding in iterative
optimization procedures (Daubechies et al., 2003; Donoho
& Johnstone, 1994), we propose a BBVI method to learn
sparse distributions by thresholding samples drawn from a
Laplacian or Gaussian distribution. We analytically show
that thresholded samples from the former are identically
distributed to a Spike-and-Slab distribution, giving practitioners control over the extent of sparsity by adjusting a

