Causal Imitation Learning under Temporally Correlated Noise

Gokul Swamy 1 Sanjiban Choudhury 2 J. Andrew Bagnell 3 1 Zhiwei Steven Wu 1

Abstract
We develop algorithms for imitation learning from
policy data that was corrupted by temporally correlated noise in expert actions. When noise affects
multiple timesteps of recorded data, it can manifest as spurious correlations between states and
actions that a learner might latch on to, leading to
poor policy performance. To break up these spurious correlations, we apply modern variants of
the instrumental variable regression (IVR) technique of econometrics, enabling us to recover the
underlying policy without requiring access to an
interactive expert. In particular, we present two
techniques, one of a generative-modeling flavor
(DoubIL) that can utilize access to a simulator,
and one of a game-theoretic flavor (ResiduIL)
that can be run entirely offline. We find both of
our algorithms compare favorably to behavioral
cloning on simulated control tasks.

1. Introduction
Much of the theory of imitation learning (IL) tells us that
with enough demonstrations, we should be able to accurately
recover the expert’s policy. A long line of work (Ross et al.,
2011; Sun et al., 2019; Spencer et al., 2021; Swamy et al.,
2021) has derived performance bounds that seem to imply
that if infinite-sample training error is driven to zero, value
equivalence to the expert policy should follow. However,
when we actually apply IL algorithms on large datasets, we
sometimes see them produce manifestly incorrect estimates
of the expert’s policy (Muller et al., 2006; Codevilla et al.,
2019; de Haan et al., 2019; Bansal et al., 2018; Kuefler
et al., 2017). One possible reason for this phenomenon is
that empirically, we might only have access to recordings of
the expert that are corrupted by temporally correlated noise
(TCN). For example, a quadcopter pilot might have been
flying under persistent wind or an expert driver might have
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Cornell University 3 Aurora Innovation. Correspondence to: Gokul Swamy <gswamy@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

been using a car with sticky brakes. More generally, we
might expect that for a variety of sequential prediction tasks,
observational data might have noise that is not independently
distributed across timesteps.
The downstream effect of TCN (more formally, an unobserved confounder) is temporal correlations in the recorded
actions that do not have their true cause in the recorded state.
Consider again our quadcopter pilot demonstrating how to
fly straight on a rather windy day. If we directly fed these
swerve-filled trajectories to the learner, they might learn to
reproduce the deviations, producing trajectories that deviate
even further from a straight path in a test-time windy environment. At a more abstract level, these sorts of inconsistent
policy estimates can result from temporal correlations between pairs of actions (e.g. the persistent wind affecting the
observed heading) being reflected in the state (e.g. the quadcopter position) leading to spurious correlations between
state and action that the learner might unfortunately latch
onto (e.g. turning further left when on the left).
What then should we hope to learn in these confounded
settings? Given we do not have access to the unobserved
confounder, a reasonable choice is to ensure that we
match the behavior of an expert with access to the same
information we have. Put differently, we should strive to
produce actions matching those proposed by an expert
queried about our current observation. While applying
an interactive imitation learning algorithm like DAgger
(Ross et al., 2011) would allow us to collect a dataset
uncorrupted by confounding (as we directly observe
deconfounded expert actions), a queryable expert is not a
realistic assumption for many domains. We therefore focus
on approaches that operate on the basis of a fixed set of
demonstrations. We base our algorithms on instrumental
variable regression (IVR) (Angrist et al., 1996), a technique
from econometrics for dealing with confounding in
recorded data. The high-level idea of IVR is to leverage
an instrument, a source of random variation independent
of the confounder, to deconfound inputs to a learning
procedure via conditioning on the instrument. In dynamical
systems, history can act as this source of variation, as it
is unaffected by future confounding (Hefny et al., 2015).
Our key insight is that we can leverage past states as
instruments to break the spurious correlation between
states and actions caused by an unobserved confounder.

