Deep Symbolic Regression for Recurrent Sequences

Stéphane d’Ascoli * 1 2 Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny * 2 3 Guillaume Lample 2 François Charton 2

Abstract
Symbolic regression, i.e. predicting a function
from the observation of its values, is well-known
to be a challenging task. In this paper, we
train Transformers to infer the function or recurrence relation underlying sequences of integers
or floats, a typical task in human IQ tests which
has hardly been tackled in the machine learning
literature. We evaluate our integer model on a
subset of OEIS sequences, and show that it outperforms built-in Mathematica functions for recurrence prediction. We also demonstrate that
our float model is able to yield informative approximations of out-of-vocabulary functions and
√
constants, e.g. bessel0(x) ≈ sin(x)+cos(x)
and
πx
2
1.644934 ≈ π /6.

1. Introduction
Given the sequence [1,2,4,7,11,16], what is the next term?
Humans usually solve such riddles by noticing patterns in
the sequence. In the easiest cases, one can spot a function:
[1,4,9,16,25] are the first five squares, so the n-th term in
the series is un = n2 , and the next one is 36. Most often
however, we look for relations between successive terms:
in the sequence [1,2,4,7,11,16], the differences between
successive values are 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, which makes it likely
that the next term will be 16 + 6 = 22. Mathematically, we
are inferring the recurrence relation un = un−1 + n, with
u0 = 1.
In all cases, we handle such problems as symbolic regressions: starting from a sequence of numbers, we try to
discover a function or a recurrence relation that they satisfy, and use it to predict the next terms. This can lead
to very challenging problems as the complexity of the unknown recurrence relation un = f (n, {ui }i<n ) increases,
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Physics, École Normale
Supérieure, Paris 2 Meta AI, Paris 3 Laboratoire d’Informatique de
Paris 6, Sorbonne Université, Paris. Correspondence to: Stéphane
d’Ascoli <stephane.dascoli@ens.fr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

e.g. un = tan−1 (un−3 ) exp(cos(n2 )).
In this paper, we train neural networks to infer the recurrence relation f from the observation of the first terms of
the sequence. The majority of studies in machine learning for symbolic regression have focused on non-recurrent
functions, i.e. expressions of the form y = f (x). Recurrence relations provide a more general setting, which gives
a deeper account of the underlying process: if the sequence
corresponds to successive time steps, the recurrence relation is a discrete time differential equation for the system
considered.
1.1. Contributions
We show that transformers can learn to infer a recurrence
relation from the observation of the first terms of a sequence.
We consider both sequences of integers and floats, and train
our models on a large set of synthetic examples.
We first demonstrate that our symbolic regression model
can predict complex recurrence relations that were not seen
during training. We also show that those recurrence relations
can be used to extrapolate the next terms of the sequence
with better precision than a “numeric” model of similar
architecture, trained specifically for extrapolation.
We then test the out-of-domain generalization of our models. On a subset of the Online Encyclopedia of Integer
Sequences, our integer models outperform built-in Mathematica functions, both for sequence extrapolation and recurrence prediction, see Table 1 for some examples. We
also show that our symbolic float model is capable of predicting approximate expressions for out-of-vocabulary func√
tions and constants (e.g. bessel0(x) ≈ sin(x)+cos(x)
and
πx
2
1.644934 ≈ π /6), see Tables 2, 3 for more examples.
We conclude by discussing potential limitations of our models and future directions.
1.2. Related work
AI for maths The use of neural networks for mathematics
has recently gained attention: several works have demonstrated their surprising reasoning abilities (Saxton et al.,
2019; Cobbe et al., 2021), and have even sparked some interesting mathematical discoveries (Davies et al., 2021). In

