Fishing for User Data in Large-Batch Federated Learning
via Gradient Magnification

Yuxin Wen * 1 Jonas Geiping * 1 Liam Fowl * 1 Micah Goldblum 2 Tom Goldstein 1

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has rapidly risen in popularity due to its promise of privacy and efficiency.
Previous works have exposed privacy vulnerabilities in the FL pipeline by recovering user data
from gradient updates. However, existing attacks
fail to address realistic settings because they either
1) require toy settings with very small batch sizes,
or 2) require unrealistic and conspicuous architecture modifications. We introduce a new strategy
that dramatically elevates existing attacks to operate on batches of arbitrarily large size, and without
architectural modifications. Our model-agnostic
strategy only requires modifications to the model
parameters sent to the user, which is a realistic threat model in many scenarios. We demonstrate the strategy in challenging large-scale settings, obtaining high-fidelity data extraction in
both cross-device and cross-silo federated learning. Code is available at https://github.
com/JonasGeiping/breaching.

1. Introduction
Is it possible to train machine learning models on massive
amounts of private data without compromising the data and
feeding it to a central server? Federated learning is poised
to be one step towards a solution to this question.
In federated learning (FL) and other collaborative learning
frameworks, machine learning models are trained in a decentralized manner. A central server sends only the current state
of the model to all participating users, the users compute
model updates based on their own private data, and only
their update is returned to the server, optionally after being
securely aggregated across multiple users (Kairouz et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Maryland 2 New York University. Correspondence to: Yuxin Wen <ywen@umd.edu>, Jonas
Geiping <jgeiping@umd.edu>, Liam Fowl <lfowl@umd.edu>,
Tom Goldstein <tomg@umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Previous attacks (left) for a batch size of 32 in the
“honest-but-curious” threat model, vs. a fishing attack (right) under
the “malicious-parameters” threat model. Malicious modifications
of the server update lead to the complete compromise of a single
example which is fished out of an arbitrarily large batch of aggregated data.

2021; Bonawitz et al., 2017). This is often referred to as the
principle of data minimization - the server never sees user
data directly, and model updates sent by the user are considered to only contain the minimal information necessary to
improve the model (Bonawitz et al., 2021). However, federated learning is only secure as long as the model updates
sent by users cannot be inverted to retrieve their original
contents. Such attacks breach privacy in federated learning
and directly reveal user data. Previously, such attacks have
been demonstrated mostly on either small batches of data,

