Dataset Condensation with Contrastive Signals

Saehyung Lee 1 † Sanghyuk Chun 2 Sangwon Jung 1 † Sangdoo Yun 2 Sungroh Yoon 1 3

Abstract
Recent studies have demonstrated that gradient
matching-based dataset synthesis, or dataset condensation (DC), methods can achieve state-of-theart performance when applied to data-efficient
learning tasks. However, in this study, we prove
that the existing DC methods can perform worse
than the random selection method when taskirrelevant information forms a significant part of
the training dataset. We attribute this to the lack
of participation of the contrastive signals between
the classes resulting from the class-wise gradient
matching strategy. To address this problem, we
propose Dataset Condensation with Contrastive
signals (DCC) by modifying the loss function to
enable the DC methods to effectively capture the
differences between classes. In addition, we analyze the new loss function in terms of training
dynamics by tracking the kernel velocity. Furthermore, we introduce a bi-level warm-up strategy
to stabilize the optimization. Our experimental
results indicate that while the existing methods
are ineffective for fine-grained image classification tasks, the proposed method can successfully
generate informative synthetic datasets for the
same tasks. Moreover, we demonstrate that the
proposed method outperforms the baselines even
on benchmark datasets such as SVHN, CIFAR-10,
and CIFAR-100. Finally, we demonstrate the high
applicability of the proposed method by applying
it to continual learning tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are data hungry; larger
datasets make DNNs more generalizable (e.g., by data aug†

Work done at NAVER AI Lab 1 Department of Electric and
Computer Engineering, Seoul National University 2 NAVER AI
Lab 3 Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul
National University. Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(a) Trailer Truck

(b) Police Van

Task-irrelevant features: {Wheels, Head lights, Roads, Trees, ...}
Task-relevant features: {Logo, Police sign, Trailers, ...}

Figure 1: Example of a fine-grained Truck classification task
where the task-irrelevant common features are dominant and
the task-relevant discriminant features are in the minority.

mentation (Zhang et al., 2017; Yun et al., 2019; Lee et al.,
2021), or by collecting hyperscale training datasets (Jia et al.,
2021)). Unsurprisingly, gigantic datasets (e.g., 410 B language tokens (Brown et al., 2020), 3.5B images (Mahajan
et al., 2018), and 1.8B image-text pairs (Jia et al., 2021))
have become central to the training of ground-breaking deep
models. However, such large datasets require tremendous
computational and infrastructural resources, not only for
training deep models but also for collecting and processing
data columns. Furthermore, real-world knowledge is increasing exponentially, while machine learning (ML) systems are
prone to catastrophic forgetting (Goodfellow et al., 2013;
Rebuffi et al., 2017). This necessitates repeated training
using massive training samples to ensure that ML applications remain competent and practical. Thus, considering
the high computational costs, dataset reduction methods are
extremely beneficial in applied ML fields. Zhao et al. (2021)
proposed a dataset condensation method (DC) to synthesize
a small but informative dataset by matching the loss gradients with respect to the training and synthetic datasets. In
particular, DC was developed to be suitable for downstream
classification tasks by repeating the classifier training during the synthetic data optimization procedure, resulting in
reasonable performances with reduced synthetic datasets.
In this study, however, we show that DC primarily focuses
on the class-wise gradient while overlooking contrastive
signals. Thus, DC underperforms even when compared with
the random selection baseline when contrastive signals are
significant to the task. For example, in fine-grained image
classification tasks, such as Truck categorization in Fig. 1,
contrastive signals should be considered to encode task-

