Correlated Quantization for Distributed Mean Estimation and Optimization

Ananda Theertha Suresh 1 Ziteng Sun 1 Jae Hun Ro 1 Felix Yu 1

Abstract
We study the problem of distributed mean estimation and optimization under communication
constraints. We propose a correlated quantization
protocol whose error guarantee depends on the
deviation of data points instead of their absolute
range. The design doesn’t need any prior knowledge on the concentration property of the dataset,
which is required to get such dependence in previous works. We show that applying the proposed
protocol as a sub-routine in distributed optimization algorithms leads to better convergence rates.
We also prove the optimality of our protocol under mild assumptions. Experimental results show
that our proposed algorithm outperforms existing mean estimation protocols on a diverse set of
tasks.

1. Introduction
Large-scale machine learning systems often require the distribution of data across multiple devices. For example, in
federated learning (Kairouz et al., 2021), data is distributed
across user devices such as cell phones, and the machine
learning models are trained with adaptive stochastic gradient
descent methods or their variations like federated averaging
(McMahan et al., 2017). Such algorithms require multiple rounds of communication between the devices and the
centralized server. At each round, the devices send model
updates to the server, and the server aggregates the data and
outputs a new model.
In many scenarios like federated learning, the data from
devices are sent to the server over wireless channels. Communication between devices and the server, especially the
uplink communication, is a bottleneck. This has resulted in
a series of works on compression and quantization methods
to reduce the communication cost (Konečnỳ et al., 2016;
Lin et al., 2018; Alistarh et al., 2017).
1

Google Research, New York. Correspondence to: Ananda
Theertha Suresh <theertha@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

At the heart of these algorithms is the distributed mean
estimation protocol where each client has a model update
(in the form of a vector). Each client compresses its update
and transmits the compressed version to the server. The
server then decompresses and aggregates the updates to
approximate the mean of the updates. In this work, we study
the problem of distributed mean estimation and provide the
first algorithm whose dominant term of the error depends
on the variance of the inputs rather than only their absolute
range without additional side information. We then use
these results to provide improved convergence guarantees
for distributed optimization protocols. Before we proceed
further, we need a few definitions.
Distributed mean estimation. Let X ⊂ Rd be the input
space and xn = x1 , x2 , . . . , xn be the n data points where
def
each xi ∈ X . For most results, we assume X = Bd (R) =
{x ∈ Rd | ∥x∥2 ≤ R}, the ℓ2 ball of radius R. We denote
the mean of the vectors as
n

1X
x̄ =
xi .
n i=1
In compression, these xi s are encoded at the clients and
then decoded at the server (Mayekar and Tyagi, 2020). Qi ,
the quantizer (encoder) at client i is a (possibly randomized)
mapping from X → Y, where Y is the quantized space.
With the slight abuse of notation let Qn = Q1 , Q2 , . . . Qn ,
be the set of quantizers. Each client encodes xi and sends
Qi (xi ) to the server. The server then decodes Qn (xn ) to
get an estimate of the mean x̂. Following earlier works
(Suresh et al., 2017; Mayekar and Tyagi, 2020), we measure
the performance of the quantizer in terms of mean squared
error,
def
E(Qn , xn ) = E∥x̂ − x̄∥22 ,
where the expectation is over the public and private randomness of the algorithm.
Distributed optimization. We consider solving the following optimization task using distributed stochastic gradient descent (SGD) methods. Let F : Rd → R be an
objective function and the goal is to minimize the F over an
def
ℓ2 -bounded space Ω = {w ∈ Rd | ∥w∥2 ≤ D}. Motivated
by the federated learning setting, we assume there are T

