Learning from Counterfactual Links for Link Prediction

Tong Zhao 1 Gang Liu 1 Daheng Wang 1 Wenhao Yu 1 Meng Jiang 1

Abstract
Learning to predict missing links is important for
many graph-based applications. Existing methods
were designed to learn the association between
observed graph structure and existence of link
between a pair of nodes. However, the causal relationship between the two variables was largely
ignored for learning to predict links on a graph.
In this work, we visit this factor by asking a counterfactual question: “would the link still exist if
the graph structure became different from observation?” Its answer, counterfactual links, will be
able to augment the graph data for representation
learning. To create these links, we employ causal
models that consider the information (i.e., learned
representations) of node pairs as context, global
graph structural properties as treatment, and link
existence as outcome. We propose a novel data
augmentation-based link prediction method that
creates counterfactual links and learns representations from both the observed and counterfactual
links. Experiments on benchmark data show that
our graph learning method achieves state-of-theart performance on the task of link prediction.

1. Introduction
Link prediction seeks to predict the likelihood of edge existence between node pairs based on observed graph. Given
the omnipresence of graph-structured data, link prediction has copious applications, such as movie recommendation (Bennett et al., 2007), chemical interaction prediction (Stanfield et al., 2017), and knowledge graph completion (Kazemi & Poole, 2018). Graph machine learning
methods have been widely applied to solve this problem.
Their standard scheme is to first learn representation vectors of nodes and then learn the association between the
representations of a pair of nodes and the existence of link
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, IN, USA. Correspondence to: Tong Zhao
<tzhao2@nd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

between them. For example, graph neural networks (GNNs)
use neighborhood aggregation to create the representation
vectors: the representation vector of a node is computed
by recursively aggregating and transforming representation
vectors of its neighboring nodes (Kipf & Welling, 2016a;
Hamilton et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2020). Then the vectors
are fed into a binary classification model to learn the association. GNN methods have shown predominance in the task
of link prediction (Zhang et al., 2020).
Unfortunately, the causal relationship between graph structure and link existence was largely ignored in previous work.
Existing methods that learn from association are not able to
capture essential factors to accurately predict missing links
in test data. Take a specific social network as an example.
Suppose Alice and Adam live in the same neighborhood
and they are close friends. The association between neighborhood belonging and friendship could be too strong to
discover the essential factors of friendship such as common
interests or family relationships. Such factors could also be
the cause of them living in the same neighborhood. So, our
idea is to ask a counterfactual question: “would Alice and
Adam still be close friends if they were not living in the same
neighborhood?” If a graph learning model can learn the
causal relationship by answering this counterfactual question, it will improve the accuracy of link prediction with
such knowledge. Generally, the questions can be described
as “would the link exist or not if the graph structure became
different from observation?”
As known to many, counterfactual questions are the key
component of causal inference and have been well defined
in literature. A counterfactual question is usually framed
with three factors: context (as a data point), manipulation
(e.g., treatment, intervention, action, strategy), and outcome
(Van der Laan & Petersen, 2007; Johansson et al., 2016).
(To simplify the language, we use “treatment” to refer to
the manipulation in this paper, as readers might be familiar
more with the word “treatment.”) Given certain data context,
it asks what the outcome would have been if the treatment
had not been the observed value. In the scenario of link
prediction, we consider the information of a pair of nodes
as context, graph structural properties as treatment, and link
existence as outcome. Recall the social network example.
The context is the representations of Alice and Adam that
are learned from their personal attributes and relationships

