Image-to-Image Regression with Distribution-Free Uncertainty Quantification
and Applications in Imaging

Anastasios N. Angelopoulos * 1 Amit Kohli * 1 Stephen Bates 1 Michael I. Jordan 1 Jitendra Malik 1
Thayer Alshaabi 2 Srigokul Upadhyayula 2 3 Yaniv Romano 4

Abstract
Image-to-image regression is an important learning task, used frequently in biological imaging.
Current algorithms, however, do not generally
offer statistical guarantees that protect against
a model’s mistakes and hallucinations. To address this, we develop uncertainty quantification
techniques with rigorous statistical guarantees for
image-to-image regression problems. In particular, we show how to derive uncertainty intervals
around each pixel that are guaranteed to contain
the true value with a user-specified confidence
probability. Our methods work in conjunction
with any base machine learning model, such as a
neural network, and endow it with formal mathematical guarantees, regardless of the true unknown data distribution or choice of model. Furthermore, they are simple to implement and computationally inexpensive. We evaluate our procedure on three image-to-image regression tasks:
quantitative phase microscopy, accelerated magnetic resonance imaging, and super-resolution
transmission electron microscopy of a Drosophila
melanogaster brain, and provide accompanying
open source code.

1. Introduction
The deployment of image-to-image regression in scientific
imaging has generated enormous excitement, promising
a future where the resolution of an imaging system can
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley 2 Advanced
Bioimaging Center, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley 3 Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA 4 Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering and of Computer Science, Technion - Israel
Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Anastasios N. Angelopoulos <angelopoulos@berkeley.edu>, Amit Kohli <apkohli@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

be improved algorithmically (Weigert et al., 2018). For
example, research developments in machine learning have
accelerated MRI scans by an order of magnitude (Zbontar
et al., 2018b). But, to this day, there remains an elephant in
the room, obstructing the deployment of these systems: how
can we know when the model has produced an incorrect
prediction?
In most cases, we cannot. Indeed, the expressive power of
modern machine learning is also its torment. Deep learning
models have revolutionized predictive accuracy, but they
fail in silent, unknown, and even unknowable ways. For
scientific imaging settings, where learning will be used for
inference and discovery, we need ways to understand when
and how a model’s predictions might be wrong. Nonetheless, image-to-image regression algorithms, such as those
for denoising and super-resolution, are normally deployed
without any notion of statistical reliability. The scientist is
therefore left worrying that their new discovery is simply
the model’s hallucination. The purpose of this paper is to
introduce a technique which rigorously quantifies the uncertainty in an image-valued point prediction, thereby alerting
the scientist of potential hallucinations (see Figure 1).
We will develop a method for endowing any image-to-image
regression model with per-pixel uncertainty intervals. At a
particular pixel, an uncertainty interval is a range of values
guaranteed to contain the true value of that pixel with high
probability. Our contributions are the following:
1. We introduce distribution-free uncertainty quantification to image-to-image regression; this means the uncertainty intervals will have a rigorous guarantee for
any image dataset and any regression model, regardless of the number of data points used to construct the
interval.
2. We introduce and evaluate several practical algorithms for constructing these sets, including pixelwise
quantile regression, an extension of quantile regression (Koenker & Bassett Jr, 1978) to this setting. In
experiments, pixelwise quantile regression consistently
leads to the best performance of any uncertainty quantification algorithm, often by a large amount.
3. We apply our methods to three challenging imag-

