Learning Efficient and Robust Ordinary Differential
Equations via Invertible Neural Networks

Weiming Zhi 1 Tin Lai 1 Lionel Ott 2 Edwin V. Bonilla 3 Fabio Ramos 1 4

Abstract
Advances in differentiable numerical integrators
have enabled the use of gradient descent techniques to learn ordinary differential equations
(ODEs), where a flexible function approximator (often a neural network) is used to estimate
the system dynamics, given as a time derivative.
However, these integrators can be unsatisfactorily slow and unstable when learning systems of
ODEs from long sequences. We propose to learn
an ODE of interest from data by viewing its dynamics as a vector field related to another base
vector field via a diffeomorphism (i.e., a differentiable bijection), represented by an invertible
neural network (INN). By learning both the INN
and the dynamics of the base ODE, we provide
an avenue to offload some of the complexity in
modeling the dynamics directly on to the INN.
Consequently, by restricting the base ODE to be
amenable to integration, we can speed up and
improve the robustness of integrating trajectories
from the learned system. We demonstrate the
efficacy of our method in training and evaluating benchmark ODE systems, as well as within
continuous-depth neural networks models. We
show that our approach attains speed-ups of up to
two orders of magnitude when integrating learned
ODEs.

1. Introduction
The problem of fitting an ordinary differential equation
(ODE) to observed data is ubiquitous throughout many disciplines of the natural sciences and engineering (Perko, 1991).
Although traditional approaches have focused on fixed-form
1
School of Computer Science, the University of Sydney, Australia. 2 Autonomous Systems Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
3
CSIRO’s Data61, Australia. 4 NVIDIA, USA.. Correspondence
to: Weiming Zhi <weiming.zhi@sydney.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Related vector fields can be thought of as a vector
field “morphed” into another. (Left) Five integral curves
(red) of a vector field of a Linear ODE, overlaid on grid
points (blue); (Right) Corresponding ”morphed” integrals
of the related vector field and grid.

system dynamics and inferring their parameters, here we
consider the more general problem of learning ODEs, when
their dynamics are completely unknown. This problem
arises, for example, in robot learning where ODEs are often
used to parameterize learned motion (Sindhwani et al., 2018;
Singh et al., 2020). In deep learning, this problem appears
within the context of Neural ODEs (Chen et al., 2018), a
family of continuous-depth models where the evolution of
hidden states is an ODE. Recent developments in learning
ODEs have allowed the use of differentiable adaptive stepsize numerical integrators to train neural network dynamics
via the adjoint method (Chen et al., 2018).
The learned ODE system allows us to integrate continuous
trajectories at different initial conditions. To roll out long
and complicated trajectories with a numerical integrator, the
neural network dynamics model is queried sequentially at
each step. This can be unsatisfactorily slow for time critical
applications, such as those in robot control, and is known
to suffer from numerical instabilities (Gholami et al., 2019;
Choromanski et al., 2020). With these challenges in mind,
we propose an alternative approach to learning ODEs: we
view the desired target ODE dynamics as a vector field that
is a “morphed” version of an alternative base vector field
via a diffeomorphism, i.e., a bijective mapping where both
the mapping and its inverse are differentiable. Thus, instead
of directly modeling the time derivative of the desired ODE

