Optimal Estimation of Policy Gradient via Double Fitted Iteration

Chengzhuo Ni 1 Ruiqi Zhang 2 Xiang Ji 1 Xuezhou Zhang 1 Mengdi Wang 1

Abstract
Policy gradient (PG) estimation becomes a challenge when we are not allowed to sample with the
target policy but only have access to a dataset generated by some unknown behavior policy. Conventional methods for off-policy PG estimation
often suffer from either significant bias or exponentially large variance. In this paper, we propose
the double Fitted PG estimation (FPG) algorithm.
FPG can work with an arbitrary policy parameterization, assuming access to a Bellman-complete
value function class. In the case of linear value
function approximation, we provide a tight finitesample upper bound on policy gradient estimation
error, that is governed by the amount of distribution mismatch measured in feature space. We
also establish the asymptotic normality of FPG
estimation error with a precise covariance characterization, which is further shown to be statistically optimal with a matching Cramer-Rao lower
bound. Empirically, we evaluate the performance
of FPG on both policy gradient estimation and
policy optimization, using either softmax tabular
or ReLU policy networks. Under various metrics,
our results show that FPG significantly outperforms existing off-policy PG estimation methods
based on importance sampling and variance reduction techniques.

1. Introduction
Policy gradient plays a key role in policy-based reinforcement learning (RL). We focus on the estimation of policy
gradient in off-policy reinforcement learning. In the offpolicy setting, we are given episodic trajectories that were
generated by some unknown behavior policy. Our goal
is to estimate the single policy gradient of a target policy
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 2 School of Mathematical
Science, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to:
Mengdi Wang <mengdiw@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

πθ , i.e., ∇θ v πθ , based on the off-policy data only. This is
motivated by applications such as medical diagnosis and
ICU management, in which sampling data with a proposed
policy is prohibitive or extremely costly. In these applications, one may not expect to learn the full optimal policy
from limited data, but rather learn a single gradient vector
for directions of improvement. To handle the distribution
mismatch between behavior and target policy, a classic approach is importance sampling (IS) (Jie & Abbeel, 2010).
However, IS is known to be sample-expensive and unstable,
as the importance sampling weight can grow exponentially
with respect to time horizon and causing uncontrollably
large variances.
In this work, we design an algorithm to avoid the high variance of importance sampling by utilizing a good (to be
defined in Sec. 4) value function approximation should they
be available. The key idea is to perform PG estimation in
an iterative way, similar to the well-known Fitted Q Iteration (FQI) algorithm. We propose the double Fitted Policy
Gradient (FPG) estimation algorithm, which conducts iterative regression to estimate Q functions and ∇θ Q functions
jointly. The FPG algorithm is able to provide an accurate estimation under mild data coverage assumption and without
the knowledge of the behavior policy, in contrast to vanilla
IS which must know the behavior policy.
When the function approximator is linear, we show that
FPG is equivalent to a model-based plugin estimator and
can give an ε-close
 PG estimator using a sample size of
N = O CH 5 /ε2 , where H is the horizon length and C is
a constant to be specified that measures the distribution shift
between behavior policy and target policy. Notably, this distribution shift C = O(1 + χ2F (µ, µ̄)) can be bounded by a
form of relative condition number or a restricted chi-square
divergence, measuring the mismatch between the behavior
and target policy in feature space. We additionally establish
the asymptotic normality of our FPG estimator with closed
form variance expression. We also provide a matching
information-theoretic Cramer-Rao lower bound, showing
that our estimator is in fact asymptotically optimal. See
Table 1 for a summary of theoretical results for off-policy
PG estimation. FPG can be easily applied as a plug-in PG
estimator in any off-policy PG algorithm. Under standard
assumptions, a PG algorithm with FPG estimator can find
an ε-stationary policy using at most N = Õ dim(Θ)2 /ε2

