Neuro-Symbolic Hierarchical Rule Induction

Claire Glanois 1 Zhaohui Jiang 2 Xuening Feng 2 Paul Weng 2 Matthieu Zimmer 2 Dong Li 3 Wulong Liu 3
Jianye Hao 3 4

Abstract
We propose Neuro-Symbolic Hierarchical Rule
Induction (HRI), an efficient interpretable neurosymbolic model, to solve Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) problems. In this model, which
is built from a pre-defined set of meta-rules organized in a hierarchical structure, first-order rules
are invented by learning embeddings to match
facts and body predicates of a meta-rule. To instantiate HRI, we specifically design an expressive set of generic meta-rules, and demonstrate
they generate a consequent fragment of Horn
clauses. As a differentiable model, HRI can be
trained both via supervised learning and reinforcement learning. To converge to interpretable rules,
we inject a controlled noise to avoid local optima and employ an interpretability-regularization
term. We empirically validate our model on various tasks (ILP, visual genome, reinforcement
learning) against relevant state-of-the-art methods, including traditional ILP methods and neurosymbolic models.

1. Introduction
Research on neuro-symbolic approaches (Santoro et al.,
2017; Manhaeve et al., 2018; Dai et al., 2019; d’Avila
Garcez & Lamb, 2020; Amizadeh et al., 2020) has become
very active recently and has been fueled by the successes of
deep learning (Krizhevsky et al., 2017) and the recognition
of its limitations (Marcus, 2018). At a high level, these
approaches aim at combining the strengths of deep learning
(e.g., high expressivity, differentiable learning) and symbolic methods (e.g., interpretability, generalizability) while
addressing their respective limitations (e.g., brittleness for
1

IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark 2 UM-SJTU Joint
Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China 4 School of Computing
and Intelligence, Tianjin University.
Correspondence to:
<paul.weng@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

deep learning, scalability for symbolic methods).
In this paper, we focus on inductive logic programming
(ILP) tasks (Cropper & Dumančić, 2021). The goal in ILP
is to find a first-order logic (FOL) formula that explains
positive and negative examples given some background
knowledge also expressed in FOL. In contrast to traditional
ILP methods, which are based on combinatorial search over
the space of logic programs, neuro-symbolic methods (see
Section 2) often work on a continuous relaxation of this
discrete space.
For tackling ILP problems, we propose a new neurosymbolic hierarchical model, denoted HRI, which is built
upon a set of meta-rules. For a more compact, yet expressive,
representation, we introduce the notion of proto-rule, which
encompasses multiple meta-rules. The valuations of predicates are computed via a soft unification between proto-rules
and predicates using learnable embeddings. Like most ILP
methods, our model can provide an interpretable solution
and, being independent of the number of objects, manifests
some combinatorial generalization skills1 . In contrast to
other approaches, HRI is also independent of the number
of predicates: this number may vary during training and
testing 2 . Our model can also allow recursive definitions, if
needed. Since it is based on embeddings, it is able to generalize and is particularly suitable for multi-task ILP problems.
Moreover, any semantic or visual priors on concepts can be
leveraged, through the embeddings initialization.
The design of proto-rules, crucially restricting the hypothesis space, embodies a well-known trade-off between efficiency and expressivity. Relying on minimal sets of metarules for rule induction models has been shown to improve
both learning time and predictive accuracies (Cropper &
Muggleton, 2014; Fonseca et al., 2004). For our model
to be both adaptive and efficient, we initially designed an
expressive and minimal set R0 of proto-rules. While most
neuro-symbolic approaches do not formally discuss the expressivity of their models, we provide a theoretical analysis
1

Trained on smaller instances, it can generalize to larger ones.
In the case some input predicates only appear in the held-out
dataset used for the final evaluation, our model can still predict
thanks to the pre-trained embeddings, as mentioned in the Visual
Genome Experiment in Appendix C.
2

