Zero-Shot AutoML with Pretrained Models

Ekrem Öztürk * 1 Fabio Ferreira * 1 Hadi S. Jomaa * 2 Lars Schmidt-Thieme 2 Josif Grabocka 1
Frank Hutter 1 3

Abstract
Given a new dataset D and a low compute budget, how should we choose a pre-trained model
to fine-tune to D, and set the fine-tuning hyperparameters without risking overfitting, particularly if
D is small? Here, we extend automated machine
learning (AutoML) to best make these choices.
Our domain-independent meta-learning approach
learns a zero-shot surrogate model, which, at test
time, allows to select the right deep learning (DL)
pipeline (including the pre-trained model and
fine-tuning hyperparameters) for a new dataset
D given only trivial meta-features describing D,
such as image resolution or the number of classes.
To train this zero-shot model, we collect performance data for many DL pipelines on a large collection of datasets and meta-train on this data to
minimize a pairwise ranking objective. We evaluate our approach under the strict time limit of the
vision track of the ChaLearn AutoDL challenge
benchmark, clearly outperforming all challenge
contenders.

1. Introduction
A typical problem in deep learning (DL) applications is to
find a good model for a given dataset D in a restrictive time
budget. In the case of tabular data, a popular approach for
solving this problem is automated machine learning (AutoML), as implemented, e.g., in Auto-sklearn (Feurer et al.,
2015a) or Auto-Gluon (Erickson et al., 2020). However,
in domains such as computer vision and natural language
processing, a better solution, especially under low resource
constraints, is typically to fine-tune an existing pre-trained
model. This, at first glance, appears to render AutoML
unnecessary for those domains. However, as we will demonstrate in this paper, AutoML and pre-trained models can be
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Freiburg 2 University of
Hildesheim 3 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Fabio Ferreira <ferreira@cs.uni-freiburg.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

combined to yield much stronger performance than either
of them alone.
A great advantage of fine-tuning pre-trained models is strong
anytime performance: the use of pre-trained models often allows to obtain very strong performance orders of magnitude
faster than when training a model from scratch. In many
practical applications, this strong anytime performance is
crucial, e.g., for DL-based recognition systems in manufacturing, or automated DL (AutoDL) web services. The
clock starts ticking as soon as a new dataset is available,
and it would be far too costly to train a new model from
scratch, let alone optimize its hyperparameters. The recent
ChaLearn AutoDL competition (Liu et al., 2021) mimicked
these tight time constraints, rewarding performance found
in an anytime fashion.
While fine-tuning pre-trained models enjoys strong anytime
performance, it also introduces many additional degrees of
freedom. Firstly, we need to select a pre-trained network
to fine-tune. To obtain good anytime performance, we may
even want to start by training a shallow model to obtain
good results quickly, and at some point switch to fine-tuning
a deeper model. There are many additional degrees of freedom in this fine-tuning phase, concerning learning rates,
data augmentation, and regularization techniques. We refer
to the combination of a pre-trained model and the fully specified fine-tuning phase, including its hyperparameters, as a
DL pipeline. Which DL pipeline works best depends heavily
on the dataset, for instance, datasets with high-resolution
images may favor the use of more downsampling layers than
the low-resolution images of the CIFAR dataset (Krizhevsky
et al., 2009); likewise, datasets with few images may favor
smaller learning rates. We, therefore, require an automated
method for selecting the best DL pipeline based on the
characteristics of the dataset at hand.
In this paper, we tackle this problem by meta-learning a
model across datasets that enables zero-shot DL pipeline
selection. Specifically, we create a meta-dataset holding
the performance of many DL pipelines on a broad range of
datasets. Using this meta-dataset, we then learn a function
that selects the right DL pipeline based on the properties
of the dataset (e.g., the image resolution and the number of
images) in a zero-shot setting. To learn this selection function, we first formulate DL pipeline selection as a classical

