Gaussian Process Uniform Error Bounds with
Unknown Hyperparameters for Safety-Critical Applications

Alexandre Capone 1 Armin Lederer 1 Sandra Hirche 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) have become an often-used tool
for regression due to their flexibility and good generalization
properties. In addition to being successful at approximating unknown functions, GPs also come equipped with a
measure of model uncertainty in the form of the posterior
variance (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). This quantity has
shown promising results for estimating the error between
the posterior mean and the underlying function (Srinivas
1

TUM School of Computation, Information and Technology,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Alexandre Capone <alexandre.capone@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Data

f (x)

µ0(x)

1

±β 2 σ0(x)

f (x)

Gaussian processes have become a promising tool
for various safety-critical settings, since the posterior variance can be used to directly estimate the
model error and quantify risk. However, state-ofthe-art techniques for safety-critical settings hinge
on the assumption that the kernel hyperparameters are known, which does not apply in general.
To mitigate this, we introduce robust Gaussian
process uniform error bounds in settings with unknown hyperparameters. Our approach computes
a confidence region in the space of hyperparameters, which enables us to obtain a probabilistic
upper bound for the model error of a Gaussian
process with arbitrary hyperparameters. We do
not require to know any bounds for the hyperparameters a priori, which is an assumption commonly found in related work. Instead, we are
able to derive bounds from data in an intuitive
fashion. We additionally employ the proposed
technique to derive performance guarantees for a
class of learning-based control problems. Experiments show that the bound performs significantly
better than vanilla and fully Bayesian Gaussian
processes.

x

Figure 1. Overconfident uniform error bounds. The solid black line
represents the unknown function, the dash-dotted line the GP mean.
Crosses correspond to measurement data, the pink shaded area
represents the estimated regression error. The estimated regression
error increases too slowly away from the data due to the high
lengthscale value and low signal variance. As a result, most of
f (x) in regions with no data is not captured by the estimated
regression error.

et al., 2012; Chowdhury & Gopalan, 2017; Lederer et al.,
2019; Maddalena et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2021). Due to this
characteristic, GPs have become particularly interesting for
safety-critical settings, i.e., whenever safety or performance
constraints need to be considered during decision-making.
Some examples include controller tuning (Capone & Hirche,
2019; Lederer et al., 2020), estimating safe operating regions
(Berkenkamp et al., 2017), as well as recommendation engines (Sui et al., 2015).
Uniform error bounds for Gaussian process regression are
typically obtained by scaling the posterior standard deviation, where the scaling factor depends on the number of
data, the input domain, as well as regularity assumptions
on the unknown function (Srinivas et al., 2012; Chowdhury
& Gopalan, 2017; Maddalena et al., 2021; Lederer et al.,
2019). The resulting error bound is generally of a probabilistic nature, i.e., it holds with high probability, with few
exceptions (Maddalena et al., 2021; Wu & Schaback, 1993).
In Lederer et al. (2019), an error bound is derived under
the assumption that the true function is drawn from a GP.
The bound is achieved by estimating the error on a finite
grid over the input space, and then extending the bound to
the whole input space using Lipschitz properties of the GP.

