DisPFL: Towards Communication-Efficient Personalized Federated Learning
via Decentralized Sparse Training

Rong Dai 1 Li Shen 2 Fengxiang He 2 Xinmei Tian 1 3 Dacheng Tao 2

Abstract
Personalized federated learning is proposed to
handle the data heterogeneity problem amongst
clients by learning dedicated tailored local models
for each user. However, existing works are often
built in a centralized way, leading to high communication pressure and high vulnerability when a
failure or an attack on the central server occurs. In
this work, we propose a novel personalized federated learning framework in a decentralized (peerto-peer) communication protocol named Dis-PFL,
which employs personalized sparse masks to customize sparse local models on the edge. To further save the communication and computation
cost, we propose a decentralized sparse training
technique, which means that each local model in
Dis-PFL only maintains a fixed number of active
parameters throughout the whole local training
and peer-to-peer communication process. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that Dis-PFL
significantly saves the communication bottleneck
for the busiest node among all clients and, at the
same time, achieves higher model accuracy with
less computation cost and communication rounds.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that our method can
easily adapt to heterogeneous local clients with
varying computation complexities and achieves
better personalized performances.

1. Introduction
Training deep neural networks is known to be data hungry, but data nowadays are often generated on the edge of
the increasingly widely-used mobile devices and Internet
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China 3 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei,
China. Correspondence to: Xinmei Tian <xinmei@ustc.edu.cn>,
Li Shen <mathshenli@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

of Things (IoT) devices (Khan et al., 2021; Nguyen et al.,
2021). Due to growing concerns about data privacy (Voigt
& Von dem Bussche, 2017), sending their local data to a
centralized device is usually prohibited. On this ground, federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017), a distributed
training paradigm, becomes a promising privacy-preserving
training method that enables a number of clients to produce
a global model without sharing local data by aggregating
locally trained parameters. One major challenge of FL is
the data heterogeneity problem, which means the distributions among clients may vary to a large extent. Personalized
FL was thus proposed to achieve personalized individual
models for each user through federating instead of using the
global model to alleviate this problem.
Recent works tackling the personalization problems mainly
focus on the centralized FL setting (Li et al., 2021b; Zhang
et al., 2020), where a central server orchestrates the learning
amongst clients and is responsible for parameter aggregation after receiving locally trained models on the edge as
depicted in Figure 2(a). However, this classical FL scheme
has a major drawback for the need of the central server. In
practice, the central server could face system failure or be
maliciously attacked, which may pose a threat to leak users’
privacy or jeopardize the training process. Moreover, the
communication process all happens on the server-client side,
which may cost a quite large communication burden for the
server (Lian et al., 2017). With this regard, decentralized FL
has recently emerged as a promising method for reducing
the communication bandwidth of the busiest node and embracing peer-to-peer communication for faster convergence
(Lalitha et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022). In
decentralized FL, no global model state exists as in Figure
2(b-d), the participating clients follow a communication
protocol to reach a so-called consensus model.
In this paper, we take a further step towards personalization
in the decentralized FL setting. Prior works have shown that
it’s promising to use sparse masks to model personalization
for each user (Li et al., 2020a; Vahidian et al., 2021), which
can also help reduce the communication cost and save computation overhead. However, both methods deal with the
centralized setting, and they both employ the technique of
dense-to-sparse training. In other words, they must train a

