Scalable Deep Gaussian Markov Random Fields for General Graphs

Joel Oskarsson 1 Per Sidén 1 2 Fredrik Lindsten 1

Abstract
Machine learning methods on graphs have proven
useful in many applications due to their ability
to handle generally structured data. The framework of Gaussian Markov Random Fields (GMRFs) provides a principled way to define Gaussian
models on graphs by utilizing their sparsity structure. We propose a flexible GMRF model for
general graphs built on the multi-layer structure
of Deep GMRFs, originally proposed for lattice
graphs only. By designing a new type of layer we
enable the model to scale to large graphs. The
layer is constructed to allow for efficient training
using variational inference and existing software
frameworks for Graph Neural Networks. For a
Gaussian likelihood, close to exact Bayesian inference is available for the latent field. This allows
for making predictions with accompanying uncertainty estimates. The usefulness of the proposed
model is verified by experiments on a number of
synthetic and real world datasets, where it compares favorably to other both Bayesian and deep
learning methods.

1. Introduction
Graphs are immensely important constructs in scientific
modeling. They show up as natural representations of technological networks, such as computer and electricity networks, but also of biological and social networks (Stanković
et al., 2020a; 2019). As massive amounts of data are collected about these networks, the area of machine learning on
graphs becomes increasingly relevant. In this field we find
probabilistic graphical models, that allow for drawing statistically sound inferences about the quantities in the graph
(Koller & Friedman, 2009). Another, more recent, family
of graph-based models are Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
1
Division of Statistics and Machine Learning, Department
of Computer and Information Science, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden 2 Arriver Software AB. Correspondence to:
Joel Oskarsson <joel.oskarsson@liu.se>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Predictive uncertainties over a large graph. Nodes inside
the rectangles are unobserved, resulting in higher uncertainty (more
red). Values are marginal standard deviations, taken from the
experiment with wind speed data in section 4.4.

(Wu et al., 2020; Kipf & Welling, 2017). These bring
the flexibility and scalability of deep learning to graphstructured data. Unifying statistically sound methods with
deep learning is an important goal in the field of graph-based
methods and in modern machine learning as a whole.
There is a need for methods with a strong statistical basis, but with the scalability of GNNs. While some graphs,
such as those describing molecules, are comparatively small,
massive graphs can emerge for example from social and traffic networks. We need efficient methods that scale also to
these. In many situations it is additionally desirable not
just to produce accurate predictions, but also some measure
of the uncertainty about the predictions. An example of
this is shown in Figure 1. We are here concerned with the
node-wise regression setting, where a single graph is considered and nodes are associated with real-valued targets.
We assume the full graph structure to be known. The main
application of interest is prediction for a subset of unobserved nodes. Such problems can for example arise when
information is missing about some individuals in a social
network or due to partial outages in technological networks.
Bayesian methods provide a principled way to obtain predictive uncertainty estimates, that properly account for the
uncertainty in latent variables. One type of Bayesian model
that utilizes the sparsity of graphs are Gaussian Markov Random Fields (GMRFs) (Rue & Held, 2005). The Deep GMRF
(DGMRF) framework of Sidén & Lindsten (2020) combines

