Deep Squared Euclidean Approximation to the Levenshtein Distance
for DNA Storage

Alan J.X. Guo 1 Cong Liang 1 Qing-Hu Hou 2

Abstract
Storing information in DNA molecules is of great
interest because of its advantages in longevity,
high storage density, and low maintenance cost.
A key step in the DNA storage pipeline is to efficiently cluster the retrieved DNA sequences according to their similarities. Levenshtein distance
is the most suitable metric on the similarity between two DNA sequences, but it is inferior in
terms of computational complexity and less compatible with mature clustering algorithms. In this
work, we propose a novel deep squared Euclidean
embedding for DNA sequences using Siamese
neural network, squared Euclidean embedding,
and chi-squared regression. The Levenshtein distance is approximated by the squared Euclidean
distance between the embedding vectors, which is
fast calculated and clustering algorithm friendly.
The proposed approach is analyzed theoretically
and experimentally. The results show that the
proposed embedding is efficient and robust.

1. Introduction
With the increasing demand for storing information, scientists have been focusing on finding advanced storage media.
DNA molecules, which carry most of the genetic information in vivo, have been tried as a new storage medium
(Church et al., 2012; Goldman et al., 2013; Grass et al.,
2015; Erlich & Zielinski, 2017; Organick et al., 2018; Dong
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). Studies have shown that
the DNA storage has high storage density, low maintenance
cost, and fast parallel replication (Ping et al., 2019; Dong
et al., 2020).
A typical pipeline for storing information in synthetic DNA
molecules includes the following steps (Dong et al., 2020).
1

Center for Applied Mathematics, Tianjin University, Tianjin,
China; 2 School of Mathematics, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
Correspondence to: Alan J.X. Guo <jiaxiang.guo@tju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

The binary data are firstly encoded as strings on the alphabet {A, C, G, T}. Such strings are called references and
usually have a fixed length in range 100 − 200 nucleotides,
which is limited by the biochemical techniques used to manipulate long DNA sequences. In the next step, the DNA
molecules used as storage media are synthesized according
to the references. These molecules are amplified and carefully preserved to increase the chances of future retrieval of
the original information. To retrieve the stored information,
the DNA molecules are sequenced into a bucket of strings,
which are called the reads, on four bases {A, C, G, T}. Due
to the aforementioned amplification procedure, the set of
reads usually includes several copies of each reference at
the same time. Also, the biochemical procedures on DNA
molecules are not fully reliable, hence the reads can contain errors such as base insertions, deletions or substitutions
(Blawat et al., 2016). Finally, the references are recovered
from the reads and decoded to retrieve the original binary
data.
A straightforward way to recover references from the reads
is to cluster the noisy reads by the Levenshtein distance
(Levenshtein, 1966), and select one reference from each
cluster. The Levenshtein distance between two strings, also
known as the edit distance, is the minimum number of insertions, deletions, or substitutions required to modify one
string to the other. Three issues arise when the size of stored
information grows. First, the number of reads increases
linearly with the amount of information stored, which leads
to a squared increase in the computational complexity of
a plain clustering algorithm (Rashtchian et al., 2017). Second, the Levenshtein distance is not easy to calculate. It is
shown that the Levenshtein distance cannot be computed
in O(n2− ), ∀ > 0, unless the strong exponential time hypothesis is false (Masek & Paterson, 1980; Backurs & Indyk,
2015). Third, most mature clustering algorithms are based
on `p distance (Hartigan & Wong, 1979); these algorithms
may fail or need to be adapted for Levenshtein distance.
These three issues render the mission of clustering a large
number of reads by plain algorithms impossible within reasonable time. Researchers have tried to address the challenge of clustering a huge amount of reads. For example,
to cluster billions of the reads efficiently, Rashtchian et al.
(Rashtchian et al., 2017) proposed a distributed, agglomera-

