A Simple Guard for Learned Optimizers

Isabeau Prémont-Schwarz * 1 Jaroslav Vı́tků * 1 Jan Feyereisl 1

Abstract

If the trend of learned components eventually
outperforming their hand-crafted version continues, learned optimizers will eventually outperform hand-crafted optimizers like SGD or Adam.
Even if learned optimizers (L2Os) eventually outpace hand-crafted ones in practice however, they
are still not provably convergent and might fail out
of distribution. These are the questions addressed
here. Currently, learned optimizers frequently outperform generic hand-crafted optimizers (such as
gradient descent) at the beginning of learning but
they generally plateau after some time while the
generic algorithms continue to make progress and
often overtake the learned algorithm as Aesop’s
tortoise which overtakes the hare. L2Os also still
have a difficult time generalizing out of distribution. (Heaton et al., 2020) proposed Safeguarded
L2O (GL2O) which can take a learned optimizer
and safeguard it with a generic learning algorithm
so that by conditionally switching between the
two, the resulting algorithm is provably convergent. We propose a new class of Safeguarded
L2O, called Loss-Guarded L2O (LGL2O), which
is both conceptually simpler and computationally
less expensive. The guarding mechanism decides
solely based on the expected future loss value of
both optimizers. Furthermore, we show theoretical proof of LGL2O’s convergence guarantee and
empirical results comparing to GL2O and other
baselines showing that it combines the best of
both L2O and SGD and that in practice converges
much better than GL2O.

*
1
Equal contribution
Good AI, Prague, Czechia.
Correspondence
to:
Isabeau
Prémont-Schwarz
<premont-schwarz@goodai.com>,
Jaroslav
Vı́tků
<jaroslav.vitku@goodai.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Principle of the guarding mechanism for learned optimizers. A learned optimizer is used to change weights of an optimizee.
Guarded learned optimizers (GL2O and LGL2O) add a guard
which monitors situations where the optimizer does not perform
well and switches to an analytic method (such as SGD) in those
cases. This ensures asymptotic convergence of the resulting hybrid
optimizer.

1. Introduction
An unambiguous trend in machine learning is that different
parts of the pipeline are being automatized. Automatized
architecture search is now the state of the art for neural
networks (Tan & Le, 2021), learned dynamic learning rates
work better than learning rate schedules (Xu et al., 2019),
even reinforcement learning algorithms have been learned
(Co-Reyes et al., 2021; Alet* et al., 2020; Kirsch et al.,
2020). There has also been quite some work on learned
optimizers (L2O) (cf. section 2) though so far, due to computational limits, they work only on small datasets and only
beat hand-crafted optimizers for the first thousand steps
or so (because that is the horizon they are trained on) and
do not generalize well. Some, like Richard Sutton(Sutton,
2019), argue that as compute becomes cheaper and more
accessible, ”learned things” will become much better than
”handcrafted things”. However, even if L2O can outperform
designed optimizers, they will still have two flaws: they will
not be provably convergent, and they might fail totally out
of distribution (different dataset, different type of objects
being optimized – what we call optimizees in this paper,
different learning horizons, etc.). A guard addresses those
shortcomings.

