A Dynamical System Perspective for Lipschitz Neural Networks

Laurent Meunier * 1 2 Blaise Delattre * 1 3 Alexandre Araujo * 4 Alexandre Allauzen 1 5

Abstract
The Lipschitz constant of neural networks has
been established as a key quantity to enforce the
robustness to adversarial examples. In this paper,
we tackle the problem of building 1-Lipschitz
Neural Networks. By studying Residual Networks from a continuous time dynamical system perspective, we provide a generic method
to build 1-Lipschitz Neural Networks and show
that some previous approaches are special cases of
this framework. Then, we extend this reasoning
and show that ResNet flows derived from convex potentials define 1-Lipschitz transformations,
that lead us to define the Convex Potential Layer
(CPL). A comprehensive set of experiments on
several datasets demonstrates the scalability of
our architecture and the benefits as an ℓ2 -provable
defense against adversarial examples. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
MILES-PSL/Convex-Potential-Layer

1. Introduction
Modern neural networks have been known to be sensible
against small, imperceptible and adversarially-chosen perturbations of their inputs (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy et al.,
2014). This vulnerability has become a major issue as more
and more neural networks have been deployed into production applications. Over the past decade, the research
progress plays out like a cat-and-mouse game between the
development of more and more powerful attacks (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Kurakin et al., 2016; Carlini et al., 2017;
Croce et al., 2020) and the design of empirical defense mechanisms (Madry et al., 2018; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2019;
Cohen et al., 2019). Finishing the game calls for certified ad*
Equal contribution 1 Miles Team, LAMSADE, Université
Paris-Dauphine, PSL University, Paris, France 2 Meta AI Research, Paris, France 3 Foxstream, Lyon, France 4 INRIA, Ecole
Normale Supérieure, CNRS, PSL University, Paris, France 5 ESPCI,
Paris, France. Correspondence to: Laurent Meunier <laurent.meunier1995@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

versarial robustness (Raghunathan et al., 2018; Wong et al.,
2018). While recent work devised defenses with theoretical
guarantees against adversarial perturbations, they share the
same limitation, i.e., the tradeoffs between expressivity and
robustness, and between scalability and accuracy.
A natural approach to provide robustness guarantees on a
classifier is to enforce Lipschitzness properties. To achieve
such properties, researchers mainly focused on two different
kinds of approaches. The first one is based on randomization (Lecuyer et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2019; Pinot et al.,
2019) and consists in convolving the input with with a predefined probability distribution. While this approach offers
some level of scalability (i.e., currently the only certified
defense on the ImageNet dataset), it suffers from significant
impossibility results (Yang et al., 2020). A second approach
consists in building 1-Lipschitz layers using specific linear
transform (Cisse et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019b; Anil et al.,
2019; Trockman et al., 2021; Singla & Feizi, 2021; Li et al.,
2019b; Singla et al., 2021a). Knowing the Lipschitz constant
of the network, it is then possible to compute a certification
radius around any points.
A large line of work explored the interpretation of residual
neural networks (He et al., 2016) as a parameter estimation problem of nonlinear dynamical systems (Haber et al.,
2017; E, 2017; Lu et al., 2018). Reconsidering the ResNet
architecture as an Euler discretization of a continuous dynamical system yields to the trend around Neural Ordinary
Differential Equation (Chen et al., 2018). For instance, in
the seminal work of Haber et al. (2017), the continuous
formulation offers more flexibility to investigate the stability of neural networks during inference, knowing that the
discretization will be then implemented by the architecture
design. The notion of stability, in our context, quantifies
how a small perturbation on the initial value impacts the
trajectories of the dynamical system.
From this continuous and dynamical interpretation, we analyze the Lipschitzness property of Neural Networks. We
then study the discretization schemes that can preserve
the Lipschitzness properties. With this point of view, we
can readily recover several previous methods that build 1Lipschitz neural networks (Trockman et al., 2021; Singla
& Feizi, 2021). Therefore, the dynamical system perspective offers a general and flexible framework to build Lip-

