AdAUC: End-to-end Adversarial AUC Optimization Against Long-tail Problems

Wenzheng Hou 1 2 Qianqian Xu 1 Zhiyong Yang 2 Shilong Bao 3 4 Yuan He 5 Qingming Huang 1 2 6 7

Abstract
It is well-known that deep learning models are vulnerable to adversarial examples. Existing studies
of adversarial training have made great progress
against this challenge. As a typical trait, they often assume that the class distribution is overall
balanced. However, long-tail datasets are ubiquitous in a wide spectrum of applications, where
the amount of head class instances is larger than
the tail classes. Under such a scenario, AUC is a
much more reasonable metric than accuracy since
it is insensitive toward class distribution. Motivated by this, we present an early trial to explore
adversarial training methods to optimize AUC.
The main challenge lies in that the positive and
negative examples are tightly coupled in the objective function. As a direct result, one cannot
generate adversarial examples without a full scan
of the dataset. To address this issue, based on
a concavity regularization scheme, we reformulate the AUC optimization problem as a saddle
point problem, where the objective becomes an
instance-wise function. This leads to an end-toend training protocol. Furthermore, we provide a
convergence guarantee of the proposed algorithm.
Our analysis differs from the existing studies since
the algorithm is asked to generate adversarial examples by calculating the gradient of a min-max
problem. Finally, the extensive experimental results show the performance and robustness of our
algorithm in three long-tail datasets.

Figure 1. Diagram of ACC and AUC change when the model is
attacked. The upper rectangular boxes represent the score rank
before and after the attack occurs; The lower plots represent the
change of score in the embedding space when the model is attacked.

1. Introduction

1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute
of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China. 2 School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China. 3 State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing,
China. 4 School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China. 5 Alibaba Group, Beijing, China 6 Key
Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. 7 Artificial Intelligence
Research Center, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Qianqian Xu <xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn>, Qingming
Huang <qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn>.

Deep learning has recently achieved significant progress on
various machine learning tasks, such as computer vision
(Voulodimos et al., 2018) and natural language processing
(Strubell et al., 2019; Sorin et al., 2020). However, recent
work shows that deep learning models are vulnerable to
adversarial attack (Szegedy et al., 2014; Biggio et al., 2013).
For example, images with human imperceptible perturbations (i.e., adversarial examples) can easily fool even the
well-trained models. The existence of adversarial examples has raised big security threats to deep neural networks,
which impels extensive efforts to improve the adversarial
robustness (Madry et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019b). For example, one can resist the adversarial examples by means of
adversarial training (AT). Specifically, AT could be formulated as a min-max problem, where the inner maximization
problem is employed to generate adversarial examples, and
the outer minimization problem is used to learn the model
under the adversarial noise. In this way, AT could be easily
applied to most of the modern architectures in deep learning, making it one of the most effective measures against
adversarial attack.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

The prior art of adversarial training methods focuses on
balanced benchmark datasets. On top of this, the learning
objective is to increase the overall accuracy. However, real-

