Constraint-based Graph Network Simulator

Yulia Rubanova * 1 Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez * 1 Tobias Pfaff 1 Peter Battaglia 1

Abstract
In the area of physical simulations, nearly all
neural-network-based methods directly predict future states from the input states. However, many
traditional simulation engines instead model the
constraints of the system and select the state
which satisfies them. Here we present a framework for constraint-based learned simulation,
where a scalar constraint function is implemented
as a graph neural network, and future predictions
are computed by solving the optimization problem defined by the learned constraint. Our model
achieves comparable or better accuracy to top
learned simulators on a variety of challenging
physical domains, and offers several unique advantages. We can improve the simulation accuracy on a larger system by applying more solver
iterations at test time. We also can incorporate
novel hand-designed constraints at test time and
simulate new dynamics which were not present in
the training data. Our constraint-based framework
shows how key techniques from traditional simulation and numerical methods can be leveraged as
inductive biases in machine learning simulators.

1. Introduction
Consider a bowling ball colliding with a bowling pin. You
might explain this event through a pair of forces being generated: one causes the pin to move, the other one causes the
ball to careen away. This approach is analogous to physical
simulators that apply an explicit forward model to calculate
a future state directly from the current one, i.e. by numerically integrating equations of motion. An alternative, but
equally valid, way to explain the collision is in terms of
constraint satisfaction: the ball and pin cannot occupy the
same location at the same time, and their combined energies and momenta must be conserved. The post-collision
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Yulia Rubanova <rubanova@deepmind.com>, Alvaro
Sanchez-Gonzalez <alvarosg@deepmind.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

trajectories are the only way the future can unfold without
violating these constraints. This approach is analogous to
the constraint-based simulators that generate a prediction by
searching for a future state that respects all the constraints.
Both families of simulators—those based on explicit, forward functions versus those which define the dynamics implicitly, via constraints—are widely used in physics, engineering, and graphics. In principle they can model the same
types of dynamics. In practice these simulators strike different trade-offs that determine which one is preferred in different domains. Explicit methods are popular for large systems
with (mostly) independent local effects where space and
time derivatives are relatively smooth. By contrast, implicit
approaches are often preferred for systems with strong interactions, such rigid and stiff dynamics, and more accurate
solutions can often be found by using more solver iterations
or more sophisticated solvers. In machine learning, so far
almost all methods for learned simulation have focused on
explicit forward models (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020;
Pfaff et al., 2021), with few exceptions (Yang et al., 2020).
Here we present a framework for learning to simulate complex dynamics via constraint satisfaction. Our “Constraintbased Graph Network Simulator” (C-GNS) defines a single
learned constraint function that indicates whether a future
state is consistent with the current and previous states. Conditioning on the previous states allows our method to capture
the time dynamics within its learned constraint function. We
implement the constraint function as a Graph Neural Network (GNN, Bronstein et al. (2017); Battaglia et al. (2018)),
which can model systems with rich compositional structure,
such as multiple bodies and complex meshes. To predict the
future state, we use a gradient-based solver that iteratively
refines a proposed state to minimize the learned constraint.
We train the model end-to-end by backpropagating the loss
gradients through the solver. Crucially, our model is trained
directly on observed trajectory data and does not require
knowledge of the true underlying constraints which govern the system dynamics. The learned constraint function
only needs to yield the same solution as the true constraints,
while their objective landscapes may differ (e.g., the learned
constraint function may be convex, as in Figure 1(c), while
the true constraint may not be).
There are several potential advantages to constraint-based

