How to Steer Your Adversary: Targeted and Efficient
Model Stealing Defenses with Gradient Redirection

Mantas Mazeika 1 Bo Li 1 David Forsyth 1

Abstract
Model stealing attacks present a dilemma for public machine learning APIs. To protect financial
investments, companies may be forced to withhold important information about their models
that could facilitate theft, including uncertainty
estimates and prediction explanations. This compromise is harmful not only to users but also to
external transparency. Model stealing defenses
seek to resolve this dilemma by making models
harder to steal while preserving utility for benign
users. However, existing defenses have poor performance in practice, either requiring enormous
computational overheads or severe utility tradeoffs. To meet these challenges, we present a new
approach to model stealing defenses called gradient redirection. At the core of our approach is
a provably optimal, efficient algorithm for steering an adversary’s training updates in a targeted
manner. Combined with improvements to surrogate networks and a novel coordinated defense
strategy, our gradient redirection defense, called
GRAD2 , achieves small utility trade-offs and low
computational overhead, outperforming the best
prior defenses. Moreover, we demonstrate how
gradient redirection enables reprogramming the
adversary with arbitrary behavior, which we hope
will foster work on new avenues of defense.

1. Introduction
As deep neural networks become more capable and economically valuable, responsibly democratizing access to the
best available models could lead to widespread social good.
Owners may not wish to just publish parameters, as this
opens the door to malicious use and provides no financial
1
UIUC. Correspondence to:
tas3@illinois.edu>.

Mantas Mazeika <man-

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Prediction API with Conventional Defense

Model Stealing Attack

Benign Users / Transparency

Figure 1. High-profile prediction APIs such as the OpenAI API
and AI21 Studio truncate posteriors. This serves as a rudimentary defense against model stealing attacks, protecting financial
investments. However, it also has significant trade-offs. Namely, it
harms benign users who might otherwise benefit from the withheld
predictions, and it reduces transparency.

return on investment (Radford et al., 2019; Buchanan et al.,
2021). Prediction APIs have emerged as a solution to these
problems, as they enable filtering out harmful use cases and
support a software-as-a-service business model. Moreover,
they allow users with minimal computational resources to
access the largest available models at reasonable costs.
The promise of prediction APIs is hampered by the fact
that they are vulnerable to model stealing attacks. Malicious users can clone the functionality of an API by gathering a dataset of queries and responses and training their
own model. This allows them to circumvent the expensive
process of manual data curation, which can be a multimillion dollar investment for API providers (Hendrycks
et al., 2021a; Tramèr et al., 2016). Additionally, model theft
can be used as a stepping stone for mounting evasion attacks, which could result in critical failures in downstream
applications utilizing the API (Papernot et al., 2017). In this
paper, we investigate methods for defending against model
stealing attacks.
In practice, prediction APIs often employ rudimentary obfuscation measures, such as truncating predicted posteriors
to a minuscule fraction of their original size. For instance,

