Confidence Score for Source-Free Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Jonghyun Lee 1 Dahuin Jung 1 Junho Yim 2 Sungroh Yoon 1 3

Abstract
Source-free unsupervised domain adaptation
(SFUDA) aims to obtain high performance in
the unlabeled target domain using the pre-trained
source model, not the source data. Existing
SFUDA methods assign the same importance to
all target samples, which is vulnerable to incorrect
pseudo-labels. To differentiate between sample
importance, in this study, we propose a novel
sample-wise confidence score, the Joint ModelData Structure (JMDS) score for SFUDA. Unlike
existing confidence scores that use only one of
the source or target domain knowledge, the JMDS
score uses both knowledge. We then propose a
Confidence score Weighting Adaptation using the
JMDS (CoWA-JMDS) framework for SFUDA.
CoWA-JMDS consists of the JMDS scores as
sample weights and weight Mixup that is our proposed variant of Mixup. Weight Mixup promotes
the model make more use of the target domain
knowledge. The experimental results show that
the JMDS score outperforms the existing confidence scores. Moreover, CoWA-JMDS achieves
state-of-the-art performance on various SFUDA
scenarios: closed, open, and partial-set scenarios.

1. Introduction
Recently, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) (LeCun et al.,
2015) have successfully demonstrated high performance
in various applications. However, if the distribution of the
training and test data differs, significant performance degradation occurs, which is known as a domain shift (Pan &
Yang, 2009). Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) mitigates the domain shift problem using both fully annotated
source and unlabeled target data with the assumption that
the data distributions in the two domains are slightly differ1
Data Science and AI Lab., Seoul National University 2 AIRS
Company, Hyundai Motor Group, Seoul, Korea 3 Department of
ECE and Interdisciplinary Program in AI, Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Figure 1. (Left) t-SNE plot of the target feature in Ar → Rw task
on the Office-Home dataset. (Right) Zoomed-in t-SNE plot. The
color of samples indicates the ground truth labels.

ent. The UDA task aims to obtain a high target performance
using the two domains without the target label.
All conventional UDA methods assume the availability of
both the source data and corresponding labels. However, this
may be impractical in some cases. First, growing concerns
regarding data privacy and security force companies to only
release the data. Second, many resources such as GPUs
and time are required to train a model when source data are
much greater than target data. To address these concerns,
source-free UDA (SFUDA) has recently been studied (Liang
et al., 2020a; Li et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020; Hou &
Zheng, 2021). Instead of accessing the source data, SFUDA
assumes that we can access only a pre-trained model using
labeled source domain data.
Existing SFUDA methods strictly follow the cluster assumption (Grandvalet et al., 2005) and use pseudo-labels (Lee
et al., 2013) of target data based on the target feature cluster. Because the only data accessible in SFUDA are the
target data, the model is updated while preserving its intrinsic cluster architecture. In other words, existing SFUDA
methods train the model so that its decision boundary does
not penetrate the target feature cluster. Figure 1 shows tSNE (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) plots to visualize
the inherent architecture of the target features obtained by
the pre-trained source model. As shown in Figure 1, the
samples form their own cluster. However, according to the
right side of Figure 1, ground truth labels of samples included in the same cluster are diverse for some clusters.
The model assigns the same pseudo-label to samples in the
same cluster based on the cluster assumption, which leads
incorrect pseudo-labels. To robustly learn with incorrect
pseudo-labels, samples with low-confidence in their pseudolabel should be suppressed when the model trains (Ding
et al., 2020). The existing methods are limited in that they

