Learning to Incorporate Texture Saliency Adaptive Attention to Image
Cartoonization
Xiang Gao * 1 2 Yuqi Zhang * 1 Yingjie Tian 1

Abstract
Image cartoonization is recently dominated by
generative adversarial networks (GANs) from the
perspective of unsupervised image-to-image translation, in which an inherent challenge is to precisely capture and sufficiently transfer characteristic cartoon styles (e.g., clear edges, smooth color
shading, abstract fine structures, etc.). Existing
advanced models try to enhance cartoonization
effect by learning to promote edges adversarially,
introducing style transfer loss, or learning to align
style from multiple representation space. This
paper demonstrates that more distinct and vivid
cartoonization effect could be easily achieved
with only basic adversarial loss. Observing that
cartoon style is more evident in cartoon-texturesalient local image regions, we build a regionlevel adversarial learning branch in parallel with
the normal image-level one, which constrains adversarial learning on cartoon-texture-salient local
patches for better perceiving and transferring cartoon texture features. To this end, a novel cartoontexture-saliency-sampler (CTSS) module is proposed to dynamically sample cartoon-texturesalient patches from training data. With extensive
experiments, we demonstrate that texture saliency
adaptive attention in adversarial learning, as a
missing ingredient of related methods in image
cartoonization, is of significant importance in facilitating and enhancing image cartoon stylization,
especially for high-resolution input pictures.

1. Introduction
Image cartoonization aims at rendering natural images into
cartoon styles, which is a challenging computer vision and
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies. Correspondence
to: Yingjie Tian <tyj@ucas.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

(a) Original Picture

(b) Our Result

Figure 1. Example evaluation results of our method in transforming real-world scenes into cartoon styles (better to zoom in).

computer graphics problem. Specially designed algorithms
that automatically stylize pictures into cartoons can help
relieve cartoon creation artists from laborious manual work,
and also have practical values in digital entertainment, advertising, childhood education, image editing, etc.
Cartoons have unique visual features characterized by clear
edges and smooth color shading in non-edge areas. The
problem of reproducing cartoon-like effect on real photos
is widely explored in early time from the perspective of
image abstraction (DeCarlo & Santella, 2002; Winnemöller
et al., 2006; Kyprianidis & Döllner, 2008; Kang et al., 2008).
These methods model cartoon styles with established image processing techniques. Though successful in mimicking
some important cartoon features, they lack data-driven learning ability to capture cartoon styles in more depth.
With the thriving of deep neural networks, recent image
cartoonization methods resort to learning-based framework,
typically generative adversarial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), to automatically learn and transfer highlevel cartoon styles from real cartoon images. It could be
formulated as an unsupervised image-to-image translation
problem where the objective is to learn a content-preserving
image translation mapping X → Y from a source domain X

