Auxiliary Learning with Joint Task and Data Scheduling

Hong Chen 1 Xin Wang 1 2 Chaoyu Guan 1 Yue Liu 1 Wenwu Zhu 1

Abstract
Existing auxiliary learning approaches only consider the relationships between the target task
and the auxiliary tasks, ignoring the fact that
data samples within an auxiliary task could contribute differently to the target task, which results
in inefficient auxiliary information usage and nonrobustness to data noise. In this paper, we propose
to learn a joint task and data schedule for auxiliary learning, which captures the importance of
different data samples in each auxiliary task to
the target task. However, learning such a joint
schedule is challenging due to the large number
of additional parameters required for the schedule. To tackle the challenge, we propose a joint
task and data scheduling (JTDS) model for auxiliary learning. The JTDS model captures the
joint task-data importance through a task-data
scheduler, which creates a mapping from task,
feature and label information to the schedule in a
parameter-efficient way. Particularly, we formulate the scheduler and the task learning process
as a bi-level optimization problem. In the lower
optimization, the task learning model is updated
with the scheduled gradient, while in the upper optimization, the task-data scheduler is updated with
the implicit gradient. Experimental results show
that our JTDS model significantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods under supervised, semisupervised and corrupted label settings1 .

1. Introduction
Auxiliary learning, utilizing auxiliary tasks to help improve
the target task, has drawn an increasing number of re1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
University 2 THU-Bosch JCML center, Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Xin Wang <xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wenwu
Zhu <wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).
1
Our code will be released at https://github.com/
forchchch/JTDS

search attentions in the community. This learning paradigm
aims to improve the model performance on the target task
via utilizing the useful information carried in the related
tasks (Navon et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2019a), and has been
widely adopted in different areas including image classification (Beyer et al., 2019), recommendation (Wen et al.,
2020), vision-language navigation (Zhu et al., 2020) and
reinforcement learning (Shelhamer et al., 2017), etc.
A typical and most widely adopted way in auxiliary learning
is to calculate the average or total loss of all training samples
for each task, linearly combine them into a single loss, and
then use the aggregated loss to optimize the task learning
model. To achieve promising performance on the target task,
the linear weights for task combinations are always tuned
with methods such as grid search or Hyper-parameter Optimization (HPO) tools (Kandasamy et al., 2020; Snoek et al.,
2012). However, when the number of auxiliary tasks is large,
this paradigm generally fails because the complexity of the
search space will be exponentially explosive. More recent
works (Du et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2019)
utilize the gradient similarity between the target task and the
auxiliary tasks to automatically assign weights to different
auxiliary tasks in an adaptive way. Furthermore, by using a
small set of the target task as guidance, researchers (Navon
et al., 2021) propose to learn a nonlinear combination of the
given tasks to better utilize the auxiliary information.
Nevertheless, existing works only consider task-level relations, ignoring the important fact that data samples within
the same auxiliary task could contribute differently to the
target task. Taking the image classification task as an example, when the target task is “correctly classifying a bird”,
“detecting the beak of a bird” becomes a helpful auxiliary
task. While an image of a frontal bird face is definitely helpful for the auxiliary task to improve the target task, an image
of a bird’s back provides little useful information. Moreover,
given that real-world data inevitably contain noises, these
noisy data samples may counterbalance the benefits of a
helpful auxiliary task as well. Therefore, existing works fail
to capture the relations of various data samples in different
auxiliary tasks towards the target task, suffering from inefficient auxiliary information usage and non-robustness to
data noise.
In this paper, we propose to learn a joint task and data

