3DLinker: An E(3) Equivariant Variational Autoencoder
for Molecular Linker Design

Yinan Huang 1 Xingang Peng 2 Jianzhu Ma 3 1 Muhan Zhang 3 1

Abstract
Deep learning has achieved tremendous success
in designing novel chemical compounds with desirable pharmaceutical properties. In this work,
we focus on a new type of drug design problem—
generating a small “linker” to physically attach
two independent molecules with their distinct
functions. The main computational challenges
include: 1) the generation of linkers is conditional
on the two given molecules, in contrast to generating complete molecules from scratch in previous works; 2) linkers heavily depend on the anchor atoms of the two molecules to be connected,
which are not known beforehand; 3) 3D structures
and orientations of the molecules need to be considered to avoid atom clashes, for which equivariance to E(3) group are necessary. To address these
problems, we propose a conditional generative
model, named 3DLinker, which is able to predict
anchor atoms and jointly generate linker graphs
and their 3D structures based on an E(3) equivariant graph variational autoencoder. So far as we
know, no previous models could achieve this task.
We compare our model with multiple conditional
generative models modified from other molecular
design tasks and find that our model has a significantly higher rate in recovering molecular graphs,
and more importantly, accurately predicting the
3D coordinates of all the atoms.

1. Introduction
The biological functions of most small molecule drugs are
to inhibit the activity of the target protein by binding its
active sites. In drug discovery, designing new molecule
1
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence 2 Tsinghua
University 3 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University. Correspondence to: Muhan Zhang <muhan@pku.edu.cn>,
Jianzhu Ma <majianzhu@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

drugs with desired pharmacophoric properties remains challenging due to the discreteness and enormity of the search
space (Polishchuk et al., 2013). To address this problem,
many machine learning methods have been developed to embed molecules in a compact hidden space, making promising
progress in multiple downstream computational tasks such
as molecular de-novo design, molecular optimization, and
chemical property prediction.
Molecules are generally represented by graphs with atoms
and bonds represented as nodes and edges, respectively.
Graph generative models (Liu et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2019;
Jin et al., 2018; 2020) are commonly applied to model the
marginal probability for FDA-approved drug molecules and
it is expected that the newly sampled molecules from the
model have similar or better pharmacophoric properties.
However, in complex diseases such as cancer, mutations
of amino acids could significantly impact the binding affinity between drugs and target proteins. The drug might fall
off the drug target when a particular amino acid mutates
with a certain probability due to the weak binding affinity,
making the patient drug-resistant. To solve this problem,
more recently, an alternative drug mechanism named Proteolysis targeting chimera (PROTAC) is developed to inhibit
the protein functions by prompting complete degradation
of the target protein. PROTAC is a unique molecule composed of two fragment molecules and a linker molecule: one
fragment binds the target protein, the other binds another
molecule that can degrade the target protein, and the linker
attaches the two fragments together. Because PROTAC
needs only to bind their targets with high selectivity (rather
than inhibit the target protein’s activity), many efforts are devoted to retooling previously ineffective inhibitor molecules
as PROTAC for developing the next-generation drugs. Even
though PROTAC owns promising potential, it has not been
broadly pushed into clinical trial stages. One of the key
challenges is the design of linker, which has a critical influence on the ultimate degradation of the target protein. To
date, linker design still relies on the expertise of structural
biologists and thus is very time-intensive. Therefore, there
are increasing efforts to develop deep learning methods to
address linker design problems (Imrie et al., 2020; Yang
et al., 2020).

