Align-RUDDER: Learning From Few Demonstrations by Reward Redistribution

Vihang Patil * 1 Markus Hofmarcher * 1 Marius-Constantin Dinu 1 2 Matthias Dorfer 3 Patrick Blies 3
Johannes Brandstetter 1 4 José Arjona-Medina 1 2 Sepp Hochreiter 1 5

Abstract
Reinforcement learning algorithms require many
samples when solving complex hierarchical tasks
with sparse and delayed rewards. For such complex tasks, the recently proposed RUDDER uses
reward redistribution to leverage steps in the Qfunction that are associated with accomplishing
sub-tasks. However, often only few episodes
with high rewards are available as demonstrations since current exploration strategies cannot discover them in reasonable time. In this
work, we introduce Align-RUDDER, which utilizes a profile model for reward redistribution
that is obtained from multiple sequence alignment of demonstrations. Consequently, AlignRUDDER employs reward redistribution effectively and, thereby, drastically improves learning on few demonstrations. Align-RUDDER outperforms competitors on complex artificial tasks
with delayed rewards and few demonstrations.
On the Minecraft ObtainDiamond task, AlignRUDDER is able to mine a diamond, though not
frequently. Code is available at github.com/
ml-jku/align-rudder.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning algorithms struggle with learning
complex tasks that have sparse and delayed rewards (Sutton
& Barto, 2018; Rahmandad et al., 2009; Luoma et al., 2017).
For delayed rewards, temporal difference (TD) suffers from
vanishing information (Arjona-Medina et al., 2019). On the
other hand Monte Carlo (MC) has high variance since it
must average over all possible futures (Arjona-Medina et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 ELLIS Unit Linz and LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning, Johannes Kepler University Linz
2
Dynatrace Research 3 enliteAI 4 Now at Microsoft Research
5
Institute of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Vihang Patil <patil@ml.jku.at>.
th

Proceedings of the 39 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

2019). Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), used for Go and
chess, can handle delayed and rare rewards since it has a
perfect environment model (Silver et al., 2016; 2017). RUDDER (Arjona-Medina et al., 2019; 2018) has been shown to
excel in model-free learning of policies when only sparse
and delayed rewards are given. RUDDER requires episodes
with high rewards to store them in its lessons replay buffer
for learning a reward redistribution model like an LSTM
network. However, for complex tasks, current exploration
strategies find episodes with high rewards only after an incommensurate long time. Humans and animals obtain high
reward episodes by teachers, role models, or prototypes.
Along this line, we assume that episodes with high rewards
are given as demonstrations. Since generating demonstrations is often tedious for humans and time-consuming for
exploration strategies, typically, only a few demonstrations
are available. However, RUDDER’s LSTM (Hochreiter,
1991; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997a) as a deep learning
method requires many examples for learning. Therefore,
we introduce Align-RUDDER, which replaces RUDDER’s
LSTM with a profile model obtained from multiple sequence
alignment (MSA) of the demonstrations. Profile models are
well known in bioinformatics. They are used to score new sequences according to their sequence similarity to the aligned
sequences. Like RUDDER also Align-RUDDER performs
reward redistribution —using an alignment model—, which
considerably speeds up learning even if only a few demonstrations are available.
Our main contributions are:
• We suggest a reinforcement algorithm that works well
for sparse and delayed rewards, where standard exploration fails but few demonstrations with high rewards
are available.
• We adopt multiple sequence alignment from bioinformatics to construct a reward redistribution technique
that works with few demonstrations.
• We propose a method that uses alignment techniques
and reward redistribution for identifying sub-goals and
sub-tasks which in turn allow for hierarchical reinforcement learning.

