Retroformer: Pushing the Limits of End-to-end Retrosynthesis Transformer

Yue Wan 1 Chang-Yu Hsieh 1 Benben Liao 1 Shengyu Zhang 1

Abstract
Retrosynthesis prediction is one of the fundamental challenges in organic synthesis. The task is to
predict the reactants given a core product. With
the advancement of machine learning, computeraided synthesis planning has gained increasing interest. Numerous methods were proposed to solve
this problem with different levels of dependency
on additional chemical knowledge. In this paper,
we propose Retroformer, a novel Transformerbased architecture for retrosynthesis prediction
without relying on any cheminformatics tools for
molecule editing. Via the proposed local attention
head, the model can jointly encode the molecular
sequence and graph, and efficiently exchange information between the local reactive region and
the global reaction context. Retroformer reaches
the new state-of-the-art accuracy for the end-toend template-free retrosynthesis, and improves
over many strong baselines on better molecule
and reaction validity. In addition, its generative
procedure is highly interpretable and controllable.
Overall, Retroformer pushes the limits of the reaction reasoning ability of deep generative models.

1. Introduction
Retrosynthesis (Corey & Cheng, 1989) is one of the major
building blocks in organic synthesis, which aims to discover
valid and efficient synthetic routes (i.e., reactants) given a
target molecule (i.e., product). It is crucial for the pharmaceutical industry as one of the main challenges for drug
discovery is to efficiently synthesize novel and complex
compounds in the laboratory (Blakemore et al., 2018).
Recently, computer-aided synthesis planning has gained vast
attention for its potential to save a tremendous amount of
time and efforts from traditional retrosynthesis approaches.
1

Tencent Quantum Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Chang-Yu Hsieh <kimhsieh@tencent.com>, Shengyu
Zhang <shengyzhang@tencent.com>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

Various machine learning approaches were proposed with
different levels of dependency on additional chemical knowledge. These methods can be categorized into three groups.
First, template-based methods (Coley et al., 2017; Dai et al.,
2019; Chen & Jung, 2021) view the retrosynthesis prediction
as the template retrieval problem, where a template encodes
the core reactive rule (Figure 1). After the templates are
retrieved, these methods use cheminformatics tools like RDKit (rdk) to build up full reactions from the templates. Despite the state-of-the-art accuracy and guaranteed molecule
validity, these methods are limited to the scope of the existing template database. In contrast, template-free methods,
the second class, use deep generative models to directly
generate the reactants given the product. Since molecule
can be represented by both the graph and the SMILES sequence, existing approaches reframe the retrosynthesis into
either sequence-to-sequence (Lin et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2019; Zheng et al., 2020; Tetko et al., 2020; Seo et al., 2021;
Kim et al., 2021) or graph-to-sequence problem (Tu & Coley, 2021). These generative methods do not rely on any
additional chemical knowledge and can perform chemical
reasoning within a larger reaction space. The third class is
semi-template-based methods, which combine the advantages of both the generative models and the prior chemical
knowledge. Conventional frameworks (Yan et al., 2020; Shi
et al., 2020; Somnath et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021) in
this category follow the same idea: They first identify the
reactive sites and convert the product into synthons using
RDKit. Then, another model completes synthons into reactants. These methods are competitive in accuracy and are
interpretable by their stage-wise nature.
In this work, we are interested in the template-free generative approach for retrosynthesis prediction. Existing methods fail to fully explore the potential of deep generative
model in terms of reaction reasoning, and we argue that
the end-to-end Transformer-based (Vaswani et al., 2017)
architecture can reach the same competitive benchmark accuracy as well as good validity and interpretability. We propose Retroformer, a novel end-to-end retrosynthesis Transformer that introduces a special attention head. It is able
to jointly encode the sequential and graphical information
of the molecule and allow efficient information exchange
between the local reactive region and the global reaction
context. The generative process is also sensitive to the exact

