On the Convergence of the Shapley Value in
Parametric Bayesian Learning Games

Lucas Agussurja 1 Xinyi Xu 1 2 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract
Measuring contributions is a classical problem in
cooperative game theory where the Shapley value
is the most well-known solution concept. In this
paper, we establish the convergence property of
the Shapley value in parametric Bayesian learning games where players perform a Bayesian inference using their combined data, and the posteriorprior KL divergence is used as the characteristic
function. We show that for any two players, under some regularity conditions, their difference
in Shapley value converges in probability to the
difference in Shapley value of a limiting game
whose characteristic function is proportional to
the log-determinant of the joint Fisher information. As an application, we present an online
collaborative learning framework that is asymptotically Shapley-fair. Our result enables this to
be achieved without any costly computations of
posterior-prior KL divergences. Only a consistent
estimator of the Fisher information is needed. The
effectiveness of our framework is demonstrated
with experiments using real-world data.

1. Introduction
Recent significant increase in computing power has enabled the training of high-capacity machine learning models
(e.g., deep neural networks) which results in an unprecedented level of performances in many domains. A key ingredient of this success is the huge quantity of data that is used
to train these models. Going forward, as models and tasks
grow in complexity, the demand for more data will only
rise in intensity and it will become necessary to utilize data
from multiple sources and across different organizations.
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore. 2 Institute for Infocomm Research, A∗ STAR,
Singapore. Correspondence to: Bryan Kian Hsiang Low
<lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

A benefit of data sharing is the ability to achieve a higher
convergence rate. It has been shown that when collaboration
is possible, an exponential improvement can be achieved in
terms of sample complexity (Blum et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2018; Nguyen & Zakynthinou, 2018).
When learning is done using datasets from multiple sources,
a natural question arises: What are the relative contributions
of individual datasets to the resulting model? As examples,
consider the following two scenarios: (a) In a hospital, a
new study is to be conducted on the general population and
datasets are collected from multiple clinics within the hospital. The datasets contain bias due to the specializations of
the clinics. Datasets from pediatricians, for example, will
contain data for patients under 12 years old, while datasets
from rheumatologists will be gender-biased since women
are (biologically) more likely to develop rheumatoid-type
conditions. It is therefore important to know the influences
that these datasets have on the outcome. (b) A group of companies have decided to jointly develop a machine learning
application by pooling their data together. The application
will then be provided as a service to customers (e.g., on a
pay-per-query basis). After deployment, the group is then
faced with the problem of distributing the generated revenue
from the application. Though resolving these problems
involves a number of non-technical (e.g., social and business) considerations, a quantitative measure of the datasets’
contributions to the learning outcome would be crucial.
The problem of attribution (cost/profit sharing) is a classical
problem in cooperative game theory and the two most wellknown solution concepts are the Shapley (Shapley, 1953)
and Banzhaf (Banzhaf, 1965) values. Both concepts are
based on the marginal contribution, i.e., the increase in a
coalition’s value when a player joins it. These values of
coalitions are given by the characteristic (valuation) function which maps each given coalition to a real number. Both
the Shapley and Banzhaf values quantify a player’s contribution with a weighted sum of its marginal contributions to
all possible coalitions, but they differ in the weights used.
What makes the Shapley value appealing is its uniqueness in
satisfying the desirable properties of symmetry, null player,
linearity, and efficiency simultaneously. The first two properties are often used as criteria for fairness. The Banzhaf

