LCANets: Lateral Competition Improves Robustness
Against Corruption and Attack

Michael A. Teti 1 Garrett T. Kenyon 1 Benjamin J. Migliori 1 Juston S. Moore 1

Abstract
Although Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) achieve high accuracy on image
recognition tasks, they lack robustness against
realistic corruptions and fail catastrophically
when deliberately attacked. Previous CNNs
with representations similar to primary visual
cortex (V1) were more robust to adversarial
attacks on images than current adversarial
defense techniques, but they required training
on large-scale neural recordings or handcrafting
neuroscientific models. Motivated by evidence
that neural activity in V1 is sparse, we develop a
class of hybrid CNNs, called LCANets, which
feature a frontend that performs sparse coding via
local lateral competition. We demonstrate that
LCANets achieve competitive clean accuracy to
standard CNNs on action and image recognition
tasks and significantly greater accuracy under
various image corruptions. We also perform the
first adversarial attacks with full knowledge of a
sparse coding CNN layer by attacking LCANets
with white-box and black-box attacks, and we
show that, contrary to previous hypotheses, sparse
coding layers are not very robust to white-box
attacks. Finally, we propose a way to use sparse
coding layers as a plug-and-play robust frontend
by showing that they significantly increase the
robustness of adversarially-trained CNNs over
corruptions and attacks.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are often considered a rough model of the ventral visual stream (Kubilius
et al., 2019), where object recognition is thought to occur in
primates. However, CNNs and biological visual systems be1
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USA.
Correspondence to: Michael Teti <mteti@lanl.gov>.

Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

have very differently in practical performance. For instance,
adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow
et al., 2015) are very effective at causing a CNN to fail
catastrophically while they remain indistinguishable from
unperturbed images to humans (Elsayed et al., 2018).
Mounting research suggests that CNN image classifiers with
representations similar to those in the primary visual cortex
(V1) exhibit increased robustness to image corruptions and
adversarial attacks (Li et al., 2019; Dapello et al., 2020; Safarani et al., 2021). These V1-like CNNs have been shown
to be more robust than those trained with state-of-the-art
adversarial defense techniques (Rusak et al., 2020). Current
methods to develop V1-like CNNs involve replacing specific
layers with hand-crafted neuroscientific models (Dapello
et al., 2020) or jointly training with V1 responses to images
(Li et al., 2019; Safarani et al., 2021). It is unclear how these
techniques can be adapted to arbitrary datasets or used as
a general purpose adversarial defense method, since neural datasets and knowledge of receptive field properties of
sensory neurons to stimuli other than still images is limited.
In contrast, we develop a CNN frontend based on biologically plausible sparse coding models, such as the Locally
Competitive Algorithm (LCA) (Rozell et al., 2008). Sparse
coding models are a class of data-agnostic unsupervised
models that have been shown to model neural responses in
visual, auditory, and olfactory cortices (Rozell et al., 2008;
Zylberberg et al., 2011; Terashima et al., 2013; Dodds &
DeWeese, 2019; Jortner et al., 2007; Jürgensen et al., 2021).
These models were originally developed based on longstanding neurophysiological evidence that the neural activity in
V1 and other sensory areas is sparse, unlike the activations
in a CNN (Barlow et al., 1961; Olshausen & Field, 1997;
Vinje & Gallant, 2000; Foldiak, 2003; Poo & Isaacson, 2009;
Hromádka et al., 2008; Yoshida & Ohki, 2020). LCA finds a
faithful but sparse representation (i.e. few active neurons) of
a given input by modeling the recurrent lateral competition
observed in V1 (Blakemore et al., 1970), whereby neurons
compete to represent an input by inhibiting neighboring neurons with similar receptive fields (Chettih & Harvey, 2019).
LCA is unlike the classical model developed by Dapello et
al. (Dapello et al., 2020), in which each neuron’s response is
entirely determined by the extent to which its preferred fea-

