Provable Reinforcement Learning with a Short-Term Memory

Yonathan Efroni 1 Chi Jin 2 Akshay Krishnamurthy 1 Sobhan Miryoosefi 2

Abstract
Real-world sequential decision making problems
commonly involve partial observability, which requires the agent to maintain a memory of history
in order to infer the latent states, plan and make
good decisions. Coping with partial observability
in general is extremely challenging, as a number
of worst-case statistical and computational barriers are known in learning Partially Observable
Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs). Motivated by the problem structure in several physical
applications, as well as a commonly used technique known as “frame stacking”, this paper proposes to study a new subclass of POMDPs, whose
latent states can be decoded by the most recent
history of a short length m. We establish a set of
upper and lower bounds on the sample complexity
for learning near-optimal policies for this class of
problems in both tabular and rich-observation settings (where the number of observations is enormous). In particular, in the rich-observation setting, we develop new algorithms using a novel
“moment matching” approach with a sample complexity that scales exponentially with the short
length m rather than the problem horizon, and is
independent of the number of observations. Our
results show that a short-term memory suffices for
reinforcement learning in these environments.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning is a well-studied paradigm for sequential decision making, in which an agent learns to make
decisions in a stateful environment to accumulate reward.
The most common framework for reinforcement learning—
particularly for theoretical analysis—is the Markov Decision
Process (MDP), in which the environment is summarized by
a state that is observable to the agent. One notable feature of
1

Microsoft Research, New York 2 Princeton University.
Correspondence to:
Sobhan Miryoosefi <miryoosefi@cs.princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

the MDP is that the agent can be memoryless, meaning that
it need not remember past states to make decisions in the
present. However, many real world problems exhibit partial
observability and require the agent to maintain a memory of
the past to infer the latent states, plan, and make good decisions. These problems are best modeled via the framework
of Partially Observable MDPs (POMDPs).
As a motivating example, consider a control task of navigating a robot that perceives the environment through a visual
system like a first-person camera. Here, a single image may
identify the agent’s location, but it would not identify the
agent’s velocity, which is necessary for deciding how much
force should be applied in order to accelerate or brake. For
optimal control, the agent would have to maintain a memory
of past images and infer its velocity from this historical
information. This problem can be modeled as a POMDP
where the system state is the position and velocity of the
agent. However, the state cannot be inferred using a single
image, hence it is partially observable.
Maintaining a memory and reasoning over histories in
POMDPs is notoriously challenging, as evidenced by a
number of complexity-theoretic barriers: computing the optimal policy (or planning) is computationally intractable (Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987) and learning an unknown
POMDP incurs a sample complexity that scales exponentially with the horizon (Mossel & Roch, 2005; Jin et al.,
2020a). These lower bounds often involve constructions
that require the agent to reason over very long histories.
However, they are worst-case in nature, so they leave open
the possibility of obtaining positive results for subclasses of
POMDPs with special structure of practical interest.
One such structure concerns applications of POMDPs where
the agent only needs a short-term memory. This structure
holds in our motivating example, since the velocity can be
recovered from just the most recent images. Short-term
memory is also frequently used in the design of practical
algorithms, which concatenate observations from the most
recent time steps and use them to make decisions—a technique called “frame-stacking” (Mnih et al., 2013; 2015;
Hessel et al., 2018). This gives rise to a natural question:
Can we develop a theoretical framework and design provably efficient algorithms for reinforcement learning with a
short-term memory?

